Optical diagnostics: Automatic data processing and application in
fundamental studies and control systems.
Abrukov V.S., Andreev I.V., Deltsov P.V.
Russia, 428015, Cheboksary, Moskovsky prosp., 15, Chuvash State University
ABSTRACT
Practical realization of the broad possibilities of optical methods requires the automation of measurements, first, of a stage
of image decoding (getting data about a light intensity distribution in the image plane, geometric characteristics, etc). The
present work generalizes some previous results of authors concerning the automation of image decoding, presents a new
automatic procedure and results of the creation of a computer programs complex and its using in experimental combustion
and detonation research. Representation of the image, as a collection of black and white pixels is used in two developed
computer programs. Originally, all computer programs were intended for interferometry. At present, they can be used for
other optical methods. The new results of neural network’s usage for combustion interferogram analysis are presented also.

Keywords: Optical image, interferometry, automatic analysis, combustion, detonation, neural network, control

1. INTRODUCTION
Optical methods possess the good possibilities at the experimental fundamental investigations of combustion. But there are
also some problems of their usage. One of problems is connected with the stage of image decoding and its evaluation.
Image decoding particularities have an essential influence upon an accuracy of measurements. The results of decoding have
often a subjective nature and depend greatly on the experience of operator in the image decoding. It limits a level of usage
of optical methods in the quantitative analysis of combustion. The automation of image decoding and processing of received
data is necessary for full realization of optical methods possibilities, ensuring accuracy and results reliability as well as the
usability of the statistical methods of the results processing.
Interferometry is perspective optical method for fundamental combustion research. It allows to carry out unique
measurements1,2 which cannot be fulfilled by other methods. But, interference images of burning processes have very
complex structure and an automation of decoding for interferometry has even the greater value, than for other optical
methods. The problem of automation of interferogram decoding is under solving for a long time3-11. Nevertheless, till now
this task is not decided completely.
The new results of authors concerning the automation of combustion interferogram decoding are presented in this paper. In
authors opinion the developed programs may be used for image decoding of diversified other optical methods, and for usage
in monitoring and controlling of combustion systems. Screens of the developed computer programs, results of investigation
of polymer vapor ignition by laser radiation and of geometric measurement of exhaust of pulsed detonation engine12 are
presented below.

2. INTERFEROMETRIC TECHNIQUES AND DATA PROCESSING
The main data that determine at the interferogram decoding are usually the following1,2 :
- phases difference distribution on the interferogram, S(x,y),
- eikonal of the object as a whole (the integral of S(x,y)dxdy),
- eikonals of the various object cross-sections (the integrals of S(x)dx for various y),
geometric borders of the object.
The similar data (light intensity distribution, geometric borders) determine also usually at decoding of other optical images.
For obtaining these data, and also some padding data, the authors created the automation procedures. At present the
complex of computer programs, developed by authors consist of the following.
1. The program of determination of the discrete kit of values of the function S(x,y). It works in the dialogue mode and is
provided with detailed menu. It uses two marking lines, moveable by operator by means of the keys of the keyboard on the
computer screen. The program vastly accelerates and facilitates the interferogram decoding in contrast with earlier facilities.
The operator marks a kit of spots on the interferogram image by marking lines and assigns the values of S(x,y) of each
marked spot. The number of the spots equals usually 20-50 depending on complexity of object structure. The further data
processing connected with different arithmetical operations of subtraction, summations, averaging is executed
automatically. The program has also the following possibilities: visualization of S(x,y) during the interferogram decoding;
the correction of the earlier entered data; the returning to earlier saved decrypted interferogram and its addition. The
interferogram images in the bmp-format with the palette "256 gradations of gray" are used (Fig.1). The preliminary
interferogram image editing is not required at usage of this program. Interferogram image is used "as is". Program can be
used for interferograms obtained at customization of an interferometer on bands of infinite and finite width.
2. The program of the determination of the eikonal of the object as a whole (the integral of S(x,y)dxdy) by means of the
"painting of the interference bands". This method processes an interferogram image as a collection of black and white
pixels. The eikonal is represented as a sum of the square of black and white interference bands multiplied by the average
value of S(x,y) ("weight of band") which correspond of each band. The decoding is make as follows. Operator by the one
"mouse" click marks any spot of the concrete interference band; the computer paints the all area of band by the green color
and computes automatically the number of painted pixels (Fig.2). This number is proportional to the eikonal of the band.
The obtained number is multiplies by "weight of band", which is indicating by the operator. The all interference bands on
interferogram are processing thereby and obtained results are summarizing. The number of the "mouse" clicks equal 10-20
usually. The interferogram image of the bmp-format (monochrome variant) is used. A calculation needs a little preliminary
image editing. Program can be used till now only for calculation of interferograms obtained at customization of an
interferometer on a band of infinite width.
The program allows also (after the full painting of the interferogram) determination the square of an object image, an object
volume and square its side surface (if an object has a cylindrical symmetry), as well as an object image perimeter (Fig.3).
These geometrical characteristics determine by simple formulae linking the border coordinates of the image with a volume
of the object, square of its side surface and with perimeter (envelope) of image. There are the broad prospects of using the
program for other optical images of the combustion flows.
The images sequence of exhaust of the pulse detonation engine12 and curves of allocation of some parameters of the image
are presented on Fig. 4.
3. The program of the automatic determination of the "full" function S(x,y). Unlike the program N1, it allows to process
automatically all possible cross-sections on the interferogram image. Usually, the number of cross-sections is near 300-400
and number of separate values of the S(x,y) near 3000-4000. This program as a program N2 uses the principle of the
painting of the interference bands. Unlike the program N2, the program N3 determine no square of band, but coordinates of
borders and middles of the all interference bands on all its length. The working of an operator consists of the indicating of
the band number (usually about 10-20 numerals). The interference cine film frames and temperature fields during the

powder vapor ignition by laser radiation are presented on the Fig. 5. The interference cine film frames of polystyrene vapor
ignition by laser radiation and the enthalpy, heat release power and heat release rate time dependencies are presented on the
Fig.6.
At present the program can be used only at the decoding of monochrome image (bmp-format) and demands a preliminary
interferogram image editing. During editing, it is necessary to remove the unnecessary areas of pixels or separate pixels
(noise). Program can be use only for interferogram obtained at customization of an interferometer on a band of infinite
width.
All above-mentioned programs are written on language C++. The algorithm of programs N2 and N 3 is simple. Authors
consider that it can be used at the diagnostics system development and active control of processes of a fuel inflammation,
combustion and detonation.
These programs may be used for decoding of LIF-images (programs N1-3); for decoding of the holographic and shadow
images of aerosols, in particular there is an interesting possibility of using the program 3 for the automatic determination of
histograms of the particles distribution at the analysis of shadow and other images of the aerosol ensemble (program N3);
for decoding of x-ray images (program N2) etc.

3. CONCLUDING REMARKS
Visualization has the important value in research of combustion processes. It is important from the point of view of true
interpretation of measurement results, confirmation of results of mathematical simulation. Optical methods that
simultaneously allow a visualization of combustion flow and to carry out the quantitative measurements have even more
value. The significance of similar methods even more grows, if these methods allow carrying out a control and process
control of burning. The latter requires the automation of all stages of measurement, first the "slowest" stage - the stage of
decoding of optical image.
Authors of this work have created several automatic procedures of image decoding that allow realizing the broad
possibilities of optical methods in fundamental research. The using of these procedures and the high-speed video
registration can greatly increase the applications of optical methods in scientific research and technical developments. At
present, these procedures (programs N2 and N3) can be used only for monochrome images. In the future, we plan to
develop procedures for analysis of the images with 256 gradation of gray, as well as color images.
Similar programs may be used in industrial systems where geometrical parameters of the image may be as the factor of
system monitoring or a system mode control. For example, geometrical parameters of the image of the engine, exhaust
plume from the engine, the image of a fuselage can register in "a black box " and can be used at the analysis of reasons of
air catastrophes.
For using a program N2 in monitoring of detonation engine it is necessary to provide registration of the exhaust plume
image in pcx format (or to create the program similar to program N2 for those image formats in which videoregistration is
realized); to provide the registration of momentary images in real time and to automate the operation of painting of the
necessary area of the image. Authors are planning a work, which will last in this direction.

4. ADDITION. INTERFEROMETRIC TECHNIQUES IN COMBUSTION RESEARCH AND NEURAL
NETWORK’S USAGE FOR IMAGE ANALYSIS
4.1 Introduction
The results of neural network usage in interferometry of combustion processes are presented for the first time. The
interferometry has broad and unique opportunities in combustion research. It is a sole method, which allows to determine
the integral characteristics of a flame, for example, mass of a flame (mass of gas in a flame area), Archimedean lifting force
acting on a flame, quantity of heat in a flame etc.
In accordance with the basic interferometric equation the phase difference distribution, S(x, y), in the interferogram plane is
an integral of the refractive index distribution, n(x, y, z), within the flame:
(1)
λS ( x, y ) = ∫ [n − n( x, y, z )]dz ,

o

where S(x,y) is measuring in unit 2π, n o is the refractive index of the undisturbed medium surrounding the flame and x,y,z
are the Cartesian coordinates, with the Oz axis directed along the light beam passing through the flame.
By Eq. (1) and Gladstone-Dale equation:

ρ  [ \ ]  = >Q [ \ ]  − @  N ∗ ,

where ρ is density, k is an average value of Gladstone-Dale constant, the following formula would be derived:
P = > Q
− 9 − , @  N  ,
*

R

where m is mass of gaseous phase of object, I = λ∫∫ S(x,y)dxdy) is an object eikonal, V is object volume, k* is an average
value of the Gladstone-Dale constant.
Also the interferometry makes possible determination of the "Archimedes lifting force" acting on the heated gas:
)

$

= ,  N J

Mass is the fundamental characteristic of a thermodynamic system. With the volume, pressure and equation of state known,
it allows the following thermodynamic characteristics to be determined:
- a temperature corresponding to the equation of gaseous state, T,
- an enthalpy (isobaric thermal effect) H=mcp(T-To), where cp=a+bT is the composition-average specific heat of the gaseous
mixture,
- an average specific enthalpy, Hm=H/m, and enthalpy density, Hv=H/V
The special program (see program N2 in previous part of this paper) is used by us for the automized calculation of the
integral characteristics of a flame. The example of interferograms of a flame generatored at an ignition of a powder by laser
radiation is shown in a fig. 5. The determination of an eikonal of interference fimage of combustion processes can not
completely is automized. It does not allow to use program N2 in such monitoring and control systems of combustion
processes, where the instantaneous driving response to change of the characteristics of system is required.

4.2 The basic problem
The basic problem, which was set in our work is a problem of learning of possibilities of neural network’s using for
calculation of the integrated characteristics of a flame on basis of inexact parameters of its interference images.
The required integral characteristics of a flame were mass of a flame (mass of gas in the field of a flame), Archimedean
lifting force acting on a flame and quantity of heat in a flame. As inexact parameters of the interference images the

geometrical parameters of the interference image of a flame were utilised: maximal height and width of the image, its area
(S) and perimeter (envelope). Determination of them is much easier, than determination of eikonal and can be completely
automized.
The Neural Network Wizard 1.7 of BaseGroup firm (www.basegroup.ryazan.ru) was used in our work. This program works
on basis of algorithm of return distribution of an error. The program was trained with the help of various gangs of
geometrical parameters of the interference image. They moved on an inlet of the program. On an output of the program
three integral characteristics of a flame were set. It was necessary to find what gangs of input values give more precise
results and to receive the program, which would allow to determine the integral characteristics of a flame on basis of inexact
(geometrical) parameters of the interference image.

4.3 The preliminary analysis of the results
The great many of the data (comparative tables) were obtained. As results have shown, the Neural Network Wizard 1.7
successfully enough has learned to determine the integral characteristics of a flame.
The most major error was gained at calculation of mass. The errors of calculation of Archimedean lifting force and amount
of heat were are insignificant.
The analysis has shown, that the precision of the program strongly is influenced by what gang of geometrical parameters
was used at training. For example, if on an inlet of program the values of height, area and envelope of a flame
simultaneously moved, the results had a rather small error. If at training of program the values of width and height of a
flame were used, the error was much more. The all results it is possible to divide into three groups: results with a small error
(0 … 5) %, results with a medial error (5 … 10) %, results with a major error (more than 10 %).
The padding analysis has shown, that the gangs of geometrical parameters, which width of a flame enters, give higher error.
On the other hand, those gangs, which the area of the image enters give a small error. So, for our type of interferograms, the
area of the image of a flame is main parameter for calculation of the integral characteristics.

4.4 Perspectives
In our work we trained the Neural Network Wizard 1.7 on the basis of five interferograms (sixth interferogram and its data
were used for checkout of operation trained program. If to increase a learning gang of interferograms, it is possible to
receive good enough program for calculation the integral characteristics of a flame generatored at an ignition of powders by
laser radiation. The advantage of the program will consist of considerably more simple operation of the operator and speed
of neural program. It has major value in scientific research of combustion processes.
The determination of the area, perimeter, height and the width of a flame are operations, which can be completely
automized. It can allow to use the neural program in applied research as well as at development of self-acting monitoring
and control systems of combustion processes.
Immediate usage of the interference images in industrial systems is impeded. The interferometry can be used, in basic, at
basic science research of laboratory models of combustion processes. Therefore in hardware systems of control it is
necessary to use neural networks, trained on the usual video images of a flame, but with the help of precise interference
methods. That is, input data at training are geometrical and some others the automatically defined characteristics of the
video images. And output data are the integral characteristics of flame determined by interference methods.

Global problem of our work are the research of neural networks opportunities in the field of the analysis and recognition of
the complex optical images, and also the usage of neural networks in monitoring and control systems of combustion
processes and modern detonation engines. The solution of it will allow essentially to expand opportunities of optical
monitoring and control systems of industrial performances.

Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research under grant rVolga 98-07-03375
and partially by Office of Naval Research (USA) under Contract No. 68171-99-M-6466.

References
1.

S.A. Abrukov, V.S. Abrukov, V.M. Maltsev, "Interferometry for Combustion Processes", Izvestija Natsionalnoy
Akademii Nauk i Iskusstv Chuvashskoy Respubliki, 6, pp. 105-124, 1996. (in Russian)
2. V.S. Abrukov, S.V. Ilyin, V.M. Maltsev, I.V. Andreev, "Interferometric Technique in Combustion, Gas Dynamic and
Heat Transfer Research. New Results and Technologies", CD-ROM Proc. Of VSJ-SPIE98 Int. Conference on Optical
Technologies and Image Processing in Fluid, Thermal, and Combustion Flow, AB076, VSJ, Yokohama, 1998.
(http://www.vsj.or.jp/vsjspie/)
3. R. South, B.M. Hayward, "Temperature Measurements in Conical Flames by Laser Interferometry", Combustion
Sciences and Technology, 12, pp. 183-195, 1976
4. M.P. Grischin, “Automatic input and processing of the photographic image on a computer”, Moscow, Izd. Energia,–
132 pp, 1976. (in Russian)
5. G.T. Reid, “Automatic Fringe Pattern-Analysis - A Review”, Opt. Laser Eng, 7, pp. 37-68, 1986
6. M.Servin, R.Rodriguezvera, M. Carpio at al., “Automatic Fringe Detection Algorithm Used For Moire Deflectometry”,
Applied Optics, 29, pp. 3266-3270, 1990
7. I.P.Gurov, N.A.Goyko, I.I Duhopel, “The automized optical-electronic system for the high-precision analysis of
interferograms”, Optichesky jurnal, 10, p.15-18, 1994 (in Russian)
8. T.R.Judge, P.J. Bryanston-Cross, “A Review Of Phase Unwrapping Techniques In Fringe Analysis”, Optics and Lasers
in Engineering, 21, N 4, pp. 199-239, 1994
9. J.M. Huntley, “Automated fringe pattern analysis in experimental mechanics: a review”, Journal Strain Anal. Eng., 33,
pp. 105-125, 1998
10. V.V.Batkovich, O.N.Budenkova, V.B. Konstantinov at al. "About obtaining allocation of temperatures in a liquid and
a solid with the help holographic interferometry", Zhurnal tehnicheskoy fiziki, 69, pp. 106-111, 1999 (in Russian)
11. N.P.Mende, A.B.Podlaskin, V.A. Saharov, "The automizing system of image processing and reconstruction of density
fields of the aerodynamic object", Zhurnal tehnicheskoy fiziki, 70, pp. 110-113, 2000 (in Russian)
12. Hanson Research Group Home Page/ A laboratory - scale pulsed detonation engine (PDE)//
http://navier.stanford.edu/hanson/

Fig. 1. The window of interferogram decoding (program No. 1).

Fig. 2. The painting of the first interference band (program No. 2).

Fig. 3. The all interferogram area painting (program No. 2).

a)
The threshold is 243.

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12





b)
6TXDUHRIH[KDXVWLPDJH












3HULPHWHURIH[KDXVWLPDJH






















1XPEHURIIUDPH































1XPEHURIIUDPH

Fig. 4. The images sequence of exhaust of the pulse detonation engine for threshold equal 243. Threshold conversion is a
process that sets a midpoint between black and white as the threshold and converts all shades above the threshold to white
and all shades below to black. Under frames their numbers are given. A total number of frames are 11. The diagrams of
change of the area and perimeter of the images for various threshold.

0.028

0.028

0.034

0.034

0.039

0.039

0.045

0.045

Fig. 5. The interference cine film frames and temperature fields during the powder vapor ignition by laser radiation. The scale of
temperature is given as line with different shadow of gray. Under images the values of time (in seconds) are shown.

0,013

0,015

0,021

0,025

0,052

0,089

0,105 (sec.)

Fig. 6. The interference cine film frames of the polystyrene vapor ignition by laser radiation and the enthalpy (H), heat release power (H’)
and heat release rate (H’v) time dependencies.

