Integrated Digital Information Security Systems
Zenovic Gherasim 1 , Marin S. Bic
1

2

, Ion Ivan 3 , Ioan Nicolaescu 4

$FDGHP\IRU+LJK0LOLWDU\6WXGLHVùRVHDXD3DQGXUL1U%XFKDUHVW

Romania
2

Military Technical Academy, Computer Science and Control Systems
Department, Bdul George &RúEXFNr. 81-83, Sector 5
Bucharest, Romania
3

$FDGHP\IRU(FRQRPLFV3LD D5RPDQ 1U%XFKDUHVW5RPDQLD

4

Military Technical Academy, Radiolocation and Guided Missiles
Department, Bdul George &RúEXFNr. 81-83, Sector 5
Bucharest, Romania

Abstract. The paper presents basic aspects of integrated digital information
securities sytems (premises, internet part, intranet part, security–cost balance),
as trend in the development of information security, and in the e-business
suport.

1. Premises
Information security affects all areas of an organization. Information security is being
recognized as an enabling factor of the new business model – electronic business (or
e-business).
Organizations must take care to preserve the integrity and the security of their
information flows such as total business integration and wireless and Web
applications.
The objective of information security is the protection of the interests of those
relying on information, and the systems and communications that deliver the
information, from harm resulting from failures of availability, confidentiality and
integrity.
The six activities involved in information security are policy development,
understanding of roles and responsibilities, design, monitoring, awareness, training
and education.
The proliferation of the Internet, Intranets and Extranets and the connections
between business has grown at a extraordinary rate: in 2001, there are a 18 exabytes
(that is 18.1018) data (Intel source).
Integrated digital information security systems represent the trend of the both
subsystems development - Internet part and Intranet part.

Structural components of these systems arise from a layered series of
technological and non-technological safeguards such as physical security measures,
user identifiers, background checks, biometrics, passwords, smard cards, and
firewalls.
.

2. Internet Part
The open nature of the Internet determine an ever-growing list of vulnerabilities that
every organization needs to consider.
As the e-commerce use increase in a great volume, the degree of information
security risk increases and the number of measures and equipments used rises.
Firewalls and antivirus subsystems are well known.
Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) is a powerful technology to control authenticity,
non-repudiation, and security of information. Each entity is assigned a security
certificate that has a private key and a public key. Information which is encrypted
with the public key, can only be decrypted with the private key. Also, the information
which is encrypted with the private key can only be decrypted with the public key.
If organization 1 wants to send data to organization 2, they first send a message
for the dialogue initiation. These messages are encrypted with private key. When
organization 2 decrypts the message with the public key of the organization 1, they
have established that they are indeed discussing to organization 1. After this step,
organization 1 sends all information messages encrypted with public key of the
organization 2 is the only entity that can decrypt these messages. The two-step
process ensures the safety and integrity of the information messages.
File Transfer Protocol (FTP) represents a widely used way to send
information messages across the Internet. FTP has some safeguards through the
use of user ID’s and passwords. However, these methods are weak safeguards at
best because the user ID and the passwords are transmitted in clear text.
It is necessary to use some sort of pre-processing and post-processing operations
to encrypt files before transmission and to decrypt files from received message. That
is a slow and cumbersome work.
Another way is to use specialized tools to secure information. The new Internet
data security applications can handle the requests of large organization e-business
needs: scalability, multiplatform capabilities, high speed, absolute reliability,
guaranted delivery, advanced scheduling automated instream encryption and
decryption. These new application provides and-to-end security in a easy to use
package.
Authentication and anti-spoofing features are build into every component of the
application. For example, each endpoint can only send or receive to other endpoints
which have been pre-approved. Authentication assures that all data are exchanged
between trusted entities.
Today, there are security keys which can be as long as 448 bits are randomly
generated by the sending endpoint. Data is encrypted instream and the key is actually
changed for every 8 bytes of data.

Modern systems generally use public key technology to distribute private keys in
the order of 2000 bits (communication level) to offer reasonable security to ebusiness systems.
Actual software advances accelerate policy development, including online
distribution of policy implementation plans throughout an organization. Each plan is
customized for any given network application or devices.

3. Intranet Part
Information security in Intranet suppose usually physical safeguards, technical
security of data and access, administrative procedures, and electronic signatures.
Physical safeguards suppose physical access controls, assigned security
responsibility (for a person or an organization), secure workstation location, media
controls, security awareness training etc.
Technical security of data contains access control, data and entity authentication,
audit and authorization controls.
Technical security of access require that the organization have documented
procedures in place for ensuring the integrity of network communications from
workstations that access sensitive data, in the areas: access and integrity controls,
event reporting, entity and message authentication, encryption.
Administrative procedures are certification, chain of trust partner agreement,
formal mechanism for processing records, information access control, internal audit,
security configuration management, security management process, personnel security,
training.
Electronic signatures provide authentication and non-repudiation, implemented
with the attributes: message integrity, interoperability, continuity of signature
capability, countersignatures, multiple signatures, non-repudiation, independent
verifiability, transportability, user authentication.
Integrated digital information security system architecture ensures the isolation
of each customer’s data and limits data access to authorized users.
The integrated digital information security system management supposes to use,
for example, the Capability Maturity Model (CMM). This model can be successively
applied as a method for self-assessment, for using the results of the self-assessment to
set target for development in the future, for planning projects and for prioritizing
project work based on project classification and an analysis of its beneficial impact
against its cost. The scale of CMM represents the following levels: 0-non-existent, 1initial, 2-repeatable, 3 – defined, 4 – managed and 5 – optimized.

4. Security-Costs Balance
Digital technology helps to make integrated security information systems.
Cryptography has evolved from black magic to quantum and adaptive secure
threshold technology ensuring that efficient and adequate protection has become
affordable and accessible.

Any integrated information security system is a tradeoff between cost, security
and convenience. This paradigm can be applied both to electronic security systems
and physical one. There are many ways to decrease the inconvenience without
sacrificing security, but the cost increase.
The complexity of an integrated digital information security system depends on
three things:
• value of information (that is the consequences if the information becomes
known);
• resources available;
• lifetime of information (especially, for sensitive information).
There is a optimum point (fig.1) in cost – security balance related to integrated
digital information security system complexity.

Fig.1
There are two basic types of risk involved in e-business through open systems
and networks: the opportunity cost of not connecting openly with the rest of online
organizations and the risk of damage when security points solutions fail. These risks
can led to a gap between the need to protect systems and the degree of protection
applied.
Integrated digital information security systems for secure e-business consist of
six closely related functions:
• intrusion detection and adequate response;
• organization security management and decision support;
• risk management and e-commerce insurance coverage;
• outsourcing for managed security services;

•
•

vulnerability management;
software piracy neutralization.

5. Conclusions
E-business are frequently misunderstood as Web-based storefronts and other eservices. The main idea of the e-business profitability is to inspire confidence from
supplier to customer, to be more available than possible in the physical world and to
protect data integrity. A way to meet these objectives is the integrated digital
information security systems which allow organizations to rethink the way a business
is run, from risk management to opportunity management. Information security is the
entire personnel problem of any organization.

References
1. Bruce, G., Dempsey, R. – Security in Distributed Computing, Prentice Hall, 1997.
2. Chapman, B., Zwicki, E. – Building Internet Firewalls, O’Reilly & Associates,
1995.
3. Franklin, M., Wright, R.N. – Secure Communication in Minimal Connectivity
Models, Journal of Cryptology, Vol.13, No.1, 2000, p.9-30.
4. Patriciu, V.V., Pietrosanu-Ene, M., Bica, I., Cristea, C. – Securitatea informatica in
Unix si Internet, Editura Tehnica, Bucuresti, 1998.
5. Patriciu, V.V., Pietrosanu-Ene, M., Bica, I., Vaduva, C., Voicu, N. – Securitatea
comertului electronic, Editura All, Bucuresti, 2001.
6. Preneel, B. (Ed.) – Advances in Cryptology – EUROCRYPT 2000, Proceedings of
the International Conference on the Theory and Application of Cryptographic
Techniques, Bruges, Belgium, May 2000.
4. 0 UJ ULW  3URFHHGLQJ RI WKH :RUNVKRS ³6RIWZDUH 3LUDF\ 1HXWUDOL]DWLRQ´
Association for Development through Science and Education, Bucharest, Nov.
2000.

