3D Mesh Generation for the Results of Anisotropic
Etch Simulation
Elena V. Zudilova, Maxim O Borisov
Integration Technologies Department
Corning Scientific Center
4 Birzhevaya Linia, St. Petersburg 199034, RUSSIA
tel.: +7-812-32292060 fax: +7-812-3292061
e-mail: {ZudilovaEV; BorisovMO}@corning.com
http://www.corning.com

Abstract. The paper is devoted to the development of 3D mesh generator that
provides the interface between etch simulation tool of IntelliSuite CAD for
MEMS and its analyses compounds. Paper provides a brief introduction to
IntelliSuite and its anisotropic etch simulator. The rest of the paper is devoted to
the algorithm of 3D mesh generation based on special requirements to Finite
Element Mesh. This algorithm can be divided into two main parts: manual
smoothing of slopes and automatic mesh generation for simplified object
obtained from the previous stage. Paper contains the detailed description of
both parts of the algorithm.

1. Introduction
The following paper is devoted to the development of mesh generation algorithm
for 3D object which geometry is defined by a set of triangles and quadrangles in
accordance with special requirements to Finite Element Mesh [4].
This algorithm has been developed for building the interface between anisotropic
etch simulator of IntelliSuite™ CAD for MEMS and its performance analysis
components. This interface will allow to use 3D model of MEMS (Micro Electro
Mechanical Systems) generated during etch simulation process for further
mechanical, electrostatic, electromagnetic and other types of analyses provided by
IntelliSuite.
To solve this task a stand-alone application has been developing. It will permit a
user to simplify manually the shape of initial 3D model by smoothing slopes of
etching pits. After that this simplified 3D object will be processed and meshed by
automatic mesh generator.
The introduction to IntelliSuite and its etch simulator is presented in section 2 of
the paper. Section 3 is devoted to the first part of the algorithm - manual smoothing of
slopes. Section 4 contains the description of its second part - automatic mesh
generating.

2. IntelliSuite Anisotropic Etch Simulation
IntelliSuite CAD for MEMS provides the ability to simulate with high accuracy
different classes of MEMS devices induced mechanically, electrostatically and
electromagnetically and then to obtain the graphical presentation of the appearance of
each simulated device. It is an integrated software complex which assists designers in
optimizing MEMS devices by providing them access to manufacturing databases and
by allowing them to model the entire device manufacturing sequence, to simulate
behavior and to see obtained results visually without having to enter a manufacturing
facility. [3]

Fig. 1 IntelliSuite example of anisotropic etch simulation results

Etch simulation tool of IntelliSuite that is called AnisE permits to generate 3D
model for anisotropic etching of silicon as a set of triangles and quadrangles defining
the object surface. With AnisE user can layout a microstructure, view 3D
representation, access information about the etch rates of different etchants and
simulate automatically the etching under different time, temperature, and
concentration parameters [5]. Fig. 1 contains a screen short of AnisE GUI and a
sample of its 3D visualization.
3D geometry generated by AnisE is appropriate for simulating anisotropic etching
but, unfortunately, obtained results can not be processed further by performance
analyses components of IntelliSuite based on Finite Element Mesh [4].
A stand-alone application has been developing for building interface between
AnisE and performance analyses of IntelliSuite. This component will generate new
3D geometry model of MEMS device in accordance with mesh requirements of
IntelliSuite by processing initial AnisE model. These requirements are as follows:

- Mesh elements are octahedrons;
- All edges are uninterrupted;
- Limits for edges ratio (1:1 - 1:10);
- Lower (30°) and higher (120°) angle bounds;
- Optimum number of finite meshed elements.
All mesh requirements listed above are determined by ABAQUS on which
IntelliSuite simulation routines are based.
As 3D geometry generated during the anisotropic etch simulation of IntelliSuite is
as usual too complicated because of AnisE accuracy, it seems reasonable to give a
user the possibility to simplify manually the surface of the object by smoothing slopes
of etching pit(s). At the end of the following stage a new simplified 3D object is
generated. Then the geometry of this object is processed automatically by 3D mesh
generator. The detailed description of each stage is provided in the next two sections
of the paper.

3. Manual Simplification of 3D Geometry Model
Simplification of 3D geometry obtained during etch simulation is conducted
manually. Fig.2 represents the screen-short of the graphical editor intended for this
purpose. The active area is divided into three zones.

Fig. 2 Screen short of the current GUI (Win-platform: MFC, Vtk 3.1.2)

The bottom zone is the feedback area of the application that provides user with
confirmations, error messages and short help instructions [8].

Fig. 3 Sample of definition of significant layers

The upper right zone contains interactive 3D viewer that represents geometry of
MEMS device. The initial 3D geometry is defined by a set of triangles and
quadrangles. Special routine for etching pits recognition has been developed. As a
result each etching pit is marked by a different color. It gives a user a possibility to
select concrete etching pit for manual smoothing or delete it if it is not significant. As
soon as any type of editing is conducted, viewer updates its screen.

Fig. 4 Sample of smoothing slopes of a simple etching pit

The upper left zone is 2D layer dependent editor. User can edit concrete etching
pit or the whole object as it is shown on Fig. 2. The top view was selected as the
active projection for editing by layers [1, 2]. User can also work with the front view
of the object, i.e. if he wants to cancel insignificant layer(s) (Fig. 3-a). For getting this
front projection, he has to define the position for vertical section on the top view of
the object (Fig. 3-b).
Manual smoothing of slopes is conducted through 2D layer dependent editor. User
can add vertices to the edges of the object and connect two vertices by line. As soon
as quadrangle is constructed, the automatic checker runs. This checker verifies angles

and edges ratio in accordance with mesh requirements. If the obtained quadrangle
satisfies them, it becomes colored (see Fig. 4).
The final goal to which the user should aim is to get a new 3D object which
surface will be meshed by quadrilateral polygons, convex and unstructured. Special
routine checks whether all final edges are uninterrupted or not. If it is true then the
manual part of the task is considered successfully completed.

4. Stage of Automatic Generating of 3D Mesh
The next part of the algorithm is aimed to the generation of 3D mesh by processing
data obtained from the previous stage. When the manual part of the algorithm is
completed we get a new object which surface is represented by a set of quadrilateral
polygons. The next stage is to mesh 3D object entirely by octahedrons that satisfy
mesh requirements.

Fig. 5 Sample of 3D meshing: slopes are vertical or nearly vertical (dry or plasma etching)

It can be obtained by cutting 3D object by vertical sections where each section is a
plane defined by the edge of a quadrilateral polygon and line perpendicular to it and
parallel to axis z [6, 7]. Several samples of how these sections can be made are
represented on Fig. 5-7.

Fig. 6 Sample of 3D meshing: bevel at the top (dry or plasma etching)

If slopes are vertical or nearly vertical (α∠30°), object is divided horizontally by
layers and cut vertically as it is shown on Fig. 5. That is true for both positive (Fig. 5a) and negative (Fig. 5-b) etching.

Fig. 7 Sample of 3D meshing: slopes are or nearly horizontal (dry or plasma etching)

If slopes are vertical and there is bevel at the bottom of the etching pit (Fig. 6), the
section at the level of the bevel top is to be made first. After that two vertical sections
defined by sloping edges of the bevel should be constructed.

Fig. 8 Sample of 3D meshing for multi-level case

If slopes are nearly horizontal (β∠30°), the object should be cut only vertically as
it is shown on Fig. 7. That is true for both positive (Fig. 7-a) and negative (Fig. 7-b)
etching.

All samples considered above have only one level of depth - each face forming a
slope has one horizontal edge at the top of the object and another one at the bottom of
an etching pit.
In the case when the object has more than one level the task can not be solved only
in accordance with variants enumerated above. If these solutions do not work, section
planes should be constructed, where each plane is formed by the edge of a
quadrilateral polygon surface and one extra point (see Fig. 8). The choice of extra
points is defined by a set of factors (quantity specifications of surface mesh, facial
angles, section planes constructed before, etc.).
Section planes may form complicated intersection and dihedral angles that do not
satisfy mesh requirements. All these situations must be controlled. Moreover, it is
necessary to trace the number of new nodes formed by these intersections, so that the
number of meshed elements will be optimal.

5. Conclusion
The uniqueness of the algorithm described in the paper consists in the combination
of manual simplification of 3D geometry with automatic mesh generation. It will give
a user the ability to control the process of generating mesh. The following algorithm
being implemented now is the first step of the long work aimed to the development of
the interface between anisotropic etch simulator of IntelliSuite CAD for MEMS and
its performance analyses components. The final goal of this work is to develop
automatic 3D Finite Element Mesh generator that can be corrected by user if
necessary [9].
These algorithms both elaborated and projected can be also used for solution of
various mesh generation tasks when 3D object is defined by a set of triangles and/or
quadrangles and mesh requirements are similar to those listed above.
Adding to IntelliSuite a new component based on the approach represented in the
paper will permit to serve better users needs. IntelliSuite users will be able to go on
processing anisotropic etch simulation results via electrostatic, mechanic,
electromagnetic and other types of analyses within a uniform design environment that
they can not do today.

References
1.

2.
3.

Bogdanov A.V., Stankova E.N., Zudilova E.V.: Visualization Environment for 3D
Modeling of Numerical Simulation Results, Proceedings of the 1st SGI Users’ Conference,
pp. 487-494 (2000).
Farin G.: Curves and Surfaces for Computer Aided Geometric Design: A Practical Guide,
Academic Press, Boston (1993).
He Y., Marchetti J., Maseeh F.: MEMS Computer-aided Design. Proc. of the 1997
European Design &Test Conference and Exhibition Microfabrication (1997).

4.
5.

6.
7.
8.

9.

Joun M.S., Lee M.C.: Quadrilateral Finite-Element Generation for Mesh Quality Control
for Metal Forming Simulation, Int. J. Num. Meth. Engng., 40(21), pp.4059-4075 (1997).
Marchetti J., He Y., Than O., Akkaraju S.: Process Development for Bulk Silicon Etching
using Cellular Automata Simulation Techniques. Proc. of SPIE's 1998 Symposium on
Micromachining and Microfabrication, Micromachined Devices and Components, Santa
Clara, CA (1998).
Maza S., Noel F., Leon J.C.: Generation of quadrilateral meshes on free-form surfaces,
Computers and Structures, 71, pp.505-524 (1999).
O'Rourke J.: Computational Geometry in C (second edition), Cambridge University Press,
377 p. (1998)
Upson C., Faulhaber J., Kamins D.: The Application Visualization System: A
Computational Environment for Scientific Visualization, IEE Computer Graphics and
Applications. 9(4), pp. 30-42 (1989).
Zudilova E.: Simulation-Visualization Complexes as Generic Exploration Environment.
Proc. of International Conference on Computational Science - ICCS 2001, San Francisco,
CA, USA, May 2001, part II, pp. 903-912 (2001).

