Design of Cellular Packet Network supporting multilevel hierarchical regional registration
JaePil Yoo1, Keechoen Kim1
1

Computer Science Dept. of Konkuk University,
Seoul, Korea
{willow, kckim}@konkuk.ac.kr

Abstract. In order to construct a cellular data network for the next generation
mobile communication service, IP layer mobility support becomes essential. IP
layer mobility support such as Mobile IP(MIP) is suitable for the global Internet environment. However, when we use MIP infrastructure for the cellular
data network, we must consider the fast hand-over for rapid data transfer, and
load balancing problem due to the location changes. In order to solve these
problems, Mobile IP Working Group is suggesting some architectures supporting micromobility. In this paper, we define a cellular data network that supports
micromobility, and we design a cellular packet network structure considering
the micromobility. The proposed network and the design of Mobile IP extension support seamless regional registrations in multi-level hierarchical topology. They accept the differential mobility management strategy as well.

1 Introduction
Mobile IP was proposed to support the mobility among IP subnet & underlying media
types by Mobile IP WG of IETF. The current activity of Mobile IP WG is mainly
focus on deployment issues and acceptance of wireless environment [1]. The efforts
of deploying IP infrastructure in wireless mobile network, such as 3GPP2(3rd Generation Partnership Project 2), mostly tend to use Mobile IP. However, from the practical point of view in deploying the IP based wireless network, there is no agreed
opinion on adopting which functional entities with physical entities of wireless IP
network. Since Mobile IP has an architecture supporting IP layer mobility in the
global Internet environment, we need some modification and optimization of mobile
IP mechanism to develop the wireless network with mobility management and fast
handoffs. These issues are currently covered in Mobile IP WG & Seamoby WG of
IETF. In this paper, we consider these problems when we adopt Mobile IP for the
next generation wireless IP network. And we design architecture applicable for the
next generation wireless IP network by modifying Mobile IP to solve the above
problems. Proposed architecture has the advantage of reduced mobility control cost
and the better scalability using the hierarchical regional registration mechanism. The

defined mobility management scheme stated in this paper also shows the reduced
resource usage.

2. Related Research
Wireless IP network for the next generation mobile network is now standardized by
3GPP and 3GPP2, which took part in the standardization of IMT2000 system by
suggesting GPRS [2][3] and Wireless IP Packet Network [4] respectively. The core
packet networks of these architectures are composed of pure packet switching infrastructure. They also define mobility management states for the mobility controls. On
the other hand, Mobile IP WG is developing mobility management protocols, which
support the signal load balance. MIP WG also tries to improve the performance
through some micromobility management schemes such as HAWAII (Hand-off
Aware Wireless Access Internet Infra), Cellular IP, and RR (Regional Registration).
In this chapter, we briefly describe such architectures.
2.1 Micro Mobility & related architectures

Mobile IP [5] uses mobility agents such as HA (Home Agent) and FA (Foreign
Agent). These agents have location information of MN (Mobile Node) to track the
current location of MN. Even though Mobile IP works well in the LAN environment,
especially in the non-real time environment, it is not suitable for the real time sensitive wireless access networks with frequent handoffs. Since wireless access network
may have a great number of MN’s and it should cover the geographically large areas,
it needs different mobility control schemes and mobility management states for fast
handoffs with efficient resource usage. This can prevent MN from not receiving the
continuous service due to the signal process delay. Seamless service for the roaming
users is critical for the wireless Internet service. Micro Mobility does support mobility management in fine granularity inside one BS domain. As a result, micromobility
processes the fast handoffs resulting in the efficient mobility control, better scalability
and the high throughput[6].
There are three main architectures supporting micro mobility as following. Cellular IP
[7][8], HAWAII [9], Regional Registration [10] are all based on the basic MIP.
Among these three architectures, Cellular IP supports micromobility using special
node called cellular IP node that serves paging function and routing function by
maintaining a paging cache and a routing cache. In order to support the macromobility, Cellular IP interacts with Mobile IP. A special cellular IP node called Cellular IP Gateway acts as a gateway between cellular IP area and Internet area, and it is
also a connection point between cellular IP and Mobile IP. So it acts as a FA in a
viewpoint of Mobile IP. Cellular IP also defines the mobility management states and
supports the classified location control scheme. But, Cellular IP needs to install the
new cellular IP protocol and all the signal messages are to be converged into the
gateway. RR is another scheme supporting micromobility of Mobile IP. It arranges

FAs in the hierarchical depth. To support micromobility in RR, each FAs only manages the lower hierarchical mobility agents. So FAs do FA’s role sometimes and do
the HA’s roles some other times. Basically, RR is composed of HA, GFA (Gateway
FA) and LFA (Local FA). Home Registration means full registration including HA
and the Regional Registration means registration between GFA-MN including LFA.
RR architecture does support micromobility but it does not support mobility management states, and optimized for the two-depth hierarchy not multi depth. HAWAII
is very similar to Cellular IP supporting micromobility and mobility management
states [11] except for using cross node for mobility management. Cross node based
mobility management results in preventing signal convergence into Domain Root
Router, which is similar to the gateway of Cellular IP.

3 Design of Network supporting hierarchical registration

3.1 Network Architecture

Internet

G atew ay agent

A

Paging agent

B
D
G

E
H

Interm ediate agent

C
F
I

J

Base Station

M obile H ost

Fig 1 : Generalized network architecture

Figure 1 depicts the generalized network architecture. It has vertically hierarchical
structure from BS to Gateway acting as a connection point with Internet. Also, all IP
routers between gateway and BS have the function of FA and HA , that are called as
Agent. Such IP router can have only one physically linked upward agent and have
one or more downward agents. BS must have wireless interface to communicate with
MN and wired interface to communicate with Agents. It acts as a FA for MN. Paging
agents send paging messages in paging areas depending on MN’s mobility management states.

3.2 Operation Flow

We describe overall processing procedure of the proposed architecture with the newly
defined extended message formats. Figure 2 depicts the overall processing flows.
M obile
Host

New Base
Station

Base
Station

Intermediate
Agent

New
Intermediate
Agent

Paging
Agent

Gateway
Agent

Agent advertisement with
hierarchical full path

Initial registration
Initial Registration

Host movement
Agent advertisement with
hierarchical full path
Regional registration

Regional registration

Fig 2 : Registration Procedure flow

Agent Advertisement
0

15
type

31

length

Sequence number

Registration lifetime

R B H F MG V LP

reserved

Base Station address
.
.
hierarchical care-of
addresses
.
Gateway address
Paging agent

Fig 3 : Agent Advertisement message format

In this architecture MN must register its location hierarchically from BS to the gateway. So some modifications are needed to make MN to register hierarchically.
COA(Care of Address) field in the Agent advertisement message is extended to the
hierarchical COA field. Hierarchical COA field has vertically hierarchical Agent list
from BS to Gateway. This helps MN to register from BS to Gateway sequentially.
Newly defined message format is shown in figure 3. The ‘L’ field in the option field
is set to distinguish the normal advertisement from the hierarchical advertisement.

Initial Registration

Initial Registration is same as full path Registration. Figure 4 depicts the procedure
for the initial registration. First, MN receives agent advertisement and then checks
whether ‘L’ field is set or not. If ‘L’ field is set, MN fetches all the COA contents and
stores in the memory in sequence. After that, MN prepares registration message. But
this registration message is somewhat different from the normal Mobile IP registration message. The first COA of the agent advertisement is set to COA of the registration message. And the second COA of the agent advertisement is set to HA field of
the registration message. The rest of COAs of the agent advertisement must be made
of COA extension message. COA extension message prevents loss of successive
COA-HA information, so it helps intermediate agents with processing registration
continually. If we don’t have COA extension message, only one depth registration
can occur due to the loss of next depth COA-HA information. We define such a COA
extension message as follows. Message format is consisted of typical TLV format.
0

15

type

31

length

unused
.
.
.
hierarchical care-of
addresses
.
.
Gateway address

Fig 4 : COA extension message format

Agent Process

If there is a COA extension message following the registration message when an
agent receives registration message, agent continues to register with upward agents
using COA extension message. If there is no COA extension, the receiver of the registration message will be HA and it is the Gateway of the architecture. Gateway ends
up the registration. Agent adds entries to binding list for MN based on the registration
message, and then returns registration replay message to downward agent which has
issued the registration request. Agent needs to continue to pass out the registration
request. In order to do this, agent fetches first COA from COA extension message
and sets it into the HA field of the registration request message. Also, the address of
agent itself becomes COA of that message. And then sends it to upward agent which
does the roles of HA’s.
Regional Registration

The proposed architecture allows regional registration in a hierarchical environment.
This regional registration must occur always after MN’s initial registration. In a
situation that MN is moving around BS’s, MN receives agent advertisement mes-

sages. In the mean time, MN compares the currently received hierarchical COAs with
pre-stored old hierarchical COAs. The different portion of COA information means it
needs regional registration. If all COAs are different except for the last gateway address between new and old COAs, it is perfectly same as the initial registration. Intermediate agent procedures are same as the initial registration procedure. The only
difference is MN’s action. MN needs to make COA extension message based on the
difference between the old and new COA field of advertisement message.
3.3 Mobility Management Scheme

Lifetime expiration problems

In the Basic Mobile IP (RFC2002), binding list of HA only depends on the MN’s
registration. Soft state timer maintains such binding list. So as to keep alive, MN must
continue on sending registration message before lifetime expires. But, regional registration do not allow registration message to reach to the upward agent, if possible, to
save signal and fast handoffs. Because of this, some agents have valid lifetime for the
MN and some agents don’t. This lifetime inconsistency makes upward agent discard
packets for active MN. In order to solve this problem, we can send registration message periodically before it expires, but this makes the entire signal information floods
over the system. It doesn’t meet our system design goals. Instead, we use parallel
timer system for MN in the binding list of agent. There are two timers called active
state timer and standby state timer. They operate separately. Standby state timer synchronizes all the lifetime value of agents related with the MN. And also has greater
timer value than the timer value of active state timer. As we send a special message
which can reset the standby state timer periodically from BS to Gateway, all the agent
related to the MN can decide whether MN is alive or not. This prevents intermediate
agents from dropping packets even MN is alive. These two-timer values can be set by
the administrative value of the system. Too small-timer values can make system act
instantly, but make too many signal flooding. In the opposite way, too big-timer value
profits to the system loads but makes slow topological convergence.
Mobility Management Scheme

We set three mobility management states to reduce the number of signals of the system and it saves the resources. And we also define the extended messages to inform
each state on the system. The first is Active state. Active state is set when Active state
timer values are valid. It means that packet sending/receiving is active. It occurs
within a small time value that the system sets as an active time value on the system. In
the system, Active state MN’s location must be maintained by the exact cell units so
as to transfer packets correctly. The second is Standby state. It is set after expiration
of active state timer value and Standby state timer is valid. It means packets transfer
is not currently occurs but, MN’s location need to be tracked for the possible traffic to

the MN. The third is Null state. It is set only when the above two state timers are
expires. System cannot track the MN’s location.
P acket send /receiving o r M IP
registratio n

A ctive tim er exp ire

SSta
tanndd bbyy

AActiv
e
ctive

(A ctive state tim er
(A ctive state tim er
valid)
valid)

M IP reg istratio n to P ag in g
o r P ack et sen d in g

(A ctive state tim er
(A ctive state tim er
invalid & S tand -b y
in valid & S tan d-b y
state
)
statetim
timerervalid
valid)

P ow er off(registratio n
w ith lifetim e valu e 0 )

P o w er off

P o w er o n

S tand b y state refresh m essag e
receiv e (M o ving b etw een P A o r
P erio d ical S tan d b y state u p date)

(reg istration w ith
lifetim e valu e 0 )

or
S tan d by tim er ex pire

NNuullll

(all tim er invalid)
(all tim er invalid)

Fig 5 : Mobility management state

Paging
M obile
H ost

Base
Station

Interm ediate
A gent

Paging
A gent

G atew ay
A gent

Incom ing packets from
external netw ork

Paging request

Packet buffering

P aging response

Paging response
Full path recognition

Packet transfer
Packet receiving

Fig 6 : Paging request and paging response

Paging is used to awake MN in the Standby state. It makes Standby state move to
Active state so MN can receive packets from upward agents. Figure 6 depicts Paging
processing. BS must belong to one Paging area. One of the intermediate agents acts
as a paging agent. For the MN, the location information from Gateway to Paging
agent must be maintained but from Paging agent to BS needs not to be maintained.
Instead Paging agent must do paging over the paging area dynamically to know the
exact path to MN to transfer packets. We need also modify the message and extensions. It can be similar to the registration request message except that the timer value

is not active lifetime but standby timer value. This message is used in two cases. The
first is when MN is moving between Paging area, and when MN needs to keep consistent standby timer value through BS to Gateway, it sends out the message periodically.We summarize the proposed architecture and related architecture in Table 1. It
shows the comparison with the proposed architecture
Table 1 : Architecture characteristics of different schemes

Load balancing
Mobility management state
Micro Mobility
Used protocol
sets

Basic
MIP
N/A

Available

Regional
Registration
Available

N/A

Available

N/A

Available
MIP, HAWAII
protocol

MIP

HAWAII

Cellular IP

Proposed

N/A

Available

N/A

Available

Available

Available
MIP, MIP
extension

Available
MIP, Cellular
IP protocol

Available
MIP, MIP
extension

4. Performance Evaluation
This chapter shows performance in the viewpoint of signal load balancing and
handoff reaction time through the comparison. We set comparable targets as related
architecture as Basic MIP, Cellular IP and HAWAII. We assume a full binary tree as
hierarchical system architecture. Also we assume a root node as Gateway and leap
nodes as BS like routers. The number of nodes of a tree with depth n is 2n+1. If we
suppose that just one MN is moving around to the next adjacent BS, the probability
for the Gateways to process the signal and the number of nodes participating in processing the signal must be different in each system. In case of Basic Mobile IP, the
number of Cellular IP Nodes that process MN’s signal (which means overall system
load) can be computed as follows
Probability of Gateway (HA) processing =1,
As the number of depth increases, this value doesn’t change, maintains a constant
value of 1.
In case of proposed Architecture and HAWAII,
The number of nodes processing MN’s signal (which means overall system load)
n

=∑
k =1

1
2 k −1

, where n=Depth of the tree

The number of nodes processing the MN'
s signal means the overall system load. And
we use this system load as a performance factor for the comparison.
.Probability of Gateway (HA) processing

=

1
2n

As the number of the depth increases, the system load reduces dramatically in our
proposed scheme. Figure 7 shows the overall signal load over Gateway based on the
above formula. The more nodes exist, the less Gateway get signal from the MN. This
graph only accounts for Active state MN
Basic M IP

Signal count

70
60
50

Cellular IP

40
30
20
10

HAWAII

0
3

7

15

31

63

Node count

Proposed
architecture(
multi level)

Fig 7 : Overall signal load over Gateway

Figure 8 shows the average handoff reaction time for moving MN. We assume one
MN moves among BS’s in a constant speed. It simply moves 1 BS hop in one second.
In case of Basic Mobile IP, as the level of depth increases, the reaction time also
increases. In case of the proposed architecture, the more the depth, the worse the
agent-processing delay, but the local registration scheme reduces the number of signals to the top. This results in the reduced handoff reaction time as you can see
curved line in Figure 9. As we can see from the above result, the proposed architecture is better for load balancing, as more routers are used. It has much more scalability than other architecture and can be operated with Mobile IP based message with
some
simple
modification.
12

Basic M IP(1
level)

10

Cellular IP

Average reaction time

14

8
6

HAWAII

4
2
0

3

7

Router count

Fig 8 . Average reaction time

15

31

63

Proposed
architecture(mul
ti level)

5. Conclusion
In this paper, we proposed wireless access core network architecture that enables fast
mobility management for next generation wireless network. We designed a cellular
data network supporting micro mobility, then we defined a suite of modified Mobile
IP message format that can be used within the proposed architecture. The proposed
network architecture and the modified Mobile IP extension design supports seamless
roaming in the hierarchical regional registration and they admit the classified mobility
management states. In order to get these goals, we design the modified Mobile IP
message format, network architecture with composing nodes, set-up process of each
nodes, and classified mobility management states characterized by using parallel
timers composed of active and standby timers. This architecture shows efficiency in
reducing the control messages so that can be used in the next generation wireless core
network. But, the proposed architecture is not effective on every aspect. As it needs
capsulations/de-capsulations [12] on every hop, it produces more processing delay.
We will make our effort to solve this problem in the future.

References
1. J. Solomon, "Applicability Statement for IP Mobility Support"` , IEFT RFC, October 1996
2. ETSI SMG, "GSM 3.60 version 6.1.1 - General Packet Radio Service description Stage 2,`
European Standard Draft, August 1998
3. ETSI SMG, "GSM 9.60 version 6.1.0 - GPRS Tunneling Protocol," European Standard
Draft, August 1998
4. TIA/EIA TR45, "Wireless IP Network Architecture based on IETF Protocols, June 28 1999
5. C.E. Perkins, "IP Mobility Support", RFC 2002, October 1996
6. Ramachandran, Kannan Varadhan, and Li Li, "IP-Based Access Network Infrastructure for
Next-Generation Wireless Data Networks”, IEEE Personal Communications special issue
on IP-based Mobile Telecommunications Networks, August 2000
7. A. G. Valko, "Cellular IP - A New Approach to Internet Host Mobility," ACM Computer
Communication Review, January 1999
8. A. T. Campbell, Gomez, J., Kim, S., Turanyi, Z., Wan, C-Y. and A, Valko "Design, Implementation and Evaluation of Cellular IP", IEEE Personal Communications, Special Issue on
IP-based Mobile Telecommunications Networks, June/July 2000.
9. R. Ramjee / T. La Porta/S. Thuel / K. Varadhan / L. Salgarelli, ` "IP micro-mobility support
using HAWAII", Internet Draft, Jun 1999
10. Eva Gustafsson / Annika Jonsson / Charles E. Perkins, "Mobile IP Regional Registration",
Internet Draft draft-ietf-mobileip-reg- tunnel-03.txt, 13 July 2000
11. R. Ramjee `"Paging support for IP mobility using HAWAII"`, Internet Draft, Jun 1999
12. Perkins, "IP Encapsulation within IP", RFC2003, October 1996

