ICT environment for multi-disciplinary design and
multi objective optimisation
W.J. Vankan, R. Maas and M. ten Dam
National Aerospace Laboratory - NLR
ICT Division
Anthony Fokkerweg 2
1059 CM
Amsterdam
The Netherlands
vankan@nlr.nl

Abstract. This paper presents an ICT environment for multi-disciplinary design
and multi objective optimisation in which a set of software tools are available
for evaluation and approximation of objective functions and for proper control
of several optimisation algorithms for multi objective optimisation. The ICT
environment provides easy access to the relevant resources in the computer
network via a Java based user interface, which can be executed stand-alone or
as a Java applet based web client. As an example of application of this
environment, some results of a multi objective optimisation study of a blendedwing-body aircraft configuration are shown.

Introduction
Technical product design is hardly ever an exclusively mono-disciplinary exercise. It
mostly requires analyses of several different aspects of the product that are often
related to different research areas or technical disciplines. For example in aeronautics,
the design of an aircraft is determined by many different aspects, of which some
important ones are aerodynamic behaviour, structural mechanical properties and flight
mechanical and control properties [1]. For each of these aspects there is a specific
technical discipline that can deal with highly detailed investigation and analysis of the
design in its specific area. Such investigation is usually performed by monodisciplinary specialists who make use of a variety of dedicated analysis tools. In
multi-disciplinary design it is required that these mono-disciplinary investigations
effectively contribute to the integrated multi-disciplinary design process [12].
In the EU project MOB [13] the multi disciplinary design and optimisation of a
blended-wing-body (BWB) aircraft configuration is considered. For this purpose an
engineering environment for multi disciplinary design analysis is developed in MOB.
This so-called computational design engine (CDE) shall be a flexible system,
providing easy access to the partners in the MOB project and allowing them to
integrate and interconnect their design and analysis tools. The CDE facilitates the
multi disciplinary design process for the BWB by transparent presentation of the
necessary analysis tools, data and documents to the CDE users. The CDE also offers

certain facilities for optimisation of the BWB design, based on an efficient but
traditional approach.
When considering product design as an optimisation process where the design
objectives are optimised subject to certain design constraints, multi-disciplinary
design leads to mutually competing objectives and constraints that arise from the
different disciplines and must be dealt with simultaneously. Such multi objective
optimisation essentially differs from traditional single-objective optimisation. In this
case, global or local optima do not exist for all design objectives simultaneously and
hence a possibly large set of compromised optimal designs, the so-called Pareto front
[8] is searched for. This requires specific search techniques, which can be considered
as generalisations of single objective optimisation methods [4].
This paper presents an ICT environment for multi-disciplinary design and multi
objective optimisation in which a set of software tools are available for proper
definition and approximation of objective functions and for easy control of several
optimisation algorithms for multi objective optimisation. The underlying middleware
technology that is used to create this ICT environment is briefly addressed. The same
underlying middleware is used in the MOB CDE, which enables easy exchange of
components between these two environments. Hence, a part of the CDE has been used
in the present study, in which a multi objective optimisation analysis of the BWB
aircraft has been performed. The set up of this study, in particular the methods for
approximation and multi objective optimisation that have been used, will be
described, and some optimisation results are shown.

ICT environment for MDO
Multi-disciplinary design and optimisation (MDO) requires close co-operation of a
number of different technical disciplines, in each of which a variety of software tools
is available for design and analysis simulations that run on specific computer
platforms. The variety of software tools and the associated heterogeneous computer
infrastructure and data formats impose certain complexity to close multi-disciplinary
co-operation from which the end user in the MDO process should be shielded as much
as possible.
Present technologies like CORBA (Common Object Request Broker Architecture),
Java and WWW provide possibilities to build end-user oriented, integrated multidisciplinary design environments. These technologies can be incorporated into
middleware systems in order to facilitate interoperability in MDO environments,
which are usually operated on distributed heterogeneous computer networks.
SPINEware is such a middleware system that supports the construction and usage of
so-called working environments on top of heterogeneous computer networks [2]. A
SPINEware-based working environment can be tailored to particular end usage and
application areas. A SPINEware working environment provides uniform and networktransparent access to the information, applications, and other resources available from
the computer network presented to the user through an intuitive GUI: the SPINEware
User Shell. SPINEware also supports web-based access to SPINEware object services
via a Java applet implementation of the SPINEware User Shell [10].

In the MOB project SPINEware is being used for the development of the CDE, which
is applied to the detailed design and optimisation of the BWB aircraft configuration.
This CDE is set up as a distributed environment that is developed from contributions
of each of the MOB partners. The main contributions of NLR to the CDE are in the
areas of high fidelity aerodynamics, structural mechanics and flight mechanics. Other
areas are contributed by other partners. For example, CAD and geometry generation
are provided by the University of Delft and low fidelity aerodynamics by the
University of Cranfield. Currently, the CDE components from NLR and the
universities of Delft and Cranfield are operational and can be used in an integrated
multi disciplinary design process of the BWB (Fig. 1).

Fig. 1. Schema of the multi disciplinary BWB design process with the currently operational
MOB CDE (left) and its implementation in a SPINEware workflow (right).

At NLR the SPINEware middleware system is also being used to build user-oriented
collaborative ICT environments, each dedicated to a certain application area. One
such environment has been developed for the field of MDO. A set of software tools
required for MDO, multi objective optimisation and approximate modeling have been
integrated into this environment, and can be accessed from and executed on different
computers of the heterogeneous NLR computer network. The environment is
accessible via a standard web browser and comprises facilities for easy tool
integration, tool manipulation and tool chaining, job and queue management, and
remote operations where CORBA is used for the communication over the network.
With this environment a multi objective optimisation study of the MOB BWB aircraft
has been performed, where some of the analysis tools of the MOB CDE have been
used (Fig. 2).

Fig. 2. Screen shots of the SPINEware working environment for MDO as accessed via a web
server and using Microsoft Internet Explorer 4.0 as web client. The upper left panel shows the
login web page, the upper right shows the SPINEware Console window. In the lower left panel
a tool library of the MOB CDE is shown, and the lower right shows the workflow (or tool
chain) for the multi objective optimisation of the BWB MDO aircraft, in which some of the
CDE tools have been incorporated.

Multi objective optimisation algorithms
In the past decades a strong development of many different optimisation algorithms
has taken place. A variety of optimisation methods, ranging from traditional gradient
based optimisation methods (GM) to genetic- or evolutionary algorithms (GA), are
currently widely available. In general, most GM are typically designed for single
objective optimisation, while GA are more suitable for multi objective optimisation.
Nevertheless it is desirable to be able to apply both methods to multi objective
optimisation problems, because both have certain specific advantages. In general, the

advantage of GA is that such algorithms have good global search capabilities, while
GM easily get stuck in a local optimum. GM, on the other hand, are generally more
efficient than GA in terms of the number of objective functions evaluations that is
required for finding an optimum.
The application of both methods to multi objective optimisation problems is not
straight-forward, and proper definition of the objective functions and effective control
of the optimisation algorithm are required. In aeronautic multi-disciplinary design the
evaluation of the objective functions can be computationally very expensive, for
example in the case of CFD simulation of the aerodynamic behaviour. Hence a
computationally much cheaper approximation model is required for such objective
functions because of the large number of objective functions evaluations that is
needed in multi objective optimisation. Moreover, in the case of GM the multi
objective optimisation process requires flexibly alternating combinations of objective
and constraint functions, which can be achieved by specific control of the
optimisation algorithms.
The considered MDO environment contains some specific tools for approximate
modeling and multi objective optimisation. The approximate modeling tool makes use
of artificial neural networks (ANN) as available from the Matlab Neural Network
Toolbox [7]. Upon execution, the tool presents a user interface that guides the user
through the process of setting up the ANN approximate model (Fig. 3). For multi
objective optimisation, a GA and four algorithms based on GM, as available from the
Matlab Optimisation Toolbox [6], can be used. The GA tool [11] applies a more or
less standard MOGA technique [5], including elitism strategy and options such as
niching (on both input and objective) and mating. The multi objective optimisation
tool provides an interface to the four different GM based optimisation algorithms
(Fig. 3).

Fig. 3. The interfaces for the ANN and multi objective optimisation tools. Left: the option
menu for the training of the ANN. Right: the option menu for specification and control of the
GM based multi objective optimisation.

Two out of the four gradient-based methods are presented in this study. The first
method is the minimax algorithm, more specific its Matlab implementation fminimax.
A special strategy is applied by the multi objective optimisation tool in order to obtain
the Pareto front instead of the standard single point minimax optimum. In this strategy
it is assumed that each objective is positive. Furthermore it is assumed that an initial
set of feasible design parameters with their corresponding objective values is

available. The Pareto rank one subset of this initial set is then used as demand values;
this rank one subset is the set of compromised optimal designs, also called the set of
non-dominated solutions. The minimax optimisation process will then result, upon
convergence of the method, in a point P on the Pareto front on the line between the
origin and the demand value of the initial set [9] (Fig. 4).

Fig. 4. Illustration of the two GM based multi objective optimisation processes. Left: using the
minimax algorithm; right: using the constrained minimisation algorithm. The open circles are
the initial objective values and the closed circles the final values. The arrows denote the
optimisation processes.

In formula it reads:
opt
Pj = c( p opt
j ) with p j = arg min max
p∈S

i

ci ( p )
ci ( q j )

(1)

where P is the point on the Pareto front, c is the multi-dimensional objective function,
i denotes i-th the component of this objective function, S is the design parameter
space, qj is a design parameter vector corresponding to a rank one design. If this is
repeated for every rank one point in the design parameter space, a set of points on the
Pareto front is obtained.
In the second gradient based method, equality-constraint, the rank one points of the
of the initial set of feasible design parameters are again the starting point, but here
only one objective is minimised while keeping the other fixed (Fig. 4). The
implementation that has been chosen is a constrained minimisation using the Matlab
function fmincon.

MDO of a blended-wing-body aircraft
In the MOB project a detailed MDO study is conducted on a new BWB aircraft
configuration. As a preliminary design analysis, a multi objective optimisation study
is applied to some key properties of the BWB in cruise flight: aerodynamic
performance (Cdl) based on the lift and drag coefficients (Cl and Cd), structural
mechanical wing loading (Mt) based on the roll and yaw moments at the centre of
mass (Mr and Mt), and flight mechanical unbalance (MpA) based on the pitching

moment at the centre of mass (Mp). These properties are represented by the following
three objective functions that are minimized:
Cdl =

Cd
Cl

(2)

Mt = Mr 2 + My 2
MpA = Mp

The BWB design parameters that are varied relative to the BWB reference
configuration, are the wing twist, wing sweep, and angle of attack in cruise flight (Fig
5).
Reference BWB

Twist variation

Sweep variation

Angle of attack

Fig. 5. Illustration of the BWB reference configuration, and the design parameters twist, sweep,
and angle alpha used in the BWB pre-design study.

The objective function values can be evaluated from simulations of the airflow around
the BWB under the cruise flight boundary conditions using a CFD solver for NavierStokes equations. However, because these simulations involve large scale and time
consuming calculations for CAD geometry re-generation, flow domain discretisation
and CFD computation, the ANN tool is used for approximation of the considered
BWB properties (Cl, Cd, Mr, My and Mp) from which the objectives Cdl, Mt and MpA are
derived. For this purpose a data set of these properties is generated for the relevant
ranges of the design parameters by flow simulations in a limited number of design
points. The ANN has been trained using the resulting data set of 342 design points,
where the three design parameters are used as ANN inputs and the five BWB
properties as ANN outputs. Afterwards the outputs are combined to yield the
objectives Cdl, Mt and MpA. To train the network the input set is split in separate
training, validation and test sets of 250, 50 and 24 design points, respectively [3]. The
ANN is a feed-forward network and the optimal number of hidden nodes is nine,
which has been automatically determined within a specified range by the ANN tool.
Furthermore it has been found that one hidden layer was sufficient and that within the
relevant range of design parameters the approximation is acceptable with an error of
about 1 %.
Once the ANN is available, the multi objective optimisations can be performed with
the different optimisation algorithms. The GA is run with a population of 100 and for
30 generations. The initial population is taken randomly from the 342 input vectors
and will contain about 22 rank one points in the output space. For both the minimax
method and the equality-constraint method those inputs of the training set are chosen
which have rank one outputs. There are 55 of those input vectors.
For each individual method, after the optimisation is run, the rank one points are
selected and taken as approximation of the Pareto front. The results are depicted in

Fig. 6. In Table 1 the approximate number of function calls, the total number of
points resulting from the optimisation, and the number of points in the non-dominated
sets are shown.

Fig. 6. The results of the different optimisation methods are depicted here. The Cdl, Mt and MpA
obtained by the GA (o), minimax method (*) and the GM2 method (∆) are depicted in 3D and
in 2D projections.

Table 1. Some numbers about the performance of each individual method

Method
Total nr of points in final result
Nr of non-dominated points
Number of function calls (about)

GA
100
100
4900

minimax
55
54
2000

equality-constraint
165
113
6400

The rank one points for each method can than be compared with the rank one points
of the other methods. Then sub-optimal solutions (i.e. not rank one) can then be
found. In Table 2 the results are summarised. One sees that every method yields
some sub-optimal points.

Table 2. The number of non-dominated and dominated points in set #1 when comparing the set
with set #2. The numbers left of the slash are the non-dominated points, while those right of the
slash are the dominated points.

set #2
set #1
GA
Minimax
GM

GA
51/3
108/5

minimax
96/4
100/13

GM
93/7
51/3
-

Discussion and conclusions
In this paper an ICT environment for multi-objective optimisation and multidisciplinary design has been presented. Special attention has been paid to the
functionality for multi-objective optimisation and approximate modeling. Several
methods for multi-objective optimisation, based on GA and GM, and a method for
approximate modeling based on ANN, were implemented in this environment.
Furthermore, several tools for specific aeronautic design analyses have been adopted
from the MDO environment (the CDE) that is developed in the MOB project.
The ICT environment has been applied to a predesign case of the BWB aircraft
configuration from the MOB project. In the multi-objective optimisation analysis an
ANN approximation of the CFD calculations has been made, and an initial
comparative study of the use of the GA and two of the GM based methods for MOO
has been performed. The results indicate that the different multi objective
optimisation methods provide comparable results at comparable computational cost.
However, the robustness and global search capabilities of the GA compete with the
higher efficiency of the GM due to the smaller size of the required sets of design
points. Therefore these methods have complementary functionality.
Acknowledgements
The support of Dr. M. Laban and Dr. J.C. Kok in setting up the CFD simulations of
the BWB with NLR's Enflow system is gratefully acknowledged. This study has been
partially supported by the EU project MOB, contract number G4RD-CT1999-0172.

References
1.
2.

Allwright, S.: Multi-discipline Optimisation in Preliminary Design of Commercial
Transport Aircraft. In: Proc. ECCOMAS'96 Conference, Paris (1996)
Baalbergen, E.H., van der Ven, H.: SPINEware – A Framework for User-Oriented and
Tailorable Metacomputers, Future Generation Computer Systems 15 (1999) 549-558

3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.

12.
13.

Bishop. Chr. M: Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition. Clarendon Press, Oxford
(1997)
Fonseca, C.M., Fleming, P.J.: Genetic Algorithms for Multi-Objective Optimization:
Formulation, Discussion and Generalization. In: Genetic Algorithms: Proc. of the Fifth Int.
Conf., San Mateo, CA, USA (1993) 416-423
Fonseca, C.M., Fleming, P.J.: An Overview of Evolutionary Algorithms in MultiObjective Optimization. Evolutionary Computing 3 (1995) 1-16
The MathWorks: Matlab Optimization Toolbox. http://www.mathworks.com/products/
optimization.
The MathWorks: Matlab Neural Network Toolbox. http://www.mathworks.com/products/
neural.
Pareto, V.: Manuale di Economia Politica. Sociata Editrice Libraria, Milan, Italy (1906).
Sawaraki, Y., and Nakayama, H.: The Theory of Multiobjective Optimization. Academic
Press, Inc, (1985)
Schultheiss, B.C., Baalbergen, E.H.: Utilizing Supercomputer Power from your Desktop.
HPCN 2001 Conference, Amsterdam (2001)
Tan, K.C.,: MOEA - Multi-objective Evolutionary Algorithm. http://vlab.ee.nus.edu.sg/
~kctan.
Vogels M.E.S., Arendsen, P., Krol, R.J., Laban M., and Pruis, G.W.: From a Monodisciplinary to a Multidisciplinary Approach in Aerospace: As Seen from Information and
Communication Technology Perspective. In: ICAS 98, Melbourne, Australia (1998)
"MOB: A Computational Design Engine Incorporating Multi-disciplinary Design and
th
Optimisation for Blended-Wing-Body Configuration". EC 5 Framework Programme,
Contract nr. GRD1-1999-11162 (2000).

