Content-Aware Automatic QoS Provisioning for UPnP
AV-Based Multimedia Services over Wireless LANs
Yeali S. Sun1, Chang-Ching Yan 1, and Meng Chang Chen2
1

Dept. of Information Management, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
sunny@im.ntu.edu.tw
2
Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
mcc@iis.sinica.edu.tw

Abstract. With the advent of wireless and mobile devices, wireless
communications technology is enjoying its fastest growth period in history. It
has been greatly affecting the way we live and work. Two main challenges
remain that prevent the wide-spread adoption of digital media distribution using
wireless technology such as IEEE 802.11 Wi-fi LANs at home are plug-andplay (zero-configuration) and Quality of Service (QoS). The UPnP AV
(audio/video) technology is an emerging multimedia session initiation/control
protocol promoted by Intel and Microsoft for multimedia content delivery
services in home networks. In this paper, we propose a new scheme to address
the above two issues. By performing Layer-7 content classification, inspection
and automatic resource allocation and configuration, the scheme provides
transparent QoS guarantees to UPnP AV multimedia streaming applications
over wireless LANs such as in home and office environments. The execution of
these operations is automatic and completely transparent to end users. Users are
free of complex QoS configuration and multimedia service technology details.
The scheme requires no changes of any existing protocols and network interface
cards. A Linux-based wireless home gateway router is also prototyped. The
performance results measured from the testbed show that the system achieves
the goals of providing home users zero configuration and transparent QoS
guarantees for multimedia streaming over wireless home networks.

1 Introduction
Digital and wireless networking will become prevailing technologies to provide a
solid foundation for distributing entertainment content at home. Two main challenges
remain that prevent the wide-spread adoption of digital media distribution using
wireless technology such as IEEE 802.11 wi-fi LANs at home are plug-and-play
(zero configuration) and Quality of Service (QoS). Unlike IT professions, no home
users can tolerate complex configuration and manipulation of consumer electronics
devices. Image you have to teach your grandparents and kids about link sharing
policy, packet classification rules and various VoIP and MPEG compression
algorithms and bit rates so they will be able to configure the wireless access
points/gateway router to guarantee the QoS of a movie or mp3 streaming in their
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3515, pp. 444 – 452, 2005.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

Content-Aware Automatic QoS Provisioning for U PnP

445

home network. Thus, providing transparent QoS service is essential to the success of
home networking. That is, the networking devices are smart enough to automatically
detect the establishment of multimedia sessions (or connections) among all the traffic
transported in a wireless home network, as well as to guarantee the QoS of these
sessions.
The UPnP (Universal Plug and Play) [1] is a technology proposed by a number of
vendors including Microsoft and Intel for peer-to-peer networking of intelligent
appliances, wireless devices and personal computers. The UPnP AV (Audio/Video)
architecture [2] is a sequel of UPnP which is specially designed to support AV
content delivery between networked devices. The UPnP AV technology is expected to
have widespread support from the industry to incorporate it into devices/equipment in
home networking in the future. While the current UPnP AV architecture reaches a
state of readiness, how to transparently guarantee the quality of service of AV content
transfer in a wireless home or office environment remains to be resolved. It truly
relies on the network equipment as an essential component to do wireless channel
resource management and provide a transparent, convenient environment to assure
users have comfortable experience of enjoying multimedia services with QoS
guarantees at home. In a home network, we envision there will be a diverse variety of
applications such as telephony, video and data traffic share the same wireless
bandwidth.
In this paper, we present a new scheme, based on content-aware packet
classification and automatic configuration, to provide transparent QoS guarantees to
UPnP AV sessions over wireless LANs. The key ideas in our scheme are as follows:
! Innovative content-aware packet classification of AV signaling/control messages
to learn the establishment and release of AV sessions.
! Real-time content inspection to extract QoS requirements of AV session (e.g.,
application type, bit rate, identifications of end points, etc.).
! Integrating the scheme with underlying network QoS mechanisms to
transparently and automatically perform bandwidth reservation and packet
classifier configuration.
To achieve automatic QoS provision, one must know the control protocols used by
the multimedia sessions. Our approach is to intercept and classify UPnP AV session
control messages, perform Layer-7 content inspection to retrieve QoS requirements
from the UPnP AV XML-based messages, automatically configure the underlying
network QoS mechanisms and packet classifier to assure the wireless channel access
of the session based on the requirements (such as the bit rate, and transport
information of the communicating devices (e.g., IP address, port number, etc.)). The
scheme requires no changes of any existing standards (e.g., IEEE 802.11 MAC and
content delivery applications). It is completely transparent to the users.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we briefly describe the
UPnP AV architecture. In Section 3, we describe the proposed scheme in details,
including system architecture and the content classification/inspection algorithms. We
have implemented the proposed scheme on a Linux-based QoS wireless gateway
router with packet classification/scheduling/queueing mechanisms supported in the

446

Y.S. Sun, C.-C. Yan, and M.C. Chen

kernel. In section 4, the performance results measured from the prototype system and
the tested are presented. Finally, the conclusion is given in Section 5.

2 UPnP AV Architecture
As shown in Figure 1, there are three components in the UPnP AV architecture:
MediaServer [3], MediaRenderer [4], and Control Point. The architecture defines the
interaction between the UPnP AV Control Points and UPnP AV devices. The
“MediaServer” is the source of the media content and allows AV Control Point to
browse the content items that are available for users to enjoy. Three services have
been defined in the MediaServer: Content Directory Service [5], Connection Manager
Service [6] and AV Transport Service [7]. A MediaRenderer device obtains and
renders audio/video content from a MediaServer device via network. There are three
services defined in MediaRenderer: Rendering Control Service [8], Connection
Manager Service, and AV Transport Service. The Control Point is a device that
provides user interface for users to select desired content available on MediaServer
devices to MediaRenderer devices of choice. It manages the operations of both
MediaServer and MediaRenderer by sending instruction messages to the devices. The
AV content streaming is however, directly from MediaServer to MediaRenderer.

Control Point

Legend:
- UPnP AV messages
- AV content

INTERNET
INTERNET

Media Renderer

Media Server

Fig. 1. The UPnP AV architecture

Figure 2 shows the message flows in the UPnP AV architecture.
• ContentDirectoryService::Browse() action allows Control Points to obtain detailed
information of the media files that MediaServer provides such as the name, artist,
transfer protocol and media format that MediaServer supports.
• The ConnectionManager::GetProtocolInfo() action allows Control Points to learn
the transfer protocol and media format that MediaRenderer supports.
• The ConnectionManager::PrepareForConnection() action is used by Control Point
to inform MediaServer and MediaRenderer that an AV session is about to be
established and the selected transfer protocol and media format for the session.

Content-Aware Automatic QoS Provisioning for UPnP

447

• AVTransport::SetAVTransportURI() action is used to inform MediaRenderer of the
URI of the AV media file to be rendered.
The UPnP AV architecture allows MediaServer and MediaRenderer to choose any
transfer protocol for content delivery. In the case of HTTP[10], after receiving
AVTransport::Play(), MediaRenderer will send a HTTP GET message to MediaServer.

When the AV content transfer is stopped, MediaRenderer will notify Control
Point by sending a notification message. For RTSP[11]/RTP[12], after receiving
AVTransport::SetAVTransportURI(), MediaRenderer will send a RTSP SETUP
message to MediaServer. Upon receiving AVTransport::Play(), MediaRenderer will
send a RTSP PLAY message to MediaServer. Finally, MediaRenderer sends a RTSP
TEARDOWN to terminate the RTSP session.

Media Server

Media Renderer

Control Point
CDS::Browse()

Media File
Description

HTTP 200 OK
CDS::PrepareForConnection()

CM::GetProtocolInfo()
HTTP 200 OK
Supported transport
protocol and media
format

HTTP 200 OK
AVTransport
Instance ID
Media File
URI

CDS::PrepareForConnection()
HTTP 200 OK
AVT::SetAVTransportURI()
HTTP 200 OK
AVT::Play()
HTTP 200 OK

Out-Of-Band Content Transfer
CM::TransferComplete()
HTTP 200 OK
CM::TransferComplete()
HTTP 200 OK

Fig. 2. The procedure and messages exchange to set up an UPnP AV session

3 Transparent QoS Provisioned UPnP AV Multimedia System
3.1 Wireless Home Network
In this paper, we consider a wireless home network as shown in Figure 3. The Control
Point module is located in a wireless gateway router. The MediaServer device is
attached to the home network through a wired or wireless link. One or more
MediaRenderer devices such as TV can be dispersed in different locations in the
house and are connected to the wireless gateway router through wireless links such as

448

Y.S. Sun, C.-C. Yan, and M.C. Chen

Upstream and
Downstream
access
Bandwidth
Sharing

softphone

Internet

Streaming Media
Server
(meidaServer)
QoS Wireless Home
Gateway Router

Video
render
Web
Browser
(meidaRenderer)

Video
VoIP phone
Render
(MediaRenderer)

Hi-fi speakers
(meidaRenderer)

Fig. 3. Multimedia services over a wireless home network

IEEE 802.11. The typical AV content distributions are such as an MPEG-4 movie
streaming from a personal video recorder with storage (MediaServer) to a TV
(MediaRenderer) and a MP3 music from a computer (MediaServer) to hi-fi stereo
speakers (MediaRenderer). In these scenarios, the interactions (control and data)
between control points, content servers and rendering devices are all via the wireless
gateway. Our objective is to design a software module inside the wireless gateway
router for two purposes. First, since all the traffic will pass through the gateway
router, the module will monitor and detect the exchange of the UPnP AV signaling
messages for AV session establishment and release. It will then perform content
inspection to retrieve QoS-relevant information from relevant messages.
Second, once obtaining the information, the module in the wireless gateway will
automatically configure the underlying QoS mechanisms to allocate necessary
bandwidth to assure the transport quality of the audio/video session. The execution of
these operations is automatic and completely transparent to end users. In other words,
users do not need to do any configuration of any of these UPnP AV devices and the
wireless gateway router. Users are free of complex QoS configuration and multimedia
service technology details. Our software provides a convenient QoS-guaranteed
wireless multimedia digital home entertainment environment. It requires no changes
to any existing standards and network interface cards.
3.2 System Architecture
The system architecture is shown in Figure 4. The Packet Type Classifier filters out
the UPnP AV messages subject to content inspection. The Packet Content Parser is
responsible for parsing message content to retrieve necessary information for
automatic QoS configuration. The Session Manager and MediaInfo Manager manage
two major data structures - the QoS session descriptors and media information
descriptors - for the active AV sessions in the system, respectively. The FSM module
implements the finite state machines (FSM) of the transport protocols supported in the
system. The FSMs are the procedures for content classification and inspection of the
UPnP AV messages and the messages of the supported transport protocols to manage
AV sessions. The QoS Manager interacts with the kernel QoS modules to make and
release bandwidth reservation.

Content-Aware Automatic QoS Provisioning for UPnP

449

Fig. 4. The architecture of the transparent QoS provisioned UPnP AV multimedia system

3.3 The Finite State Machines for Content-Aware Packet Classification and
Inspection
Two transport protocols - HTTP and RTSP/RTP – are currently supported in the
proposed system. The corresponding finite state machines (FSM) are shown in
Figure 5.

(a) for HTTP transport

(b) for RTSP/RTP transport

Fig. 5. The finite state machines of the UPnP-AV content-aware classification and inspection

450

Y.S. Sun, C.-C. Yan, and M.C. Chen

3.4 QoS Information Extraction and Algorithm
Figure 6 presents the UPnP AV message content inspection algorithm used to retrieve
necessary information for automatic QoS configuration and provisioning. The UPnP
AV messages are in the HTTP/XML format. The algorithm interacts with the
underlying QoS mechanisms (e.g., packet classifier, packet scheduler and queue
manager) to perform real-time resource allocation to assure the content delivery
performance of the session in the wireless channel (both upstream and downstream).
switch (UPnP message)
{
case (CDS::BrowseResponse):
Search for media file(s) to playback;
Create a Media Information Descriptor for each media file;
case (AVT::SetAVTransportURI):
Parse the message to retrieve QoS relevant data;
Create a QoS Session descriptor;
case (HTTP GET):
Search the QoS Session descriptorDB that matches the IP address and URI in the message;
If found, pass QoS parameters (MediaRendererPort, MediaServerIP, MediaServerPort) to
QoS Manager to make bandwidth reservation;
case (RTSP SETUP):
Search the QoS Session descriptorDB that matches the IP address and URI;
If found, pass QoS parameters (RTSP Session Identifier, CSeq) to QoS Manager to make
bandwidth reservation;
case (RTSP SETUP response):
Parse the message to get MediaRendererPort and MediaServerPort;
Update the QoS Session descriptor of the session;
case (RTSP PLAY):
Search the QoS Session descriptorDB that matches the IP address and RTSP Session Identifier;
If found, pass QoS parameters to QoS Manager to make bandwidth reservation;
case (RTSP TEARDOWN):
Search the QoS Session descriptorDB that matches the IP address and RTSP Session Identifier;
If found, pass session information to QoS Manager to release bandwidth reservation;
Delete this session’s Session descriptor from the QoS Session descriptorDB;
case (NOTIFY::STOP):
Search the QoS Session descriptorDB that matches the IP address and AVTranspont Instance ID;
If found, pass session information to QoS Manager to release bandwidth reservation;
Delete this session’s Session descriptor from the QoS Session descriptorDB;
}

Fig. 6. The content inspection algorithm of UPnP AV messages for automatic QoS
configuration and provisioning

4 Performance Evaluations
We have implemented the proposed transparent QoS-provisioned system as a Linux
kernel module on an IEEE 802.11b wireless gateway router [13] (an Intel Pentium 3
PC with Prism2 wireless card and the Linux kernel is 2.4.19). The testbed is similar to
the configuration as shown in Figure 3. The AV content flow is from the
MediaServer to the MediaRenderer via HTTP. Figure 7 and Figure 8 show the
throughput and delay performances of two UPnP AV movie streaming sessions
measured from the tested when sharing the wireless channel with a 5Mbps UDP flow.

Content-Aware Automatic QoS Provisioning for UPnP

451

With the QoS system enabled, each UPnP AV session automatically receives the
required bandwidth allocation and the content rendering is smooth and of good
quality.

3.2

UPnP AV
stream 2

UPnP AV
stream 1

6.4

UDP Background
Traffic

3.2

UPnP AV
stream 2

1.6

4.8

UPnP AV
stream 1

0

Throughput (Mbits/sec)

4.8

Throughput (Mbits/sec)

6.4

UDP Background
Traffic

1.6

0

Time ( seconds)

Time ( seconds)

(a). without QoS

(b). with QoS

Delay (ms)

Jitter (ms)

Fig. 7. Throughput performance of the UPnP AV streams with a UDP background traffic

packet sequence number

packet sequence number

Fig. 8. Delay and jitter performances of the UPnP AV streams with content-aware automatic
QoS-provisioned system enabled

5 Conclusion
In a home network, there will be a diverse variety of applications such as telephony,
video and data traffic share the same wireless bandwidth. Unlike IT professions, no
home users can tolerate complex configuration and manipulation of consumer
electronics devices. In this paper, we present the design and implementation of a
content-aware automatic QoS provisioning system. The goal is to implement such
system on a wireless home gateway device to provide home users with a transparent,
convenient environment to assure their comfortable experience of enjoying

452

Y.S. Sun, C.-C. Yan, and M.C. Chen

multimedia services at home. The signaling or control architecture and protocol
considered in the system is the UPnP AV architecture which is an emerging industrial
standard for digital home networks. The proposed scheme is implemented on a Linuxbased wireless AP. The performance results measured from the testbed show that our
system can correctly identify all UPnP AV sessions and detect the start and
termination of data transfer of each AV session. By integrated with the underlying
network QoS mechanisms, the wireless home gateway router can provide QoSguaranteed transmission service to multimedia applications over the wireless LAN.

References
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]

The UPnP™ Forum, “UPnP Device Architecture 1.0,” May 2003.
John Ritchie and Thomas Kuehnel, “UPnP AV Architecture:0.83,” June 2002.
John Ritchie, “MediaServer:1 Device Template Version 1.01,” June 2002.
John Ritchie, “MediaRenderer:1 Device Template Version 1.01,” June 2002.
Kirt Debique, Tatsuya Igarashi, Sho Kou, et al., “ContentDirectory:1 Service Template
Version 1.01,” June 2002.
Shannon Chan, Alec Dara-Abrams, Mike Dawson, et al., “ConnectionManager:1 Service
Template Version 1.01,” June 2002
Larry Buerk, Jean Moonen, Dale Sather et al., “AVTransport:1 Service Template Version
1.01,” June 2002.
Sho Kou, Takashi Matsui, Jean Moonen et al., “RenderingControl:1 Service Template
Version 1.01 1.01,” June 2002.
T. Berners-Lee, R.Fielding and H.Frystyk, “Hypertext Transfer Protocol – HTTP/1.0,”
RFC 1945, May 1996.
R. Fielding, J. Gettys, J.Mogul, H. Frystyk, L. Masinter, P. Leach and T. Berners-Lee,
“Hypertext Transfer Protocol – HTTP/1.1,” RFC 2616, 1999.
H. Schulzrinne, A. Rao and R. Lanphier, “Real Time Streaming Protocol (RTSP),” RFC
2326, April 1998.
H. Schulzrinne, S. Casner, R. Frederick and V. Jacobson, “RTP: A Transport Protocol for
Read-Time Applications,” RFC 1889, January 1996.
Yeali S. Sun and J. F. Lee, “Policy-based QoS Management in NBEN – Differentiated
Services Provisioning,” TANET2000, October 2002.

