Handling Ambiguous Inverse Problems by the
Adaptive Genetic Strategy hp–HGS
Barbara Barabasz2, Robert Schaefer1 , and Maciej Paszyński1
1

2

Department of Computer Science
Department of Modeling and Information Technology,
AGH University of Science and Technology,
Al. Mickiewicza 30, 30-059 Cracow, Poland
barabasz@metal.agh.edu.pl,
{schaefer,paszynsk}@agh.edu.pl

Abstract. We propose the new multi-deme, adaptive genetic strategy
hp–HGS that allow solving ill posed parametric inverse problems that
may posses multiple solutions. The strategy was obtained by combining
hp-adaptive Finite Element Method with the Hierarchic Genetic Strategy. Its eﬃciency results from the coupled adaptation of the accuracy of
solving optimization problem and the accuracy of hp–FEM direct problem solver. We present the simple L-shape domain benchmark that posses
exactly two solutions. Test results show how the tunning of hp–HGS may
aﬀect on the number of solutions to be found. Moreover we discuss the
artifacts that may appear by the particular setting of genetic operations.

1

Ambiguity of the Parametric Inverse Problems Solution

The inverse problems under consideration base on the particular class of direct
problems:
(1)
ess minu∈uV {E (d; u)},
where E(d; u) = 12 b (d; u, u) − l (u) stands for the total energy of the modeled
physical system, V is the proper Sobolev space shifted by the Dirichlet boundary
condition. The form of functionals b, l depend of the physical phenomena (e.g.
linear elasticity, heat conduction) and of their parameters d ∈ D, where D is
the regular compact in RN , N < +∞. We assume, that the above problem is
well posed in the sense of Hadamard and its solution u ∈ V can be obtained as
the limit of the sequence {uh,p } ⊂ V of solutions of ﬁnite dimensional problems
obtained by the hp–adaptive Finite Element Method (hp–FEM) assuming h → 0
and p → +∞ (see Demkowicz [5]).
The inverse problem under consideration leads to encountering the unknown
ˆ = E(d;
ˆ u) of the exact solution u ∈ V
parameter dˆ ∈ D while the energy J(d)
to (1) is known (e.g. it is measured during the laboratory test). Because the
exact energy J(d) is impossible to compute eﬀectively for each d ∈ D, we can
only ﬁnd the approximation gˆ ∈ D of the exact parameter dˆ ∈ D such that:
lim

h→0, p→+∞

ˆ ≤
g ) − J(d)
Jh,p (ˆ

lim

h→0, p→+∞

ˆ
Jh,p (g) − J(d)

G. Allen et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2009, Part II, LNCS 5545, pp. 904–913, 2009.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

∀g ∈ D

(2)

Handling Ambiguous Inverse Problems

905

where Jh,p (d) = E(d; uh,p ) stands for the energy of the approximate solution
uh,p obtained for the parameter d.
The inverse problem presented above is a kind of the global optimization
ˆ . The most frequent diﬃculty
one with the very costly objective Jh,p (g) − J(d)
is cosed by the ambiguity of its solution (multiple solutions) manifested as the
objective multimodality. Moreover, the uncertainty of the mathematical model as
well as the errors in the numerical objective evaluation caused, that not only the
global minimizers, but also the local ones with the suﬃciently low objective value
may represent the solutions. A large variety of such problems in mechanics and
other branches may be found in the literature. The good example was published
by Cabib, Davini and Chong-Quing Ru [3] where the ambiguity of the global
minimizer was mathematically proved.
The only way to solve such kind of problems is to ﬁnd all local minimizers
that satisﬁes the additional criterion (e.g. objective is lower then the assumed
threshold). Niching genetic algorithms as well as multi start strategies were often
applied as the robust methods for ﬁnding multiple minimizers (see e.g. [8], [9]).
The adaptive strategies that can signiﬁcantly decrease the number of objective
calls are also highly appreciated (see e.g. [4]).
We propose the new strategy called hp–HGS composed of the adaptive numerical method hp–FEM (see Demkowicz [5], [6]) that allow very eﬀective direct
problem solving up to the assumed accuracy expressed by the energy error of
the physical phenomenon and the multi-deme, Hierarchic Genetic Strategy HGS
(see Schaefer, Kołodziej [10]) that allow economic global search with the adaptive accuracy in the parameters domain. The nature of HGS allow ﬁnding many
local minimizers in parallel. The proper rule of scaling the error of solving direct problem vs. inverse problem error decreases the computational cost of the
single objective call. The computational example show the hp–HGS behavior
by solving the simple bimodal problem of heat conductivity identiﬁcation. The
parameter tunning as well as appearing of dangerous artifacts are discussed.

2

hp–HGS

The HGS introduced by Kołodziej and Schaefer (see e.g. [10], [11]) proceeds treestructured, dynamically changing set of dependent demes. The depth of HGS tree
is limited by m < +∞. All demes work asynchronously and are synchronized
by the message-passing mechanism if necessary. The evolution of each deme
is governed by the separate instance of the Simple Genetic Algorithm (SGA)
(see Vose [15]).
The low-order demes (closer to the root) perform more chaotic search with the
lower accuracy, while the demes of higher order perform the more accurate, local
search. The various search accuracy is obtained by the various encoding precision
and by the diﬀerent length binary strings as the genotypes in demes of diﬀerent
order. The unique deme of the ﬁrst order (root) utilizes the shortest genotypes,
while the leafs utilizes the longest ones. To obtain the search coherency for demes
of diﬀerent order the special kind of hierarchical, nested encoding is used. First

906

B. Barabasz, R. Schaefer, and M. Paszyński

the densest mesh of phenotypes in D for the demes of m-th order is deﬁned. Next
the meshes for the lower order demes are recursively deﬁned by selecting some
nodes from the previous ones. The maximum diameter of the mesh δj associated
with the demes of the order j determines the search accuracy at this level of the
HGS tree. Of course δ1 >, . . . , > δm .
Each deme expecting leaf-demes sprouts the new child-deme after the constant
number of genetic epochs K called the metaepoch. The child-deme is activated in
the promising region of the evolutionary landscape surrounding the best ﬁtted
individual distinguished from the parental deme at the end of the metaepoch.
HGS implements also two mechanisms that allow to reduce the search redundancy. The ﬁrst one called conditional sprouting disable to sprout new deme
in the region already occupied or explored by the brother-deme (another childdeme of the same order sprouted by the same parent). The second mechanism
called branch reduction reduces the branches of the same order that perform the
search in the common landscape region or in the region already explored.
Let us apply HGS for solving the inverse problem (2). The ﬁtness function for
the particular deme should be based on the energy error
ˆ
eh,p (g) = Jh,p (g) − J(d)

(3)

computed by using hp–FEM which approximate the objective function of the
global optimization problem (2) for the particular values of h and p. As previˆ the known, exact energy
ously, dˆ ∈ D denotes the exact parameter value and J(d)
of the exact solution while Jh,p (g) the approximated value of energy computed
by hp–FEM with respect to the parameter value g ∈ D obtained from the HGS
individuals’ genotype.
Let us assume for a while that g represents the parameter value decoded from
the genotype that appears in the HGS deme of the j-th order, j ∈ {1, . . . , m}.
Using the Lemma 2 in [14] and the formula (8) in [12] that follow the regression
of the error (3) while improving the hp–FEM approximation we obtain
e h ,p+1 (g) ≤ u h ,p+1 (g) − uh,p (g)
2

2

2
E

+ u(g) − uh,p (g)

2
E

ˆ
+ L|g − d|.

(4)

ˆ stands for the energy error
The left-hand-side e h ,p+1 (g) = J h ,p+1 (g) − J(d)
2

2

while the ﬁrst right-hand-side component errF EM (g) = u h ,p+1 (g) − uh,p (g) 2E
2
is the relative error decrement in the single hp–FEM step (see Demkowicz [5]).
ˆ is the
Moreover L stands for the Lipshitz constants of the functional J and |g − d|
error of the inverse problem solution that characterizes the individuals belonging
ˆ corresponds
to the HGS demes of the j-th order. It is easy to observe, that |g − d|
to δj . The above formula shows, that the error of the energy evaluation over the
ﬁne FEM mesh is restricted by the relative FEM error on the coarse FEM mesh
solution with respect to the ﬁne mesh solution plus the absolute FEM error over
the coarse FEM mesh plus the accuracy of the proper HGS branch.
The main idea of hp–HGS is to adjust dynamically the accuracy of the objective computation to the particular value of the parameter g encoded in the

Handling Ambiguous Inverse Problems
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.

907

if (j = 1) then
initialize the root deme;
end if
t ← 0;
repeat
if (global_stop_condition received) then
STOP;
end if
for (i ∈ P t ) do
solve the direct problem for g = code(i) on the coarse and ﬁne FEM meshes;
compute errF EM (g);
while (errF EM (g) > Ratio ∗ δj ) do
execute one step of hp adaptivity;
solve the problem on the new coarse and ﬁne FEM meshes;
compute errF EM (g);
end while;
compute ﬁtness fj (i) using the FEM mesh ﬁnally established;
end for
if (j > 1) then
compute the phenotypes’ average and send it to the parental deme;
if (branch_stop_condition(P t )) then
STOP;
end if
end if
if (((t mod K) = 0) ∧ (j < m)) then
distinguish the best ﬁtted individual x from deme P t ;
if (¬ children_comparison(x)) then
sprout;
end if
end if
perform proportional selection, obtaining multiset of parents;
perform SGA genetic operations on the multiset of parents;
t ← t + 1;
until (f alse)

Algorithm 1. Pseudo-code of the j-th order deme P in the hp–HGS tree

individuals’ genotype as well as for the inverse problem error that characterizes
the current HGS branch. It may be obtained by balancing the components of
the FEM error given by the right hand side of the formula (4), assuming δj as
the accuracy of inverse problem solving by the branch of j-th order. We will
perform then the hp-adaptation of the FEM solution of the direct problem while
the quantity errF EM /δj is greater then the assumed Ratio, which stands for
the parameter of this strategy. The value of the parameter Ratio corresponds to
the Lipshitz constant L, because two ﬁrst components of the right-hand-side of
(4) asymptotically vanish as a consequence of the hp–FEM convergence.

908

B. Barabasz, R. Schaefer, and M. Paszyński

Notice, that no matter how the ﬁtness of the individual i is computed by
iterative process of the hp–FEM adaptation, the ﬁtness function fj is well deﬁned
for all individuals in branches of j-th order (it is not a random variable).
The draft of the single hp–HGS deme activity is stressed in the pseudo-code
Algorithm 2. The function branch_stop_condition(P ) returns true if it detects the lack of evolution progress of the current deme P . The separate module continuously checks whether the satisfactory solution was found or hp–HGS
could not ﬁnd more local extremes. If yes, the global_stop_condition signal is
send to all computing demes. The conditional sprouting mechanism is implemented as follows. Each branch excepting root computes the average of its
phenotypes and send it to its parental deme. These values are analyzed by
the children_comparison(x) procedure and compared with the phenotype of
the best ﬁtted individual x distinguished from the parental deme. This procedure returns true if x is suﬃciently close to the existing child-demes. The branch
reduction mechanism is omitted in Algorithm 2 for the sake of simplicity.

3

Sample Bimodal Inverse Problem

The inverse problem under consideration is originated from the classical L-shape
domain direct problem, a model academic problem formulated in [1], [2], to test
the convergence of the p and hp adaptive algorithms. The direct L-shape domain
problem consists in computing the temperature distribution over the L-shape
domain, presented in Figure 1 with ﬁxed zero temperature in the internal part
of the boundary, and the Neumann boundary condition prescribing the heat
transfer on the external boundary. There is a single singularity in the central
point of the domain, where the gradient of temperature ∇u goes to inﬁnity,
so the accurate numerical solution requires a sequence of adaptations in the
direction of the central point.
The strong formulation of the direct problem consists in ﬁnding the temperature distribution u ∈ C 2 R2 such that
∇ · K∇u = 0 in Ω ⊂ R2

Fig. 1. The L-shape domain problem

(5)

Handling Ambiguous Inverse Problems

909

with boundary conditions
u = 0 on ΓD ,

3
3
π
∂u
= χ = r 2 sin 2 θ +
∂n
2

on ΓN

(6)

with n being the unit normal outward to ∂Ω vector, and (r, θ) the radial system
of coordinates with the origin point O (see Figure 1). K is the heat transfer
coeﬃcient, that takes the constant values K1 , K2 , K3 over three parts of the
domain, as illustrated in Figure 1.
The strong formulation (5) – (6) is transformed to the weak one: Find u ∈
V = {v ∈ L2 (Ω) ; Ω v 2 + ∇v 2 dx < +∞, tr (v) = 0 on ΓD } such that:
b(d; u, v) = l(v) ∀v ∈ V ; b(d; u, v) =

Ω

K uv dx, l(v) =

χ v dS

(7)

ΓN

where d = (K1 , K2 , K3 ) ∈ D = [0, 3]3 ⊂ R3 is the vector of parameters.
The benchmark inverse problem is formulated in the following way: Find
values of the heat transfer coeﬃcients gˆ ∈ D that satisfy (2). The energy of
ˆ where dˆ = (0.1, 1.5, 2.9) are the
the "exact" solution, was computed as Jh,p (d),
assumed values of the heat transfer coeﬃcients. In order to obtain the energy
ˆ =
ˆ the L-shape domain problem
u 2 + ∇u 2 dx close to the J(d)
Jh,p (d)
Ω
was computed once with the very high relative accuracy 10−5 by using the selfadaptive hp-FEM code.
Because both boundary conditions are symmetric with respect to the domain
geometry (e.g. with respect to the axis θ = π/4) then the parameter vector
ˆ so the inverse problem (2) has two
dˆ = (2.9, 1.5, 0.1) gives the same energy as d,
solutions in this case.

4

Test Results

We applied the three level’s hp–HGS algorithm for solving inverse problem described in previous section. Because of the high computational cost of the accurate ﬁtness evaluation, we decide to set Ratio to 900. Each metaepoch contains
only three epochs. The next step of tunning the algorithm was to choose the mutation and crossing rates on each level. In order to do it properly we analyze the
standard deviation of phenotypes for diﬀerent values of the binary mutation rate
(see Table 1). The mutation rate should decrease from the root to the leafs in order to increase the search locality in higher tree levels. From the other side, the
standard deviation of the phenotypes obtained by the mutation has to be greater
then the search accuracy δj on each level j in the hp–HGS tree in order to assure
the enough search eﬃciency. The ﬁrst choice was 0.3 for the crossing rate on each
level of hp–HGS tree, and the mutation rates 0.05, 0.035, 0.005 for the root, the
branches and leafs respectively. Many tests show that such setting allow to ﬁnd
only one solution to the inverse problem, mostly because of the small diversity of
the root and the branches. The corrected setting of the mutation and crossing rates
as well as other hp–HGS parameters are contained in Table 2. We pre-deﬁne the
number of meataepoch as the stopping condition of our algorithm.

910

B. Barabasz, R. Schaefer, and M. Paszyński

Table 1. Standard deviations of phenotypes for various mutation rates tested for all
levels of the hp–HGS tree
Mutation rate level 1 leve 2 level 3
0.5

1.54

1.51

1.51

0.2

1.29

1.19

1.21

0.1

0.85

0.91

0.83

0.035

0.49

0.55

0.56

0.025

0.4

0.53

0.55

0.01

0.31

0.23

0.25

0.005

0.24

0.18

0.11

Table 2. Final parameters of the hp–HGS tree applied by solving the sample inverse
problem
level 1 level 2 level 3
Code length

9

18

27

0.375

0.047

0.006

Population size

50

12

8

Crossing rate

0.7

0.5

0.2

Mutation rate

0.5

0.1

0.01

δj

Table 3. Leaves statistics obtained for the 5 selected hp–HGS settings
test 1 test 2 test 3 test 4 test 5
number of leafs

21

21

10

21

21

errf it

1.29

3.67

0.74

0.29

0.71

min eucl1

0.65

0.62

2.02

0.22

0.89

min eucl2

1.42

0.93

0.21

1.29

0.68

aver errf it

30,38 98,63 230,81 179,33 66,48

aver eucl1

0,98

1,28

2,02

1,16

1,6

aver eucl2

2,03

1,69

0,9

1,33

0,89

Handling Ambiguous Inverse Problems

911

The Table 3 shows the result of ﬁve selected runs of hp–HGS algorithm
with the ﬁnal parameters. The min eucl1 and min eucl2 mean the smallest
euclidean distance between the computed solutions and the ﬁrst exact solution
dˆ = (0.1, 1.5, 2.9) and the second exact solution dˆ = (2.9, 1.5, 0.1) respectively.
The values aver eucl1 , aver eucl2 are the averages of the euclidean distance between the best solutions found by leafs, which are in the attractor of the proper
exact solution.
Perhaps the best result gave tests number two and ﬁve. In these cases both
extremes were found by the separate leafs. In the test number one there are also
both solutions found, but the second with much worst accuracy. It is also visible
in the average distance between computed and real solutions. The same situation
appears in the test number four. Because of the shorter assumed computational
period in the third test, there were only about the half leafs than in others runs.
It would be a reason, why the algorithm detected only one solution in this case.
In the case of multimodal problems the culmination of individuals may by
located not only in the basins of attractions of global or local extremes. It may
appear out of them when two solutions are linked to each other through mountain ridges with shallow saddle and the expected distance of the oﬀspring from
the parent is above half of the distance between these solutions. Such artifact
looking like the optimum found was described by Karcz-Dul¸eba [7] and called
evolutionary channel. Such phenomenon appears in about 15% of our tests. In
these tests at least two leafs found both exact solution with the accuracy comparable to those presented in tests number two and ﬁve. Moreover, the point
laying in the half way between two solutions were encountered as the solution
by the other single leaf. This was probably caused by the unfortunate setting of
the mixing parameters that results in the standard deviation of the phenotypes
1.6, almost the half of the distance between exact solutions, which is equal to
3.96. The ﬂat shape of the ﬁtness between two solutions and the assumed (by
setting large Ratio) moderate accuracy of the hp–FEM caused that the ﬁtness
value at the artifacts could not be used to discard them from the set of potential
solutions. The only way to eliminate the artifacts is to take into account their
rare appearance in comparison to the right solutions of the inverse problem.

5

Conclusions

– The main diﬃculties in solving inverse parametric problems are caused by
their ill posedness, in particular by the solution ambiguity, the low stability
(sensitivity for the numerical errors) and high computational cost of the objective evaluation. The sophisticated global optimization strategies can be
applied in order to ﬁnd multiple solutions, keeping the memory and computational costs at the acceptable level.
– The proposed hp–HGS strategy is well suited for solving ambiguous inverse
problems, because of its global search possibilities (local, parallel search controlled by the deme hierarchy). It is conﬁrmed by the test results for the simple bimodal benchmark. Its well asymptotic properties can be also veriﬁed
mathematically (see [13]).

912

B. Barabasz, R. Schaefer, and M. Paszyński

– The hp–HGS strategy oﬀers two ways to decrease the computational and
memory costs. Firstly it is obtained by decreasing of the number of the
objective calls by using the adaptation of the inverse problem accuracy (HGS
strategy). Secondly, the cost of the direct problem solution which is necessary
for ﬁtness evaluation is decreased by the proper scaling of the FEM error
using the hp adaptation technique.
– The parameters of hp–HGS have to be carefully tunned. The genetic mixing
(mutation with crossover) has to be intensive enough in the higher levels in
order to ensure the suﬃcient diversity of the root and high order branches.
The standard deviation of mixing in leafs has to be correlated with the
maximum search accuracy. Moreover, it needs to be "desynchronized" with
the ﬁtness periodicity (it should be signiﬁcantly less then the half of the
distance between each pair of solutions) in order to avoid artifacts that may
be recognized as a solutions.
– No matter how SGA with the binary encoding is sometimes criticized as a
tool for solving optimization problems in the continuous domains, it is used
in each branch of the ﬁrst version of hp–HGS mainly because the theoretical
results that characterize its asymptotic behavior are available. We plan to
design the next version of hp–HGS which will be based on the hierarchic
genetic strategy with the real number encoding (see [11], [16]). Moreover the
much broader testing program will be performed in order to evaluate the hp–
HGS particular behaviors statistics and in order to conﬁrm its advantages
in solving inverse problems of the considered type.

Acknowledgment
The work has been partially supported by the Polish Ministry of Scientiﬁc Research and Information Technology and by the Foundation for Polish Science
under Homming Program.

References
1. Babuška, I., Guo, B.: The hp-version of the ﬁnite element method, Part I: The
basic approximation results. Comput. Mech. 1, 21–41 (1986)
2. Babuška, I., Guo, B.: The hp-version of the ﬁnite element method, Part II: General
results and applications. Comput. Mech. 1, 203–220 (1986)
3. Cabib, E., Davini, C., Ru, C.-Q.: A problem in the optimal design of networks
under transverse loading. Quarterly of Appl. Math. XLVIII(2), 251–263 (1190)
4. Cabib, E., Schaefer, R., Telega, H.: A Parallel Genetic Clustering for Inverse Problems. In: Kågström, B., Elmroth, E., Waśniewski, J., Dongarra, J. (eds.) PARA
1998. LNCS, vol. 1541, pp. 551–556. Springer, Heidelberg (1998)
5. Demkowicz, L.: Computing with hp-Adaptive Finite Elements. In: Applied Mathematics and Nonlinear Science. Chapmann & Hall / CRC, Boca Raton (2006)
6. Demkowicz, L., Kurtz, J., Pardo, P., Paszyński, M., Rachowicz, W., Zdunek, A.:
Computing with hp-Adaptive Finite Elements. In: Applied Mathematics and Nonlinear Science. Frontiers: Three-Dimensional Elliptic and Maxwell Problems with
Applications, vol. II. Chapmann & Hall /CRC, Boca Raton (2007)

Handling Ambiguous Inverse Problems

913

7. Galar, R., Karcz-Dul¸eba, I.: The Evolution of Two. An Example of Space of States
Approach. In: Sebald, A.V., Fogel, L.J. (eds.) Proc. of the Third Annual Conf. on
Evolutionary Programming, San Diego, CA, pp. 261–203. Word Scientiﬁc, Singapore (1994)
8. Koper, K.D., Wysession, M.E., Wiens, D.A.: Multimodal function optimization
with a niching genetic algorithm: A seismological example. Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America 89(4), 978–988 (1999)
9. Liszkai, T.R., Raich, A.M.: Solving Inverse Problems in Structural Damage Identiﬁcation Using Advanced Genetic Algorithm Representation. In: Herkovits, J.,
Mazorche, S., Canelas, A. (eds.) Proc. of the 6th Congress of Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization. ISSMO 2005, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, May 30- June 3
(2005)
10. Schaefer, R., Kołodziej, J.: Genetic search reinforced by the population hierarchy.
In: De Jong, K.A., Poli, R., Rowe, J.E. (eds.) Foundations of Genetic Algorithms
7, pp. 383–399. Morgan Kaufman Publisher, San Francisco (2003)
11. Schaefer, R.: Foundation of Genetic Global Optimization. Studies in Computational Intelligence Series, vol. 74. Springer, Heidelberg (2007) (with the chapter 6
written by Telega, H.)
12. Schaefer, R., Barabasz, B., Paszńyski, M.: Twin adaptive scheme for solving inverse
problems. In: Proc. of the 10th Conf. on Evolutionary Algorithms and Global
Optimization KAEiOG 2007, B¸edlewo, pp. 241–249 (2007)
13. Schaefer, R., Barabasz, B.: Asymptotic behavior of hp-HGS (hp-adaptive Finite
Element Method coupled with the Hierarchic Genetic Strategy) by solving inverse
problems. In: Bubak, M., van Albada, G.D., Dongarra, J., Sloot, P.M.A. (eds.)
ICCS 2008, Part III. LNCS, vol. 5103, pp. 682–691. Springer, Heidelberg (2008)
14. Paszyński, M., Barabasz, B., Schaefer, R.: Eﬃcient adaptive strategy for solving
inverse problems. In: Shi, Y., van Albada, G.D., Dongarra, J., Sloot, P.M.A. (eds.)
ICCS 2007. LNCS, vol. 4487, pp. 342–349. Springer, Heidelberg (2007)
15. Vose, M.D.: The Simple Genetic Algorithm. MIT Press, Cambridge (1999)
16. Wierzba, B., Semczuk, A., Kołodziej, J., Schaefer, R.: Hierarchical Genetic Strategy
with real number encoding. In: Proc. of the 6th Conf. on Evolutionary Algorithms
and Global Optimization Łagów Lubuski 2003, pp. 231–237. Warsaw Technical
University Press (2003)

