Uniﬁed Error Control Framework
with Cross-Layer Interactions for Eﬃcient
H.264 Video Transmission over IEEE
802.11e Wireless LAN
Jeong-Yong Choi and Jitae Shin
School of Information and Communication Engineering,
Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, 440-746, Korea
{eldragon, jtshin}@ece.skku.ac.kr

Abstract. Eﬃcient H.264 video transmission, as a dominant video coding standard used in Digital Multimedia Broadcasting (DMB) and other
advanced video conferencing, over wireless/mobile networks becomes
dominant. However, wireless video transmission suﬀers from deﬁcient
wireless channel conditions such as high bit error rate, error bursts due to
channel fading and bandwidth limitations. In this paper, a novel design
of uniﬁed error-control with cross-layer interaction over IEEE 802.11e
Wireless LAN, in order to improve error protection performance, is proposed. This framework combines cross-layer error protection techniques,
i.e., error correction code in the link layer, erasure code in the application
layer and automatic repeat retransmission across the link layer and the
application layer.

1

Introduction

In Korea, Satellite Digital Multimedia Broadcasting (S-DMB) and Terrestrial
Digital Multimedia Broadcasting (T-DMB) services have been widely standardized on a national basis. S-DMB was launched as a test-service in January and
as a main-service in May 2005, respectively, and T-DMB commenced service in
December 2005. The Korean DMB system [1] adopts the European Digital Audio Broadcasting (DAB) system known as Eureka-147 [2] as its base, and adds
various coding, networking and error correcting tools to process multimedia content. While S-DMB and T-DMB services have a diﬀerent system, the associated
video coding techniques are based on the H.264/Advanced Video Coding (AVC)
baseline proﬁle [3]. The H.264/AVC video coding standard provides for coding
eﬃciency and network friendliness, splitting the Video Coding Layer (VCL) and
Network Adaptation Layer (NAL).
In the trend of broadcasting communication convergence, multimedia content
is supplied via various communication channels. IEEE 802.11-based Wireless
LANs (WLANs) can be one a great communication channel, supplying users with
portability. IEEE 802.11e [4] has been developed and standardized to support
QoS of Audio/Visual (AV) data. In contrast to wired networks, since wireless
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part IV, LNCS 3994, pp. 25–32, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

26

J.-Y. Choi and J. Shin

channels suﬀer from restrictions such as bit-error and bandwidth, video transmission over wireless channels is a challenging task.
There has been considerable research invested, to overcome such inferior channel conditions. Many hybrid ARQ (HARQ) techniques combine various errorcontrol schemes [5][6]. They include error detection code, Forward Error Correction (FEC) and Automatic Repeat reQuest (ARQ). Although aforementioned
error-control-related research proposes eﬃcient error protection schemes, there
have been few concrete cross-layer frameworks in WLANs.
In this paper, a novel cross-layer error-control framework in IEEE 802.11e
wireless LAN is proposed to improve error protection performance. This framework combines cross-layer error protection schemes, i.e., error correction code
(Reed-Solomon code) in the link layer, erasure code in the application layer and
ARQ across both the link layer and the application layer.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. A brief overview of H.264
video transmission in wireless channels and a review of error-control techniques
are provided in Section 2. Section 3 describes the proposed uniﬁed cross-layer
error-control framework. In Section 4, the performance of proposed framework
is evaluated. Lastly, conclusions and further works are presented in Section 5.

2
2.1

Related Works on Key Error-Control Components
Error-Controls for Video Transmission

FEC and delay-constrained ARQ are the main error-control techniques in video
transmission. FECs, which are based both on the error correction code and
on the erasure code, realize a proactive error-control mechanism. The sender
generates redundant data and transmits these data with the original data. Then,
the receiver recovers the erroneous bits or packets with redundant data. In order
to prevent confusion, FECs are classiﬁed into two categories, i.e., error correction
code-based FEC (namely Symbol-level FEC, S-FEC) and erasure code-based
FEC (namely Packet-level FEC, P-FEC). While both S-FEC and P-FEC provide
proactive solutions, ARQ is driven by reactive feedback information. ARQ spends
less overhead in comparison with constantly rate-wasteful FECs, because ARQ
is driven only when the received packet is erroneous, ARQ tends to result in
greater delay than FECs.
In order to alleviate error resilience, hybrid techniques were attempted, and
type-I [7] and type-II HARQ [8] were introduced. H. Liu et al. proposed a HARQ
technique that combines the beneﬁt of type-I and type-II techniques, and showed
its eﬃcacy for video transmission over wireless networks [5]. Y. Shan et al. presented a priority-based error protection scheme in the sense of the cross-layer
approach [6]. Lastly, P. Ferr´e et al. attempted to modify the IEEE 802.11 legacy
MAC to improve the throughput eﬃciency [9]. The article includes composition
of an MAC frame and modiﬁcation of MAC-level retransmission.
This paper is dominantly motivated by [9], to move the wireless channel to
IEEE 802.11e, and makes use of the FEC option and BlockAck mechanism of
IEEE 802.11e MAC.

Uniﬁed Error Control Framework with Cross-Layer Interactions

2.2

27

IEEE 802.11e MAC-Level Error Control Techniques

Symbol-Level Forward Error Correction (S-FEC) [10]. Fig. 1 shows the
MAC Protocol Data Unit (MPDU) format deﬁned in the draft speciﬁcation
of IEEE 802.11e. Basically, a (224, 208) shortened Reed Solomon (RS) code,
deﬁned in GF(256), is used. Since an MAC Service Data Unit (MSDU), from
the higher layer, can be much larger than 208 octets, an MSDU may be split
into (up to 12) multiple blocks, and then each block is separately encoded by
the RS encoder. The ﬁnal RS block in the frame body can be shorter than 224
octets, using a shortened code. A (48, 32) RS code, which is also a shortened
RS code, is used for the MAC header, and CRC-32 is used for the Frame Check
Sequence (FCS). It is important to note that any RS block can correct up to 8
byte errors. The outer FCS allows the receiver to skip the RS decoding process if
the FCS is correct. The inner FCS (or FEC FCS) allows the receiver to identify
a false decoding by the RS decoder.

Fig. 1. IEEE 802.11e MPDU format with the optional FEC

ARQ [11]. The legacy MAC of IEEE 802.11 is based on the simple Stop-andWait ARQ (SW-ARQ) scheme. This involves a lot of overheads due to the immediate transmissions of acknowledgements (ACKs). In 802.11e, a new SelectiveRepeat ARQ (SR-ARQ) mechanism named block acknowledgement (BlockAck)
is introduced. In this mechanism, a group of data frames can be transmitted
one by one with SIFS interval between them. Then, a single BlockAck frame is
transmitted back to the sender to inform ACKs how many packets have been
received correctly. Obviously, this scheme can improve channel eﬃciency. There
are two kinds of BlockAck mechanisms used in 802.11e: immediate and delayed.
Details of each modes are presented in [11]. In this paper, the delayed BlockAck mechanism will be adopted between two mechanisms, so as to satisfy the
requirements of delayed operations across layers.

3

Uniﬁed Cross-Layer Cooperating Error-Control
Framework

In this section, a uniﬁed error-control framework with cross-layer interactions is
proposed, and the role of each layer and cross-layer cooperation are described.
The overall structure of the proposed framework is depicted in Fig. 2.1 The
1

Since, in this paper, the range of the implementation is restricted, the implemented
components are marked as shadow in Fig. 3.

28

J.-Y. Choi and J. Shin
Sender
H.264 Video Encoder
- Adjust NALU length

Application/RTP
Layer

Receiver

H.264 Video Decoder

Content Prioritization
: Priority Index (PI)

P-FEC encoding

P-FEC decoding

Transport
Layer

CRC over whole UDP packet

CRC over whole UDP packet

Network
Layer

CRC over IP packet header

CRC over IP packet header

S-FEC encoding

Detecting/marking erroneous blocks
in an MAC frame

Link/MAC
Layer

ARQ response

S-FEC decoding

Deciding ARQ

ARQ request

Physical
Channel

Fig. 2. Overall structure of the uniﬁed error-control framework with cross-layer interactions

techniques and schemes previously explained in Section 2 are combined, in order
to achieve an eﬃcient framework.
3.1

Link/MAC Layer

As explained in 2.2, the link/MAC layer performs S-FEC. On the sender side,
the MAC header and all MSDUs are encoded using (48, 32) and (224, 208)
RS codes, respectively, and then composed into an MAC frame. After S-FEC
encoding, the whole MAC frame is calculated and the CRC-32 and FCS ﬁeld
are generated.
On the receiver side, prior to S-FEC decoding, the FCS check is performed.
If the FCS is correct, the S-FEC decoding procedure is unnecessary, and is
therefore not performed. However, if the FCS is incorrect, all S-FEC blocks are
decoded and erroneous blocks are corrected. If MAC header is erroneous and
uncorrectable, all of the MSDUs belonging to the MAC header will be dropped.
If an FEC block of MSDUs is uncorrectable, the block is marked as erroneous
and then passed to a higher layer. The uncorrectable S-FEC block is determined
whether to be retransmitted in the application layer.
In addition to S-FEC, the link/MAC layer provides ARQ scheme for the
erroneous MSDUs, as explained in 2.2. Since the uncorrectable S-FEC block
is passed to higher layers, not immediately requested for retransmission, the
delayed BlockAck scheme is used, rather than the immediate BlockAck scheme.

Uniﬁed Error Control Framework with Cross-Layer Interactions

29

The sequence numbers of the uncorrectable S-FEC blocks determined to be
retransmitted are bitmapped in the BlockAck frame.
3.2

Application Layer

In the proposed cross-layer framework, the application layer is responsible for
packet-level adaptation and cross-layer interaction. Packet-level adaptation includes H.264 encoding, priority indexing (PI), RTP packetization and P-FEC.
In this procedure, the H.264 encoder should consider the maximum length of
an MSDU at the link/MAC layer. This implies that if one RTP packet is not
fragmented into greater than one MSDU at the link/MAC layer, so as not to
deteriorate error resilience, the maximum length of an RTP packet, including
2-byte P-FEC header, should not exceed 180 bytes, as presented in Fig. 3. Sizeadjusted H.264 NAL Units (NALUs) are P-FEC-encoded and packetized into an
RTP packet. Priorities of each NALUs are estimated and indexed, while NALUs
are simultaneously encoded. The PI method which is used in [12] may be extended for H.264.2 The PI-values can be criteria for UEP strategy.
MAC Frame
32 bytes

16 bytes

208 bytes

16 bytes

MAC Header

S-FEC

MSDU1

S-FEC

IP Packet

4 bytes
....

FCS

IP Header

UDP Header

RTP Header

P-FEC
header

NAL Unit

20 bytes

8 bytes

12 bytes

2 bytes

~ 166 bytes

~ 180 bytes

Fig. 3. Structure of an MAC frame

Fig. 4. Cross-layer error-control process at the receiver
2

Although we include PI in the proposed framework, it is out of scope in this paper
because of page limit.

30

J.-Y. Choi and J. Shin

Next, consider the cross-layer interaction. The proposed framework complements S-FEC with P-FEC and ARQ. First, S-FEC protects all symbols in a
packet. Next, if S-FEC proves to be uncorrectable, P-FEC recovers the erroneous data blocks. Lastly, if P-FEC fails, the application layer signals to the
link layer to request for retransmission of the necessary data blocks, to ensure
that cross-layer cooperation is completed. The detailed error-control process is
depicted and explained in Fig. 4. To conclude, the application layer adapts the
video content to the underlying structure of the link/MAC layer, and decides the
error-control strategy, whereas the link/MAC layer provides the application layer
with the transport information of the packets and a means for retransmission.

4

Simulation

In this section, the performance of the proposed cross-layer error-control framework is demonstrated over IEEE 802.11e WLAN, by performing simulations
under several BER conditions. The “Foreman” sequence (CIF, 352x288) was
encoded using H.264 with encoding parameters, as presented in Table 1, and
then transmitted through the Gilbert-Elliott channel model. The performance
of the generic error-control scheme and the proposed error-control scheme are
compared. Both schemes consist of (24, 20) P-FEC at the application layer, (224,
208) S-FEC at the link/MAC layer and ARQ with maximum ARQ count of 2.
Table 1. Video encoder parameters and channel settings used in the simulation
Parameter settings
Video encoder
H.264 (JM 10.1)
Foreman
Sequence name
CIF (352×288)
Image format
Number of encoded frames 1200
1 IDR-frame followed by 1199 P-frames with CBR
Encoding method
(384kbps), 20 random intra MB update every P-frame,
ﬁxed packet size shorter than 180 bytes.
Channel settings
Channel model
Gilbert-Elliott channel model
5 × 10−3
Bit error probability

Table. 2 and Fig. 5 present the simulation results for the generic isolated-layer
scheme and the proposed cross-layer scheme. Table. 2 presents the MSDU overhead rate needed for ARQ and the NALU error rate. From numerical results,
it is demonstrated that the proposed cross-layer scheme results in less NALU
error rate with dramatically less overhead. The simulation result, presented in
Fig. 5, shows that the proposed cross-layer error-control scheme outperforms the
isolated-layer error-control scheme, with regard to end-quality. In the isolatedlayer scheme, since even an uncorrectable MSDU in the MAC frame results in

Uniﬁed Error Control Framework with Cross-Layer Interactions

31

Table 2. MSDU overhead rate for ARQ and NALU error rate

MSDU overhead rate for ARQ (%)
NALU error rate (%)

Isolated-layer schemeProposed cross-layer scheme
32.84
0.29
0.40
0.33

retransmission of the whole MAC frame, the isolated-layer scheme experiences
higher bit error probability than the cross-layer scheme. Thus, greater retransmission overhead is required, and high MAC frame error probability deteriorates
throughput, eventually, producing degradation of objective video quality.

No Error
Isolated-layer scheme
Proposed cross-layer scheme

40

PSNR (dB)

35

30

25

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900

1000

1100

1200

Frame Number

Fig. 5. PSNR distribution of Y-component of transmitted sequences: (a) No error, (b)
Isolated-layer error-control scheme, and (c) Proposed cross-layer error-control scheme

From simulation results, it can be inferred that the proposed cross-layer errorcontrol scheme presents excellent performances from the viewpoint of both endquality and transmission eﬃciency.

5

Conclusions and Future Works

In this paper, a uniﬁed cross-layer error-control framework was proposed, and
the performance of the framework demonstrated. In the proposed error-control
framework, each layer does not perform its dedicated role but also considers
overall layers, thus unnecessary operations can be omitted. From simulation
results, it can be inferred that the proposed cross-layer error-control scheme
demonstrates excellent performance from the viewpoint of both end-quality and
transmission eﬃciency.
FEC and ARQ have been the most powerful error-control tools in data communication. In order to maximize the performance of FEC and ARQ, combined
with packet-level interleaving and symbol-level interleaving can be considered.
In current work, we cannot present the mathematical analysis of the proposed
scheme, because of page limit. Mathematical analysis under certain parameters
of Gilbert-Elliott channel helps to estimate the simulation result.

32

J.-Y. Choi and J. Shin

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the Ministry of Information and Communication
(MIC), Korea, under the Information Technology Research Center (ITRC) support program supervised by the Institute of Information Technology Assessment
(IITA) (IITA-2005-(C1090-0502-0027)).

References
1. “Digital Multimedia Broadcasting,” Telecommunications Technology Association,
2003SG05.02-046, 2003.
2. “Radio Broadcasting System: Digital Audio Broadcasting (DAB) to mobile,
portable and ﬁxed receivers,” ETSI EN 300 401 v1.3.3, May, 2001.
3. Draft ITU-T Recommendation and Final Draft International Standard of Joint
Video Speciﬁcation (ITU-T Rec. H.264 — ISO/IEC 14496-10 AVC), Document:
JVT-G050r1, May. 2003.
4. IEEE 802.11e/D3.0, “Draft Supplement to Part 11: Wireless Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) speciﬁcations: Medium Access Control
(MAC) Enhancements for Quality of Service (QoS),” May, 2002.
5. H. Liu and E. Zarki, “Performance of H.263 Video Transmission over Wireless
Channels Using Hybrid ARQ,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, Vol. 15, No. 9, Dec. 1997.
6. Y. Shan and A. Zakhor, “Cross Layer Techniques for Adaptive Video Streaming
over Wireless Networks,” International Conference on Multimedia and Expo, Lausanne, Switzerland, Aug. 2002, pp. 277-280.
7. H. Deng and M. Lin, “A Type I Hybrid ARQ System with Adaptive Code Rates,”
IEEE Trans. Communications, vol. 46, pp. 733-737, Feb. 1995.
8. S. Lin and D. Costello, “Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications,”
Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1983.
9. P. Ferr´e, A. Doufexi, A. Nix, D. Bull, and J. Chung-How, “Packetisation Strategies
for Enhanced Video Transmission over Wireless LANs,” Packet Video Workshop
(PV2004), Irvine, CA, USA, 13 14 Dec. 2004.
10. S. Choi, “IEEE 802.11e MAC-Level FEC Performance Evaluation and Enhancement,” IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, 2002.
11. Q. Ni, L. Romdhani and T. Turletti, “A Survey of QoS Enhancements for IEEE
802.11 Wireless LAN,” RFC 3550, IETF, Jul. 2003.
12. J. Shin, J. G. Kim, J. W. Kim and C.-C.J. Kuo, “Dynamic QoS mapping control
for streaming video in relative service diﬀerentiation networks,” European Transactions on Telecommunications, Vol. 12, No. 3, May-June 2001, pp. 217-230.

