Damages Recognition on Crates of Beverages by
Artificial Neural Networks Trained with Data Obtained
from Numerical Simulation
Jörg Zacharias, Christoph Hartmann, and Antonio Delgado
Technische Universität München
Chair of Fluid Mechanics and Process Automation
Weihenstephaner Steig 23, 85350 Freising-Weihenstephan, Germany
Joerg.Zacharias@wzw.tum.de

Abstract. A new method to detect damages on crates of beverages is
investigated. It is based on a pattern-recognition-system by an artificial neural
network (ANN) with a feedforward multilayer-perceptron topology. The sorting
criterion is obtained by mechanical vibration analysis, which provides
characteristic frequency spectra for all possible damage cases and crate models.
To support the network training a large number of numerical data-sets is
calculated by finite-element-method (FEM). The combination of artificial
neural networks with methods of numerical simulation is a powerful instrument
to cover the broad range of possible damages. First results are discussed with
respect to the influence of modelling inaccuracies of the finite-element-model
and the support of ANN by training-data obtained from numerical simulation.

1 Introduction
Based on the project-idea to improve the quality requirements on deposit systems and
filling lines in the beverage industry [1], a new recognition method is presented in the
current contribution. The increasing variety of crate models complicates the sorting as
well as added impurities and ageing of the material. Therefore, functional sorting
systems are needed for the inspection of returned crates of beverages which are
mainly sorted by optical systems in industrial automatic filling lines. The general
problem of these lines is the detection of small and hidden damages.
The scientific motivation results from some contributions in aerospace, civil
engineering, seismic research and some basic mechanical engineering problems. They
describe methods to detect damages an failures in structures using frequency response
and transient response data of vibrating mechanical systems ([2], [3], [4]). Also
numerical simulation on frequency response methods of different examples as plates,
beams, bridges, buildings have been done with good agreement to experimental
results ([5], [6]). Further researches show the capability of artificial neural networks
(ANN) in different topologies to classify some damages of structures which receive
data out of different vibration based analysis ([7], [8]). This short review shows that
the basic principles have been proven on buildings, aircraft-wings, beams and plates
by different authors. The combination of all these principles to get finite-element (FE)

2

supported ANN trained by numerical simulated data-sets have been taken mainly at
simple structures like plates, beams and strongly simplified models ([9], [10]), where
also some problems to get fitting results with this technique are discussed [11]. This
also underlines that there is not an overall solution and each single case needs its
special adaptation.
The following contribution will apply the methods to the complex structure of a
crate of beverage. The basic idea and the feasibility of the method have been reported
in [12]. The development of a pattern-recognition-system for damaged polyethylene
crates of beverages is carried out on the principle of mechanical excitation and
frequency response measurement. The aim of the system is to take advantage of these
reliable mechanical methods and combine them with the quick, adaptive pattern
recognition of ANN which allows automatic sorting. Additionally, numerical
simulation of the mechanical system provides many information about the system
behaviour for the planning of the experimental device and for further use in network
training. Typical damages as flaws, deformations or separated components are
considered in the current contribution.

2 Analysis
In order to meet the principle objectives of the system, the damage detection of
polyethylene crates of beverages, based on the pattern recognition of vibration
response analysis data is established. This technique is taking advantage of the
property of mechanical systems to transmit signals through the whole structure. The
vibration response of damaged crates or crates of different kind differ from that of a
standard (undamaged) crate. The difference is used as a criterion to select individual
crates. The pattern recognition of different response spectra is done by ANN. Since a
large number of possible damages occur, the training is carried out with data obtained
from experimental analysis and from numerical simulation. Also the data reduction
(pre-processing) of the response spectra to an appropriate amount of characteristic
input data is described.
In the experimental part of the present project a mechanical excitation is applied to
a crate of beverage. Therefore, a customary polyethylene crate is fixed on an
electrodynamic vibration facility (see figure 1). Control by a PC-control-system
provides a sinusoidal vertical movement of the shaker-piston where the crate is fixed
on a central position on a specially constructed expander. The excitation is carried out
over a sweep of a frequency range from 50 to 1000 Hz, controlled by an amplitude of
constant power with a starting acceleration of 75 m/s² which also is the reference for
the system calibration. This excitation does not cause any visible destruction or plastic
deformation to the crates. The system answer is recorded separately as an acceleration
signal over the whole frequency range at different locations on the crate by an
acceleration-sensor. Mainly observed for the described results is one control sensor at
the expander and one reference sensor on the middle of the handle of the crates. All
kind of crates and damages can be processed in this way. In the present case, 20 crates
with different, empirically evaluated damages are used to cover a basic range of
damages. Flaws, deformations, separated components on sides, handles,

3

compartments and also multiple damages as well as three different models are
inspected.

Fig. 1. Vibration system at the laboratory

The vibrational motion can be described mathematically by the general equation of
motion (1) which is the basis for the numerical analysis of the system. In a finiteelement model inertia (M), damping (D), stiffness (K) of the model are determined by
the geometry and the material properties. The force f(t) defines the excitation, and u
represents the displacement vector of all degrees of freedom of the discretized model.

[M ]{u&&}+ [D]{u&}+ [K ]{u}= {f }(t )

(1)

From modal analysis it is known, that the displacement vector {u} can be
expressed as a series of superposed eigenmodes Φ i with different amplitudes ξ i .

{u}= ∑ [Φ i ]ξ i

(2)

i

The natural frequencies of a structure are the frequencies at which the structure
naturally tends to vibrate if it is subjected to a disturbance. The deformed shape of a
structure at a specific natural frequency is called its mode shape of vibration. Natural
frequencies and mode shapes are functions of the structural properties (e.g. material
parameters, geometry). All the modes and frequencies are system immanent. If the
excitation frequency is equal to one of the natural frequencies the responseamplitudes become very large. This is called resonance. In the case of enforced
motion, the amplitude and the phase of the vibration at a distinct point are recorded.
Excitation in the representative frequency range results in associated response
frequency spectra which are specific for each observed measurement point as well as
for each geometry, including damages, and different material properties.
Based on this knowledge, numerical simulation is carried out in order to provide
both, insight into the basic vibration behaviour and frequency response spectra for the
training of the ANN. The evaluation of the mode shapes ensures the optimisation of

4

the experiment and can guide through it. In pre-test planning stages standard mode
shapes can be used to indicate the best location for the accelerometers and for the
position of excitation [13]. Furthermore, there is an enormous need of data-sets for the
network-training and network-testing, that represent a wide range of crates of equal
damages and also a wide variety of possible damages, whose experimental data
collection is very costly. These data-sets can be produced in a more efficient way by
numerical simulation.
A CAD-data-set is automatically meshed with support of the pre-processor
MSC/PATRAN, which leads to a model of more than 1.000.000 degrees of freedom.
Two different element types are deployed, 4 node (TET4) and 10 node (TET10)
tetrahedral elements [14]. The finite-element-solver MSC/NASTRAN is configured to
a frequency response analysis to calculate comparable spectra of the vibration
behaviour of the crates, intact as well as damaged. For this purpose some
simplifications are done within the configuration. Therefore, usually the first step is
the calculation of mode shapes and natural frequencies. No damping is used which
leads to results that characterise the basic dynamic behaviour of the structure and
indicate how the structure will respond to dynamic loading. To simulate frequencyresponse-spectra another method is applied, which uses the technique of the largemass-principle, where applied forces are used in conjunction with concentrated
masses (see [15], [16], [17] for further information). These spectra are validated by
comparison with the experimental data and by optimisation of the parameters and the
simulation configuration of the system and the solver. The validated numerical
database now is applicable for any possible damage case in further simulations. This
data can be included into the training-data-set to enhance experimental training-data
and cover a broad range of possible damages.
The third part of the system, the pattern recognition by ANN, is done with a
multilayer-perceptron (MLP) network with one input, one hidden and one output
layer trained by the supervised learning algorithm resilient propagation ([18], [19]). A
network with 10 input nodes and 5 nodes in the hidden layer, all connected in forward
direction, is built up in order to classify the signal in 2 output nodes as “intact” or
“damaged”. Each output node has to predict a “1” for true and a “0” for false, as also
reported by [20]. Data-reduction by splitting and integrating the spectra yields a
suitable amount of data for the input nodes of the ANN. Each node processes a part of
response range and is not dependent on any previous knowledge about the model
behaviour. A minimum of non-redundant data-sets is needed for training (20 to 50
different cases at the moment). This number depends on the variety of the damages.
The implementation of more crate models will cause more training-data-sets.

3 Results and Discussion
The mode shape analysis gives insight into the preferred state of motion of the
mechanical structure. Therefore, it can be evaluated in order to choose sensor
positions which provide a high degree of sensitivity. For example, in figure 2, the fifth
mode shape is shown. The region around the handles is strongly deformed. This
means, that a sensor placed on the handle would record a high amplitude. A damaged

5

handle would be recognised because of a different mode shape at a different
frequency.

Fig. 2. Fifth mode shape at 243 Hz

The experimental results show, concerning the feasibility of the damage
recognition method, that different cases of detected spectra show different peaks with
different amplitudes and positions depending on the damages. See figure 3 for typical
vibration spectra at one reference point on the handle of an intact and two damaged
crates.
It can be stated that damages on crates of beverages can be identified by the
comparison of vibration spectra. Also the small and hidden damage in the
compartment is observable. In detail, the peaks are specific in position and size,
especially in two main regions from 120 to 250 Hz and from about 400 to 850 Hz.
This is mainly due to the geometry modifications of every sample. The reproducibility
of the spectra measured by the described method is possible in all cases. This is
proved by repeated measurements. However, to obtain data-sets, which are to be
expected in an industrial environment, data of up to 5% perturbation in amplitude are
produced by artificial inaccuracies during the measurement process, which offers a
pool of about 300 data-sets. Further investigations show that some very small

6

damages (e.g. very small flaws) are better observable, if more than one spectra of
different measurement points are taken into account.
900
intact crate
handle damage
damaged compartment

800

Acceleration [m/s²]

700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900

1000

Frequency [Hz]
Fig. 3. Examples of vibration spectra of two different damages (handle reference point)

In order to limit the degrees of freedom of the ANN, the number of input nodes has
been limited to 10. This requires a reduction of the spectrum data-sets by a factor of
hundred. Different methods have been applied. Splitting the spectrum into ten parts
and integration of each part leads to an appropriate data reduction. Scaling,
normalising, shifting or calculating of for example inertia moments did not improve
the results. Figure 4 shows four different cases, where the input values of the nodes
are displayed as bars. The data-reduction for both numerically and experimentally
obtained spectra is carried out in the same way.

aera of integration [-]

2,0E+04

row 1
row 3
row 5
row 7
row 9

1,5E+04

row 2
row 4
row 6
row 8
row 10

1,0E+04
5,0E+03
0,0E+00

1

handle damage

2

intact crate

3

other type

4

compartment d.

Fig. 4. Input data for ANN, bar plot of four different cases

7

3.1 ANN trained by experimental data-sets
In a first step, the ANN is processing exclusively experimental data in order to prove
the feasibility of the pattern-recognition-system. The configuration of the network has
been modified in order to analyse the sensitivity of the net topology. In all tests a
MLP is used, trained by resilient propagation (RPROP) algorithm. Using more than
10 input nodes and more than 5 hidden nodes did not lead to any improvement in the
prediction. Using less nodes resulted in worse predictions. If more output nodes are
used, additional features of damages can be classified. For example a detection of
different damage classes (e.g. “broken handle” or “broken compartment”) is then
possible. Damages that can not be identified, are automatically put into the class of
“unknown” damages. The 10x5x2 network yields a prediction of the defined output
values (“1” and “0”) with an accuracy of about 5% for all the data-sets.
3.2 ANN trained by a combination of numerical and experimental data-sets
The frequency response obtained by numerical simulation has to agree with the
experimental data in order to make sure that both methods can be applied.
Experimental and numerical data of a frequency response analysis obtained by the use
of 4 node and 10 node tetrahedral elements for an intact crate are shown in figure 5.
900
intact crate (exp.)
intact crate (num.) TET10
intact crate (num.) TET4

800

Acceleration [m/s²]

700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900

1000

Frequency [Hz]
Fig. 5. Comparison of experimental and numerical spectra simulated by 4 node and 10 node
tetrahedral elements (handle reference point)

It can be stated, that the observable main characteristics of the curves are similar.
In addition, there are two regions of interest where the numerical data are similar to
those of the experimental response (around 200 Hz and above 500 Hz). It is obvious
that the simulation by the 10 node element model is closer to the experimental spectra
than the 4 node element model. Further improvement of the agreement of the numeric

8

simulation with the experiment is required. Nevertheless, simulations of damaged
crates have been carried out in order to investigate their accuracy. As in the measured
spectra (see figure 3) it can be stated that damages can be identified by comparison of
the spectra. To estimate their quality, the comparison of numerical and experimental
data of a handle damage is presented in figure 6.
900
handle damage (exp.)
handle damage (num.)

800

Acceleration [m/s²]

700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900

1000

Frequency [Hz]
Fig. 6. Comparison of experimental and numerical handle damage (handle reference point)

The calculated response spectra as well as the experimental response spectra show
net changes of peak size and location in similar frequency ranges. The difference
between model and measurement of the undamaged crate in the example is, as [11]
reported for a cracked beam, in the order of the change that the damage on the handle
causes in measurement as well as in the simulation data. Because of this overlapping,
it is important to be aware of the problem of false indication of damage in the two
categories “false-positive” (indication of damage when none is present) and “falsenegative” (no indication of damage when damage is present) [20]. However, other
damages and other crate models cause serious changes in the spectra so that these
cases differ significantly, which allows their classification.
At the moment, the objective of a training without experimental data-sets of these
complex model is not yet met. Due to the existing difference between the numerical
data-sets and the experimental data-sets, at the moment only an additional support use
of the numerical data-sets is possible. Nevertheless, these first results point out the
feasibility of network-training with simulated data. As the quality of the numerical
simulation will be improved and data-reduction will be refined the classification is
expected to become better.

9

4 Conclusion and Perspectives
In the present contribution, a pattern recognition method has been developed in order
to detect damages on crates of beverages. Therefore, vibration response data of both
damaged and intact crates have been recorded. Net differences can be observed with
respect to the intact crate in all analysed damage cases. As the attempt is to use as less
as possible “expert know-how”, an ANN has been trained such that the detection of
damaged crates is possible in all cases. Finite-element-simulation is carried out to
analyse the mode shapes and in order to obtain data for the ANN-training. An
updating of the FE-model meshing with ten node tetrahedral elements causes an
enhancement of the agreement to measured data. While in the FE-data, damages can
also be recognised easily, the agreement between experimental data and numerical
data is not yet satisfying with regard to the little changes of some damages. Moreover
the FE-data are exploited to get insight into the basic vibration behaviour. This is
important to determine locations where sensors can be placed in order to obtain
damage-representative data. The data reduction by splitting the spectra in equal sized
parts and integration of each part over the individual frequency range has been proved
to be an appropriate method.
The next steps in the current project will consist of a further improvement of the
agreement between numerical and experimental data. This might be obtained by an
anisotropic behaviour of the sensor or the idealised material parameters in the
numerical model. Further improvement in availability of data is expected from the use
of more than one measurement point on a crate and more data-sets to assure the
reliability of the prediction of the ANN.
As a long term objective ageing or micro damages should be recognised by the
system. For application of the method in an industrial context a reduction of the cycle
time is required. While at the moment the cycle time is about 20 seconds, it has to be
reached a level of one to two seconds. This can be obtained, if the excitation can be
modified such that a shock excitation replaces the sinusoidal sweep which represents
the bottle-neck of the current procedure. Also alternative processes are possible for
the measurement of vibration signals, for example using contactless measurement
systems or directly the signals on gripper devices.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Klein, F.: Leergutsortierung in der Getränketechnik, Getränketechnik, 8 (1992) 46-52
Hermans, L., Van der Auweraer, H.: Modal Testing and Analysis of Structures under
Operational Conditions: Industrial Applications, Mechanical Systems and Signal
Processing, 13(2) (1999) 193-216
Doebling, S.W., Farrar, C.R., Prime, M.B.: A Summary Review of Vibration-Based
Damage Identification Methods, The Shock and Vibration Digest, 30(2) (1998) 91-105
Salawu, O.S.: Detection of structural damage through changes in frequency: a review ,
Engineering Structures, 19(9) (1997) 718-723
Wang, Z., Lin, R.M., Lim, M.K.: Structural damage detection using measured FRF data,
Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 147 (1997) 187-197
Alampalli, S.: Effects of Testing, Analysis, Damage, and Environment on Modal
Parameters, Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing 14(1) (2000) 63-74

10

7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.

Marwala, T., Hunt, H.E.M.: Fault Identification Using Finite Element Models and Neural
Networks, Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing 13(3) (1999) 475-490
Masri, S.F., Nakamura, M., Chassiakos, A.G., Caughey, T.K.: Neural Network Approach
to Detection of Changes in Structural Parameters, Journal of Engineering Mechanics,
122(4) (1996) 350-360
Elkordy, M.F., Chang, K.C., Lee, G.C.: Neural Networks Trained by Analytically
Simulated Damage States, Journal of Computing in Civil Engineering, 7(2) (1993)
130-145
Kudva, J.N., Munir, N., Tan, P.W.: Damage Detection in Smart Structures Using Neural
Networks and Finite-Element-Analyses, Smart Materials and Structures, 1 (1992) 108-112
Fritzen, C.-P., Jennewein, D.: Damage Detection Based on Model Updating Methods,
Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing, 12(1) (1998) 163-186
Zacharias, J., Hartmann, Ch., Delgado, A.: Recognition of Damages on Crates of
Beverages by an Artificial Neural Network, accepted for Presentation and Proceedings of
eunite 2001, Tenerife, Spain, (2001)
Reynier, M.: Sensors Location for Updating Problems, Mechanical Systems and Signal
Processing, 13(2) (1999) 297-314
Entrekin, A.: Accuracy of MSC/NASTRAN First- and Second-Order Tetrahedral
Elements in Solid Modeling for Stress Analysis, MSC Aerospace Users’ Conference,
(1999)
Sitton, G.: MSC/NASTRAN Basic Dynamic Analysis User’s Guide, The McNealSchwendler Corporation, USA, (1997)
Rieg, F., Hackenschmidt, R.: Finite Elemente Analyse für Ingenieure, Hanser-Verlag,
München, (2000)
Hagedorn, P., Otterbein, S.: Technische Schwingungslehre – Lineare Schwingungen
diskreter mechanischer Systeme, Springer-Verlag, (1987)
http://www.lfp.blm.tu-muenchen.de/pa/Software/knn.htm, 16.11.2001
Zell, A.: Simulation Neuronaler Netze, Addison-Wesley, Bonn, (1994)
Fugate, M.L.: Vibration-Based Damage Detection Using Statistical Process Control,
Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing, 15(4) (2001) 707-721

