Formation of Dwarf Galaxies in Reionized
Universe with Heterogeneous Multi-computer
System
Taisuke Boku1,5 , Hajime Susa2 , Kenji Onuma3 ,
Masayuki Umemura4,5 , Mitsuhisa Sato1,5 , and Daisuke Takahashi1,5
1

3

Institute of Information Sciences and Electronics, University of Tsukuba
2
Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, Rikkyo University
Doctoral Program of Systems and Information Engineering, Graduate School,
University of Tsukuba
4
Institute of Physics, University of Tsukuba
5
Center for Computational Physics, University of Tsukuba

Abstract. HMCS (Heterogeneous Multi-Computer System) is a very
powerful and ideal computational environment for large scale computational astrophysics simulations including multiple physical phenomena.
In this system, general purpose and special purpose parallel processing
systems are involved to realize very high performance computation. We
have constructed a system with MPP and PC-cluster as general purpose
side and GRAPE-6 gravity engine as special purpose side.
We perform 3D radiation smoothed-particle-hydrodynamics (RSPH) simulations on the formation and the photoevaporation of subgalactic objects (M ∼ 108 −109 M ). We conﬁrm the suppression of the formation of
small galaxies after the reionization. We also ﬁnd that the galaxies that
undergo violent photoevaporation process, still retain certain amount of
stars, which are formed at small scale high density peaks. These cooled
components merge with each other when the dark matter halo of the
whole system is formed. It is also found these low mass galaxies should
have large mass-to-light ratio, and these systems could be the progenitor
of dwarf spheroidal galaxies in Local Group.

1

Introduction

Galaxy formation is one of the important issues on computational astrophysics.
In this ﬁeld, we are especially interested into the formation of dwarf galaxies in
reionized universe which requires very heavy simulations under multiple physical
phenomena. The main part of the simulation consists of two elements: SPH
(smoothed particle hydrodynamics) and N-body gravity calculation. We have
developed a parallel code for the ﬁrst half on both massively parallel processor
and Linux PC clusters. The latter half is extremely heavy because it requires
O(N 2 ) computation. For this part, we introduced a special purpose processor
GRAPE-6[1] which provides 1 TFLOPS peak performance with only a single
board. We have developed a combined system with these two parts, named
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3039, pp. 629–636, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

630

T. Boku et al.

HMCS (Heterogeneous Multi-Computer System)[2]. In this paper, we describe
the simulation result of the formation of dwarf galaxies on HMCS as well as the
brief introduction of HMCS itself.

2

Formation of Low Mass Galaxies and Ultraviolet
Background Radiation Field

According to the standard theory of cosmology, ﬁrst galaxies are small (M ∼
106 − 108 M 1 ), and are formed when the universe is a hundred million years old.
These ﬁrst generation galaxies start to reionize the universe due to the ultraviolet
radiation ﬁeld emitted from the massive stars in them. These emitted ultraviolet
photons built up the ultraviolet background radiation ﬁeld. In fact, recent observations strongly suggest that the universe is highly ionized after the age of the
universe (tH ) is approximately 3 × 108 years [5]. On the other hand, these small
galaxies are so tiny that they cannot aﬀord to keep the ionized hot gas in their
gravitational potential, because of the gas pressure. Thus, if the background ultraviolet photons penetrate and heat up the galaxy, the gas component escapes
from the potential of the host galaxy. This mechanism is always called as photoevaporation. In order to evaluate the eﬀects in realistic clumpy forming galaxies,
we perform numerical simulations on the formation of small galaxies under the
ultraviolet background radiation ﬁeld. The code includes the eﬀects of radiation
transfer of ionizing photons, chemical reaction network, radiative cooling, star
formation, gravity, dark matter particles and smoothed particle hydrodynamics
(SPH). This type of simulation with radiative transfer on the formation of small
galaxies have never been done before, because of the complexity and high cost of
radiation transfer. We utilize the newly developed parallel processing platform
Heterogeneous Multi-Computer System [2,7] to realize the present numerical
simulation which includes various type of physical phenomena.

3

Heterogeneous Multi-computer System

HMCS (Heterogeneous Multi-Computer System) [2] is a paradigm combining
heterogeneous parallel processing systems to solve multi-physical or multi-scale
problems which cannot be solved ordinary single system architecture such as
general purpose MPPs or clusters. In HMCS, basically, two or more high performance parallel processing systems are connected by wide-bandwidth parallel
commodity network such as parallel link of Fast- or Gigabit-Ethernet. We have
developed a prototype system of HMCS for astrophysics introducing special purpose gravity engine GRAPE-6[1]. GRAPE-6 is developed at University of Tokyo,
and we made a cluster with eight boards of GRAPE-6 in a collaborative work
with the originators of GRAPE-6[2].
Fig. 1 shows the conceptual overview of our HMCS prototype. As general
purpose machines (GPMs hereafter), we are using CP-PACS[4] MPP system
1

M

denotes the mass of Sun.

Formation of Dwarf Galaxies in Reionized Universe

631

Fig. 1. HMCS overview

with 2048 processors (peak performance = 614 GFLOPS) or commodity-base
Pentium Xeon PC-cluster with 37 nodes (74 processors, peak performance =
414 GFLOPS). Eight boards of GRAPE-6 (peak performance = 8TFLOPS) are
connected to a small PC-cluster with Pentium4 operated by Linux. Each node of
this PC-cluster is connected to a GRAPE-6 board via 32-bit PCI. A parallelized
management program written in MPI is provided to control multiple GRAPE-6
boards performing a large scale particle calculation in parallel.
We have designed the system to allow multiple GPMs share a cluster of
GRAPE-6 in time-sharing manner. Thus, this GRAPE-6 cluster, named HMCS
Server Cluster, works as a server system to provide gravity calculation service,
and all GPMs work as client machines. GPMs communicate with HMCS Server
Cluster via serial or parallel Ethernet links according to the load of calculation,
i.e. the number of particles to be processed. This network with parallel Ethernet
links is controlled by user-level middleware named PIO[3] which provides high
bandwidth communication with trunk of parallel Ethernet links on TCP/IP
level.
Each GRAPE-6 board consists of 32 ASICs for N-body calculation and provides 1 TFLOPS of peak performance on gravity calculation. HMCS Server Cluster
operates with MPI-based management program for 1) parallel data exchanging
with GPMs through PIO, 2) time-sharing controlling of multiple requests of gravity calculation by multiple GPMs and 3) coordinating parallel gravity calculation on all GRAPE-6 boards. The server program is well designed to maximize
the utilization ratio of GRAPE-6 regardless the communication speed between
any of GPMs and the server[8].
In HMCS prototype, we can distribute multiple series of simulations with
various initial conditions to multiple GPMs surrounding HMCS Server Cluster.

632

T. Boku et al.

For relatively small scale problems where the number of particles is less than
50,000, one or two GRAPE-6 boards are involved to minimize the overhead for
parallel processing among multiple boards. For larger problems, 4 to 8 GRAPE-6
boards are involved. Currently, this distribution control is performed manually
with system conﬁguration setting, however we are now developing the automatic
load distribution and balancing system to optimize the utilization ratio of eight
GRAPE-6 boards.

4

Algorithm and Execution on HMCS

HMCS is an ideal platform for computational astrophysics problems which require both continuum and particle simulations in the target system. In the simulation of dwarf galaxies, there are multiple physical phenomena to be simulated
such as hydrodynamics, chemical process and gravity and so on. We simulate all
these elements except gravity calculation on GPM while HMCS Server Cluster
performs gravity calculation with GRAPE-6.
The basic algorithm of 3D RSPH with gravity on HMCS is as follows.

gravity calculation

GRAPE-6

SPH (density)

GPM

radiation transfer
chemical reaction

iterate
until
convergence

temperature determination
pressure gradient determination
gravity calculation
integration of moment equation

Fig. 2. Basic algorithm and workload of 3D RSPH with gravity

1. Initialize all physical conditions of particles such as mass, location and velocity, and the ﬁeld such as density, temperature, the amount of chemical
seeds, etc.
2. Transfer the particle data from GPM to GRAPE-6, and evaluate the self
gravity.
3. Calculate the density, pressure and gradient of pressure with SPH.

Formation of Dwarf Galaxies in Reionized Universe

633

4. Determine the time step from the velocity and force.
5. Vary the size of SPH particles.
6. Iterate the calculation of radiation, chemical reaction and energy equation of
SPH until they converge, with optional adjustment of time step if necessary.
7. Integral the movement of particles according to SPH dynamic equation.
8. Iterate from Step 2 to 7 for required time length.
In each time step, HMCS Server Cluster (GRAPE-6) and GPM communicate to exchange particle data and acceleration. In this algorithm, most of
computation time is spent by GPM. Even if the order of computation for gravity calculation is O(N 2 ) for N particles, RSPH calculation part is much heavier
than gravity part for N ∼ 50, 000. In such cases, GRAPE-6 is mostly idle, therefore we can share HMCS Server Cluster with multiple GPMs in time-sharing
manner to perform multiple cases of simulation simultaneously.

5

Simulations and Results

We have performed several runs with two diﬀerent total masses and various
formation epochs of galaxies. The detailed of applied method and algorithm
are shown in [7]. In this paper, results from four runs with parameters listed
in Table 1 are shown. Projected positions of gas particles, star particles and
dark matter particles in model A1 are plotted in Fig. 3. The left three panels
represent the epoch prior to the reionization. At this epoch, gas particles are cold
(T < 104 K) and almost trace the distribution of dark matter particles. Stellar
particles are not formed yet. After the reionization (middle three panels), the
4
low density regions are heated up to T <
∼ 10 K, while the high density peaks
are self-shielded to the ultraviolet background radiation ﬁeld. In the self-shielded
dense clumps, stars are formed from cooled clouds. Finally (right three panels),
the gas components are blown away due to the photoevaporation. The clumps
of the star particles merge with each other, and form a spheroidal system. On
the other hand, such as in case B2, the gas is not blown away, and most of the
gas and stars settle onto the gravitational potential of dark matter particles,
because the gravitational force is strong enough to keep the hot ionized gas with
T 104 K.
Table 1. Model parameters
Model ID Formation epoch zc Total mass Mtot
A1
1.5
2 × 108 M
A2
1.5
2 × 109 M
B1
6
2 × 108 M
B2
6
2 × 109 M

634

T. Boku et al.

Fig. 3. Projected positions of SPH particles (upper panels), numerically formed star
particles (middle) and dark matter particles (bottom panels) are plotted at three different epochs (left:z = 8.958, middle:z = 5.755 and right:z = 1.361) for model A1. Remark that larger redshift represents the earlier epoch. The color of the gas particles represents the gas temperature (red:T ≥ 104 K, green:103 K ≤ T ≤ 104 K, blue:T ≤ 103 K).
The box size is 6 kpc × 6 kpc

In Fig. 4(a), time evolution of the fraction of stars and gas particles within
5 kpc2 are plotted for four runs. For models A1 and A2, which correspond the
models with later formation epoch ( i.e. low zc ), signiﬁcant amount of gas are
lost from galaxy. On the other hand, for models B1 and B2 (earlier formation
epoch), most of the gas and stellar components do not escape from the galaxy.
Gas particles are converted to star particles more eﬃciently than the previous
case, because the gas clumps are formed prior to the reionization epoch (i.e. when
the intensity of UV radiation ﬁeld is weak), and they are easily self-shielded. Once
the gas are converted to star particles, thermal pressure of the ionized gas does
not disrupt the system.
These results also infer the large mass-to-light ratio (ratio of luminosity and
total mass) for models A1 and A2, because gas are lost by photoevaporation
while the dark matter particles are not aﬀected by radiation. The observation of
2

kpc = 3.08 × 1021 cm

Formation of Dwarf Galaxies in Reionized Universe

635

Local Group dwarf spheroidal galaxies3 tells that those faint galaxies have very
large mass-to-light ratio [6], which is similar to our results in models A1 and A2.
In Figure 4(b) relative star formation histories are plotted. We ﬁnd a clear
feature for all models: star formation rates4 sharply drop at tH = 1−2Gyr, which
is the direct consequence of the photoevaporation of the gas. It is interesting to
point out that this star formation history is again similar to that of dwarf galaxies
in Local Group [6].

(a) Cooled fraction

(b) Star formation history

Fig. 4. (a) Time evolution of the fraction of cooled baryonic components are plotted
for four runs. Horizontal axes denote the cosmological time, and vertical axes represent
the fractions of the baryonic components (i.e. SPH particles and star particles) within
5kpc from the center of gravity. Left two panels represent the cases with zc = 1.5
(Model A1 and A2). Right two panels denote the cases with zc = 6 (Model B1 and
B2). (b) Star formation history of four runs are plotted. Vertical axis denotes the star
formation rate (mass of the formed stars per unit time) normalized by the peak value.
Left two panels represent the cases with zc = 1.5 (Model A1 and A2). Right two panels
denote the cases with zc = 6 (Model B1 and B2)

6

Conclusion

We performed 3D radiation hydrodynamical simulations on the formation of low
mass objects with four set of parameters on HMCS prototype system with general purpose PC-clusters and special purpose cluster with GRAPE-6 gravity
engine. Through these product runs, we conﬁrmed that HMCS is an ideal and
powerful tool for real applications of computational astrophysics. The suppression of the formation of low mass objects at later epoch is conﬁrmed. It is also
3
4

Small galaxies in our neighbourhood.
Mass of the formed stars per unit time.

636

T. Boku et al.

found that the low mass galaxies formed at low redshift should have very large
mass-to-light ratio and characteristic star formation history. Observational counter part of these systems might be the spheroidal components of Local Group
dwarf galaxies.
Acknowledgment. The authors truly thank Prof. Jun’ichiro Makino at University of Tokyo for his valuable suggestions and comments to our work. We also
thank to members of Center for Computational Physics, University of Tsukuba
for their support.

References
1. Makino, J., et.al., “A 1.349 Tﬂops simulation of black hole in a galactic center on
GRAPE-6”, Proc. of SC2000 (CD-ROM), IEEE, Los Alamitos, 2000.
2. Boku, T., Makino, J., Susa, H., Umemura, M., Fukushige, T., Ukawa, A., “Heterogeneous Multi-Computer System: A New Platform for Multi-Paradigm Scientiﬁc
Simulation”, Proc. of ICS’02, pp.26–34, New York, Jul. 2002.
3. Boku, T., Matsubara, M., Itakura, K., “PIO: Parallel I/O System for
Massively Parallel Processors”, Proc. of European High Performance Computing
and Network Conference 2001 (LNCS-2110), pp.383-392, Amsterdam, Jun. 2001.
4. Boku, T., Itakura, K., Nakamura, H., Nakazawa, K., “CP-PACS: A massively parallel processor for large scale scientiﬁc calculations”, Proc. of ACM ICS’97, pp.108115, Vienna, Jul. 1997.
5. Kogut, A. et al., “First-Year Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP)
Observations: Temperature-Polarization Correlation”, Astrophysical Journal Supplement, Volume 148, 161, 2003.
6. Mateo, M., “Dwarf Galaxies of the Local Group”, Annual Review of Astronomy
& Astrophysics, Volume 36, 435, 1998.
7. Susa, H., Umemura, M., “Formation of Dwarf Galaxies during the Cosmic Reionization”, Astrophysical Journal, Volume 600, Issue 1, pp. 1–16, 2004.
8. Onuma, K., Boku, T., Sato, M., Takahashi, D., Susa, H., Umemura, M., “Heterogeneous Remote Computing System for Computational Astrophysics with OmniRPC”, Proc. of Workshop on High Performance Grid Computing and Networking, Proc. of SAINT2004, pp.623–629, Tokyo, Jan. 2004.

