Eﬀect of Structural Disorder on the Electronic
Density of States in One-Dimensional Chain of
Atoms
Maciej Woloszyn and Bartlomiej J. Spisak
Faculty of Physics and Nuclear Techniques,
AGH-University of Science and Technology,
Al. Mickiewicza 30,
30-059 Krak´
ow, Poland
woloszyn@novell.ftj.agh.edu.pl

Abstract. A simple model of chain containing Dirac’s delta-like potentials is used to calculate the density of states in systems with structural
disorder. The crystal case of equally spaced scattering centers may be
seen as a reference case suitable both for numerical calculations as well as
analytical ones. The structural disorder means distortion of ideal lattice
seen as ﬂuctuation of distances between adjacent sites. Such disorder is
sometimes referred to as amorphous and may lead to smearing oﬀ the
band boundaries resulting in a tail-like density of states.

1

Introduction

In the last decade we observe a great interest in the low dimensional systems.
The rapid development of nanotechnology allows to fabricate the new class of
artiﬁcial structures such as dots, wires and wells, where the motion of electrons
is conﬁned by the spatial dimensions of the system [1]. Therefore the dots, the
wires and the wells are regarded as zero-, one- and two- dimensional systems,
respectively.
The electronic structure of these systems is especially important for practical applications and its theoretical analysis can be based on the Bethe ansatz
method [2], the concept of low energy Tomonaga-Luttinger liquid [3] and powerful numerical techniques such as the Quantum Monte-Carlo [4] or Density Matrix
Renormalization Group Method [5]. Another important numerical techniques are
Coherent Potential Approximation [6] and Recursion Method [7]. Especially the
last two methods allow us to construct the density of states (DoS) [8] in a simple
manner.
As it is well known the structural disorder, i.e. spatial ﬂuctuations of potential, has a strong inﬂuence on the electronic phenomena in condensed matter [9].
In this paper we adopt the generalized Kronig-Penney model to the description
of the chain of atoms (which can be treated as a model of quantum wire) and
conﬁne our attention to the modiﬁcation of the DoS as a result of amorphisation.
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3037, pp. 630–633, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

Eﬀect of Structural Disorder on the Electronic Density of States

2

631

Model

In the presented simple model which can be regarded as a generalization of the
Kronig-Penney model [10], we consider the time-independent Schr¨
odinger equation for the one-dimensional system of noninteracting electrons with eﬀective
mass m which move in a random potential V (x), namely
−

¯ 2 d2
h
+ V (x) ψ(x) = εψ(x) ,
2m dx2

(1)

where ψ(x) is the wave function, ε – energy and h
¯ – the Planck constant.
In fact, the potential V (x) represents the collection of N atoms and consequently
scattering potentials well located at random positions xi , namely
N

V (x) =

F0
i=1

¯2
h
δ(x − xi ) ,
m

(2)

where F0 = h
¯ 2 V0 b/m and parameter b is deﬁned as the width of the square interatomic barriers with V0 being their height. The distribution of these scattering
centers in the chain can be described by the probability distribution function,
P {xi }, for the random potential [11].
The limit V0 → ∞ and b → 0 allows us to deﬁne the constant strength of
scattering potential, i.e. V0 b = const, and even in the case of disordered chain of
atoms we can construct the wave function of electrons which satisﬁes (1), using
the analytical expression for the wave function ψi (x) inside the i-th square well
ψi (x) = Ai cos(ux + ξi ) ,
(3)
√
where Ai is the amplitude, u = 2mε/¯h and ξi is the phase.
Joining solutions (3) found at consecutive ranges gives the wave function
ψ(x) which must satisfy the following conditions:
−
ψ(x+
i ) = ψ(xi ) ,

d
ψ(x)
dx

x+
i

−

d
ψ(x)
dx

x−
i

= 2F0 ψ(xi ) ,

(4)
(5)

where the ﬁnite discontinuity at the step results from integrating (1).
Of course the boundary values ψ(x1 ) and ψ(xN ) also have to be provided to
calculate Ai and ξi for each i-th (i = 1, . . . , N − 1) potential well, which is
achieved by applying conditions (4) and (5) at each site xi .
The knowledge of exact form of ψ(x) allows us to ﬁnd the DoS function ρ(E)
from the relation
dS
,
(6)
ρ(E) =
dE
where S(E) is the number of zeros of the wave function ψ(x) and corresponds to
the number of excited states with energy E ≤ ε. Since each function ψi (x) has

632

M. Woloszyn and B.J. Spisak

the simple form of a cosine ﬁnding all zeros is quite straightforward, however
the whole procedure has to be repeated for all values of energy E for which we
intend to obtain the DoS function. It allows us to calculate S(E) and than the
DoS from (6).

3

Results and Conclusions

ρ(E)

The method described above provides the way to ﬁnd the DoS function for
disordered systems with xi+1 = xi + a + η∆x. The average distance between
N
neighboring sites is denoted as a = i=1 ai where ai = xi+1 − xi .
η is a random value from the range (−1; 1) and ∆x describes the degree of
disorder. For calculations presented in this paper we assume the average distance
between neighboring sites a = 1, number of sites N = 104 and F0 = 1 with
arbitrary units.
For ∆x = 0 we obtain a fully ordered chain of potentials corresponding to
a pure crystal and the ρ(E) function for that system is presented on all ﬁgures
for reference with dashed line. It shows well known characteristics of the DoS
function for one-dimensional ordered systems, that is ρ(E) ∝ E −1/2 at the edge
of each band.

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

∆x = 0.01
∆x = 0.20

2

4

6
E [a.u.]

8

10

12

Fig. 1. DoS ρ(E) for diﬀerent values of ∆x: 0.01 and 0.20. For reference, thin dashed
line shows the DoS of the ordered system with the same F0 and all ai = a

In case of disordered systems the characteristic deformation of the DoS function is observed (Fig. 1): previously sharp edges of the electronic bands smear oﬀ
forming so-called “tails”, where the localized states are expected (the problem
of localization will be discussed in the forthcoming paper).
Broadening of the energy bands leads as it should be expected to ﬁlling the
gaps when the bands start to overlap. The results on Fig. 2 show the vanishing
gap between the ﬁrst and the second band for the growing disorder.
It is well known that for example amorphous silicon exhibits band structure
with the DoS showing characteristic “tails” which extend beyond the originally

Eﬀect of Structural Disorder on the Electronic Density of States

0.5

∆x = 0.10
∆x = 0.30

0.4
ρ(E)

633

0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0

2

4

6

8
10
E [a.u.]

12

14

16

Fig. 2. The gap (or lack of it) in the DoS function ρ(E) for various degrees of disorder:
∆x = 0.10 and ∆x = 0.30. Thin dashed line denotes the DoS of the ordered system
with the same F0 and all ai = a

placed band boundary for the crystal [12]. These tails correspond to localized
states and so amorphisation may serve as an alternative possibility to introduce
localized scattering centers, as it is known for the amorphous semiconducting
silicon, instead of the standard doping technique.
The discussed computer simulation may help for the better understanding
of how the amorphisation described in terms of parameter ∆x alters the DoS.
In the computer experiment we scan ∆x from zero, the reference case of a pure
crystal when the computer simulation restores the known analytical results, to
larger ∆x > 0 when we may observe how Dos reacts to the amorphisation. In
particular, we report (a) the sharp boundary is smeared oﬀ when ∆x increases
and (b) the gap between bands even vanishes for ∆x above a critical value.

References
1. Ando, T., Fowler, A.B., Stern, F. Rev. Mod. Phys. 54 (1982) 437
2. Castro-Alvaredo, O., Fring, A. Nucl. Phys. B 649 (2003) 449
3. Mahan, G.D.: Many-Particle Physics. Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, New
York, Boston,Dordrecht, London, Moscow (2000)
4. Evertz, H.G. Adv. Phys. 52 (2003) 1
5. Peschel, I., Wang, X., Kaulke, M., Hallberg, K., eds.: Density-Matrix Renormalization, A New Numerical Method in Physics. Springer, Berlin (1999)
6. Woloszyn, M., Maksymowicz, A. TASK Quarterly 6 (2002) 669
7. Haydock, R. In Ehrenreich, H., Seitz, F., Turnbull, D., eds.: Solid State Phys.
Volume 35. Academic Press, London (1980) 216
8. Ziman, J.M.: Principles of the Theory of Solids. Cambridge University Press,
London (1972)
9. Anderson, P.W. Phys. Rev. 109 (1958) 1492
10. Kronig, R. de L., Penney, W.G. Proc. Roy. Soc. A130 (1930) 499
11. Economou, E.N.: Green’s Functions in Quantum Physics. Springer-Verlag, BerlinHeidelberg-New York-Tokyo (1983)
12. Aljishi, S., Cohen, J.D., Jin, S., Ley, L. Phys. Rev. Lett. 64 (1990) 2811

