Towards a Complex Automata Multiscale Model
of In-Stent Restenosis
Alfonso Caiazzo1 , David Evans2 , Jean-Luc Falcone3 , Jan Hegewald4 ,
Eric Lorenz5 , Bernd Stahl3 , Dinan Wang6 ,
J¨
org Bernsdorf6 , Bastien Chopard3 , Julian Gunn2 ,
2
Rod Hose , Manfred Krafczyk4 , Patricia Lawford2 , Rod Smallwood2 ,
Dawn Walker2 , and Alfons G. Hoekstra5
1

INRIA Rocquencourt, France
{alfonso.caiazzo}@inria.fr
2
The University of Sheﬃeld, UK
{david.evans,j.gunn,d.r.hose,p.lawford,r.smallwood,
d.c.walker}@sheffield.ac.uk
3
CUI Department, University of Geneva, Switzerland
{jean-luc.falcone,bernd.stahl,bastien.chopard}@unige.ch
4
Technical University of Braunschweig, Germany
{hegewald,kraft}@irmb.tu-bs.de
5
University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands
{e.lorenz,a.g.hoekstra}@uva.nl
6
NEC Laboratories Europe, St. Augustin, Germany
{d.wang,j.bernsdorf}@it.neclab.eu

Abstract. In-stent restenosis, the maladaptive response of a blood vessel to injury caused by the deployment of a stent, is a multiscale problem
involving a large number of processes. We describe a Complex Automata
Model for in-stent restenosis, coupling a bulk ﬂow, drug diﬀusion, and
smooth muscle cell model, all operating on diﬀerent time scales. Details
of the single scale models and of the coupling interfaces are described,
together with ﬁrst simulation results, obtained with a dedicated software
environment for Complex Automata simulations. The results show that
the model can reproduce growth trends observed in experimental studies.
Keywords: Complex Automata, in-stent restenosis, multiscale modeling.

1

Introduction

A stenosis is a narrowing of a blood vessel lumen due to the presence of an
atherosclerotic plaque. This can be corrected by balloon angioplasty, after which
a stent (metal mesh) is deployed to prevent the vessel from collapsing. The injury
caused by the stent can lead to a maladaptive biological response of the cellular
tissue (mainly smooth muscle cells). The abnormal growth can produce a new
stenosis (re-stenosis). The multiscale nature of this process has been discussed
in detail previously by Evans et al. [1].
G. Allen et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2009, Part I, LNCS 5544, pp. 705–714, 2009.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

706

A. Caiazzo et al.

The geometry of the stent employed inﬂuences the biological events occurring
in the vessel following deployment. Stent length, strut thickness, number, crosssectional shape and arrangement all inﬂuence the hemodynamics and degree of
injury/stretch observed within the stented segment [2]. These in turn, are critical
determinants of the severity of restenosis observed. Additionally, stents may be
coated with active compounds targeted at the biological processes responsible for
driving the progression of a restenosis which, when eluted locally at the stented
site, can prevent proliferation of smooth muscle cells and neointimal growth.
The development of a multiscale in silico model capable of testing both the
inﬂuence of stent geometry and that of drug elution is motivated by the desire for
a better understanding of the dynamics regulating restenosis. Thus providing a
potentially powerful tool for improved understanding of the biology, and to assist
in the process of device/therapy development.
As in many other biological systems, the dynamics of in-stent restenosis span
many orders of magnitude through the scales, from the smallest microscopic
scales up to the largest macroscopic ones. The wealth of experimental data that
is now available has made in silico experimentation an attractive tool in systems
biology, allowing hypothesis testing and formulation of predictions which can
be further tested in vitro or in vivo [3]. The next challenge is to study, not
only fundamental processes, on all these separate scales, but also their mutual
coupling across the scales and to determine the emergent structure and function
of the resulting system [4].
Based on the conceptual description of the relevant processes and their characteristic scales as presented in [1], we propose a simpliﬁed CxA model of in-stent
restenosis, coupling a lattice Boltzmann bulk ﬂow (BF) solver (for the blood
ﬂow), an agent based model for smooth muscle cell (SMC) dynamics (simulating growth, cell cycle, physical and biological cell-cell interaction), and a Finite
Diﬀerence scheme for the drug diﬀusion (DD) within the cellular tissue.
In section 2 we introduce the main ideas behind the CxA approach. In section
3 following a short introduction on instent restenosis, we present the multiscale
model. We describe the main characteristics of the single scale solvers, which
have been developed independently from one another, and independently from
the ultimate application. Then, in section 4 we discuss how the coupling between
these models has been realized using a CxA dedicated software environment.
Preliminary numerical results are presented in section 5, and conclusions are
discussed in section 6.

2

Complex Automata Modeling and Simulation

Recently we introduced Complex Automata (CxA) as a paradigm for multiscale
modelling and simulation [5,7,8]. A multiscale system is decomposed into mutually interacting single scale models. The multiscale system can be represented
graphically on a Scale Separation Map (SSM), where the horizontal and vertical axes represent the temporal and spatial scales. An example of such SSM is
shown in Fig. 1 for the multiscale model of in-stent restenosis (as discussed in

Towards a Complex Automata Multiscale Model of In-Stent Restenosis

707

detail in section 3). The single scale models and their interactions are drawn on
the map. The single scale models are discrete and explicitly update their state
to a next time step using a well deﬁned evolution operator, in the form of collision+propagation1 . An essential step in the modelling process is the inclusion
of speciﬁc coupling templates, designed to mimic the dynamic behavior of the
multi-scale process as accurately as possible.
The conceptual ideas behind the CxA approach have been used to develop
the COAST Multiscale Coupling Library and Environment (MUSCLE) [11,12], a
software environment where a CxA can be implemented naturally. The coupling
library is based on JADE, a multiagent platform, where both the kernels (i.e. the
single scale models) and the conduits (i.e. the multiscale couplings) are treated
as agents. The single scale models do not need to be aware of each other, and
the information concerning the coupling and the global setup are held by the
framework. The structure of the coupling library allows a complete independence
from native codes, which can be replaced with a diﬀerent source, provided the
interface with respect to the framework (i.e. the wrapper agent) remains the
same. Kernels communicate via smart conduits (special agents which implement
the multiscale coupling) using two communication primitives, a non-blocking
send operation and a blocking receive operation. Often, conduits perform ﬁltering
operations, in order to match the input and output of the diﬀerent single scale
models. The details of coupling for this particular application are discussed in
section 4.

3

Multiscale Model of In-Stent Restenosis

In a previous work [1], the processes key to the restenosis system and their
mutual coupling were identiﬁed and considered in terms of their temporal and
spatial scales, allowing us to generate a comprehensive Scale Separation Map [1].
In this paper, we consider a simpliﬁed model focused on SMC behavior, and the
interaction with blood ﬂow and drug eluted from the stent. A simpliﬁed SSM
is shown in Fig. 1. After deployment of the stent, which is actually modelled
in a separate box as an initial condition (using the SMC model itself, see section 4), SMCs start to proliferate. This proliferation depends on the blood ﬂow
(speciﬁcally the wall shear stress) and the concentration of drug (in the case of a
drug eluting stent). The blood ﬂow, in turn, depends on the lumen domain (and
therefore changes due to the proliferation of SMC), and the concentration of drug
depends on the SMC domain itself (and therefore also on SMC proliferation).
In the current model we assume that scale separation between the single scale
models is conﬁned to the temporal scale. The SMC proliferation is the slowest
process, dictated by the cell cycle whereas ﬂow is a fast process, dictated by one
heart beat. Due to the speciﬁc value of the diﬀusion coeﬃcients and the typical
size of the tissue level, the temporal scale of the diﬀusion process resides between
1

The terminology collision-propagation is borrowed from the lattice gas automata
framework (see e.g. [9]), and it has been recently shown to be equivalent to other
update paradigms [10].

708

A. Caiazzo et al.

spatial scale
<<geometry>>
Velocity
Viscosity

Cell Cycle Data
Diff.coeff.

Thresholds

tissue level
blood flow

diffusion

SMC proliferation

cellular level

<<concentrations>>
<<shear stress>>

temporal scale
seconds

minutes

hours

days

LEGEND:
inputs to single scale models
<< .... >>

coupling between single scale models
data items passed in coupling templates

Fig. 1. The simpliﬁed SSM

the ﬂow and the SMC scales. In future models we will also explicitly consider
spatial scale separation.
The blood ﬂow inside the vessel is modeled as a Newtonian incompressible
ﬂow. We employ a lattice Boltzmann Method to obtain a numerical solution (see
for example [9,13]). The observable related to the bulk ﬂow (BF) model is the
wall shear stress on the vessel boundary (WSS). This is needed as input for the
SMC model, after being properly mapped (section 4).
The dynamics of smooth muscle cells are simulated using an Agent Based
Model (SMC model), where each cell represents a single agent, identiﬁed by a
set of state-variables: position, radius, biological state, drug concentration and
structural stress. Each SMC agent evolves in time according to the current state,
and to the states of neighboring cells. The solver comprises a physical solver, simulating the structural dynamics of cells, and a biological solver which simulates
the cell cycle, according to a biological rule set. More detail of the SMC model will
be published elsewhere [14]. Cells are represented by their centres and potential
functions, which determine non-linear repulsive and attractive inter-cell forces.
In additional, boundary forces, viscous friction and radial elastic forces modeling
the primary ﬁbre direction of real 3D SMCs and motility forces modeling cell
migration are taken into account [14]. At every iteration step, new equilibrium
positions of SMCs are computed by iterating a ﬁnite diﬀerence scheme until
steady state is reached. Next, the structural stress is calculated and provided as
input to the biological solver.
The biological solver contains a model of the cell cycle, consisting of a discrete set of states, a quiescent state G0, a growth state G1 and ﬁnally a mitotic

Towards a Complex Automata Multiscale Model of In-Stent Restenosis

709

state S/G2/M, when a mother cell eventually divides into two new daughter
cells. Progression through the cell cycle takes place at a ﬁxed rate, depending
on the time step, and culminates in mitosis (division). Cells may enter or leave
the inactive phase of the cell cycle (G0) depending on certain rules, which take
into account contact inhibition (based on neighbor count), structural stress, and
local drug concentration (for all cells) and wall shear stress (WSS) and oscillatory stress index (OSI) for cells in contact with the ﬂuid. Low WSS or high
structural strain are individually capable of inducing agent proliferation if drug
concentration and contact inhibition criteria allow.
Drug eluting stents represent an eﬀective way of inhibiting neointimal formation. We include this additional aspect in the CxA model by implementing
a drug diﬀusion sub-process. Since drug is eluted from the stent and diﬀuses
into the cellular tissue, the spatial domain for the Drug Diﬀusion Model coincides with the space occupied by SMCs. The stent struts act as a source, whilst
the boundaries between ﬂow and cells are considered sinks (assuming that drug
eluted into the lumen is continuously ﬂushed away by the faster blood ﬂow).
Since biological tissues are heterogeneous in nature, we assume that this process
can be described using a generic anisotropic diﬀusion.
The diﬀusion tensor is chosen such that the diﬀusion along the artery axis or
tangentially to a cross section is at least 10 times higher than the diﬀusion in
the radial direction [15,16]. To solve the diﬀusion equation numerically we use a
Finite Diﬀerences (FD) approach, solved by a Propagation-Collision loop, which
complies with the CxA modeling language. According to [16], the time scale to
reach the steady state is of the order of minutes. Therefore, when coupling DD
and SMC, we are largely interested in the steady drug concentration (the time
step for the SMC model, which uses as input the drug concentration, is of the
order of 1 hour).

4

CxA Implementation: Connection Scheme, Kernels,
Conduits

In order to combine the single scale models in a CxA setup, we need to deﬁne a
communication graph, the Connection Scheme (CS), which speciﬁes in detail the
communication topology of the CxA, i.e. which pairs of single scale models, the
kernels of the CxA, communicate. For the simpliﬁed model of in-stent restenosis,
the CS is shown in Figure 2.
At each SMC iteration, the cell conﬁguration deﬁnes a new domain for the BF
solver. The conduit from SMC to BF converts the array of positions and radii of
the cells into a computational mesh, decomposed into ﬂuid and solid nodes for
the ﬂow solver.
Similarly, a conduit from SMC to DD converts the array of positions and radii
of the cells, into a computational mesh for the drug diﬀusion solver, marking the
nodes as tissue, source, or sink.
plus .1em In some cases, the interaction between kernels is slightly more complex,
and multiple inputs are required for computing an output. This is the case for the

710

A. Caiazzo et al.

Fig. 2. The Connection Scheme, showing the single scale models (Bulk Flow, SMC,
Drug Diﬀusion), the Init agent (used to generate the initial structural stress condition
in the tissue), the mapper agents and the conduits. For each single scale models it is
speciﬁed whether it is mesh-based (BF, DD) or Agent-based (SMC).

mapper agents in (Fig. 2). For example, since the SMC agents are moving, each time
an input for the SMC model has to be computed, the SMC itself has to send its current state, to allow the coupling agent to map the values to each agent.
The values of ﬂuid shear stress at the boundary aﬀect the biological evolution of the cells. Given the ﬂuid output, and the current cell conﬁguration, a
mapper agent computes the shear stress on each surface cell. Depending on the
discretization used in the ﬂow solver, diﬀerent approaches can be used. If the
ﬂow grid is coarser than the spatial scale of the SMC model (for example, the
radius of the cells), a proper algorithm must be used in order to determine which
cells are in contact with the ﬂow, then for each cell position, the shear stress
is extrapolated from the closest boundary ﬂuid nodes. Alternatively, if the ﬂow
discretization is suﬃciently ﬁne, allowing more ﬂuid boundary nodes to interact with single cells, the shear stress on the cell surface can be calculated by
averaging the values of the closest nodes.
Given the current drug concentrations and the cell conﬁguration, the mapper agent approximates the concentration on each cell. As is the case for the
shear stress approximation, the algorithm used depends on the grid size of the
DD model. If the grid is suﬃciently ﬁne, with many lattice nodes per SMC,
the concentration on a cell can be integrated. If a coarse DD grid is used, the
concentration for each cell will be extrapolated using the closest nodes.
The single scale models, BF, SMC, DD, are implemented in diﬀerent programming languages (FORTRAN90, C++, JAVA), wrapped as JAVA agents [11,12],
and connected as shown in the Connection Scheme (Fig. 2). In the current setup
we have 25 agents (3 kernels, 20 conduits and 2 mappers) which participate in
the main computation of our prototype application. These can be distributed
across multiple CPUs and machines to gain an advantage in computing speed.

5

Simulation Results

As a benchmark geometry for the 2D CxA model, we consider a vessel, of length
1.5 mm and width 1.0 mm, where two square struts of side length 90 μm have

Towards a Complex Automata Multiscale Model of In-Stent Restenosis

711

Fig. 3. Initial Condition for the CxA model, including initial cell conﬁguration, equilibrated after deployment, and blood ﬂow (the ﬂow is shown in the lumen as streamlines,
and the ﬂuid shear stresses are color coded (red high, blue low)

Fig. 4. Results with bare metal stent after 400 time steps (∼18 days). The ﬂow is
shown in the lumen as stream lines, and the ﬂuid shear stresses are color coded (red
high, blue low).

been deployed. The vessel wall has a thickness of 120 μm. Smooth muscle cells
are generated with an average radius of 15 μm, densely packed inside the wall.
To obtain the initial conditions based on the above geometry, an initial stress
conﬁguration compatible with the initial geometry must be provided. To do this,
cells are stent deployment is simulated, iterating the structural SMC solver until
a stationary state is reached. The initial cell conﬁguration resulting from this
procedure is shown in Fig. 3. The struts are shown in black, the SMC in red.
We have run the simulation for 400 time steps of the SMC model (Δt = 1
hour) for both a bare metal stent and a drug eluting stent. The ﬁnal results are
shown in Fig. 4 and 5 respectively. The preliminary results of the model demonstrate smooth muscle cell proliferation in response to injury caused by the stent
deployment. Proliferation is modulated by ﬂow, local mechanical stress, and

712

A. Caiazzo et al.

Fig. 5. Results with a drug eluting stent after 400 time steps (∼18 days)

drug concentration (of particular note is the inhibitory eﬀect observed when a
drug eluting stent is simulated). The smooth muscle proliferation currently observed appears to share more in common with tumour cell growth, than the
slower, more regulated hyperplastic response we would expect to see in a coronary artery following stent deployment. We are currently in the process of running more extended simulations and validating the model against a biological
data-set obtained from stented porcine arteries. As parameters are tuned using
archival quantitative data (from the literature), and experimental measurements,
we hope to reproduce the positive correlation between neointimal growth rate
and injury index. The next step will be to run a full 3D version of the model,
enabling the inﬂuence of the stent geometry on the restenosis response to be
investigated.

6

Conclusions

We have shown how Complex Automata methodology can be applied in a challenging multiscale model of in-stent restenosis. In particular, we described a
conceptual multiscale model of in-stent restenosis, implementing the coupling of
single scale algorithms for three diﬀerent subprocesses with diﬀerent time scales.
The model has been realised employing a dedicated coupling library. The preliminary results demonstrate that the CxA model can be successfully implemented
within this framework.
The individual models are at a relatively early stage of development and require further improvement. During the lifetime of the project we aim to achieve
integration of a parallel ﬂow solver (to achieve more detailed local hydrodynamics) and enhancement of the complexity of the SMC Agent rule-set. Moreover,
the current 3-box CxA model might be improved further by including additional

Towards a Complex Automata Multiscale Model of In-Stent Restenosis

713

processes modelling thrombus formation and endothelial cell loss/re-growth. Validation of the improved and additional individual models using quantitative data
derived from in vivo and in vitro experimentation will allow assessment of model
accuracy, thus indicating the limitations of the models.
This ﬁrst realisation of the coupled CxA is an important milestone on the
journey towards a full multiscale model of in-stent restenosis, the subject of
ongoing research.
Acknowledgments. This research is supported by the European Commission,
through the COAST project (www.complex-automata.org, EU-FP6-IST-FET
Contract 033664).

References
1. Evans, D., Lawford, P., Gunn, J., Walker, D., Hose, R., Smallwood, R., Chopard,
B., Krafczyk, M., Bernsdorf, J., Hoekstra, A.: The Application of Multiscale Modelling to the Process of Development and Prevention of Stenosis in a Stented Coronary Artery. Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. A 366, 3343–3360 (2008)
2. Morton, A., Crossman, D., Gunn, J.: The Inﬂuence of Physical Stent Parameters
upon Restenosis. Pathologie Biologie 52, 196–205 (2004)
3. Kitano, H.: Computational Systems Biology. Nature 420, 206–210 (2002)
4. Sloot, P.M.A., Hoekstra, A.G.: Multiscale Modeling in Computational Biology.
Accepted for publication in Brieﬁngs in Bioinformatics (2009)
5. Hoekstra, A.G., Lorenz, E., Falcone, J.-L., Chopard, B.: Towards a Complex Automata Formalism for Multi-Scale Modeling. Int. J. Mult. Comp. Eng. 5, 491–502
(2007)
6. Southern, J., Pitt-Francis, J., Whiteley, J., Stokeley, D., Kobashi, H., Nobes, R.,
Kadooka, Y., Gavaghan, D.: Multi-scale Computational Modelling in Biology and
Physiology. Prog. Biophys. and Mol. Biol. 96, 60–89 (2008)
7. Hoekstra, A.G., Lorenz, E., Falcone, J.L., Chopard, B.: Towards a Complex Automata Framework for Multi-Scale Modeling: Formalism and the Scale Separation
Map. In: Shi, Y., van Albada, G.D., Dongarra, J., Sloot, P.M.A. (eds.) ICCS 2007.
LNCS, vol. 4487, pp. 922–930. Springer, Heidelberg (2007)
8. Hoekstra, A.G., Falcone, J.-L., Caiazzo, A., Chopard, B.: Multi-scale modeling with
cellular automata: The complex automata approach. In: Umeo, H., Morishita, S.,
Nishinari, K., Komatsuzaki, T., Bandini, S. (eds.) ACRI 2008. LNCS, vol. 5191,
pp. 192–199. Springer, Heidelberg (2008)
9. Chopard, B., Droz, M.: Cellular Automata Modeling of Physical Systems. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1998)
10. Chopard, B., Falcone, J.-L., Razakanirina, R., Hoekstra, A.G., Caiazzo, A.: On the
Collision-Propagation and Gather-Update Formulations of a Cellular Automata
Rule. In: Umeo, H., Morishita, S., Nishinari, K., Komatsuzaki, T., Bandini, S.
(eds.) ACRI 2008. LNCS, vol. 5191, pp. 144–251. Springer, Heidelberg (2008)
11. Hegewald, J., Krafczyk, M., T¨
olke, J., Hoekstra, A.G., Chopard, B.: An AgentBased Coupling Platform for Complex Automata. In: Sloot, P.M.A., et al. (eds.)
ICCS 2008, Part II. LNCS, vol. 5102, pp. 227–233. Springer, Heidelberg (2008)

714

A. Caiazzo et al.

12. The COAST muscle (MUltiScale Coupling Library and Environment). Sources and
Documentation, http://coast-dscl.berlios.de
13. Succi, S.: The Lattice Boltzmann Equation for Fluid Dynamics and Beyond. Oxford
University Press, Oxford (2001)
14. Stahl, B., Evans, D., Lawford, P. and Hose, R. (in preparation) (2009)
15. Hwang, C.-W., Wu, D., Edelman, E.R.: Physiological Transport Forces Govern
Drug Distribution for Stent-Based Delivery. Circulation 104, 600–605 (2001)
16. Levin, A.D., Vukmirovic, N., Hwang, C.-W., Edelman, E.R.: Speciﬁc Binding to
Intracellular Proteins Determines Arterial Transport Properties for Rapamycin and
Paclitaxel. PNAS 101, 9463–9467 (2004)

