A Novel Frequency Oﬀset Estimation Algorithm
Using Diﬀerential Combining for OFDM-Based
WLAN Systems
Sangho Ahn1 , Sanghun Kim1 , Hyoung-Kee Choi1 , Sun Yong Kim2 ,
and Seokho Yoon1
1

School of Information and Communication Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University,
300 Chunchun-dong, Jangan-gu, Suwon, Kyunggi-do, 440-746, Korea
{ash9252,hkchoi,ksh7150,syoon}@ece.skku.ac.kr
2
Department of Electronics Engineering, Konkuk University,
1 Hwayang-dong, Gwangjin-gu, Seoul 143-701, Korea
kimsy@konkuk.ac.kr

Abstract. The timing oﬀset is one of the main error sources in estimating the frequency oﬀset in orthogonal frequency division multiplexing
(OFDM)-based wireless local area network (WLAN) systems. Although
some works have been done to mitigate the eﬀect of the timing oﬀset
on the frequency oﬀset estimation, most of the investigations require the
knowledge of the timing oﬀset range, which is not generally available in
practical systems. In this paper, we propose a new frequency oﬀset estimation algorithm using diﬀerential combining between two successive
correlation samples, which does not require the knowledge of the timing
oﬀset range, and thus, is robust to the timing oﬀset variation. The simulation results show that the proposed algorithm is not only robust to
the timing oﬀset variation, but also generally performs better than the
conventional algorithm, in the case of the timing oﬀset range being not
known exactly.
Keywords: OFDM, WLAN, frequency oﬀset estimation.

1

Introduction

Future wireless and mobile systems are envisioned to provide reliable and highspeed multimedia services to users. Among the wireless and mobile technologies
proposed so far, OFDM technology has been attracting considerable research
interest for wireless and mobile applications [1] and selected as a modulation
scheme in wireless local area network (WLAN) standards, such as institute of
electrical and electronics engineers (IEEE) 802.11a, high performance local area
network type 2 (HiperLAN/2), and mobile multimedia access communication
This research was supported by grant No. R01-2004-000-10690-0 from the Basic
Research Program of the Korea Science & Engineering Foundation. Dr. Yoon is the
corresponding author.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 360–367, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

A Novel Frequency Oﬀset Estimation Algorithm

361

(MMAC) [2], [3]. This is because OFDM oﬀers many advantages including high
spectral eﬃciency and immunity to multipath fading and impulsive noise [1], [4].
However, OFDM-based systems are very sensitive to the frequency oﬀset
[5], which could destroy the orthogonal property among subcarriers, and consequently, deteriorate the overall performance of OFDM-based systems. Thus,
the frequency oﬀset estimation is one of the most important technical issues in
OFDM-based systems [6], [7].
One of the main error sources in estimating the frequency oﬀset in OFDMbased systems is the timing oﬀset [4], [8]. Some techniques have been proposed to
alleviate the eﬀect of the timing oﬀset on the frequency oﬀset estimation [8]-[10];
however, most of the investigations require the knowledge of the timing oﬀset
range, which is not generally available in practical systems. Thus, it would be
useful to develop an algorithm that does not require the knowledge of the timing
oﬀset range.
In this paper, we propose a new frequency oﬀset estimation algorithm using
diﬀerential combining between two successive correlation samples for OFDMbased WLAN systems. The timing oﬀset causes a phase drift among the correlation samples used for frequency oﬀset estimation, and thus, hinders the eﬀective
accumulation of the correlation samples, which is essential to obtain a large correlation value for the detection of the correct frequency oﬀset estimate. In the
proposed algorithm, we remove the phase drift due to the timing oﬀset via differential combining between two successive correlation samples, and thus, can
obtain a large correlation value for frequency oﬀset estimation, regardless of the
timing oﬀset value. The simulation results show that the proposed algorithm is
not only robust to the timing oﬀset variation, but also performs better than the
conventional algorithm on average, in the case of the timing oﬀset range being
not known exactly.

2

Signal Model

In OFDM-based systems, the transmitted symbol is generated by the inverse
fast Fourier transform (IFFT) and expressed as
N −1

z(m) =

Zk e

k T
j2π T Ns m
s
,

(1)

k=0

where m is the discrete time index, Zk is a phase shift keying (PSK) or quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM) data symbol of the kth subcarrier, Ts is the
symbol period, and N is the IFFT size.
For a zero-mean additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel, the received
signal can be expressed as
y(m) = z(m − τ )ej2πΔf (m−τ )/N + w(m),

(2)

where Δf is the frequency oﬀset normalized to the subcarrier spacing T1s , τ is the
timing oﬀset normalized to the sample interval Ts /N , and w(m) is the AWGN.
For the sake of simplicity, Δf is assumed to be an integer.

362

S. Ahn et al.

The receiver ﬁrst demodulates the received OFDM symbol using the FFT operation, and then, yields the FFT output, Yl , corresponding to the lth subcarrier
as follows:
Yl = Zl−Δf e

−j2π(l−Δf )τ
N

+ Wl ,

(3)

where Wl is the FFT output of w(m) corresponding to the lth subcarrier. From
(3), we can see that the FFT output of the received OFDM symbol is cyclically
shifted by the frequency oﬀset and its phase is rotated by the timing oﬀset.

3

The Eﬀect of Timing Oﬀset on Frequency Oﬀset
Estimation

In this paper, we consider the frequency oﬀset estimation system employing a
training sequence, as in [8]-[10]. Then, an estimate Δfˆ of Δf can typically be
obtained as
N −1

Δfˆ = arg max
d

Zk∗ Y(k+d)N

,

(4)

k=0

where Zk is the locally generated training sequence, ∗ denotes the complex conjugate, d is the amount of cyclic shift, and (·)N is the modulo-N operator. When
Δf is estimated correctly, that is Δfˆ = Δf , the correlation value (normalized to
2

−jπτ (N −1)

sin(πτ )
N
N |Zk | ) in (4), if AWGN is not considered, becomes e
sin(πτ /N ) and
is plotted as a function of the timing oﬀset τ , as shown in Fig. 1. From Fig. 1,
we can clearly observe that the correlation value used for the frequency oﬀset
estimation is very sensitive to the variation of the timing oﬀset, which implies

Fig. 1. Correlation value as a function of the timing oﬀset (N = 1024)

A Novel Frequency Oﬀset Estimation Algorithm

363

Fig. 2. Correlation value of the proposed (solid line) and conventional (dotted and
dashed lines) algorithms (N = 1024, cyclic preﬁx = 100)

that the correlation value could be reduced signiﬁcantly due to the timing oﬀset even if the frequency oﬀset is correctly estimated, resulting in considerable
degradation in estimation performance (note that a large correlation value when
Δfˆ = Δf , is essential for the detection of the correct frequency oﬀset estimate).
In the conventional algorithm, the frequency oﬀset estimation in the the presence of the timing oﬀset is achieved using the coherence phase bandwidth (CPB),
which is the maximum correlation range in which the correlation value increases
monotonically, and depends on the timing oﬀset range strongly. Denoting the
CPB and allowed timing oﬀset by BWc and τallow , respectively, we get
BWc ≈

N

(5)

2τallow

and using which we obtain the estimate Δfˆ of Δf as
K−1 BWc −1

Δfˆ = arg max
d

n=0

∗
Zk+nBW
Y
c (k+nBWc +d)N

,

(6)

k=0

where K is the number of blocks divided by the CPB and τallow is equal to
N/BWc . As shown in (6), the conventional algorithm compensates for the correlation value reduction due to the timing oﬀset by adding the absolute values of
each partial correlation over BWc . Fig. 2 shows the correlation value (normalized to N |Zk |2 ) in (6), where the dotted and dashed lines represent the cases
of τallow = 8 and 16, respectively. As shown in the ﬁgure, the correlation value
decreases rapidly as the timing oﬀset becomes larger than τallow , which results

364

S. Ahn et al.

in the signiﬁcant performance degradation in estimating Δf . That is, the conventional algorithm requires the knowledge of the timing oﬀset range to set a
value of τallow (or BWc ) demanded for its proper operation.

4

Proposed Algorithm

To mitigate the eﬀect of the timing oﬀset on the frequency oﬀset estimation, we
perform the diﬀerential combining between two successive correlation samples,
∗
Y(k+1+d)N . Then, the diﬀerentially combined components
Zk∗ Y(k+d)N and Zk+1
∗

N −1

∗
Zk∗ Y(k+d)N Zk+1
Y(k+1+d)N
become phase aligned, and thus, a large
k=1
correlation value can be obtained by adding the components, regardless of the
timing oﬀset. It should be noted that each of the components
Zk∗ Y(k+d)N
∗ N −1

∗
Y(k+1+d)N
is divided into real and imaginary parts. Hence, we take
Zk+1
k=1
∗
N −1
∗
∗
the envelope of
Zk+1
Y(k+1+d)N
to combine the divided
k=0 Zk Y(k+d)N
parts, and ﬁnally, obtain the following frequency oﬀset estimation algorithm:
N −1

Δfˆ = arg max
d

Zk∗ Y(k+d)N

∗
Y(k+1+d)N
Zk+1

∗

,

(7)

k=0

From Fig. 2 in Section 3, we can see that the correlation value (normalized to
2
2
N |Zk | |Zk+1 | ) of the proposed algorithm is almost constant regardless of the
timing oﬀset value. It is also observed that the correlation value of the proposed
algorithm slightly decreases when the timing oﬀset value is negative, which is
caused by the interference from the neighboring preamble including the cyclic
preﬁx, as shown in Fig. 3, where CP is an abbreviation of the cyclic preﬁx.
However, from Fig. 2, we can see that the correlation value of the proposed
algorithm is still much larger than that of the conventional algorithm.

Fig. 3. Interference from the neighboring preamble when the timing oﬀset value is
negative

A Novel Frequency Oﬀset Estimation Algorithm

5

365

Performance Comparison

In this section, we compare the performance of the proposed algorithm with that
of the conventional algorithm [10] in terms of the frequency oﬀset estimation
accuracy, in the presence of the timing oﬀset. Simulation was performed on an
AWGN channel with a ﬁxed frequency oﬀset 10 and an OFDM system with a
guard interval (cyclic preﬁx) of 100 samples and 1024 subcarriers was considered.
The simulation results were obtained with 103 Monte Carlo runs at each value
of signal-to-noise ratio (SNR).

Fig. 4. Accuracy of the proposed (solid line) and conventional (dotted line) algorithms
as a function of SNR when Δf = 10, N = 1024, τallow = 8, and τ = 4, 8, 10, 12, and 16

Figs. 4 and 5 show the accuracy of the proposed (solid line) and conventional
(dotted line) algorithms as a function of SNR when τallow = 8 and 16, respectively. From the ﬁgures, it is observed that the conventional algorithm performs
better than the proposed algorithm when the timing oﬀset τ is equal to or less
than τallow ; however, the performance of the conventional algorithm signiﬁcantly
degrades as τ gets larger than τallow and eventually becomes much worse than
that of the proposed algorithm. From the result, we can see that the conventional
algorithm cannot operate properly without the knowledge of the timing oﬀset
range demanded for setting τallow . On the other hand, it is seen that the proposed algorithm is much more robust to the timing oﬀset variation and generally
performs better than the conventional algorithm in practical systems, where the
knowledge of the timing oﬀset range is not available.

366

S. Ahn et al.

Fig. 5. Accuracy of the proposed (solid line) and conventional (dotted line) algorithms
as a function of SNR when Δf = 10, N = 1024, τallow = 16, and τ = 8, 16, 20, 24 and 32

6

Conclusion

In this paper, we ﬁrst investigated the eﬀect of the timing oﬀset on the frequency
oﬀset estimation, and then, proposed to use the diﬀerential combining between
two successive correlation samples to mitigate the eﬀect. From the comparison
results, we observed that the performance of the conventional algorithm might
signiﬁcantly degrade and eventually become useless for the frequency oﬀset estimation in the case where the knowledge of the timing oﬀset range is not available.
On the other hand, the proposed algorithm is very robust to the timing oﬀset
variation and generally outperforms the conventional algorithm, in the case of
the timing oﬀset range being not known exactly.

References
1. R. V. Nee and R. Prasad, OFDM for Wireless Multimedia Communications. London, England: Artech House, 2000.
2. IEEE Std. 802.11a-1999, ”Wireless LAN MAC and PHY Speciﬁcations – HighSpeed Physical Layer in the 5 GHz Band,” ISO/IEC 8802-11: 1999 (E) / Amd 1:
2000 (E), New York, NY: IEEE, 2000.
3. N. Prasad and A. Prasad, WLAN Systems and Wireless IP for Next Generation
Communications. Boston, MA: Artech House, 2002.
4. J. A. C. Bingham, ”Multicarrier modulation for data transmission: an idea whose
time has come,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 28, pp. 5-14, May 1990.
5. P. H. Moose, ”A technique for orthogonal frequency division multiplexing frequency
oﬀset correction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 42, pp. 2908-2914, Oct. 1994.

A Novel Frequency Oﬀset Estimation Algorithm

367

6. B. Y. Prasetyo, F. Said, and A. H. Aghvami, ”Fast burst synchronisation technique
for OFDM-WLAN systems,” IEE Proceedings: Commun., vol. 147, pp. 292-298,
Oct. 2000.
7. J. Li, G. Liu, and G. B. Giannakis, ”Carrier frequency oﬀset estimation for OFDMbased WLANs,” IEEE Signal Process. Lett., vol. 8, pp. 80-82, Mar. 2001.
8. H. Nogami and T. Nagashima, ”A frequency and timing period acquisition technique for OFDM systems,” in Proc. IEEE PIRMC, Toronto, Canada, pp. 10101015, Sep. 1995.
9. K. Bang, N. Cho, H. Jun, K. Kim, H. Park, and D. Hong, ”A coarse frequency
oﬀset estimaion in an OFDM system using the concept of the coherence phase
bandwidth,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 49, pp. 1320-1324, Aug.2001
10. S. Kim, S. Yoon, H. -K. Choi, and S. Y. Kim, ”A low complexity and robust
frequency oﬀset estimation algorithm for OFDM-based WLAN systems,” SpringerVerlag Lecture Notes in Compu. Sci., vol. 3992, pp. 961-968, May 2006.

