Ad Hoc Distributed Simulation of Surface
Transportation Systems
R.M. Fujimoto, R. Guensler, M. Hunter, K. Schwan, H.-K. Kim,
B. Seshasayee, J. Sirichoke, and W. Suh
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332 USA
{fujimoto@cc, randall.guensler@ce, michael.hunter@ce,
schwan@cc}.gatech.edu

Abstract. Current research in applying the Dynamic Data Driven Application
Systems (DDDAS) concept to monitor and manage surface transportation
systems in day-to-day and emergency scenarios is described. This work is
focused in four, tightly coupled areas. First, a novel approach to predicting
future system states termed ad hoc distributed simulations has been developed
and is under investigation. Second, on-line simulation models that can
incorporate real-time data and perform rollback operations for optimistic ad hoc
distributed simulations are being developed and configured with data
corresponding to the Atlanta metropolitan area. Third, research in the analysis
of real-time data is being used to define approaches for transportation system
data collection that can drive distributed on-line simulations. Finally, research
in data dissemination approaches is examining effective means to distribute
information in mobile distributed systems to support the ad hoc distributed
simulation concept.
Keywords: surface transportation systems, ad hoc distributed simulations,
rollback operations.

1 Introduction
The Vehicle-Infrastructure Integration (VII) initiative by government agencies and
private companies is deploying a variety of roadside and mobile sensing platforms
capable of collecting and transmitting transportation data [1-3]. With the ongoing
deployment of vehicle and roadside sensor networks, transportation planners and
engineers have the opportunity to explore new approaches to managing surface
transportation systems, offering the potential to allow the creation of more robust,
efficient transportation infrastructures than was possible previously. Effective and
efficient system management will require real-time determinations as to which data
should be monitored, and at what resolutions. Distributed simulations offer the ability
to predict future system states for use in optimizing system behaviors both in day-today traffic conditions as well as in times of emergency, e.g., under evacuation
scenarios. Data collection, data processing, data analysis, and simulations performed
by system agents (sub-network monitoring systems, base stations, vehicles, etc.) will
lessen communication bandwidth requirements and harness surplus computing
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part I, LNCS 4487, pp. 1050 – 1057, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Ad Hoc Distributed Simulation of Surface Transportation Systems

1051

capacity. Middleware to manage the distributed network, synchronize data and results
among autonomous agents, and resolve simulation output conflicts between agents
using disparate data sets become critical activities in such a system. Dynamic, datadriven application systems (DDDAS) offer the potential to yield improved
efficiencies in the system that can reduce traffic delays and congestion, pollution, and
ultimately, save lives during times of crisis.
We are addressing this challenge through a distributed computing and simulation
approach that exploits in-vehicle computing and communication capabilities, coupled
with infrastructure-based deployments of sensors and computing equipment.
Specifically, we envision a system architecture that includes in-vehicle computing
systems, roadside compute servers (e.g., embedded in traffic signal controllers) as
well as servers residing in traffic management centers (TMCs). The remaining
sections provide an overview of specific research examining key elements of this
system. The next section describes a concept called ad hoc distributed simulations that
are used to project future system states.

2 Ad Hoc Distributed Simulations
Consider a collection of in-vehicle simulations that are interconnected via wireless
links and (possibly) wired network infrastructure. Individually, each simulation only
models a portion of the traffic network – that which is of immediate interest to the
“owner” of the simulator, Figure 1.
IN-VEHILCE
SIMULATION

IN-VEHILCE
SIMULATION

IN-VEHILCE
SIMULATION

IN-VEHILCE
SIMULATION

Individual Vehicles
Simulate Local Area
of Interest

Fig. 1. In-Vehicle Simulation

Collectively, these simulations could be used to create a kind of distributed
simulation system with the ability to make forecasts concerning the entire
transportation infrastructure as a whole. One can envision combining in-vehicle
simulators with simulations running within the roadside infrastructure, e.g., within
traffic signal controller cabinets, simulations combining sub-regions of the
transportation network, and simulations running in traffic management centers to
create a large-scale model of a city’s transportation system, as shown in Figure 2.

1052

R.M. Fujimoto et al.
In-Vehicle
Simulations

Roadside Server

In-Vehicle
Simulations

Roadside Server

In-Vehicle
Simulations

Roadside Server

Area Server
Area Server
Area Server

Regional Server

Fig. 2. Ad Hoc Distributed Simulation Structure

We term a collection of autonomous, interacting simulations tied together in this
fashion an ad hoc distributed simulation. Like a conventional distributed simulation,
each simulator within an ad hoc distributed simulation models a portion of the overall
system, and simulators exchange time stamped state information to collectively create
a model of the overall system. However, in a conventional distributed simulation the
system being modeled is designed in a top-down fashion. Specifically, the system is
neatly partitioned into non-overlapping elements, e.g., geographic regions, and a
process is assigned to model each element. By contrast, an ad hoc distributed
simulation is created in a bottom-up fashion with no overarching intelligence
governing the partitioning and mapping of the system to processes. Rather, the
distributed simulation is constructed in an “ad hoc” fashion, in much the same way an
arbitrary collection of mobile radios join together to form an ad hoc wireless network.
The elements of the physical system modeled by different simulators in an ad hoc
distributed simulation may overlap, leading to possibly many duplicate models of
portions of the system, as seen in Figure 1. Other parts of the system may not be
modeled at all. For example, an in-vehicle transportation simulator may be only
modeling the portion of the road network along the vehicle’s intended path to reach
its destination. Thus, ad hoc distributed simulations differ in important fundamental
ways from conventional distributed simulations.
Ad hoc distributed simulations are on-line simulation programs, meaning they are
able to capture the current state of the system through measurement, and then execute
forward as rapidly as possible to project a future state of the system. By assumption,
each of the simulators making up the distributed simulation can simulate some portion
of the system faster than real time.
Ad hoc distributed simulations require a synchronization protocol to coordinate
interactions among other simulations. For this purpose we have developed an
optimistic (rollback-based) synchronization protocol designed for use in these
systems. Each in-vehicle simulator utilizes information concerning traffic conditions
and predictions of future system states (e.g., road flow rates) to complete its

Ad Hoc Distributed Simulation of Surface Transportation Systems

1053

simulation. If this information changes beyond certain parameterized limits, the
simulator rolls back, and corrects its previously computed results. Based on this
protocol, a prototype ad hoc distributed simulation system has been developed using
both a custom-developed cellular automata traffic simulator as well as a commercial
simulation tool called VISSIM, described next. Further details of this work are
presented in [4].

3 Transportation Simulation Models
An ad hoc transportation simulation based on a cellular automata model was
developed for our initial investigations. The simulation consists of agents modeling
vehicles, traffic signal controllers and traffic lights. The simulation operates in a
timestep fashion. At every timestep, each agent decides what operation to perform
next based on its own characteristics and the state of the system at the end of previous
interval. Each vehicle agent includes characteristics such as origin, destination,
maximum speed of the vehicle, and driver characteristics such as aggressiveness.
Each vehicle has complete knowledge of the road topography around it. At the end of
each timestep each vehicle agent makes decisions whether to move, stop, accelerate,
or decelerate based on the following four rules:
•
•
•
•

Acceleration: if the velocity v of a vehicle is lower than max velocity and if
the distance to the next car ahead is larger than v + gap, the speed is
increased: v = v + acceleration.
Slowing down (due to other cars): If a vehicle at site X sees the next vehicle
at site X + j (with j < v), it reduces its speed to j: v = j
Randomization: The velocity a vehicle, if greater than zero, is decreased with
probability pdec,: v = v - deceleration.
Car motion: each vehicle is advanced v cells.

Similarly, the traffic controller may also change its state, specifically the stop-go flag,
at the end of each time step.
We conducted experiments in the management of 20 client simulations using the
cellular automata simulator covering a 10 intersection corridor. Under steady
conditions, the distributed simulation client provided a system representation similar
to that of a replicated trial experiment of the entire network, demonstrating that the ad
hoc approach offers potential for accurately predicting future systems states Further,
when a spike in the traffic flow was introduced into the network, the distributed
clients again successfully modeled the traffic flows; however there was a short delay
(up to approximately four minutes) in the upstream client transmitting the increased
flows to the downstream clients.
While the cellular automata simulation model allowed for the development of an
understanding of the behavior of the ad hoc distributed approach it is desirable that
future experimentation be conducted with a significantly more detailed, robust
transportation simulation model. Further, the ability to adapt existing commercial
simulation software for use in ad hoc distributed simulations would significantly
improve the likelihood that the technology would be used. An initial investigation into
implementing the ad hoc strategy using the off-the-shelf transportation simulation

1054

R.M. Fujimoto et al.

model VISSIM was conducted. VISSIM is widely used by private firms and public
agencies for transportation system analysis. VISSIM is a discrete, stochastic, time
step based microscopic simulation model developed to model urban traffic (freeway
and arterial) and public transit operations. The model is capable of simulating a
diverse set transportation network features, such as facility types, traffic control
mechanism, vehicle and driver types, etc. Individual vehicles are modeled in VISSIM
using a psycho-physical driver behavior model developed by Wiedemann. The
underlying concept of the model is the assumption that a driver can be in one of four
driving modes: free driving, approaching, following, or braking [5]. VISSIM version
4.10 was utilized for this investigation.
Investigation into the use of VISSIM has proven very hopeful. Utilizing the VISSIM
COM interface [6] it is possible to access many of the VISSIM object, methods, and
properties necessary to implement simulation roll backs and automate VISSIM clients
disbursed among workstations connected by a local area network. The initial
investigation discussed in the section focuses on the ability to implement a roll back
mechanism in VISSIM. Through the VISSIM COM interface it is possible at anytime ti
during a simulation run to save the current state of the simulation model. At any later
time tj, where j > i, it is possible to stop the simulation run, load the simulation state
from time ti, update the simulation attributes indicated by the roll back (i.e. arrival rate
on some link), and restart the simulation from time ti. An initial experiment was
conducted using VISSIM demonstrating that the roll back algorithm was successfully
implemented. This simulator was driven by traces of simulation-generated traffic flow
data, and demonstrated to accurately predict future states (as represented from the trace
data). Further details of these experiments are presented in [4].

4 Real-Time Dynamic Data Analysis
The precision of the real-time data varies depending on the level of data
aggregation. For example, minute-by-minute data are more precise than hourly
average data. We examined the creation of an accurate estimate of the evolving state
of a transportation system using real-time roadway data aggregated at various update
intervals.
Using the VISSIM model described in the previous section, a simulation of the
transportation network in the vicinity of the Georgia Institute of Technology in
Atlanta, Georgia was utilized to represent the real world, with flow data from the
Georgia Tech model provided to a smaller simulation of two intersections within the
network. The “real-world” flow data (i.e. flow data measured from the large scale
Georgia Tech model) was aggregated in different intervals and used to dynamically
drive the two-intersection model. The desire of this study was to explore how well
the small-scale simulation model is able to reflect the real world scenario when fed
data at different aggregation levels. This work explored congested and non-congested
traffic demand at data five different aggregation time intervals: 1 sec., 10 sec., 30 sec.,
60 sec., and 300 sec.
For the non-congested conditions, there existed minor differences in the average
value of the considered performance metrics (arrival time and delay) and the
performance metric difference values for the tested scenarios. However, there was a

Ad Hoc Distributed Simulation of Surface Transportation Systems

1055

clear trend of increasing the root mean square error (RMSE) as the aggregation
interval increased. Varying the upstream origin of the arrival streams also tended to
influence the RMSE values more than the average values. From these results it can be
seen that under non-congested conditions, the average of performance metrics alone
are likely not good indicators of the ability of a data driven simulation to reflect real
world operations. Measures of variation such as RMSE should also be considered.
Unlike the non-congested conditions, the average values of the performance
metrics in congested conditions were considerably different for the large real world
simulation than the local simulation. The RMSE values also were significantly greater
that those in the non-congested scenarios. There is also not a clear trend of the local
simulation providing an improved reflection of the large simulation when given the
smaller aggregation intervals. For the tested scenarios, the impact of congestion
dominated the impact of a selected aggregation interval and upstream arrival pattern.
The use of outflow constraints significantly improved the local model performance.
These constraints helped capture the impact on the local simulation of congestion that
occurs outside the local model boundaries. Where the boundaries of the congested
region fall outside of the local simulation it becomes readily apparent that both the
inflow and outflow parameters of the simulation must be dynamically driven to
achieve a reasonable reflection of the real world conditions.
In the deployment of in-vehicle simulations these experiments highlight the need
for realistic field measured inflow and outflow data streams, which are not currently
widely available. However, as sensor technologies have advanced, the amount of
available real-time field data is increasing dramatically. The quantity of available
real-time data is expected to continue to climb at an ever-increasing rate. This tidal
wave of real-time data creates the possibility of a wide variety of data driven
transportation applications. This effort has begun to examine some of the
innumerable potential uses of this data. Further details of these results are described
in [7].

5 Data Dissemination
The proposed DDDAS system relies on mobile, wireless ad hoc networks to
interconnect sensors, simulations, and servers. The experiments reported earlier were
conducted over a local area network, and thus do not take into account the
performance of the wireless network. However, the performance of the network
infrastructure can play an important role in determining the overall effectiveness of
the ad hoc distributed simulation approach. Thus, a separate effort has been devoted
to examining the question of the impact of network performance on the results
produced by the ad hoc distributed simulation.
Clearly, a single hop wireless link between the vehicles and servers severely limits
the wireless coverage area, motivating the use of a multihop network. However,
standard routing protocols designed for end-to-end communication in mobile ad hoc
networks cause each node to maintain the state of their neighboring nodes, for
efficient routing decisions. Such a solution does not scale to vehicular networks,

1056

R.M. Fujimoto et al.

where the nodes are highly mobile, and route maintenance becomes expensive. Other
routing protocols such as those discussed in [8,9] attempt to address this problem
using flooding or optimistic forwarding techniques.
Vehicle ad hoc network (VANET) data dissemination protocols are typically
designed to address data sharing among the vehicles, and related applications such as
multimedia, control data, etc. Distributed simulations, however, define a different
data transfer model, and consequently, the solutions designed for data sharing
applications may not perform well when transposed to the demands of simulations.
Additionally, data transfers in VANETs is inherently unreliable, and drops and delays
in message delivery can be highly dependent on factors such as traffic density and
wireless activity, thus having a strong impact on the simulation itself.
To address this challenge, a data dissemination framework for addressing the
routing demands of a distributed simulation in the VANET environment has been
developed. Our framework uses a combination of geographic routing and controlled
flooding to deliver messages, with no organization enforced among the vehicles. The
design parameters of the framework are currently under study in order to assess how
this impacts the overall accuracy and reliability of simulation results.

6 Future Research
Research in ad hoc distributed simulations and their application to the management of
surface transportation systems is in its infancy, and many questions remain to be
addressed. Can such a distributed simulation make sufficiently accurate predictions of
future system states to be useful? Can they incorporate new information and revise
projections more rapidly and/or effectively than conventional approaches, e.g., global,
centralized simulations? Does networking the individual simulators result in better
predictions than simply leaving the individual simulators as independent simulations
that do not exchange future state information? How would an ad hoc distributed
simulation be organized and operate, and what type of synchronization mechanism is
required among them? Will the underlying networking infrastructure required to
support this concept provide adequate performance? These are a few of the questions
that remain to be answered.
A broader question concerns the applicability of the ad hoc simulation approach to
other domains. While our research is focused on transportation systems, one can
imagine simulations like those discussed here might be used in other on-line
simulation applications such as management of communication networks or other
critical system infrastructures.

Acknowledgement
The research described in this paper was supported under NSF Grant CNS-0540160,
and is gratefully acknowledged.

Ad Hoc Distributed Simulation of Surface Transportation Systems

1057

References
1. Werner, J.: Details of the VII Initiative 'Work in Progress' Provided at Public
Meeting(2005)
2. Bechler, M., Franz, W.J., Wolf, L.:Mobile Internet Access in FleetNet. In KiVS (2003)
3. Werner, J.: USDOT Outlines the New VII Initiative at the 2004 TRB Annual
Meeting(2004)
4. Fujimoto, R. M., Hunter, M., Sirichoke, J. Palekar, M. Kim, H.-K., Suh, W. :Ad Hoc
Distribtued Simulations. Principles of Advanced and Distributed Simulation( 2007)
5. PTV, VISSIM User Manual 4.10. 2005, PTV Planung Transport Verkehr AG: Karlsruhe,
Germany(2005).
6. PTV, VISSIM COM, User Manual for the VISSIM COM Interface, VISSIM 4.10-12. 2006,
PTV Planung Transport Verkehr AG: Karlsruhe, Germany(2006).
7. Hunter, M. P., Fujimoto, R. M. , Suh, W., Kim, H. K. :An Investigation of Real-Time
Dynamic Data Driven Transportation Simulation. In: Winter Simulation Conference(2006)
8. Rahman, W. Olesinski, Gburzynski, P.: Controlled Flooding in wireless ad-hoc networks.
In: Proc. of IWWAN(2004)
9. Wu, H., Fujimoto, R., Guensler, R., Hunter, M.: MDDV: A Mobility-Centric Data
Dissemination Algorithm for Vehicul ar Networks. In: Proceedings of the VANET
Conference(2004)

