3D-VLSI Design Tool
Rajesh Bollapragada
80, Sherman St, Cambridge, MA 02140, rbollapragada@r3logic.com
Abstract. In this paper we present a tool for 3d-integrated circuit technology.
The fashion of decreasing feature size and increasing chip dimension has
increased the concern of increased interconnect delay and high power-budgets
in the design. Adequate design tools are not available which incorporate 3D
design capabilities like design rule checking, timing analysis and netlist
extraction. We have extended M-Edit, a Layout Editor to incorporate 3D design
and verification capabilities. It also features capabilities to perform thermal
simulation, layout-vs-schematic checking, and 3D parasitic extraction.

1 Introduction
Today, semiconductor devices are scaling in accordance to Moore’s law. The fashion
of decreasing feature size and increasing chip dimension has increased the concern of
increased interconnect delay and high power-budgets in the design. Hence, new
technologies have evolved which can increase the “nearest neighbors”, by using
three-dimensional integration. Three-dimensional circuit technology has enabled the
fabrication of a single chip with multiple device-interconnect layers (wafers) stacked
on each other. This technology aids in lowering the interconnect wire length by
connecting them vertically.
Not many designers have adapted to this technology as there are not many design
tools which incorporate the features available in conventional 2D CAD tools like
design-rule checking, netlist extraction, etc. Recently, tools have been introduced,
which facilitate drawing of three-dimensional circuit layouts but do not incorporate
features like design-rule checking, 3D parasitic extraction etc. There is need for a
unified tool, which can seamlessly integrate and facilitate the process of designing
and verifying circuits using three-dimensional technology.
1.1 Background
The use of reduced feature size, has helped circuit designers achieve greater
frequencies of operation. Smaller geometries are causing a wide variety of deep submicron effects like interconnect delays and thermal issues. Three dimensional circuit
technologies helps designers to layout a single chip with multiple device-interconnect
layers. This technology helps reduce the interconnect delay, but not thermal issues.
Sample studies have shown intermediate layers reaching high temperatures in a threelayer process. Three-dimensional integration is an iterative process and there are no
definitive rules on the placement or circuit-partition, required to implement the
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3039, pp. 1017–1020, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

1018

R. Bollapragada

design. There is need for a unified tool, which can help in drawing 3D layouts and
which provides tools such as design-rule checks, 3D parasitic extraction, 3D netlist
extraction and thermal simulation on the top-level layout. The availability of such a
design tool will help in coming up with design methodologies to implement circuits in
this new technology.

2 3D Design Tool
We have extended M-Edit a Layout Editor to incorporate 3D design capabilities. It is
being developed in Java and hence is easily portable to various platforms. It is a
technology independent layout design tool delivering an extensive set of functions for
custom IC design. The user can create custom technology files using the processdesign kit.

(a)

(b)

(c)
Fig. 1. (a) 3D Timer with over 1000 transistors and its (b) 3D view (Partial); (c) Cadence
implementation of 3D layout

M-Edit implements a proprietary dynamic design-rule checking algorithm, which
reports the complete DRC error on – the –fly for 3D layouts (Fig 2(a)). The tool
maintains the electrical connectivity on the top level of the 3D layout; so the designer
can extract useful information like delay between components in different layers, and
3D netlist. At any point, the user can access the technology file, to check the effects of
the material properties on delay and power (Fig 2(b)).

3D-VLSI Design Tool

1019

(a)
(b)
Fig. 2. (a) Easy Highlighting for design error correction, (b) Timing analysis on 3D Layouts

3 Design Composition
To implement the circuit using the new technology, the designer needs to create a
three-dimensional technology file. This file consists of the individual technology files,
which make up the device-interconnect layers and the inter-level vias required to
connect layers. The technology file also embeds information regarding material and
electrical properties and design rules. A process design kit is provided with the layout
tool, which can be used to change the material properties or the design–rules.
The ability of a human to do three-dimensional design is limited by both the
depth-free nature of most human interface devices and the inability of a human to
keep track of complex three-dimensional interactions. This problem is alleviated as
the designer composes the individual layers (wafers) using the corresponding
technologies as separate layout files. The choice of the number of layers to partition
the design depends on the inter-level via cost factor and other factors such as joule
heating of inter-mediate layers, etc. Once the device-interconnect layers are complete,
the designer creates an abstract layer in which he can connect the different layers
using the inter-level vias. The abstract layer is used as a marker layer to align the
different layers and place vias in the right position. Electrical connectivity is
maintained across the layers, allowing the designer to examine and extract the nets.
The abstract layer acts as the top-level of the design, which can be used to instantiate
copies of the design. Upon completion of the 3D Layout, the user can perform tasks
such as 3D parasitic extraction and 3D netlist extraction for the complex hierarchical
design.

4 M-Edit Applications
Medit has been used to generate layouts for the full-module of a 3D-Imaging Chip
(Fig. 3). The layout was done using the MIT Lincoln Labs 3D process. The design
involved 3 layers with a total of over 80 million transistors. The first layer contains
counters and memory cells, the second layer contains photo-diode cells and the third
layer which is the abstract layer combines the above two layers with inter-level vias.
We chose to use M-Edit for this application as no other tool had working design rule
checking capabilities. The tool was used to extract the netlist for the 3D chip. The

1020

R. Bollapragada

final design was 22 mm x 22 mm in dimension. We were able to successfully tape-out
the design and fabricate the chip.

Fig. 3. 22mm x 22mm layout containing over 80 million gates

5 Conclusion
We have presented a design tool, which can be used to take advantage of the threedimensional circuit technology. It provides the designer with additional functions
such as design-rule checking, which is essential to layout the design with minimum
errors. The process design kit offers a user-friendly interface to create 3D technology
files, so that additional inter-level vias can be added and the necessary design-rules
incorporated. M-Edit has been used to design a 3D Imaging chip. Availability of a 3D
layout tool will help in the study of other issues like placement and joule heating in
the new packaging technology.
Acknowledgements. The paper acknowledges the support from DARPA under the
project SBIR Phase II.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.

A.C Harter: Three Dimensional Integrated Circuit Layout, Cambridge University, Press
1991
J. Ousterhout et al. Magic: A VLSI layout system. In Proceedings of the 21st Design
Automation Conference, pages 152–159, 1984.
International technology roadmap for semiconductors, http://public.itrs.net/.
S.Das, A. Chandrakasan, R. Reif: Three-Dimensional Integrated Circuits: Performance,
Design Methodology, and CAD Tools. In Proc. ISVLSI, Feb. 2003.

