Integration of Multiple Segmentation Based
Environment Models
SeungTaek Ryoo1 and CheungWoon Jho2
1
2

Department of Software, HanShin University, Korea
stryoo@hs.ac.kr
Division of Digital Contents, DongSeo University, Korea
cwjho@dreamwiz.com

Abstract. An environment model that is constructed using a single image has the problem of a blurring eﬀect caused by the ﬁxed resolution,
and the stretching eﬀect of the 3D model caused when information that
does not exist on the image occurs due to the occlusion. This paper introduces integration method using multiple images to resolve the above
problem. This method can express parallex eﬀect and expand the environment model to represent wide range of environment. 3

1

Introduction

The image-based modeling method is the one that is being studied the most
due to its eﬃciency. This method enables real-time rendering because it extracts
the geometric information from the image that represent the environment in the
pre-processing stage. The objective of this paper is on real-time rendering for
free navigation as realistically as possible. A method for acquiring the depthimage through image segmentation is suggested to construct the environment
model. Also, the environment model has been made to be expandable through
registration and integration of the multiple environment models.
The methods using the planes[1, 2, 3] reconstruct the 3D model based the reference plane. Methods using the vanishing point and vanishing line[1, 2] and the
image editing method through interaction[3] are some examples of this method.
The ﬁrst method performs the modeling of the environment using the vanishing
point based on the acquired plane, which makes it diﬃcult to acquire an accurate
environment model. The second method enables a more accurate modeling but
requires user interaction using various tools. Horry[1] used a plane constructed
using spider mesh to set the depth value and Criminisi[2] took into account the
relationship between the plane parallel to the reference plane and the vanishing point in calculating the distance. Oh[3] used the ﬂoor parallel tool and the
perpendicular tool to set the location on the reference plane. To resolve the
3

This work was supported by the Korea Research Foundation Grant(KRF-2004-003D00339).

V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3515, pp. 327–330, 2005.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

328

S. Ryoo and C. Jho

problem mentioned above, we used an environment modeling method based on
depth image acquired through image segmentation[4]. This method makes the
environment modeling easier and can be implemented on an environment map.

2

Multiple Environment Models

A 3D model constructed using a single image has a problem of stretching eﬀect
when occluded object appear on the scene. A 3D environment model based on
multiple images is required to resolve this problem. To do this, the integration
method based on the corresponding line is suggested in this paper. the process of
integrating the multiple environment models is as follows. First of all, the images
acquired are reconstructed into 3D environment models using the method shown
in previous chapter. Then the corresponding points are set from the image to
be integrated and the 3D environment models are registered by using the transformation (translation, rotation, scaling) through the corresponding points. To
acquire a more accurate environment model, the subdivision method is applied
to integrate the environment models. Finally, the texel values are mixed and
recreated to resolve the texture inconsistency eﬀect to acquire a desired image.
2.1

The Registration of the Environment Models

Each image is divided into a ﬂoor, ceiling and surrounding objects[4]. The 3D environment models acquired through diﬀerent viewpoints have the characteristic
that the reference plane equation is equal to each other. By using this characteristic, the 3D coordinate registration can be simpliﬁed into a 2D coordinate
registration. This means that the reconstructed environment models share the
planes that form the ﬂoor and the ceiling which makes the registration of each
environment model an easy task through 2D transformation. Figure 1 shows
the process of integrating the 3D environment models using two corresponding
point. Figure 1-a shows the setting of the two corresponding points from the image by user. The dotted line (corresponding line) indicates the vectors created
by the ﬁrst and second corresponding points. Figure 1-b shows the result image
of the environment model Ea created by the left image of Figure 1-a that has
been translated by the environment model Eb created by the right image. Figure 1-c shows the environment models created by rotating environment model
Ea around the ﬁrst corresponding point. Figure 1-d shows the two environment
models that have been created by scaling environment model Ea . We can see that
the environment models can be registered by translating, rotating and scaling
the models using only the two corresponding points.

a. the corresponding point

b. translation

c. rotation

d. scaling

Fig. 1. the registration of the environment model

Integration of Multiple Segmentation Based Environment Models

2.2

329

The Integration of the Environment Models

we proposed the method of integrating the environment models after partition
using a subdivision plane based on a corresponding line. Since two environment
models based on only the two corresponding points have been registered, the
environment models that are far away from the corresponding line have a larger
displacement than those nearby. Therefore, it becomes diﬃcult to discard the
redundant areas through polygon comparison and analysis. We have integrated
the two environment models using this feature between the corresponding line
and the environment model. The environment model has been subdivided into
two sub-models using the plane created based on the corresponding line and have
chosen the sub-model with less redundant area to form an integrated environment model. Figure 2 shows the integration process of the environment model
using the subdivision plane. Figure 2-a shows the process of selecting the area
partitioned using the normal of the subdivision plane. Each dotted line indicates
the intersection point between each subdivision plane and the environment model
and the arrows indicate the direction of the normal of the plane. The sub-models
are selected through this direction. Figure 2-b shows the environment models cut
by each subdivision plane and Figure 2-c shows the environment model created
by integrating the sub-models that have been partitioned. As shown in this ﬁgure, this method can be easily integrated the environment models to select and
assemble the subdivided models. However, the model created during the integration of the two environment models has a problem of inconsistency in the
connection area. To remove this seam, the texture samples of the two environment models that overlap each other must be blended for use. We have used the
corresponding line for the consistency of the images in this paper. The seam can
be fully removed by repeatedly applying texel blending.

a. the relationship b/w the plane and environment model

b. selection

c. integration

Fig. 2. the integration of the environment models using the subdivision plane

3

The Results

Figure 3 shows the process of constructing an environment model from three
regular images acquired from diﬀerent viewpoints and angle. In model1, the view
orientation is towards the center of the hall, model2 to the left-side, and model3
to the right side to form the environment model. The two models, model2 and 3,
are merged around model1. The merged models are divided into two sub-models
using the subdivision plane, and the sub-model with less redundancy is selected
for the integration. A seam is found on the connection area of an integrated

330

S. Ryoo and C. Jho

Model 2

Model 1

Registration

Model 3

Model Division
Registered Models

Split - Models

Integration

Integrated Model

Blending
Texture

Environment Model

Fig. 3. the construction of the environment model using the multiple images

environment model. The environment model is reconstructed by blending the
related texels from each texture map.

4

Conclusion and Future Work

The environment modeling method through the multiple images is able to create precise environment model that can freely change the viewpoint and has
an optimal resolution image. It can also extend the navigation area through
the integration of the environment model by adding a new environment image. The suggested environment modeling method using the multiple images
has advantages as well as limitations which require further research. the 3D environment model acquired using the segmentation-based environment model is
hard to merge and integrate precisely. Further studies will focus on a new way of
acquiring a more precise 3D environment model without using the range image
and also on ways for merging and integrating these new environment models
automatically.

References
1. Y. Horry, K. Anjyo, K. Arai, ”Tour Into the Picture: Using a Spidery Mesh Inter-face
to Make Animation from a Single Image”, SIGGRAPH ’97, pp 225-232, 1997
2. A. Criminisi, I. Reid, A. Zisserman, ”Single View Metrology”, Int. J. of Computer
Vision, v.40, n.2, pp. 123-148, 2000
3. Byong Mok Oh, Max Chen, Julie Dorsey, Fredo Durand, ”Image-based modeling
and photo editing”, SIGGRAPH 2001: 433-442
4. SeungTaek Ryoo, ”Segmentation Based Environment Modeling Using Single Image”, ICIAR2004(LNCS3211), pp 98-105, 2004.

