Preliminary Study of Avian Influenza A Infection Using
Remote Sensing and GIS Techniques
Jianping Guo1,4, Yong Xue1,2,*, Shaobo Zhong1,4, Chunxiang Cao1, Wuchun Cao3,*,
Xiaowen Li1, and Liqun Fang3
1
State Key Laboratory of Remote Sensing Science, Jointly Sponsored by the Institute of
Remote Sensing Applications of Chinese Academy of Sciences and Beijing Normal University,
Institute of Remote Sensing Applications, Chinese Academy of Sciences, P.O. Box 9718,
Beijing 100101, China
2
Department of Computing, London Metropolitan University, 166-220 Holloway Road,
London N7 8DB, UK
3
Institute of Microbiology and Epidemiology, Academy of Military Medical Sciences,
Chinese PLA, Beijing 100071, PR China
4
Graduate School of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
gjpgis@163.com, y.xue@londonmet.ac.uk

Abstract. The outbreak of Avian Influenza A (H5N1) infection has spread
across all over the world from East-South Asia to Russia, Greece, Romania and
Turkey. It will be important to find the transmission route and determine the
environmental factor that affect the prevalence of avian influenza A virus.
Based on the environmental parameters derived from remote sensing (RS)
measurements and the avian influenza A (H5N1) infection case data in China
during January 23, 2004 to February 24, 2004, the correlations between the
outbreak of H5N1 avian influenza and the environmental parameters of the
infected area, such as land surface temperature, was conducted using the spatial
analysis abilities of GIS. The statistically significant association between the
land use or land cover and outbreak of avian influenza A infection was found,
i.e. about 86.4% of the 44 cases are in the cropland. Besides, by the buffering
analysis, it is estimated that the vicinity at 50 km or so to main railways plays a
key role in the spatial distribution of avian influenza A infection. Finally, we
draw preliminary conclusion that the infection often outbreak in a certain range
of land surface temperature etc probably due to in part the H5N1 virus
implications.

1 Introduction
The avian influenza A infection has outbroken in poultry and wild birds around the
world, killing thousands of poultry, which has already aroused much attention from
nearly all the people. According to WHO latest information, the human cases have
amounted to 118 infected, included 61 dead since December 1997 [2]. As for as avian
influenza A is concerned, we only know that the virus, particularly the high pathogenic
*

Corresponding authors.

V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part III, LNCS 3993, pp. 9 – 12, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

10

J. Guo et al.

H5N1 strain, can easily mutate to transmit to human directly, if appropriate condition
is satisfied. However, from the perspective of epidemiology and effectively control, the
transmission, the origin, the ecosystem of the outbreak and spatial pattern of avian
influenza A infection outperform above-mentioned factors, which is particularly in the
interests of many environmental epidemiologist.
Geographic Information Systems (GIS) and remote sensing (RS) technologies are
being used increasingly to study the spatial and temporal patterns of infectious
diseases (Brooker and Michael, 2000), which show great potential to serve as: (1) an
effective data capture, mapping and analysis tool for the development of spatial
epidemiological diseases; (2) an environment for modeling the spatial distribution of
infection accounting for the RS derived parameters and climate measures; and (3) a
focal tool in infection control given their abilities to better define the endemic area
and predict precisely the risk of the population exposed to some infections.
In this paper, the data and methods used in the study were introduced in Section 2.
The analysis of data was conducted in Section 3. Finally, we gave the preliminary
conclusions.

2 Data and Methods
2.1 Pre-processing of Infection Case Data
The first avian influenza outbreak in the Guangxi Zhuang autonomous region in
Southwestern China on January 23, 2004. From then on till February 24, 2004, there
were other 43 cases in total of avian influenza A infection across China, which were
all high pathogenic i.e. H5N1 strain virus. It is very uncommon in China for so many
cases in such short time. We chose the case data during the period as the objective of
our study concerning the statistical implications. Accounting for the time lags
between report of suspected case and determining of case, the time of case outbreak
was determined on the day of report of suspected case, which is better in line with the
true situation of avian influenza A infection. The spatial coordinate of avian influenza
A infection was centred at the county level. The spatial resolution of the analysis was
based on the 1km x 1km pixel.
2.2 Preparation of Land Use/ Land Cover Data
Due to the little change of land use/land cover, we chose the MODIS land cover
product (MOD12Q1) of 2001 in China, which identifies 17 classes of land cover
including 11 natural vegetation classes, 3 developed land classes (1 class of which is a
mosaic with natural vegetation), 1 permanent snow or ice class, 1 barren or sparsely
vegetated class, and 1 water class.
2.3 Land Surface Temperature Measurement
We chose MODIS thermal infrared bands 1B data to derive land surface temperature
using the split-window technique [3]. In order to reduce the random error, we derived
the mean temperature of the infected area by averaging the measures of neighbouring
8 cells (1km x 1km).

Preliminary Study of Avian Influenza A Infection Using Remote Sensing

11

3 Analysis
Buffering is a process of identifying objects within a specified distance of a reference
object. A simple environmental example would be to create a buffer around the strip.
In regarding to the avian influenza, Buffer could be used to assess potential risks to
the affected avian population. In this case, we built a buffer around the main railway
of China (Figure 1) on both sides by 50 kilometres away the main railway of China.
Based on the buffer analysis, there are 43 cases (97.8%) in the buffer area, which
suggests that some strong association between the railway and the outbreak of avian
influenza A infection exits.
From the mean land surface temperature derived from MODIS data, we got a plot
of
temperature
range in 44 cases
of avian influenza
A infection in
China, from which
we found that
about 66% (29/44)
of avian influenza
cases outbreak in
the range of (70C,
130C), other 34%
in the range of (–
130C – 70C) and
(170C -270C). It is
very important for
us to effectively Fig. 1. The 50 km buffer map around main railway network of China,
which is overlaid with avian influenza A infections cases of the period
prevent
and
between January 23- February 24, 2004
control the avian
influenza for temperature varies in the (70C – 130C) range in the autumn and spring in
most part of China. So we should take any measures to strengthened monitoring of the
avian influenza prevalence in the season when temperature varies in that range.
Land cover type is very popular in the environmental epidemiology, especially
for vector-borne infection disease, because the vector habitat usually prefers some
specific land cover type to other types. Meanwhile, there are great evidences of avian
influenza transmitted from migratory birds, which often fly through some specific
routes. Therefore, when we tried to find the environmental factor influencing the
outbreak of avian influenza A infection, we incorporated the land cover type into our
research. Through overlay analysis of case data and land cover data, we find that there
are 28 cases (64%) outbreak in cropland.

4 Conclusion
Besides the land cover type, we also got some association between mean land surface
temperature and avian influenza, from the perspective of cluster in the specific range
of mean land surface temperature in the area affected by avian influenza A infection.

12

J. Guo et al.

This can be implicated that avian influenza A (i.e. H5N1) virus often adapts to some
range of temperature, which is in line with the high frequency of avian influenza in
winter and spring when the land surface temperature in most of China accords to the
range calculated in our study. However, accounting for the avian influenza prevalence
in May 2005, a plenty of migratory birds died of H5N1 strain avian influenza in
Qinghai Lake, and the prevalence in the southeast Asia, where the land surface
temperature often lies out of the range we got in the study. In the study, strong
association as well between railway and avian influenza A infection holds true. This
can be explained by the fact that in China, the transportation by railway of poultry
products is the key way besides the highway for most poultry managers. In this study,
we only investigated the correlation between railway and avian influenza A infection.

Acknowledgement
This publication is an output from the research projects “Monitoring of Beijing
Olympic Environment Using Remote Sensing” (2002BA904B07-2) funded by the
MOST, China, "Digital Earth" (KZCX2-312) funded by CAS, China. This study was
also funded by NSFC, China (grant number: 30590370, 30590374) and national
military of sciences and technologies of China (grant number: 2004BA519A32).

References
[1] Brooker S and Michael E.: the potential of geographical information systems and remote
sensing in the epidemiology and control of human helminth infections. Advances in
Parasitology, edited by Hay S. I., Randolph S. E., and Rogers D. J. (Academic Press)
Vol.47 (2000).
[2] Tran Tinh Hien, M.D., Nguyen Thanh Liem, M.D., Nguyen Thi Dung, M.D., Luong Thi
San, M.D., Pham Phuong Mai, M.D., et al.: Avian influenza A (H5N1) in 10 patients in
Vietnam. England Journal of Medicine, 350 (2004) 1179-88.
[3] Xue Y., Cai G.Y., Guan Y. N., and Tang J. K.: Iterative self-consistent approach for earth
surface temperature determination. International Journal of Remote Sensing, 26(1), (2005)
185-192.

