Rule-Based Visualization in a Computational
Steering Collaboratory
Lian Jiang, Hua Liu, Manish Parashar, and Deborah Silver
Dept of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA
{lianjian,marialiu,silver,parashar}@caip.rutgers.edu

Abstract. In this paper, we introduce the concept of rule-based visualization for a computational steering collaboratory and show how these
rules can be used to steer the behaviors of visualization subsystems.
Feature-based visualization allows users to extract regions of interests,
and then visualize, track and quantify the evolution of these features.
Rules deﬁne high level user policies and are used to automatically select
and tune the appropriate visualization technique based on application
requirements and available computing/network resources. Such an automated management of the visualization subsystem can signiﬁcantly improve the eﬀectiveness of computational steering collaboratories in wide
area Grid environments.

1

Introduction

A computational steering collaboratory is an environment in which geographically distributed scientists can collaboratively investigate complex and multidisciplinary simulations using online monitoring, remote visualization and computational steering techniques. Computational steering in such an environment
not only shortens the period between changes to parameters and the viewing of
the results, but also enables a what-if analysis which makes cause-eﬀect relationships more evident [1].
The ability to ﬂexibly manipulate the visualization subsystem in a computational steering collaboratory is important for both computational steering
and multi-user collaboration as visualization is typically the basis for interactive monitoring and steering. For example, scientists often tend to look at the
isosurface of a scalar ﬁeld. These are speciﬁed using thresholds and are generally manipulated interactively using the visualization subsystem. However, for
large-scale long-running simulations it may not be feasible to download an entire
dataset or even one timestep of the dataset to a visualization platform. Therefore, visualization routines are co-located at the simulation platform. However,
this can prevent them from being interactive and thresholds have to be selected
a priori, which may not be most eﬀective. Using rule-based control, scientists can
enable the visualization subsystem to automatically pick the appropriate threshold. In this paper we present such a rule based visualization system. Rules are
decoupled from the system and can be externally injected into a rule base. This
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3038, pp. 58–65, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

Rule-Based Visualization in a Computational Steering Collaboratory

59

allows scientists to conveniently add, delete, modify, disable, and enable rules
that will control visualization behavior. Scientists can manipulate rules not only
before the simulation, but also during the simulation. For example, while the
simulation is running the scientist may specify a rule such as “if the number
of the extracted regions is greater than 100, then increase the threshold by 5”.
The visualization subsystem will automatically adjust the threshold when the
rule conditions evaluate to true. However, if the scientist knows from monitoring
the ﬁrst 200 timesteps that the value of x in the second rule is not appropriate
and should be changed, she can modify the rule during the simulation and the
modiﬁed rule will be applied to the rest of the simulation.
Rules can also be used to support collaborative visualization in heterogeneous environments where the collaborators’ resources and display capabilities
may diﬀer. Some visualization techniques are more computation intensive than
others, or may require more powerful graphic capabilities to display. For example,
rendering an isosurface with millions of polygons may be too compute/network
intensive for a thin client such as a PDA. Either the polygons can be reduced
using straightforward triangle decimation techniques, or a more abstract featurebased representation can be displayed [2]. Such automated adaptations can be
simply achieved using a rule such as “if there are more than 10k triangles, then
display a higher level abstraction”.
The rule based visualization subsystem presented in this paper builds on
Discover, which is a computational collaboratory for interactive grid applications
and provides the infrastructure for enabling rules to be dynamically composed
and securely injected into the application, and executed at runtime so as to
enable it to autonomically adapt and optimize its behavior [3]. In this paper,
we integrate the rule mechanism into a feature-based visualization subsystem
and demonstrate how this can be used to improve monitoring, steering and
collaboration.

2

The Discover Computational Collaboratory

Discover is a virtual, interactive and collaborative PSE that enables geographically distributed scientists and engineers to collaboratively monitor, and control
high performance parallel/distributed applications using web-based portals [3].
As shown in Figure 1, Discover provides a 3-tier architecture composed of detachable thin-clients at the front-end, a network of web servers in the middle,
and the Distributed Interactive Object Substrate (DIOS++) [4] at the back-end.
DIOS++ enables rule based autonomic adaptation and control of distributed
scientiﬁc applications. It is composed of 3 key components: (1) autonomic objects
that extend computational objects with sensors (to monitor the state of an object), actuators (to modify the state of an object), access policies (to control accesses to sensors and actuators) and rule agents (to enable rule-based autonomic
self-management), (2) mechanisms for dynamically and securely composing, deploying, modifying and deleting rules, and (3) a hierarchical control network
that is dynamically conﬁgured to enable runtime accesses to and management

60

L. Jiang et al.
'LVWULEXWHG ',6&29(5 6HUYHUV

$SSOLFDWLRQ 

&25%$  50,  ,,23

$SSOLFDWLRQ ,QWHUDFWLRQ 6HUYOHW

'DWDEDVH +DQGOHU

6WHHULQJ

6HVVLRQ $UFKLYDO

&KDW
:KLWHERDUG
&ROODERUDWLYH
9LVXDOL]DWLRQ«

,QWHUDFWLRQ

&ROODERUDWLRQ
*URXS

3ROLF\ 5XOH%DVH

9LVXDOL]DWLRQ

0RELOH &OLHQW

0DVWHU 6HUYOHW
50,VRFNHWV+773

$XWKHQWLFDWLRQ  6HFXULW\

$SSOLFDWLRQ 
9L] 3ORW

3'$

$SSOLFDWLRQ 

,17(5$&7,21 6(59(5
+773  6(&85( +773  6HFXUH 6RFNHWV

,QWHUDFWLRQ DQG &ROODERUDWLRQ 3RUWDOV

&ROODERUDWLRQ
*URXS

3ULYDWH .H\
0' 66/

',26 ,QWHUDFWLRQ
$JHQWV

',26
$3,

,QWHUDFWLRQ
(QDEOHG
&RPSXWDWLRQDO
2EMHFWV

6HUYOHWV
0RELOH &OLHQW

$SSOLFDWLRQ 

/RFDO 5HPRWH
'DWDEDVHV

Fig. 1. Architectural Schematic of the DISCOVER Computational Collaboratory

of the autonomic objects and their sensors, actuators, access policies and rules.
The rule engine responds to the users’ actions (e.g. rule creation, deletion, modiﬁcation, activation, deactivation) by decomposing and distributing the rules to
corresponding rule agents, collecting rule execution results from the rule agents
and reporting to users. The rule engine also controls and coordinates rule agents.
Rules are evaluated and executed in parallel by the distributed rule agents. Priority and dynamic locking mechanisms are used at each rule agent to solve
rule conﬂicts. The Discover collaboratory allows users to collaboratively interact
with, interrogate, control, and steer remote simulations using web based pervasive portals, and has been used to enable remote feature extraction and tracking
for the 3D Ritchmyer Meshkof compressible turbulence kernel (RM3D) [5,6].

3

Feature Extraction and Feature Tracking

Feature-based visualization allows scientists to extract regions of interests, and
then visualize, track and quantify the evolution of these features. The ﬁrst step
in feature-based framework is deﬁning the feature of interests. In [2], features
are deﬁned as connected regions which satisfy some threshold since this is a
basic deﬁnition for most visualization routines (such as isosurfaces or volume
rendering).
Features are tracked from one timestep to the next to capture how the features evolve [2]. Feature events can be classiﬁed into the following categories:
continuation (a feature continues from one timestep ti to the next ti+1 ), creation
(a new feature appears in ti+1 ), dissipation (a feature in ti does not appear in
ti+1 ), bifurcation (a feature in ti splits into one or more features in ti+1 ) and

Rule-Based Visualization in a Computational Steering Collaboratory

61

amalgamation (two or more features from ti merge into one in ti+1 ). Feature
tracking allows events to be catalogued and enables complex queries to be performed on the dataset. Queries include data-mining type exploration, such as
“how many new regions appear in timestep ti ?”, “in which timesteps do large
regions merge?”, or “where does a large region break up?”. The framework of
feature based visualization is shown in Figure 2. First, the features (shown as
the isosurfaces in this ﬁgure) are extracted from the time-varying data. Then
the evolution of these features are tracked and the features are abstracted for
diﬀerent levels, one example of which shown in this ﬁgure is ellipsoid. Finally,
the quantiﬁcation, such as volume, mass, centroid, of the features is computed.
The tracking, abstraction and quantiﬁcation results can be used for enhanced
visualization and event querying in a heterogeneous collaboratory.
After the features are
extracted, the feature attributes, such as isosurface,
mass and volume, can be
computed. The features can
also be abstracted using a
simpler shape. One such reduced representation is an
ellipsoid that provides an
iconic abstraction to blob-like
regions. An ellipsoid can capture the essential shape and
orientation of the region with
a limited number of parameters (center + axes) as opposed to an isosurface which
Fig. 2. Feature based visualization
may contain thousands of
triangles. For huge datasets
which may contain hundreds or thousands of evolving regions, and ellipsoid may
provide a suitable ﬁrst abstraction. Other types of abstractions include more
line-like regions like skeletons [7] and vortex cores [8], or for vector ﬁelds, critical
points and critical curves [9]. For scalar ﬁelds, contour trees [10] can also provide
an abstraction. A contour tree is a graph which describes the topological changes
of the isosurface with respect to the threshold.
An example of ellipsoid abstraction is shown in Figure 2. The scientist can
choose between displaying ellipsoids or isosurfaces depending on the requirements and computing/network resources.
In addition to the standard feature extraction and tracking implemented
within AVS, in [5], a distributed AMR version of feature extraction and tracking
is described. AMR (Adaptive Mesh Reﬁnement) is a technique used in computational simulations to concentrate grid points in areas where the errors are large.
This results in a set of nested grids with varying resolutions. In distributed
AMR grids, features can span multiple reﬁnement levels and multiple proces-

62

L. Jiang et al.

sors; therefore, tracking must be performed across time, across levels, and across
processors. The distributed algorithm [5], called Ftrack, is implemented within
Discover and run in-situ, i.e., together with the simulation so that the data does
not have to be copied or stored for visualization processing.

4

Rule Deﬁnitions

Ftrack, the feature-based visualization system integrated with Discover [3], is
capable of self-management based on runtime user-deﬁned rules. The rules are
categorized into: (1) Steering rules apply intra-function management (e.g. changing the runtime behaviors of the visualization functions by dynamically altering
their parameters). (2) Conﬁguration rules apply inter-function management (e.g.
organizing the visualization functions by selecting the appropriate functions to
be executed). Examples of rules and the related sensors, actuators applicable to
Ftrack are presented below:
Steering Rule: The rule for choosing an appropriate threshold mentioned
in Section 1 is an example of steering rule.
Another
example given here is a
rule for changing the
color schemes. The
level-highlighting color
scheme gives each level
a diﬀerent hue and
assign diﬀerent saturation to each feature, as
shown in ﬁgure 3(a).
On the other hand,
the time-highlighting
color scheme assigns
a diﬀerent hue to the
feature in diﬀerent
timestep. If a feature
Fig. 3. Two color schemes used in AMR tracking for
spans several levels,
RM3D: (a) a level-highlighting color scheme is used. (b)
then each part of the
a time-highlighting color scheme is used.
feature falling in a
diﬀerent level is assigned a diﬀerent saturation of the feature’s hue, as shown in
ﬁgure 3(b).
Rules can be used to select the color schemes. For example, when the number
of features is very small (below 3), there is no need to highlight time-tracking.
A scientist may prefer to see the tracking in reﬁnement levels. For this purpose,
Ftrack exposes one sensor getAverageNumberofFeatures() and two actuators useLevelHighlightingScheme() and useTimeHighlightingScheme(). A corresponding
rule could be:
IF getAverageNumberofFeatures()<3 THEN useLevelHighlightingScheme()
ELSE useTimeHighlightingScheme()

Rule-Based Visualization in a Computational Steering Collaboratory

63

Conﬁguration Rule: Scientists may choose to vary the visualization techniques based upon the computing/network resources available at the time of
visualization. For example, when the number of grid cells in the dataset exceeds
a threshold, a scientist at a thin client may want to display ellipsoids instead of
isosurfaces. Thus, Ftrack should expose a sensor getNumCells() (to get the number of the cells in the input volume) and four actuators: enableEllipsoidFitting(),
disableEllipsoidFitting(), enableIsosurface(), disableIsosurface(). Corresponding
rules could be:
Rule 1: IF getNumCells()>10K
THEN {enableEllipsoidFitting(); disableIsosurface()}
ELSE {disableEllipsoidFitting(); enableIsosurface()}

The scientist can modify this rule with operations like “change 10K to 50K”
or “switch THEN and ELSE statements”. If a scientist is working on a PDA,
which typically has poor graphics resolution as well as limited memory capacity,
the rule speciﬁed could be:
Rule 2: IF isPDA()=TRUE THEN {enableEllipsoidFitting();
disableIsosurface()}

5

Rule-Based Visualization Using Discover

The visualization subsystem, Ftrack, which performs the distributed feature extraction and tracking algorithms, is designed as a DIOS++ object. As shown in
Figure 4, the Ftrack object consists of three actors, each managing a part of the
visualization task:
Feature extractor : this actor extracts
Ftrack object
interesting features, and computes the
Feature extractor
Control aspect
geometry attributes(e.g. isosurface) and
Feature tracker
Access aspect
Visualizer
Rule aspect
quantiﬁcation attributes (e.g. volume,
Rule agent
mass, tensor, etc.) for each feature. Furthermore, it can calculate global statistics
such as the average number of features,
Fig. 4. Ftrack Object Structure
the variation of feature numbers, etc.
Feature tracker : this actor tracks the extracted features. The input is the
feature information coming from feature extractor and the user steering commands from portals or rule operations from the rule engine. The output is the
tracking information which can be represented as a set of graphs. A graph can
be a feature tree [5] describing the feature correlation tracked on diﬀerent levels,
or a direct acyclic graph (DAG) [2] describing the feature correlation tracked on
diﬀerent timesteps.
Visualizer : this actor includes various visualization modules supported by
the feature extractor and feature tracker. It utilizes the results coming from
the other two actors to create visualizations of the features (for example, an
isosurface rendering displaying quantiﬁcation) and sends the image or data to
the Discover portals.

64

L. Jiang et al.

The rule agent (RA), which is dynamically generated by the rule engine, is
shared by the three actors. The rule engine and the RA form the interface between the actors and rules. Control aspects in the rule handler deﬁne sensors and
actuators for the three actors and allow the state of the visualization subsystem
to be externally monitored and controlled. The access aspect controls access to
these sensors/actuators based on user privileges and capabilities. The rule aspect contains the rules that are used to automatically monitor, adapt and control
the object. The rule-based visualization process is summarized below. Detail of
the operation and evaluation of rule-based control in DIOS++/Discover can be
found in [4].
Initialization and Interaction: During initialization, the application uses
the DIOS++ APIs to register its objects, export their aspects, interfaces and
access policies to the local computational nodes, which will further export the
information to the Gateway. The Gateway then updates its registry. Since the
rule engine is co-located with Gateway, it has access to the Gateway’s registry.
The Gateway interacts with the external access environment and coordinates
accesses to the application’s sensor/actuators, policies and rules.
At runtime the Gateway may receive incoming interaction or rule requests
from users. The Gateway ﬁrst checks the user’s privileges based on the user’s
role, and refuses any invalid access. It then forwards valid interaction requests
to Ftrack and forwards valid rule requests to the rule engine. Finally, the responses to the user’s requests or from rules executions are combined, collated
and forwarded to the user.
Rule Deployment and Execution: The Gateway transfers valid rules to
the rule engine. The rule engine dynamically creates rule agents for Ftrack and
other objects if they do not already exist. It then composes a script for each
agent that deﬁnes the rule agent’s lifetime and rule execution sequence based on
rule priorities. For example, the script for the rule agent of Ftrack may specify
that this agent will terminate itself when it has no rules, or that Rule 1 of the
Conﬁguration Rules (see Section 4) has higher priority than Rule 2.
While typical rule execution is straightforward (actions are issued when their
required conditions are fulﬁlled), the application dynamics and user interactions
make things unpredictable. As a result, rule conﬂicts must be detected at runtime. In DIOS++, rule conﬂicts are detected at runtime and are handled by
simply disabling the conﬂicting rules with lower priorities. This is done by locking the required sensors/actuators. For example, conﬁguration rules Rule 1 and
Rule 2 conﬂict if getNumCells() is less than 10K (disableEllipsoidFitting() and
enableIsosurface() should be used) while isPDA() is TRUE (enableEllipsoidFitting() and disableIsosurface() should be used). Assuming Rule 1 has higher
priority, the script will inform the rule agent to ﬁre Rule 1 ﬁrst. After Rule 1 is
executed, interfaces enableEllipsoidFitting() and disableIsosurface() are locked
during the period when getNumCells() is less than 10K. When Rule 2 is issued,
it cannot be executed as its required interfaces are locked. The two interfaces
will be unlocked when getNumCells() becomes greater than 10K. By modifying
the rules in the rule base through the Discover portal, the scientist can promote

Rule-Based Visualization in a Computational Steering Collaboratory

65

the priority of Rule 2 to be higher than that of Rule 1 so that the visualization
subsystem always displays ellipsoids if isPDA() is TRUE.
The rule agent at Ftrack will continue to exist according to the lifetime
speciﬁed in its script. If the scientist modiﬁes the rules, for example, promoting
the priority of Rule 2, the rule engine can dynamically modify the script to
change the behavior of the rule agent.

6

Conclusion

This paper presented a rule based visualization system that improves the ﬂexibility of visualization in a WAN-based computational steering collaboratory. Rules
can be used to steer in-situ visualization and aid in data mining. In a heterogeneous environment, rules can help the scientists specify the type of interaction
and visualization desired based on system capabilities.
This work was done at the Vizlab and TASSL, Rutgers University. This
material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation
under Grant Nos. 0082634, 9984357, 0103674, and 0120934. Any opinions,
ﬁndings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of the National
Science Foundation.

References
1. Mulder, J.D., Wijk, J.J.v., Liere, R.v.: A survey of computional steering environments. Future Generation Computer Systems (1999)
2. Silver, D., Wang, X.: Tracking and visualizing turbulent 3d features. IEEE Trans.
on Visualizatin and Computer Graphics (1997)
3. Mann, V., Matossian, V., Muralidhar, R., Parashar, M.: Discover: An enviroment
for web-based interaction and steering of high-performance scientiﬁc applications.
Concurrency-Practice and experience (2000)
4. Liu, H., Parashar, M.: Dios++: A framework for rule-based autonomic management of distributed scientiﬁc applications. In: Proc. of the 9th International EuroPar Conference (Euro-Par 2003). (2003)
5. Chen, J., Silver, D., Jiang, L.: The feature tree: Visualizing feature tracking in
distributed amr datasets. In: IEEE Symposium on Parallel and Large-Data Visualization and Graphics. (2003)
6. Chen, J., Silver, D., Parashar, M.: Real-time feature extraction and tracking in a
computational steering environment. In: Proc. of Advanced Simulations Technologies Conference (ASTC). (2003)
7. Reinders, F., Jacobson, M.E.D., Post, F.H.: Skeleton graph generation for feature
shape description. Data Visualization (2000)
8. Banks, D., Singer, B.: A predictor-corrector technique for visualizing unsteady
ﬂow. IEEE Trans. Visualization and Computer Graphics (1995)
9. Helman, J., Hesselink, L.: Representation and display of vector ﬁeld topology in
ﬂuid ﬂow data sets. IEEE Computer (1989)
10. Sural, S., Qian, G., Pramanik, S.: Segmentation and histogram generation using
the hsv color space for image retrieval. In: Int. Conf. on Image Processing. (2002)

