The Simulation Course: An Innovative Way of
Teaching Computational Science in Aeronautics
Ricard Gonz´
alez-Cinca1 , Eduard Santamaria2, and J. Luis A. Yebra3
1

Department of Applied Physics
Department of Computer Architecture
3
Department of Applied Mathematics IV
Castelldefels School of Technology (EPSC)
Technical University of Catalonia (UPC)
Av. del Canal Ol´ımpic, 15 - 08860 Castelldefels, Spain
ricard@fa.upc.edu
2

Abstract. This article describes an innovative methodology for teaching an undergraduate course on Computational Science, with a particular
emphasis in Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD), and the experiences
derived from its implementation. The main activities taking place during this course are: development by students of a training project on a
topic in materials science, development of a larger CFD project, and an
introduction to a CFD commercial package. Projects are carried out by
groups of students and are assigned from a set of diﬀerent available possibilities. Project development consists in the implementation in code of
the corresponding mathematical models and a graphical interface which
permits the visualization of the results derived from the numerical resolution of the models. The main innovative aspects of the methodology
are the use of Project Based Learning combined with the participation of
lecturers from diﬀerent areas of expertise. Other innovative issues include
the opportunity for students to practice skills such as report writing, doing oral presentations, the use of English (a foreign language for them)
and the use of Linux as the development environment.

1

Introduction

The Simulation course belongs to the bachelor’s degree in Aeronautical Engineering (Air Navigation specialization) oﬀered at the Technical School of Castelldefels (EPSC) of the Technical University of Catalonia (UPC). The bachelor’s
degree in Aeronautical Engineering started in 2002 and Simulation is being run
since 2004. It is an elective course which students can enrol during the third year
of their studies. The course complements previous training which mainly focuses
on Air Navigation topics. Simulation has always been developed with the idea of
applying an innovative methodology for teaching Computational Science, with
a particular emphasis in CFD.
The broad context in which Simulation is being developed requires an introduction in order to better understand its innovative aspects. Spanish higher
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2008, Part II, LNCS 5102, pp. 735–744, 2008.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

736

R. Gonz´
alez-Cinca, E. Santamaria, and J.L.A. Yebra

education system is currently in an adaptation process to the new European
framework. Technical universities are composed by schools or faculties and departments. In the still active system schools have the role of oﬀering degrees
which last either three years (’technical engineering’ or bachelor degree) or ﬁve
years (’higher engineering’ degree or bachelor + master degree). The unifying
characteristics of the members of a department is their area of expertise, that is
the scientiﬁc background and research interests (e.g. physics or mathematics).
Courses in the degrees curricula are assigned to the department which has the
closest area of expertise to the course. Although several courses have characteristics shared by diﬀerent areas, in Spanish universities they use to be assigned
to just one department; in other words, it is very unlikely that lecturers from
diﬀerent departments participate in the same course.
The two main features of the innovative methodology presented in this paper
are the use of Project Based Learning [1,2,3] and the participation of lecturers from three main areas: physics, mathematics and computation. In Section
2 objectives of the course in the three areas as well as skills expected to be
acquired by students are presented. Section 3 is devoted to the description of
the methodology used, including an overview of the projects and information
about the course organisation. The implemented system for evaluation of students progress is presented in Section 4. Finally, remarks on the experiences
obtained during the last three years are presented.

2

Objectives

The main scientiﬁc objective of the Simulation course is an introduction to the
application of numerical analysis to basic materials science and ﬂuid dynamics problems in aerospace engineering. In particular, it is expected that after
completing the course, students have:
- A theoretical knowledge of the models describing some basic aerospace problems.
- A conceptual understanding of numerical methods commonly used in the
analysis of aerospace systems.
- A working knowledge of these numerical methods and experience in implementing them.
- A physical interpretation of the results derived from numerical simulations.
- A practical knowledge of visualization techniques.
- An intoductory knowledge of CFD commercial packages.
In order to accomplish these objectives in a comprehensive way, fundamentals of theoretical models and several numerical and programming techniques
for computation and visualization are presented by specialists in each area. The
course counts with the participation of lecturers coming from the departments
of Applied Physics, Applied Mathematics IV and Computer Architecture of the
Technical University of Catalonia (UPC), and are specialized in the physical description, the numerical analysis and the programming and visualization aspects,
respectively.

The Simulation Course: An Innovative Way of Teaching

737

Besides the objectives related to scientiﬁc and technical knowledge, the course
also aims at developing other skills like group work, project development, scientiﬁc documents writing, use of English and performing oral presentations.
The speciﬁc objectives of each area as well as an explanation on the other
skills are presented in the following subsections.
2.1

Physical Description

When students enrol Simulation, they have already followed courses on Fundamental Physics, Thermodynamics, Materials Science and Aerodynamics. However, no computational tools to solve problems related with these topics have
been used before.
The main goal from the physical point of view is to show how some physical
phenomena related to aerospace applications in ﬂuid dynamics and materials
science can be addressed in an reachable way by means of simpliﬁed models and
adequated numerical techniques. Besides this objective, it is also an important
issue to promote in students a critical point of view in any numerical results
they can obtain.
Projects development throughout the course share some common objetives
such as the understanding of the involved physics and the models used to simulate them as well as the physical interpretation of the obtained results.
2.2

Numerical Methods

An introduction to the basics of numerical analysis and partial diﬀerential equations is the main objective in the area of numerical methods. The considered
topics are:
- Numerical integration (the trapezoidal rule and Simpsons method, including
error estimation in both cases).
- Discrete approximation of derivatives.
- Numerical methods for ordinary diﬀerential equations (from Euler’s to RungeKutta method and introducing predictor-corrector methods).
- Partial Diﬀerential Equations (only second order and mainly parabolic and
hyperbolic equations).
Aimed at acquiring a working knowledge in numerical methods, a brief introduction strongly facilitates the study of the discretization procedures and the
numerical treatment of those partial diﬀerential equations that govern the main
problems in ﬂuid dynamics which the students will face in the course.
2.3

Programming and Visualization

From the programming perspective, the main goal of the course is to make
students acquire a basic knowledge and understanding of Object Oriented Programming (OOP) in C++ and the necessary skills to develop applications with
a graphical user interface (GUI). It is noteworthy that previous programming

738

R. Gonz´
alez-Cinca, E. Santamaria, and J.L.A. Yebra

experience of students is limited to an introductory course to C programming
followed by another course where OOP is introduced but only addressing encapsulation. After these courses a full year passes before they can enrol Simulation.
The following list summarizes the main objectives of the course in this area:
- Introduction to GNU/Linux: during the course students will familiarize with
this system at a user level.
- Object Oriented Programming in C++: students will have to brush up on
their C++ and learn new concepts as they work on their projects.
- Real numbers in computing: due to the numerical nature of the algorithms
that will be implemented having notions on this topic will help understing
some issues that may arise.
- Application programming and debugging with KDevelop: KDevelop [4] is an
Integrated Development Environment that provides an editor, compilers, a
debugger, etc. thus sharing features with most IDEs.
- Application progamming using Qt GUI toolkit: the Qt [5] libraries provide
a quite comprehensive set of classes for GUI programming. Besides it is
multiplatform, well documented, integrates well with KDevelop and provides
an easy to use interface designer.
2.4

Skills

There are a number of important skills whose development also forms part of
the course objectives:
- Group work: Most of the course work is done in group.
- Self learning: There are no in-depth explanations to the class, rather they
are given introductory notions and pointers to diﬀerent topics that they will
need to work on.
- Report writing: One of the items that must be delivered after the project
completition is a report as described in Section 3.
- Performing oral presentations: Each group must give a presentation to the
class explaining the main aspects of their project and demoing the developed
application.
- Use of English: Unfortunately, the use of English is not integrated into the
studies to a point in which students are able to use it ﬂuently. We try to
alleviate this situation by providing all course materials in English. At least,
students should be comfortable reading technical documentation in English.

3

Methodology

In this Section the learning methodology used in the Simulation course is presented. It starts with a very brief introduction to Project Based Learning, following an overview of the materials science (training project) and CFD projects that
students will have to develop. Finally, we describe how the course is organized
around the project development process.

The Simulation Course: An Innovative Way of Teaching

3.1

739

Project Based Learning

The basic idea of Project Based Learning (PBL) [1,2,3] is to organize the course
(or most of it) around a project which the students must work on in groups.
During the development process they need to learn the necessary topics in order
to carry it out.
PBL provides a model based on the student learning process rather than
focusing on the lecturer teaching activities. It is a quite extended methodology,
specially in engineering studies, where it ﬁts very well. Nevertheless, it is not easy
to implement because it confronts both lecturers and students with a number of
challenges.
3.2

Projects Overview

Three consecutive projects are developed by students throughout the course.
A ﬁrst short training project on crystal growth, a largest CFD project, and a
ﬁnal project using a commercial tool. The ﬁrst two projects, in which students
implement their own codes, are explained in this Section.
The ﬁrst project developed during the course is a training one developed by
all the groups. It consists in the numerical simulation of the process of a crystal
growing from an undercooled melt. A simple version of the phase-ﬁeld model introduced in [6] is used to reproduce the physical phenomena. This project allows
students to familiarise with ﬁnite diﬀerence techniques, implicit schemes, mesh
related problems and to start implementing visualisation techniques. Diﬀerent
initial and boundary conditions and system sizes are considered. From the physical point of view, students acquire an idea of the role played by undercooling
and anistropies on the time evolution of the system.
The projects in the ﬂuid dynamics ﬁeld are inspired in [7] and are the following:
1) Subsonic-supersonic isentropic nozzle ﬂow.
2) Incompressible Couette ﬂow.
3) Prandtl-Meyer expansion wave.
Each group carries out only one of the CFD projects. Students directly acquire
the knowledge associated with the project that they develop, while knowledge
on the other projects is acquired through the lecturer presentations and, at the
end of the course, through the oral presentations of the other groups.
In project 1), the ﬂow of a gas through a convergent-divergent nozzle is simulated. In order to simplify the model to use, the study is carried out for quasi-onedimensional ﬂows. A set of dimensionless ﬁnite-diﬀerence equations (continuity,
momentum and energy) are solved by means of MacCormack’s technique for an
speciﬁc nozzle shape and initial conditions. The goal of this project is to obtain the steady-state solution. Figure 1 (left) shows an example of the graphical
interface developed for this project.
In project 2), incompressible Couette ﬂow is studied as an example of a simple viscous ﬂow that retains much of the same physical characteristics of a more
complicated boundary-layer ﬂow. The governing equations for this problem are

740

R. Gonz´
alez-Cinca, E. Santamaria, and J.L.A. Yebra

Fig. 1. Project examples. Left: subsonic-supersonic nozzle, right: Prandtl-Meyer expansion wave.

parabolic partial diﬀerential equations, while in projects 1) and 3) are hyperbolic
diﬀerential equations. The employed numerical technique for the solution of the
Couette ﬂow is the Crank-Nicholson implicit method. In this case, the steady-state
solution can be easily validated by the corresponding analytical solution of the
problem. The observation of the evolution of the velocity proﬁles in an unsteady
ﬂow is an example of the added value provided by the numerical simulation.
A two-dimensional, inviscid, supersonic ﬂow moving over a surface is studied
in project 3). This problem shows an special interest when the surface contains a
sharp corner. In this situation, the supersonic ﬂow is expanded around the sharp
expansion corner in such a way that an expansion wave (the Prandtl-Meyer expansion wave) made up of an inﬁnite number of inﬁnitely weak Mach waves, fans
out from the corner. The corresponding Euler equations for the considered ﬂow are
solved by means of the MacCormack’s predictor-corrector explicit ﬁnite-diﬀerence
method applied to downstream space marching. An additional diﬃculty of this
project lies in the necessity of carrying out a grid transformation to change from
the physical plane to a rectangular computational plane. An example of the graphical interface developed for this project is shown in Figure 1 (right).
In general, the projects are not specially complex from a class design point
of view. Most groups end up with just two to three classes involved in the
simulation computation. It is in the development of the graphical user interface
where students will have to deal with a hierarchically structured collection of
C++ classes that provide the diﬀerent graphical components.
The interdisciplinary nature of the projects makes its development a richer experience and also more real and encouraging. Besides, its open-endness allows the
more motivated and capable groups to add features beyond the required minimums.
3.3

Course Organisation

Simulation requires about 250 hours of workload for the students, including
classroom sessions. It has a duration of 15 weeks with 7 hours of classroom

The Simulation Course: An Innovative Way of Teaching

741

sessions per week. There are 25 available places which, from its beginning, have
always been covered by demand.
As seen on table 1, the Simulation course is organized in three blocks. The ﬁrst
block corresponds to the training project, which is delivered during the fourth
week. Once the training project has been done, a more challenging and bigger
ﬂuid dynamics project is presented. Students will be working on this project for
approximately seven weeks. Finally, the remaining four weeks of the course are
devoted to the introduction and use of a widely used commercial ﬂow modelling
software. All lecturers of the course participate in both the trainig and the main
project. The remainder of the course is done by only one of the lecturers.
Table 1. Course organisation
Block

Duration

Deliverables

Lecturers

Training Project
Main Project

4 weeks
7 weeks

Physics, Math, Comp
Physics, Math, Comp

CFD Package

4 weeks

Working application
Application, writen
report
and
oral
presentation
Tutorials, writen report and working application

Physics

At the beginning of the course students are organized in groups of 3 to 4
members. During the ﬁrst weeks the main topics that will be covered during the
course are introduced. The training project is proposed at the same time. This
project aims at making students get familiar with the basic concepts and the
tools that will be used during the course. It also forces students to get rapidly
started and helps in establishing group work dynamics.
During the second block of the course students carry out the development of
the main project. First all projects are presented, then the course coordinator
negotiates the distribution of the projects among the diﬀerent groups. Since the
diﬃculty level may diﬀer from project to project, the results obtained in the
training project will be helpful in order to decide on this distribution. From that
point on, students work on their own. During the development process students
will face diﬀerent physics, mathematical and programming problems that they
will need to work on in order to make progress. Thus the study of the diﬀerent
topics of the course is prompted by the learning needs that stem from the project
development. Two books of J.D. Anderson [7,8] are the basic reference materials
of the course, providing guidance and sample results that must be matched by
the simulation programs outcome. This phase ends with the delivery of three
diﬀerent items:
1. The application that simulates the ﬂuid dynamics problem.
2. A written document containing:
(a) an abstract both in English and Spanish or Catalan,

742

R. Gonz´
alez-Cinca, E. Santamaria, and J.L.A. Yebra

(b) a description of the physical problem,
(c) its mathematical resolution,
(d) and the main aspects of the program implementation with a minimal
user manual.
3. A 20 minutes oral presentation, summarizing the information contained in
the document, with a demo of the application.
During the ﬁnal weeks of the year, students are introduced to Gambit, the
geometry and mesh generation tool of the Fluent CFD commercial package [9].
This block of the course is done by the lecturer from the physics department. At
this point students already have a basic understanding of numerical simulation
principles which facilitates the use of commercial tools. After some introductory
lectures, students carry out six tutorials provided by Fluent in order to practise
the basic points of geometry creation and mesh generation and reﬁnement. The
ﬁnal part of this block is devoted to the development of a project using Gambit.
Under the lecturer advise, students choose an aerospace system (e.g. wings, balloons) and generate its geometry and create and study diﬀerent meshes. Students
have the possibility to complete this work in the Computational Fluid Dynamics
course oﬀered in the following semester. In this other course, the Fluent solver
is introduced and students can use it to study the behavior of ﬂuids ﬂowing in
the geometries built in the project done in Simulation.
An important point of the methodology is the role of the lecturers, that gradually changes as the course advances. During the ﬁrst weeks the lecturing activity
is rather based on talks about the diﬀerent topics that must be introduced. Once
students start working on their projects their activity will consist in solving questions, supervise students progress and, from time to time, give small clarifying
lectures if deemed necessary. During scheduled times at the classroom students
will be able to perform their group meetings, work on their projects and ask
whatever questions they have.
Finally, in order to facilitate students work, the Castelldefels School of Technology provides every group of the Simulation course with a laptop for their use
during the whole semester. The laptop comes with all the necessary software
pre-installed. Students can also take advantadge of the wiﬁ network available in
most areas of the campus. Additional computers are available at the room where
sessions take place. This is a key point which facilitates meetings and work in
group.

4

Assesment

There is a separate evaluation of the activities done by students throughout the
diﬀerent blocks of the course. The whole part of the evaluation process is done
by the evaluation comission, composed by the three lecturers in charge of this
course.
The ﬁrst part of this evaluation comes from the document of the training
project delivered by students. Grades are determined by the quality of the project
and represent 10% of the ﬁnal grading.

The Simulation Course: An Innovative Way of Teaching

743

At the seventh week of the year, students take the mid-term exam which lasts
90 minutes. General or speciﬁc questions about the introduced concepts on the
physics, numerical or visualisation part are posed. Grades obtained in this exam
represent 20% of the total grading of the course.
The CFD project is evaluated from the document presented as well as from
the public presentation done by groups. In order to pass this evaluation, students have to present some predetermined results which basically serve to validate their simulations. Students are encouraged to perform additional studies in
their project in order to get higher marks. This part represents 50% of the ﬁnal
grading.
Work performed in the last block of the course is evaluated through the delivery of a short document on the project of geometry construction and meshing
with Gambit and represnets 10% of the total grading of the course.
Finally, a 10% of the grading comes from the subjective evaluation done by
the commission on the students participation in each activity.

5

Concluding Remarks

In this article the implementation of the Simulation course oﬀered at the Technical School of Castelldefels (EPSC) has been discussed. The two main innovative
aspects of the course are the use of PBL as the learning methodology and the
participation of lecturers from diﬀerent areas of expertise. The course is being
run since 2004 and the experience gathered during its past three editions lets us
draw some conclusions.
Due to the interdisciplinary nature of the course the participation of lecturers from diﬀerenet areas of expertise ﬁts quite naturally. This is uncommon in
the Spanish university context where each course is usually assigned to a single
department. We believe that this is good for both lecturers and students. Lecturers become more familiar with the activities carried out by their colleagues
and students are provided with a broader view of the diﬀerent course topics.
This aspect is also positively valued by students. The main challenge that must
be addressed is an adequate coordination of lecturers, so that students face a
steady and manageable workload. Also care needs to be taken in order to provide
students with a common view regarding all aspects of the course.
The PBL approach clearly makes students more engaged with the course.
Being confronted with a challenging and realistic project is encouraging, they
percieve their learning as a direct consequence of their personal eﬀort and, at
the end of the course, they feel more satisﬁed. As a consequence of working in
a “real” project, students also think that acquired knowledge may be useful in
their academical or professional future.
In respect to the use of Linux and other free and open-source software there
are some complains mostly regarding the availability of Linux at home (not all
students are willing to install a diﬀerent OS on their personal computers). Besides
having a laptop available at all times, this issue has been greatly alleviated by
virtualization tools such as VirtualBox [10] and the possibility of dual booting.

744

R. Gonz´
alez-Cinca, E. Santamaria, and J.L.A. Yebra

The availability of ﬁnalized projects from previous editions and students doing little work within their group could be matters of concern. The continuous
supervision of groups work at the classroom makes both issues unlikely to pass
unpercieved and these situations have not been detected yet. A concern that
we are studying how to address is an excessive degree of specialization within
the groups. As an example, programming is not equally done among the group
members. This can be seen during the classroom sessions and is conﬁrmed by
the exam results. Also, sometimes we feel that diﬀerences among students of a
given group may not be properly reﬂexed in the ﬁnal marks.
To conclude, we are satisﬁed with the quality of most delivered projects and
with the course results in general. It is also worth noting that the studentcentered active learning approach applied in the course suits perfectly to the
methodologies shift that should accompany the adaptation process to the new
European framework.

References
1. Markham, T.: Project Based Learning, a guide to Standard-focused project based
learning for middle and high school teachers. Buck Institute for Education (2003)
2. Crawford, A., Tennant, J.: A Guide to Learning Engineering Through Projects.
University of Nottingham (2003)
3. Del Canto, P., Gallego, I., Hidalgo, R., L´
opez, J., L´
opez, J.M., Mora, J., Rodr´ıguez,
E., Santamaria, E., Valero, M.: Aprender a Programar Ordenadores mediante una
on EdMetodolog´ıa Basada en Proyectos. 18o Congreso Universitario de Innovaci´
ucativa en las Ense˜
nanzas T´ecnicas (2007)
4. KDevelop Integrated Development Environment, http://www.kdevelop.org/
5. Qt GUI Toolkit, http://trolltech.com/products/qt
6. Wang, S.-L., Sekerka, R.F., Wheeler, A.A., Murray, B.T., Coriell, S.R., Braun,
R.J., McFadden, G.B.: Physica D, 69 (1993)
7. Anderson Jr., J.D.: Computational Fluid Dynamics. The basics with applications.
McGraw-Hill, New York (1995)
8. Anderson Jr., J.D.: Fundamentals of Aerodynamics. McGraw-Hill, New York
(2001)
9. http://www.fluent.com/
10. VirtualBox, http://www.virtualbox.org/

