Improving the Introduction to a Collaborative ProjectBased Course on Computer Network Applications
Felix Freitag1, Leandro Navarro1, and Joan Manuel Marquès2
1

Computer Architecture Department, Polytechnic University of Catalonia, Spain
2
Open University of Catalonia, Spain
{felix,leandro}@ac.upc.edu, jmarquesp@uoc.edu

Abstract. In engineering studies, there is a shift to new teaching methodologies
with focus on the student involvement, like project-based learning. Projectbased learning courses, however, often relay on a previous course where the
technical background to be used in the projects is taught, requiring this way two
terms for an area. In this paper, we consider a project-based course on computer
network applications, which has been designed to cover both the technical and
non-technical content in only one term. In the three years we have been
teaching this course, our observation based on questionnaires is that the
organization of the course allows to successfully reaching the course objectives.
We feel, however, that we do not fully exploit the learning potential the course
could have in the first few weeks of the course. We describe how the course is
organized and the problems we have identified. We propose a project
demonstration tool and describe how our solution improves towards our goals.
With the proposed tool, the students should better obtain already in the very
first days of the course a clear vision about the projects, allowing fully taking
advantage of the opportunities which the course offers. format.
Keywords: Project-based learning, Course content, Tools for teaching.

1 Introduction
In 2003, the computer science curriculum of the Computer Science Faculty of
Barcelona (FIB) of the Technical University of Catalonia (UPC) in Barcelona was
revised. This revision stated that students of the computer science studies should
acquire more non-technical competences (like working in groups, the capacity to
manage projects, the oral and written presentation of work, the capacity to learn
independently a new technical context and be able to solve new problems).
In order to acquire these new non-technical competences, a number of new courses
based on projects were added to the computer science curriculum.
In this paper, we consider one of such project-based learning courses, the course
“Project on Computer Network Applications” 1 at the Computer Science Faculty of
Barcelona of the Technical University of Catalonia. Courses on Computer Network
Applications have recently gained substantial importance in many computer science
curricula, being now often part of the core subjects.
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2008, Part II, LNCS 5102, pp. 669–677, 2008.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

670

F. Freitag, L. Navarro, and J.M. Marquès

We explain how the course “Project on Computer Network Applications” is
organized in order to highlight the improvement we have identified. After three years
of teaching experience in this course, our observation based on questionnaires is that
both the technical and non-technical objectives of the course are successfully
achieved. However, from students’ feedback obtained we feel that we do not fully
exploit the learning potential the course could offer to the students in the first weeks.
We describe the potential for enhancement we have identified and explain our
solution. Our solution should provide the students already in the first days a clear
vision about the project in the course, which allows better taking advantage of the
opportunities offered by the course.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Sec. 2 we explain how the course
is organized and identify the problem. In Sec. 3 we evaluate possible solutions.
Section 4 explains the design and implementation of our solution, and discusses the
expected improvement. Finally, Sec. 5 presents our conclusions.

2 Problem Identification
2.1 Objectives of the Course
The course “Project on Computer Network Applications” in the Computer Science
Curriculum at the Computer Science Faculty of Barcelona of the Technical University
of Catalonia has the following objectives, ordered into technical and non-technical
objectives [2]:
Technical objectives
• Choose the appropriate protocol and format for a certain application.
• Design and configure application components and services.
• Define and extend elements of an application to provide services taking
into account interoperation, performance, scalability and urity.
• Install and deploy applications necessary for a certain organization.
Non-technical objectives
• Collaborative work 3, oral and written communication, work planning,
capability to find information, being able to evaluate alternatives, being
able to defend a project.
Furthermore, the course is expected to have 5 ECTS credits [4], which corresponds
to a total dedication of 125 h –150 h of the students.
2.2 Design of the Course
The technical context in which the project of this course is to be carried out, computer
network applications, is new to the students, since in the previous courses on
computer networks up to the network level is taught, but the application level is not
addressed. Within the technical context of computer network applications, the
development of a complete project in group is the main target of our course.

Improving the Introduction to a Collaborative Project-Based Course

671

Taking into account this situation, the course is organized to introduce application
layer technologies in the first part of the course to provide the basis by means of small
applications developed in laboratory sessions. While these fundamental technologies
are becoming known to the student, project groups are formed which choose a project
idea and develop a project proposal. The project proposal is prepared in parallel to the
laboratory sessions and finishes when the last laboratory sessions also finish. The
proposed project is then developed in the group in the second part of the course.
Fig. 1 shows the organization of the course. The first six weeks of the course
referring to part I include the laboratory sessions, a few session on theory, and the
project proposal. Weeks seven to fifteen, referring to part II, is dedicated to the
project development.

Weeks 1
LABORATORY

PART 1

6
7

P1: Web Server
P2: Servlets
P3: RMI
P4: XML
P5: Web Services
P6: Security

THEORY

PROJECT
PROPOSAL

• XML
• Caches/CDN
• Security
• Web Services

PROJECT
Proposal presentation

Additional activities on
• making project presentations
• reading technical papers
• writing technical documentation

PART 2
Review presentation

15

PROJECT
DEVELOPMENT

Final project presentation

Fig. 1. Schema of the organization of the course

In order to better explain the potential for improvement which we have identified,
we describe in the following more details on both parts of the course.
Course organization in the first 6 weeks
The first six weeks of the course focus on the technical foundations of application
layer networks. In the first week, groups of two students are formed for the laboratory
sessions. Six laboratory sessions are carried out where different application layer
technologies are explored by means of simple implementations. At week three, groups
of four students are formed as project groups. A project - different for each group but
within the technical context of the course - is proposed at week five by the group by
means of a written proposal and approved by the lecturer. This proposal includes,

672

F. Freitag, L. Navarro, and J.M. Marquès

among other points, the division of the project tasks into work packages and assigning
them to members of the group. A Gantt chart is made to define the temporal
distribution of the tasks.
Course organization in weeks 7 to 15
The second part of the course (part II in weeks 7-15) is dedicated to carry out the
proposed projects in groups. During this time the projects are developed. In order to
achieve the non-technical objectives of the course (see Sec. 2.1), a number of project
presentations are scheduled, periodic review meetings with the lecturer take place,
project planning and coordination is done, decisions are taken, a demonstration of the
project is run, a project presentation to the students is done, and a written project
report is elaborated. Optionally, students can realize additional activities concerning
how to make the presentation of the project, and how to read and write technical
documentation.
2.3 Problem Statement
In order to evaluate the course, we have been carrying out a questionnaire via Web
with the students at the end of each term, which provides us with feedback from the
students’ point of view. In order to get the point of view of the lecturers who teach the
course, meetings between the lecturers have been taken place.
The information gathered has led to the identification of the following three main
problems:
1.

2.

3.

Insufficient knowledge of the technologies at the beginning of the course:
Recalling the situation, different to other project-based learning courses, our
course does not have a previous course in the computer science curriculum,
which provides the technical background on computer network applications. In
the project proposal, due at week 5, this lack of sufficiently mature knowledge
makes it difficult to estimate the technologies’ impact and usage correctly.
In the first few weeks, a lack of a clear vision of what is the project in this
course: The project proposal is made at week 5 without having seen other
similar projects. The project proposal has to be made without being supported
by this knowledge.
In the first few weeks, the expected results of the project are still not clear: At
the time of the project proposal writing, students face the lack of illustrative
examples of finished projects, which could allow them assessing better what
their project should achieve. Currently, students make the project proposal at
week 5 without having this information fully clear.

3 Our Solution
The problems identified indicate the need for more information in the first few weeks
of the course concerning what is a project in the context of this course. It is clear,
however, that a solution to this problem cannot be sought by increasing the number of
hours of the course, since the student dedication to the course is already fixed and
given by the ETCS credits.

Improving the Introduction to a Collaborative Project-Based Course

673

In order to provide the project knowledge without increasing the course hours, two
alternative solutions have been identified:
Alternative 1. Organize the laboratories in part I of the course as a project.
Alternative 2. Develop a project demonstration tool available at the beginning of the
course.
Alternative 1, organize the laboratories in the first part of the course as a project,
could be reasonable in the sense that a many project proposal include these
technologies to implement different components. A particular context like in a project
could be sought and used in the laboratories, where in each of the six laboratory
sessions a component of the project is then implemented. The result would be that at
the end of part I (when at week 6 the laboratory sessions finishes), these sessions have
been carried out within the context of a project. This way, all students made a project
before developing their own project from week 7 to 15.
Alternative 2, providing a project demonstration tool to the students, is based on
the idea that already in the very first day of the course, information about projects
would be made available by such a tool. This tool could support and provide more
details about the information on projects given by the lecturer in the first sessions of
the course.
Between these alternatives providing a solution to the problem, our choice has
been the alternative 2. The main reason for deciding to develop a project
demonstration tool is the early availability of the project information to the students.
Already in the first days of the course, illustrative project information can be
accessed. On the contrary, alternative 1 would provide a more practical project
experience, however the full experience would be available after finishing the
laboratories in week 6, while the project proposal has to be written by the students
already in weeks 3 to 5.

4 Design and Implementation
4.1 User Interface
The project demonstration tool has been decided to be a web application. The user
accesses via a web browser the application server, which provides by means of the
GUI different types of project information.
Referring to the content of the user interface, the problems identified in Sec. 2.3
needs to be addressed. This means, the project application tool needs to provide
information about
1.
2.
3.

technologies for computer network applications,
provide a clear vision about what is a project in this course,
allow getting a clear picture about the results to be achieved by a project.

Fig. 2 shows a schema of the organization of the main page of the project
demonstration tool. The highlighted frames illustrate the access provided to the three
main information needs in the main page. In the frames, links to other pages
addressing the particular issue are given.

674

F. Freitag, L. Navarro, and J.M. Marquès

Project Demonstration Tool for the
Computer Network Application Course
Generic
course
information

Project demonstrations

Technologies

Case study

Fig. 2. Organization of main page of the project demonstration tool

The field on technologies allows accessing definitions and use cases of
technologies usually applied in any of the projects developed in this course.
Depending on the particular technology, information on software packages and
comparisons with related technologies is also given. Currently, information about the
following technologies is provided: Bluetooth, Peer-to-Peer, J2ME for mobile clients,
Ajax, Streaming, the Spring Framework, Apache Struts, and Hibernate.
In the field on project demonstrations, access to a number of project
demonstrations in terms of results of applications developed within real projects is
provided. These demonstrations are given as videos showing the functioning of the
different components of a project, which new students of the course can download.
Additionally, code developed within projects can be downloaded for installation,
which allows the students to personally executing the applications.
In the case study field, a link to a detailed project execution example is provided.
The case study shows by means of a concrete project example how a project is carried
out along the whole course. It shows how a project has been envisioned as first ideas
and how this leaded to a project proposal. The access to documents generated during
the project execution allows showing the progress during the project development and
the final result obtained. Perceiving the whole project development in detail allows
the students to better perceiving what a project is in the context of this course.
4.2 Architecture and Implementation
It was decided to provide the project demonstration tool as a web application.
Between different alternatives for the implementation of such an application, like
allow advanced support by Content Management Systems, taking advantage of Wiki

Improving the Introduction to a Collaborative Project-Based Course

675

platforms, taking into account the requirement of easy maintenance it was needed to
use well known technologies. Therefore, it was chosen to use Apache Tomcat as web
server, generate the presentation of the application by JSPs, use servlets for
processing the user requests, and use MySQL as the data base.
Fig. 3 shows the architecture of the application. Users are the students who use the
application and the administrator. A PC hosts the application server (Apache Tomcat)
and the database (MySQL). By design an external FTP server can be used where the
videos of the project demos are stored. The FTP server is implemented by means of
the ProFTPd tool.

User
Administrator
HTTP
HTTP

Application
Server

Data
base

FTP

FTP
Server

Fig. 3. Architecture

4.3 Prototype and Evaluation
The work plan for the development of the project demonstration tool is divided into
two phases.
The first phase started in September 2007. At time of this writing, the user
interfaces have been defined and the application has been designed. Three projects

676

F. Freitag, L. Navarro, and J.M. Marquès

have been selected as demonstrators of finished projects. The description of the
technologies they use has been made. The implementation of the first prototype has
been completed. The prototype has been deployed in January 2008 on a PC with
publicly available IP.
The second phase started in February 2008, at the time when the new course
started. The deployed prototype is available to the new students since the beginning of
this new course. This second phase focuses first on the feedback gathering from the
students and then on a final version of the application which incorporates the
suggested improvements.
In order to evaluate the usefulness of the application, the following methods are
pursued.
1.

2.

Interviews: Informal conversation between the lecturers and the students
during the project definition phase in the first weeks of the course will
provide data on the intensity of use of the application and the usefulness
perceived by the students.
Enquiry: During the course (after the project definition phase), an anonymous
enquiry via web will be launched to formally capture student’s feedback on
different aspects of the application.

Concerning the first method, the students who already used the application
indicated its usefulness and suggested to add more project demos. On the other hand,
we observed that not all students have accessed the application in the first days of the
course, which might be related to the fact that the project proposal is due still some
six weeks ahead.
4.4 Discussion on Impact
The success of the project demonstration tool should be measured by the following
impacts:
1.

2.

3.

By providing definitions and use cases of the technologies to be used in the
projects, it represents an additional source of information to the students that
will allow making technically sound project proposals already in the first
weeks of the course. It enhances the current situation in which the
technologies are shown relatively late and mainly in the context of the
laboratories of the course.
The demonstration of finished projects allows the students to make a better
estimation of the project goals and the related efforts. This will allow making
more accurate project proposals.
A detailed example of a project execution both contributes the students to
better elaborate the management part of the project in the project proposal,
and to actually carry out this management during the project execution.

4.5 Vision on Future Deployment
Considering the need to store a growing number of video demos as suggested by the
students, we will need to add dynamically additional storage capabilities to those
currently available in the PC which hosts the FTP server. We consider therefore

Improving the Introduction to a Collaborative Project-Based Course

677

adapting the hosting of the videos to the Grid storage infrastructure (VOFS) which is
currently developed within the Grid4All project [5]. This way, the FTP server will be
able to dynamically increase its storage resources if needed. It could therefore adapt
to a sudden increase of video demos which might happen by the end of the course
when a large number of student projects finishes. Another aspect of integrating part of
the application in Grid4All which is interesting for the course from an instructor point
of view is that the application itself could become a demonstrator of a Grid enabled
application.

5 Conclusions
The paper showed by means of a project-based computer network applications course,
that such courses might not fully take advantage of the learning potential available in the
first few weeks of the course, due to not providing students with sufficient practical and
illustrative examples of projects. Revising the organization of this course, the benefits of
such project information at the beginning of the course were stated.
A project demonstration tool was chosen as a solution to support the lecturer in
teaching at the beginning of the course on project related issues. It was described how
the project demonstration tool could address the current lack of practical information.
The information provided will allow the student acquiring more knowledge in the first
weeks of the course, allowing them to better exploit the course’s opportunities.
The course presented, project-based computer network applications, achieved
teaching both the technical and non-technical contents in one term. This experience
could interesting in the sense that other project-based course rely on the technical
background provided in another previous course. Our experience could motivate to
think if other project-based courses could also be enabled to cover an area in one term
instead of two in the curriculum.
Acknowledgements. This work has been partially financed by the Grid4All European
project under contract FP6-IST-034567, the Spanish Ministry of Education and
Science under contract TIN2007-68050-C03-01, FEDER funds, and the Technical
University of Catalonia.

References
1. Course Project on Computer Networks at Computer Science Faculty at UPC Barcelona,
http://www.fib.upc.edu/en/infoAca/estudis/assignatures/PXC.html
2. CRITERIA FOR ACCREDITING COMPUTING PROGRAMS. Accreditation Board for
Engineering and Technology (ABET), http://www.abet.org
3. Johnson, D.W., Johnson, R.T., Smith, K.A.: Active Learning: Cooperation in the College
Classroom (1998)
4. European Credit Transfer System, http://europa.eu.int/comm/education/
socrates/ects.html
5. Grid4all project: http://grid4all.elibel.tm.fr/

