Visual Discovery and Reconstruction of the
Climatic Conditions of the Past
Roberto Ther´
on
Departamento de Inform´
atica y Autom´
atica,
Universidad de Salamanca, Salamanca, 37008, Spain
theron@usal.es
Abstract. The development of new tools and methodologies is necessary in order to better understand current and past climatic changes,. To
be useful, these mathematical or software tools must not remain only in
the hands of specialists in statistics, but must also be usable by the larger
community of paleoclimatologists. It is therefore necessary to conceive a
user interface adapted to the specificities of their use in paleoclimatology.
Here, we propose the development of new tools of interactive analysis.
Through the combination of techniques coming from knowledge discovery
and information visualization (visual data mining), rapid and accurate
paleoclimatic reconstructions will be easier to produce.

1

Introduction

While the need to foresee abrupt climatic changes is an urgent challenge for
the society, paleoclimate research has shown that the causes and eﬀects of these
changes are very diﬀerent, with extremely rapid variations even on one-year
basis. Computers have played a key role in our understanding of the climatic
dynamics. Nowadays, the improvement of data acquisition methods oﬀer us the
opportunity to gain the needed depth of information to diagnose and prevent any
natural disaster. However, although data are available, the development of new
tools and new methodologies is necessary. If very high precision physical or chemical measurements are necessary to reconstruct paleoenvironments, they often
need to be accompanied by sophisticated statistical analysis methods ([1],[2]).
But, to be useful, these mathematical or software tools must not remain only
in the hands of specialists in statistics, but must also be usable by the larger
community of paleoclimatologists. It is therefore necessary to foster an optimal
use of these mathematical tools, by establishing methodological choices among
the most relevant and the most recent statistical methods, and to conceive a
user interface adapted to the speciﬁcities of their use in paleoclimatology.
The data registered over thousands of years (mainly in ice and sediment cores)
is an impressive source of information that, for instance, help us to model earth
and oceans dynamics [3], ﬁrst step to make climatic predictions. When looking for historic climatic data with durations exceeding decades, the largest and
This work was supported by the MCyT of Spain under Integrated Action (SpainFrance) HF2004-0277 and by the Junta de Castilla y Le´
on under project SA042/02.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part III, LNCS 3993, pp. 32–39, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

Visual Discovery and Reconstruction of the Climatic Conditions of the Past

33

oldest record is found in the oceans. Palaeoceanographers need to manipulate,
integrate and analyze time-series that are obtained from a number of independent techniques (such as ocean drilling, ocean tracers, AMC 14C datings, astronomic curves, etc.), which, moreover, are usually produced by diﬀerent researchers and/or laboratories. This work is done with the aid of proper tools
such as PaleoPlot [4] and AnalySeries [5].
Some of these data needed to understand paleoclimate are time-series of speciﬁc attributes related to the oceans. Thus, one problem scientists must face
is how to know environmental parameters, such as Sea Surface Temperature
(SST), at each given past moment. For the reconstruction of this features, isotope measurements (δ 18 O) or biomarkers (Uk37 index) have been used. On the
other hand, for the quantitative reconstruction of environmental conditions of the
past, currently the Modern Analog Technique (MAT, actually a nearest neighbor
prediction)[6], is one of the most commonly used techniques in paleoclimatology.
Although software tools for MAT have been developed [7], and some improvements have arisen such as SIMMAX [8], RAM [2] and artiﬁcial neural networks
[9], they all have a main drawback: once developed they are black boxes. Paleoclimatologists can use them but no knowledge acquisition is involved; they just
trust in the reconstructions obtained, they cannot know if the data used is valid
from a geologic point of view. Furthermore, the classic MAT method inherently
produces reconstructions whose precision is very diﬃcult to estimate [10].
Visualization provides insight through images and can be considered as a collection of application of speciﬁc mappings from the problem domain to a visual
range [11]. Thus, it is our aim to design new tailor-made methods of analysing
and viewing the paleoclimatic data that would have diﬀerent advantages and
one goal: avoiding blind reconstructions by means of well designed user driven
procedures. Through the combination of techniques coming from statistics, information theory, information visualization and visual data mining, rapid and
accurate paleoclimatic reconstructions will be easier to produce. In this paper
we show how new methods of interactive analysis can be extremely useful for
the paleoclimatic ﬁeld.
The rest of this paper is organised as follows: in section two how modern
analogs (neighbors) are found through the calculation of dissimilarity coeﬃcients
between modern and paleo data (MAT) is shown. Third section is devoted to
explain how a proper interactive analysis enables knowledge discovery and permits more accurate reconstructions. To ﬁnalize, the main conclusions and future
work are described.

2

Calculating the Distances

This section describes how PaleoAnalogs, a Java based program, improves the
modern analog technique in order to provide faster and more accurate reconstructions [12]. It is assumed that the user has faunal census estimates of one or
more fossil samples, the core ﬁle; and one or more sets of faunal data from modern
samples with the related environmental features, the database ﬁle. Furthermore,

34

R. Ther´
on

the user must understand the taxonomic categories represented in the data sets,
and be able to recognize taxa that are or may be considered equivalent in the
analysis.
The process begins after the selection of the core and database ﬁles; in general, these ﬁles will contain diﬀerent taxa (ﬁgure 1.a and ﬁgure 1.b ), both because diﬀerent taxa are prevalent in diﬀerent regions and because data providers
use varying taxonomic categories (species and subspecies), names, and abbreviations. MAT requires that corresponding variables in diﬀerent data sets be
recognizable as such, otherwise it would be impossible to calculate the distance
measures. With the help of the taxa association wizard (ﬁgure 1.c) this problem
is easily worked out, allowing the user to determine which taxa from both the
modern and fossil data ﬁles are compared, calculate proportions if needed, and
identify the environmental features to be reconstructed.

Fig. 1. Taxa association

Once the database and the core data are transformed to have the same number and equivalent taxa (ﬁgure 1.d and ﬁgure 1.f), each sample in the core is
compared with each sample in the database using a dissimilarity coeﬃcient.
Finally, using the distance measure selected by the user, a dissimilarity matrix
is built. For each core sample N dissimilarity values are given, being N the number of samples in the modern database; these values are ordered increasingly so
that each row of the matrix contains, left-to-right, the list of the N best analogs,
that is, the database samples ordered by their alikeness to that particular core
pattern.
The next step in MAT is to reconstruct the environmental conditions of each
core sample based on the environmental data of a number of best analogs (generally ten). This can be done by calculating the average value or by weighting the
analogs. However, this is somehow very strict, because some of the used analogs
could not be valid from a geologic point of view and should be eliminated.

Visual Discovery and Reconstruction of the Climatic Conditions of the Past

35

Fig. 2. Reconstruction tuning

It must be noted that the classical MAT technique only permitted to select the
number K of analogs (neighbors), normally 10, used to calculate the averaged
variables. But consider the case where only 3 of these 10 modern analogs were
actually similar to the sample being reconstructed, while the 7 remainders were
only the following most similar, and, therefore, it would be a mistake to use
them for the reconstruction from a geological point of view.
Figure 2 shows the PaleoAnalogs interactive reconstruction tool. It enables
for each sample to observe which sites have been closest. For the example in
the ﬁgure, centimeter 10 of the core (which is a particular year in the past,
depending on the sedimentation rate) is being studied. In this case the user has
considered that the diﬀerence between the dissimilarity values of the ﬁfth and
sixth analogs is not acceptable; interactively, by clicking on each point of the
graphic the analog is deselected, and the average recalculated using only the
remaining selected analogs. On the other hand, the information of each analog
is exposed, e.g. sixth analog is site C5-84-S2007, so the paleoclimatologist may
decide upon rejecting any particular analog using geological criteria that may
suggest not to use the data from that site.

3

Discovering the Past

Although the MAT method is very useful for paleoclimatic reconstruction there
is much more information that can be provided than a mere neighbor distance
calculation. Thus, before proceed with the algorithmic reconstruction further
knowledge can be easily discovered from the calculated set of analogs.
As it has been stated in the previous sections, the problem is that paleontologists can obtain reconstructions as outputs from techniques such as nearest
neighbor prediction, but no ways of knowledge acquisition are possible. However,

36

R. Ther´
on

Fig. 3. Analogs geographic distribution

if the particular case of paleoclimatology is considered, ad hoc visualization tools
may be developed, that will indeed provide insight in that forest of numeric data.
Geologists are trained for geographic visualization, and they basically face
a problem of evolution through time, so we can design an interactive visual
interface that takes advantage of both location and time.
Let’s consider the following situation (ﬁgure 3): a paleoclimatologist is studying the data obtained from a particular point in the Mediterranean Sea (the
label CORE in the ﬁgure shows that point) and the modern data comes from
the North Atlantic ocean. Instead of just calculate the temperature reconstruction, he/she can analyse ﬁrst how the analogs for a given sample (depth/age)
are distributed geographically. This can be seen in ﬁgure 3, which is the three
dimensional (longitude(x axis), latitude(y axis) and dissimilarity(color)) representation for the sample at 20 cm1 . Thus, the expert would easily see(discover)
that the studied site, t kiloyears ago had temperatures much more similar to
those of cold sites of today (blue zone of analogs in the picture) than those in
warm or polar latitudes (red zone of analogs).
Also, this representation can be done for a selected number of analogs (just
the number of analogs that will be used for the reconstruction, for instance, or
for those with dissimilarity values smaller than a cutoﬀ. Analogs can be labeled
with the associated database sample name so the expert might decide that a
particular analog is not valid for the reconstruction due to a geological reason.
A combination of visualization approaches may discover a lot of information:
choosing to show only 5 analogs, labeling each analog, zooming in and animating
the evolution of the whole core, i.e., visualizing the analog evolution through
time, we may arrive to some interesting conclusions. Thus, in ﬁgure 4 we could
start with the deepest sample in the core, i.e., t kiloyears ago: since at that age
the planet was covered with ice, we can see that the best 5 analogs are distributed
within a wide range of latitudes. As the animation is showing the evolution, we
1

Depending on the particular age model this depth will be a number of kiloyears in
the past.

Visual Discovery and Reconstruction of the Climatic Conditions of the Past

37

Fig. 4. Best analogs trough time

Fig. 5. Bull Species as an indicator of analog dissimilarity

can see that best analogs are grouped, which is the typical distribution we should
expect. The snapshot on the bottom-left shows a particular interesting situation:
four of the ﬁve analogs are grouped up north (note the blue color), while the
ﬁfth one is located at a much warmer latitude (note the red color). This analog
distribution should warn the paleoclimatologist, the most probable reason is that
the outsider is only the ﬁfth closest neighbor, but not a real neighbor, so that
particular site should not be considered in the reconstruction for that sample.
Another example (ﬁgure 5) of knowledge discovery would be that a particular
species (BULL, for instance) is valid as an analog indicator, since the dissimilarity for the sample is very high when the proportion of this species is close to
zero (all analogs in the x axis are red and have a high dissimiliraty value, while
the rest of analogs are getting more and more blue, i.e., more similar, as the
proportion of the species grows).
Finally, using speciﬁc visual techniques for the interactive analysis of multidimensional data such as Parallel Coordinates [11] (see ﬁgure 6) will improve the

38

R. Ther´
on

Fig. 6. Reconstruction visually driven by Parallel Coordinates

paleoclimatic knowledge discovery; this practice is an emerging usability issue
in geovisualization[13].

4

Conclusions and Future Work

This work is an example of how interactive analysis can help knowledge discovery in the paleoclimatology ﬁeld. We have shown how a well-known standard
technique of the ﬁeld (MAT) can be greatly improved so the reconstructions of
paleoenvironmental conditions can be more accurate. This is accomplished by
fostering a user driven reconstruction procedure where the expert get more insight from the data and can decide on the validity of potentials reconstructions.
Finally, we can add that more complex interactive analysis can be designed that
will help to gain a deeper knowledge about the climatic evolution of a given area.

References
1. Yiou, P., Baert, E., Loutre, M.F.: Spectral analysis of climate data. Surveys of
Geophysics 17(6) (1996) 619–663
2. Waelbroeck, C., Labeyrie, L., Deplessy, J., Guoit, J., Labracherie, M., Leclaire, H.,
Duprat, J.: Improving past sea surface temperature estimates based on planktonic
faunas. Paleoceanography 13 (1998) 272–283
3. Ther´
on, R., Flores, J.A., Sierro, F.J., Pelejero, C., Grimalt, J., Vaquero, M.: Using
data mining and visualization techniques for the reconstruction of ocean paleodynamics. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing
Symposium. Volume IV. (2002) 2382–2384

Visual Discovery and Reconstruction of the Climatic Conditions of the Past

39

4. Ther´
on, R., Flores, J.A., Sierro, F.J., Vaquero, M., Barbero, F.: Paleoplot: A tool
for the analysis, integration and manipulation of time-series paleorecords. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium.
Volume VI. (2002) 3528–3530
5. Paillard, D., Labeyrie, L., Yiou, P.: Macintosh program performs time-series analysis. Eos, Transactions, American Geophysical Union 77 (1996) 379
6. Hutson, W.H.: The agulhas current during the late pleistocene: Analysis of modern
faunal analogs. Science 207 (1980) 64–66
7. Schweitzer, P.N.: Analog: A program for estimating paleoclimate parameters using
the method of modern analogs. Technical Report 94-645, U. S. Geological Survey
Open-File (1994)
8. Pflaumann, U., Duprat, J., Pujol, C., Labeyrie, L.: Simmax: A modern analog
technique to deduce atlantic sea surface temperatures from planktonic foraminifera
in deep-sea sediments. Paleoceanography 11 (1996) 15–35
9. Malmgren, B.A., Kucera, M., Nyber, J., Waelbroeck, C.: Comparison of statistical
and artificial neural network techniques for estimating past sea surface temperatures from planktonic foraminifer census data. Paleoceanography 16(5) (2001)
520–530
10. Mannila, H., Toivonen, H., Korhola, A., Olander, H.: Learning, mining or modeling? a case study from paleoecology. In: Discovery Science. (1998) 12–24
11. Inselberg, A.: Visualization and knowledge discovery for high dimensional data.
In: Proceedings of the Second International Workshop on User Interfaces to Data
Intensive Systems. (2001) 5–24
12. Theron, R., Paillard, D., Cortijo, E., Flores, J.A., Vaquero, M., Sierro, F.J., Waelbroeck, C.: Rapid reconstruction of paleoenvironmental features using a new multiplatform program. Micropaleontology 50 (2004) 391–395
13. Robinson, A.C., Chen, J., Meyer, E.J., MacEachren, A.M.: Combining usability
techniques to design geovisualization tools for epidemiology. Cartography and
Geographic Information Science, 32 (2005) 243–255

