A Finite Element Model for Epidermal Wound
Healing
F.J. Vermolen1 and J.A. Adam2
1

Delft University of Technology, Delft Institute of Applied Mathematics,
Mekelweg 4, 2628 CD Delft, The Netherlands
2
Old Dominion University, Department of Mathematics and Statistics,
Norfolk, VA 23529-0077, USA
f.j.vermolen@tudelft.nl

Abstract. A ﬁnite element model for epidermal wound healing is proposed. The model takes into account the sequential steps of angiogenesis (neo-vascularization) and wound contraction (the actual healing of a
wound). An innovation in the present study is the combination of both
partially overlapping processes, yielding novel insights into the process
of wound healing. The models consist of nonlinearly coupled diﬀusionreaction equations, in which transport of oxygen, growth factors and
epidermal cells and mitosis are taken into account.
Keywords: ﬁnite elements, wound contraction, neo-vascularization.

1

Introduction

Models for bone regeneration and wound healing often rely on experiments on
animals. When a wound occurs, blood vessels are cut and blood enters the wound.
Due to coagulation of blood inside the wound, the wound is temporarily closed
and as a result the blood vessels adjacent to the wound are also closed. In due
course contaminants will be removed from the wounded area and the blood vessel network will be restored, but initially due to insuﬃcient blood supply, there
will be a low concentration of nutrients which are necessary for cell division
and wound healing. Wound healing, if it occurs, proceeds by a combination of
several processes: chemotaxis (movement of cells induced by a concentration gradient), neo-vascularization, synthesis of extracellular matrix proteins, and scar
modeling. Previous models incorporate cell mitosis, cell proliferation, cell death,
capillary formation, oxygen supply and growth factor generation, including studies by Sherratt et al. [1], Fillion et al. [2], Maggelakis [3] and Gaﬀney et al. [4],
to mention just a few. A recent work devoted to mathematical biology has been
written by Murray [5], in which the issue of wound healing is also treated. The
wound healing process can roughly be divided into the following partially overlapping consecutive stages:
1. Formation of a blood cloth on the wound to prevent undesired chemicals from
entering the tissue of the organism (blood clothing/inﬂammatory phase);
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part I, LNCS 4487, pp. 70–77, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

A Finite Element Model for Epidermal Wound Healing

71

2. Formation of a network of tiny arteries (capillaries) for blood ﬂow to supply
the necessary nutrients for wound healing;
3. Division and growth of epidermal cells (mitosis), taking place during the
actual healing of the wound (remodeling phase).
A good supply of nutrients and constituents is necessary for the process of cell
division and cellular growth. For this purpose tiny capillaries are formed during
the process of angiogenesis. Some models for capillary network formation have
been proposed by Gaﬀney et al. [4] and Maggelakis [6].
Wound contraction is modeled by Sherratt & Murray [1] who consider cell
division and growth factor generation simultaneously for healing of epidermal
wounds. Their model consists of a system of reaction-diﬀusion equations. Among
many others an alternative model, based on an active layer at the wound edge,
for wound contraction was proposed by Adam et al. [7] and for more references,
see [8]. Until now, the conditions for wound healing were only analyzed for geometries where only one spatial co-ordinate could be used. As far as we know, in all
the mathematical studies mentioned before, either neo-vascularization or wound
contraction is modeled. Hence, these processes are considered to be sequential.
However, according to the medical literature [9], these sequential processes partially overlap. Therefore, this study aims at the creation of a model in which the
stages of neo-vascularization and wound contraction are treated as sequential,
but partially overlapping processes. Hence, the key innovations in the present
study are the following: Finite Element solutions for arbitrary wound geometries; and a combination of models for angiogenesis and wound contraction as
partially overlapping consecutive processes.
The present paper is organized as follows. First, an existing model for angiogenesis (neo-vascularization) with an extension is described. This is followed
by a treatment of a model for wound contraction and a proposition of how to
combine these models. We continue with a description of the numerical method
to solve the resulting nonlinearly coupled system of partial diﬀerential equations
and present some numerical experiments, followed by some concluding remarks.

2

The Mathematical Model

In this section a model for epidermal wound healing is presented. The model
consists of neo-vascularization and wound contraction and the construction of
the model relies on a combination of the ideas developed by Maggelakis [6],
Gaﬀney et al. [4] and Sherratt and Murray [1].
2.1

Neo-vascularization

Maggelakis constructed this model on angiogenesis in 2004 [6]. It is assumed
that the tips of the capillaries act as the only sources for oxygen supply. The
domain of computation is assumed to be divided into the wound region Ωw and
the undamaged region Ωu , that is Ω = Ωw ∪Ωu ∪(Ω w ∩Ω u ) and Ωw is embedded
within Ωu . The closures of Ωw and Ωu respectively are denoted by Ω w and Ω u .

72

F.J. Vermolen and J.A. Adam

Let n and co respectively denote the capillary density and oxygen concentration
and let them be functions of time t and space within the domain of computation
Ω; then a mass balance results into the following partial diﬀerential equation
(PDE):
∂co
= Do div grad co + λn n − λo co , for x ∈ Ωw ,
(1)
∂t
subject to co (x, t) = ci for x ∈ Ω w ∩ Ω u .
The initial oxygen concentration is assumed to be zero in Ωw . The above
equation is based on the assumption that the oxygen supply and oxygen consumption depend linearly on the capillary density and oxygen concentration
respectively. When the oxygen level is low, macrophages appear at the wound
site. The macrophages release MDGF’s (macrophage derived growth factors)
which are hormones that enhance the growth of blood vessels and collagen deposition and hence help to restore the capillaries that provide the skin with the
necessary nutrients and oxygen for cell division needed for wound contraction.
An assumption in the model is that macrophages are produced if the oxygen
level is below a threshold value, say cθ . The production rate, Q, is assumed to
depend linearly on the lack of oxygen, that is
⎧
⎨1 − c0 , if c0 < cθ ,
cθ
Q = Q(c0 ) =
(2)
⎩0,
if c ≥ c .
0

θ

The mass balance of MDGF’s results into the following PDE’s in the wound
region Ωw and out of the wound region Ωu :
∂cm
= Dm div grad cm + λm Q(co ) − λcm , for x ∈ Ωw ,
∂t
∂cm
= Dm div grad cm − λc cm , for x ∈ Ωu .
∂t

(3)

The initial MDGF concentration, denoted by cm , is assumed to be zero in the
entire domain of computation Ω and a homogeneous Neumann boundary condition is used. The capillary density is assumed to grow as a result of the MDGF’s
in a logistic manner, that is
n
∂n
), for x ∈ Ω,
= Dn div grad n + μcm n(1 −
∂t
nm

(4)

where nm denotes the maximum capillary density. The capillary density is assumed to satisfy the following initial condition
n(x, 0) =

0,
nm ,

for x ∈ Ωw ,
for x ∈ Ωu .

(5)

A homogeneous Neumann boundary condition is used for n. We assume the
capillary tips to migrate via a random walk. This random walk was not incorporated into Maggelakis’ model but it was extended with a bias in Gaﬀney’s model.

A Finite Element Model for Epidermal Wound Healing

73

Further, Gaﬀney et al. [4] distinguish between the capillaries and the capillary
tips. The bias is neglected in this paper but it will be dealt with in the future
work to be presented in the talk. But it is reasonable since away from the wound
the capillary network is assumed to be undamaged. Further, Maggelakis sets in
a nonzero artiﬁcial starting value for the capillary density to have the capillary
density to increase up to the equilibrium value. Analytic solutions are considered
in [6] for the above equations under the assumptions that the diﬀusion of oxygen
and growth factors is instantaneous and that Dn = 0. The induced growth of
MDGF’s due to a lack of oxygen can be classiﬁed as a negative feedback mechanism. In the presentation we will extend this model with model hypotheses due
to Gaﬀney et al. [4] who incorporate the interaction of the capillary tip density
with the endothelial cell density and use a biased random walk resulting into
nonlinear cross diﬀusion.
2.2

Wound Contraction

The mechanism for wound contraction is cell division and growth (mitosis).
This mechanism is triggered by a complicated system of growth factors. In the
present model we use the simpliﬁcation that wound contraction is inﬂuenced by
one generic growth factor only. The growth factor concentration inﬂuences the
production of epidermal cells. Following Sherratt and Murray [1], we assume
that the main source of growth factors is the epidermal cells. Growth factors
diﬀuse through the tissue region and the concentration decays due to reactions
with other chemicals present in the tissue. Further, the epidermal cells need the
supply of nutrients by the capillaries in order to be able to grow and divide. A
constant blood ﬂow through the capillaries is assumed, hence, the mitotic rate
can be related to capillary density n. The mitotic rate is assumed to depend on
the capillary density in a nonlinear fashion by a function φp (y), given by
φp (y) =

yp
,
(1 − y)p + y p

(6)

where p is assumed to be positive. Herewith, the expression of Sherratt and Murray where the accumulation of the epidermal cells is determined by proliferation
(diﬀusive transport), mitosis and cell death, is adjusted to
n
m
∂m
= D1 div grad m + φp (
)s(c)m(2 −
) − km,
∂t
nm
m0
subject to m(x, t) = m,
ˆ for x ∈ Ω w ∩ Ω u .

x ∈ Ωw ,

(7)

in order to depend on the capillary density. In the above equation m = m(x, t)
and c = c(x, t) respectively denote the epidermal cell density and growth factor concentration. The function s = s(c) is a nonlinear function of the growth
concentration describing the mitotic rate, see [5, 1]. For the growth factor accumulation a similar relationship due to diﬀusive transport, production and decay
is obtained with a similar adaptation for the dependence of the capillary density:
n
∂c
= D2 div grad c + φp (
)f (m) − λc,
∂t
nm
subject to c(x, t) = cˆ, for x ∈ Ω w ∩ Ω u .

x ∈ Ωw .

(8)

74

F.J. Vermolen and J.A. Adam

As initial conditions for m and c we have m(x, 0) = 0 and c(x, 0) = 0. In the
above equation f (m) denotes a nonlinear relation for the growth factor regeneration. In the model due to Sherratt and Murray, two diﬀerent types of growth
factors are considered: 1. activators; and 2. inhibitors, both with their characteristic functions for s and f . We assume that within the wound initially m = c = 0
and at the wound edge, m = m0 and c = c0 . Hence we want the initial state to
be unstable and the boundary conditions to be stable, so that the functions m
and c converge to the values of the boundary conditions m0 and c0 as t → ∞. In
other words, the unwounded state is stable with respect to small perturbations,
whereas the wounded state is unstable. Note that the capillary density from
the neo-vascularization model described in the previous subsection is needed.
Furthermore, limp→∞ φp (y) = u1/2 (y), which is in the class of Heaviside functions with the jump at y = 1/2. The behavior is motivated by the intuitively
obvious notion that the mitotic rate and production rate of the growth factors
increase with the capillary density. The rest of the equations remains the same.
The present coupling between the two models is an innovation and will be evaluated during the presentation. Further, the model will be extended to include
the interaction of the capillary density with the endothelial cell density, which
is the building block of the capillaries. A further future implementation is the
feedback from the contraction model to the neo-vascularization model.

3

Numerical Method

The numerical method is explained for the wound contraction model since this
model contains most of the diﬃculties. To solve the system of partial diﬀerential
equations a ﬁnite element strategy is used. In the presentation the solution and
a discussion of the entire set of model equations will be considered. In this
section we present the solution method for our preliminary results consisting
of the solution of the equations of Sherratt and Murray. Piecewise linear basis
functions are used for the triangular elements with a Newton-Cotes integration,
which makes the mass matrix diagonal. For the time integration method, we use
the following IMEX method:
mk
mk+1
=M
+ D1 Smk+1 + M1 (mk , ck )mk+1 ,
Δt
Δt
ck+1
ck
M
=M
+ D2 Sck+1 − λM ck+1 + bk .
Δt
Δt

M

(9)

Here M and S respectively denote the mass and stiﬀness matrices. By the use
of the Newton-Cotes integration rule, the element mass matrix for M1 becomes
for an element Ωε surrounded by nodes i, j and p:
M1Ωε =

|Δ|
diag(s(ckα )(2 − nkα )), for α ∈ {i, j, p},
6

(10)

A Finite Element Model for Epidermal Wound Healing

75

where |Δ|
2 represents the area of the triangular element. The α-th component of
the element vector for b becomes
|Δ|
(f (nkα )), for α ∈ {i, j, p}.
6
These functions have been implemented within the package SEPRAN.
ε
bΩ
α =

4

(11)

Preliminary Results

Since the thickness of human skin is in the order of a millimeter, the model can
be considered as two-dimensional. First, we show some ﬁnite element results for
a circular wound with radius 1 of the neo-vascularization model. Our simulations
indicate that the oxygen and growth factor concentrations reach the steady-state
solution rapidly. This conﬁrms the assumption under which Maggelakis found
the analytic solutions. The capillary tip density exhibits a transient behavior.
Due to diﬀusion, the tip density decreases for a while outside the wound region,
whereas it increases at all stages within the wound region. As time proceeds, it
converges towards its equilibrium value. The results are not shown in the present
paper.
Subsequently, we consider the actual wound contraction time, where we assume the neo-vascularization process to have taken place entirely, as a function
of the aspect ratio of rectangular and elliptic wounds. The aspect ratio is deﬁned
by the ratio of the length and the width for a rectangular wound and by the
ratio of the longer and shorter axis for elliptic wounds. Following Sherratt &
Murray [1] the wound edge is identiﬁed by the level curve n = 0.8. In Figure
1 we show the healing time as a function of the aspect ratio for ellipsoidal and
circular wounds. It can be seen that the width of the wound is the most important factor to determine the healing time. However, the relation is not linear,
the decrease of the healing time as a function of the aspect ratio is much less
than for the linear case.
Subsequently, when the models are combined, the full system of PDE’s is
solved, and the inﬂuence of the oxygen production on the healing rate is shown
in Figure 2. For larger values of λo wound healing slows down. This is caused
by the decrease of the MDGF growth factor concentration as more oxygen is
supplied. The decrease of MDGF growth factors, decreases the speed of capillary
formation and hence the supply of nutrients needed for cell division in the wound
contraction process deteriorates. This results into a delay of mitosis, and hence
the wound contraction slows down. Finally, the inﬂuence of the capillary density
on the healing time is investigated. The inﬂuence is quantiﬁed by the power p
in the function φp (y). For 0 < p < 1 the inﬂuence is large for n/nm < 0.5 and
small elsewhere. For p > 1, the behavior is opposite. The calculations, not shown
here, result into a strange behavior for 0 < p ≤ 1 that the wound heals from the
edge at the early stages and starts healing from the wound center at the later
stages. This behavior is not realistic. Note that p = 1 corresponds to a linear
coupling. For p > 1 the wound only heals from the edge, which is more realistic

76

F.J. Vermolen and J.A. Adam
1

normalized healing time

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

Elliptic wound
0.4

Rectangular wound
0.3

0.2

0.1

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

LOG (aspect ratio)

3

2

5

2.6

4.5

2.4

normalized healing time

normalized healing time

Fig. 1. Healing times as a function of the aspect ratio of rectangular and ellipsoidal
wounds with the same area

4

3.5

3

2.5

2

1.5

1
−1
10

2.2

2

1.8

1.6

1.4

1.2

0

10

1

2

10

oxygen regeneration coefficient λ

n

10

1
0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

Power (p)

Fig. 2. Circular wound:Left: The inﬂuence of oxygen production on the healing time
(p = 5); Right: The inﬂuence of the power p in φ on the healing time (λo = 0.1)

from an intuitive point of view. Therefore, the expectation is that p > 1 reﬂects
the right behavior. For the input values we used the same values as Sherratt and
Murray [1] and Maggelakis [6].

5

Conclusions

Some preliminary results for a wound healing model have been presented. An
innovation in this paper is the assumption to allow overlapping between the
processes of neo-vascularization and wound contraction. During the presentation
further extensions to the neo-vascularization model will be discussed and the

A Finite Element Model for Epidermal Wound Healing

77

coupling between the two models will be analyzed in more detail. In this paper
the nonlinear impact of the aspect ratio of the wound on the healing time is also
demonstrated. In future work (to be presented in the talk) the model will be
extended with tip-sprout interaction (anastomosis) and a biased random walk,
resulting into cross diﬀusion.

References
1. Sherratt, J.A., Murray, J.D.: Mathematical analysis of a basic model for epidermal
wound healing, J. Math. Biol., 29 (1991), 389–404.
2. Filion, J., Popel, A.P.: A reaction diﬀusion model of basic ﬁbroblast growth factor
interactions with cell surface receptors, Annals of Biomed. Engng., 32(5) (2004),
645–663.
3. Maggelakis, S.A.: A mathematical model for tissue replacement during epidermal
wound healing, Appl. Math. Modell., 27(3) (2003), 189–196.
4. Gaﬀney, E.A., Pugh, K., Maini, P.K.: Investigating a simple model for cutaneous
wound healing angiogenesis, J. Math. Biol,, 45 (4) (2002), 337–374.
5. Murray, J.D.: Mathematical biology II: spatial models and biomedical applications,
Springer-Verlag, New York, 2004.
6. Maggelakis, S.A.: Modeling the role of angiogenesis in epidermal wound healing,
Discr. and Cont. Sys., 4 (2004), 267–273.
7. Adam, J.A.: A simpliﬁed model of wound healing (with particular reference to the
critical size defect), Math. and Comput. Modell., 30 (1999), 23–32.
8. Vermolen, F.J., van Rossum, W.G., Javierre, E., Adam, J.A.: Modeling of selfhealing of skin tissue, in: Self-healing materials, Springer-Verlag, to appear, 2007.
9. Stadelman, W.K., Digenis, A.G., Tobin, G.R.: Physiology and healing dynamics
of chronic cutaneous wounds, The American Journal of Surgery, 176(2) (1997),
265–385.

