A XKMS-Based Security Framework for Mobile Grid
into the XML Web Services
Namje Park, Kiyoung Moon, Jongsu Jang, and Sungwon Sohn
Information Security Research division
Electronics Telecommunications research Institute (ETRI)
161 Gajeong-Dong, Yuseong-Gu, Daejeon, 305-350, Korea
{namejepark,kymoon,jsjang,swsohn}@etri.re.kr

Abstract. Mobile Grid, or Wireless Grid Services refers to value-added Grid
Service by processing in Mobile environment. Besides Mobile Internet the
traditional Internet computing is experiencing a conceptual shift from ClientServer model to Grid and Peer-to-Peer computing models. As these trends,
Mobile Internet and the Grid, are likely to find each other the resource
constraints that Wireless devices pose today affect the level of interoperability
between them. The goal of this paper is to investigate how well the most limited
Wireless devices can make use of Grid Security Services. This paper describes
a novel security approach on Mobile Grid Services to validate certificate based
on current Mobile XML Web Services Platform environment using XKMS
(XML Key Management Specification) and SAML (Security Assertion Markup
Language), XACML (extensible Access Control Markup Language) in XML
Security mechanism.

1 Introduction
Grid Computing emerges as a technology for coordinated large-scale resource sharing
and problem solving among many autonomous groups. In Grid’s resource model, the
resource sharing relationships among virtual organizations are dynamic. However,
Grid requires a stable quality of service provided by virtual organizations and the
changing of sharing relationship can never happen frequently. This model works for a
conventional distributed environment but is challenged in the highly variational
wireless mobile environment[3].
Besides Mobile Internet the traditional Internet computing is experiencing a
conceptual shift from Client-Server model to Grid and Peer-to-Peer computing
models. As these trends, Mobile Internet and the Grid, are likely to find each other the
resource constraints that Wireless devices pose today affect the level of
interoperability between them[2].
Grid is the umbrella that covers many of today’s distributed computing
technologies. Grid technology attempts to support flexible, secure, coordinated
information sharing among dynamic collections of individuals, institutions, and
resources. This includes data sharing but also access to computers, software and
devices required by computation and data-rich collaborative problem solving. So far
the use of Grid services has required a modern workstation, specialized software
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3038, pp. 124–132, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

A XKMS-Based Security Framework for Mobile Grid into the XML Web Services

125

installed locally and expert intervention. In the future these requirements should
diminish considerably. One reason is the emergence of Grid Portals as gateways to
the Grid. Another reason is the ’Web Service’ boom in the industry. The use of XML
as a network protocol and an integration tool will ensure that future Grid peer could
be a simple wireless device[2,3].
Furthermore, open Mobile Grid service infrastructure will extend use of the Grid
technology or services up to business area using Web Services technology. Therefore
differential resource access is a necessary operation for users to share their resources
securely and willingly. Therefore, this paper describes a novel security approach on
open Mobile Grid service to validate certificate based on current Mobile Grid
environment using XKMS (XML Key Management Specification) and SAML
(Security Assertion Markup Language), XACML (eXtensible Access Control Markup
Language) in XML(eXtensible Markup Language) security mechanism.
This paper is organized as follows. First we investigate related work on Grid and
mobile web service, XML web service security. Then we propose a design of security
system platform for open mobile Grid service and explain experimented XKMS
model for certificate validation service. Finally, we explain function of system and
then we conclude this paper.

2 Mobile XML Web Services
A mobile XML web service can feature one of the following architectures: wireless
portal network, wireless extended Internet, or wireless ad hoc network.
In a wireless portal network, the wireless information devices connect to the
Internet backend services through portal entry points. The portal creates a "walled
garden" and controls access to Internet contents. Wireless portal networks support
widely deployed thin-client wireless technology, such as WAP (Wireless Application
Protocol). The portal receives the message, checks the user's privilege, and then
translates the request to a SOAP (Simple Object Access Protocol) message or an
XML-RPC call to an appropriate partner web service. The web service replies, and
the portal translate the response back to a WML (Wireless Markup Language)
document. The portal sends the WML document back to the wireless device for
display. In this way, the portal works as a proxy for wireless users. The portal
operator provides user authorization and management services. Many partner vendors can
provide real application web services under the ASP (Application Service Provider)
model.
Wireless extended Internet is the wired Internet's expansion to wireless devices.
Wireless information devices can have their own IP addresses (through Internet
Protocol 6) and full network functionalities. Those devices usually run smart, fat
clients that interact with multiple backend services simultaneously and store/process
application data on the device. Smart devices support sophisticated user interfaces,
offline processing, and automatic transactions. They can also implement flexible,
application-specific security policies. Like the Internet itself, the wireless extended
Internet architecture is decentralized and eliminates any single point of failure.
However, as you will see later, centralized web services hubs are still required to
support advanced security schemes and user interfaces. Unlike the portal architecture,
the hubs themselves can be decentralized. Different vendors can provide similar hub

126

N. Park et al.

Fig. 1. Mobile Web Services Architecture

services that can interoperate with each other. Fig. 1 shows a topography diagram for
such networks.
The extended wireless Internet architectures blended with decentralized hub web
services will provide the foundation for future wireless web services applications, an
approach we focus on throughout this article. Since most of the supporting
technologies are just emerging, many challenges prevail.
The wireless ad hoc networks allow wireless devices to become servers to peers.
Wireless peers can provide content, network traffic routing, and many other services.
The ad hoc network truly leverages wireless networks' dynamic nature. However,
because wireless peer-to-peer technology is still embryonic, its many performance
and security issues must be solved before it can be widely used.

3 Security Framework for Providing Secure Open Mobile Grid
Web services can be used to provide mobile security solutions by standardizing and
integrating leading security solutions using XML messaging. XML messaging is
referred to as the leading choice for a wireless communication protocol and there are
security protocols for mobile applications based upon it. Among them are the follows.
SAML is a protocol to transport authentication and authorization information in an
XML message. It could be used to provide single sign on web services. XML
signatures define how to digitally sign part or all of an XML document to guarantee
data integrity. The public key distributed with XML signatures can be wrapped in
XKMS formats. XML encryption allows applications to encrypt part or all of an XML
document using references to pre-agreed symmetric keys. The WS-Security, endorsed
by IBM and Microsoft, is a complete solution to provide security to web services. It is
based on XML signatures, XML encryption, and an authentication and authorization
scheme similar to SAML. When a mobile device client requests access to a back-end
application, it sends authentication information to the issuing authority. The issuing
authority can then send a positive or negative authentication assertion depending upon
the credentials presented by the mobile device client. While the user still has a session
with the mobile applications, the issuing authority can use the earlier reference to
send an authentication assertion stating that the user was, in fact, authenticated by a

A XKMS-Based Security Framework for Mobile Grid into the XML Web Services

127

Fig. 2. Security Service Model for Open Mobile Grid Middleware

particular method at a specific time. As mentioned earlier, location-based
authentication can be done at regular time intervals, which means that the issuing
authority gives out location-based assertions periodically as long as the user
credentials make for a positive authentication.
CVM (Certificate Validation Module) in XKMS system perform path validation on
a certificate chain according to the local policy and with local PKI (Public Key
Infrastructure) facilities, such as certificate revocation (CRLs) or through an OCSP
(Online Certificates Status Protocol). In the CVM, a number of protocols (OCSP,
SCVP, and LDAP) are used for the service of certificate validation. For processing
the XML client request, certificate validation service from OCSP, LDAP
(Lightweight Directory Access Protocol), SCVP (Simple Certificate Validation
Protocol) protocols in XKMS based on PKI are used. The XKMS client generates an
‘XKMS validate’ request. This is essentially asking the XKMS server to go and find
out the status of the server’s certificate. The XKMS server receives this request and
performs a series of validation tasks e.g. X.509 certificate path validation. Certificate
status is determined. XKMS server replies to client application with status of the
server’s certificate and application acts accordingly. Using the OCSP protocol, the
CVM obtained certificate status information from other OCSP responders or other
CVMs. Using the LDAP protocol, the CVM fetched CRL (Certificate Revocation
List) from the repository. And CA (Certificate Authority) database connection
protocol (CVMP;CVM Protocol) is used for the purpose of that the server obtains
real-time certificate status information from CAs. The client uses OCSP and SCVP.
With XKMS, all of these functions are performed by the XKMS server component.
Thus, there is no need for LDAP, OCSP and other registration functionality in the
client application itself.

128

N. Park et al.

Fig. 3. Security Protocol for Secure Open Mobile Grid Service

4 Mobile Grid Application Security Protocol
Three types of principals are involved in our protocol: Mobile Grid application
(server/client), SAML processor, and XKMS server (including PKI). Proposed
invocation process for secure Mobile Grid security service consists of two parts:
initialization protocol and invocation protocol. The initialization protocol is
prerequisite for invoking Grid web services securely. Through the initialization
protocol, all principals in our protocol set up security environments for their web
services, as shown in fig. 3. The flow of setting up security environments is as
follows.
The client first registers its information for using web services, and then gets its
id/password that will be used for verifying its identity when it calls web services via
secure channel. Then, the client gets SAML assertions and installs security module to
configure its security environments and to make a secure SOAP message. It then
generates a key pair for digital signature, and registers its public key to a CA.
The client creates a SOAP message, containing authentication information, method
information, and XML signature, XML encrypts it, and then sends it to a server. The
message is in following form: Encsession(Envelope (Header(SecurityParameters,
Sigclient(Body)) + Body(Method, Parameters)))), where Sigx(y) denotes the result of
applying x’ s private key function (that is, the signature generation function) to y. The
protocol shown in fig. 4 shows the use of end-to-end bulk encryption[12]. The
security handlers in server receive the message, decrypt it, and translate it by
referencing security parameters in the SOAP header. To verify the validity of the
SOAP message and authenticity of the client, the server first examines the validity of
the client’s public key using XKMS. If the public key is valid, the server receives it
from CA and verifies the signature. The server invokes web services after completion

A XKMS-Based Security Framework for Mobile Grid into the XML Web Services

129

Fig. 4. Security Message Flow using XKMS in Open Mobile Grid Middleware

of examining the security of the SOAP message. It creates a SOAP message, which
contains result, signature, and other security parameters. Then, it encrypts the
message using a session key and sends it back to the client. Lastly, the client
examines the validity of the SOAP message and server, and then receives the
result[14,15].
In current Grid service, there is no mechanism of differential resource access. To
establish such a security system we are seeking, a standardized policy mechanism is
required. We employ the XACML specification to establish the resource policy
mechanism that assigns differential policy to each resource (or service). SAML also
has the policy mechanism while XACML provides very flexible policy mechanism
enough to apply to any resource type. For our implementing model, SAML provides a
standardized method to exchange the authentication and authorization information
securely by creating assertions from output of XKMS (e.g. assertion validation service
in XKMS). XACML replaces the policy part of SAML as shown in fig 4.
Once the three assertions are created and sent to the protected resource, there is no
more verification of the authentication and authorization at the visiting site. This, SSO
(Single Sign-On), is a main contribution of SAML in distributed security systems.
Fig. 4 shows the flow of SAML and XACML integration for differential resource
access. Once assertions are done from secure identification of the PKI trusted service,
send the access request to the policy enforcement point (PEP) server (or agent) and
send to the context handler. Context handler parses the attribute query and sends it to
PIP (policy information point) agent. The PIP gathers subject, resource and
environment attributes from local policy file, and the context handler gives the
required target resource value, attribute and resource value to PDP (policy decision
point) agent. Finally, the PDP decides access possibility and send context handler so
that PEP agent allow or deny the request[10,13].

130

N. Park et al.

Fig. 5. Package Library Architecture of XKMS Server System based on CAPI

Fig. 6. Testbed Configuration of XKMS Component for Open Grid

5 Design of Mobile Grid Application Key Management Using
XKMS
XKMS has been implemented based on the design described in previous section.
Package library architecture of XKMS based on CAPI (Cryptographic Application
Programming Interface) is illustrated in fig. 5.
Components of the XKMS are XML security library, service components API,
application program. Although XKMS service component is intended to support
XML applications, it can also be used in order environments where the same
management and deployment benefits are achievable. XKMS has been implemented
in Java and it runs on JDK (Java Development Kit) ver. 1.3 or more.
The figure for representing Testbed architecture of XKMS service component is as
follows fig. 6. We use Testbed system of windows PC environment to simulate the
processing of various service protocols. The protocols have been tested on pentium 3
and pentium 4 PCs. It has been tested on windows 2000 server, windows XP.

A XKMS-Based Security Framework for Mobile Grid into the XML Web Services

131

Java 2, Micro Edition (J2ME) is a set of technologies and specifications developed
for small devices like smart cards, pagers, mobile phones, and set-top boxes. J2ME
uses subset of Java 2, Standard Edition (J2SE) components, like smaller virtual
machines and leaner APIs. J2ME has categorized wireless devices and their
capabilities into profiles: MIDP, PDA and Personal. MIDP and PDA profiles are
targeted for handhelds and Personal profile for networked consumer electronic and
embedded devices. As the technology progresses in quantum leaps any strict
categorization is under threat to become obsolete. It is already seen that J2ME
Personal profile are being used in high-end PDAs such as PocketPCs and Mobile
Communicators. We will concentrate on the most limited category of wireless J2ME
devices that use Mobile Information Device Profile (MIDP). Applications that these
devices understand are Midlets. Typically maximum size of a midlet varies from 3050kbs and user can download four to six applications to his mobile phone. Midlet is a
JAR-archive conforming to the Midlet content specification[2].
The XKMS server is composed server service component of XKMS platform
package. And the message format is based on Specification of W3C (World Wide
Web Consortium).

6 Conclusion
Mobile Grid services are so attractive that they can cover all walks of life. However,
current Grid is growing slower than expected. Many problems like accuracy, privacy,
security, customer requirement have to be addressed. It should be understood that
there is no single universal solution to Grid.
We propose a novel security approach on open Grid to validate certificate based on
current Grid security environment using XKMS and SAML, XACML in XML
security. This service model allows a client to offload certificate handling to the
server and enable to provide central administration of XKMS polices. In order to
obtain timely certificate status information, the server uses several methods such as
CRL, OCSP etc. Our approach will be a model for the future security system that
offers security of open Grid security.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

XML Key Management Specification Version 2.0 (W3C Working Draft), April 2003.
Miika Tuisku, Wireless Java-enabled MIDP devices as peers in Grid infrastructure,
Helsinki Institute of Physics, CERN.
Ye Wen, Mobile Grid Major area examination, University of California, 2002.
E. Faldella and M.Prandini, A Novel Approach to On-Line Status Authentication of Public
th
Key Certificates, in Proc. the 16 Annual Computer Security Applications Conference,
Dec 2000.
Y. Elley, A. Anderson, S. Hanna, S. Mullan, R. Perlman and S. Proctor, Building
Certification Paths: Forward vs. Reverse, Proc. the Network and Distributed System
Security Symposium Conference, 2001.
M. Naor and K. Nissim, Certificate Revocation and Certificate Update, IEEE Journal on
Selected Areas in Communications, 18 (4) (2000).
Jonghyuk Roh et. Al., Certificate Path Construction and Validation in CVS, KICS-Korea
IT Forum, 2002.

132
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.

N. Park et al.
M. Prandini, Efficient Certificate Status Handling within PKIs: an Application to Public
th
Administration Services, in Proc. the 15 Annual Computer Security Applications
Conference, 1999.
Donald E, Eastlake, Kitty Niles, Secure XML, Pearson addsion wesley, 2003.
Namje Park et. Al., Certificate Validation Scheme of Open Grid Service Usage XKMS,
GCC 2003, 2003.
Euinam Huh, Jihye Kim, Hyeju Kim, Kiyoung Moon, Policy based on Grid security
infrastructure implementation for dirrerential resource access, ISOC 2003, 2003.
Yuichi Nakamur, et. Al., Toward the Integration of web services security on enterprise
environments, IEEE SAINT ’02, 2002.
Diana Berbecaru, Antonio Lioy, Towards Simplifying PKI Implementation: Client-Server
based Validation of Public Key Certificates, IEEE ISSPIT 2002, pp.277-281.
Jose L. Munoz et. Al., Using OCSP to Secure Certificate-Using transactions in MCommerce. LNCS 2846 (2003) 280-292.
Sungmin Lee et. Al., TY*SecureWS:An integrated Web Service Security Solution based
on java, LNCS 2738 (2003) 186-195.

