Real-Time Data Driven Wildland Fire Modeling
Jonathan D. Beezley1,2 , Soham Chakraborty3, Janice L. Coen2 ,
Craig C. Douglas3,5 , Jan Mandel1,2 , Anthony Vodacek4 , and Zhen Wang4
1

2

University of Colorado Denver, Denver, CO 80217-3364, USA
{jon.beezley.math,jan.mandel}@gmail.com
National Center for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, CO 80307-3000, USA
janicec@ucar.edu
3
University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40506-0045, USA
{sohaminator,craig.c.douglas}@gmail.com
4
Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, NY 14623-5603, USA
{vodacek,zxw7546}@cis.rit.edu
5
Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520-8285, USA

Abstract. We are developing a wildland ﬁre model based on semiempirical relations that estimate the rate of spread of a surface ﬁre and
post-frontal heat release, coupled with WRF, the Weather Research and
Forecasting atmospheric model. A level set method identiﬁes the ﬁre
front. Data are assimilated using both amplitude and position corrections
using a morphing ensemble Kalman ﬁlter. We will use thermal images
of a ﬁre for observations that will be compared to synthetic image based
on the model state.
Keywords: Dynamic data driven application systems, data assimilation, wildland ﬁre modeling, remote sensing, ensemble Kalman ﬁlter,
image registration, morphing, level set methods, Weather Research and
Forecasting model, WRF.

1

Introduction

We describe the current state of a new dynamic data-driven wildland ﬁre simulation based on real-time sensor monitoring. The model will be driven by real-time
data from airborne imagery and ground sensors. It will be run on remote supercomputers or clusters.
An earlier summary of this project is in [1], where we have used a regularization approach in an ensemble Kalman ﬁlter (EnKF) for wildﬁres with a ﬁre
model by reaction-diﬀusion-convection partial diﬀerential equations [2,3].
Level set methods were applied to empirical ﬁre spread also in [4], without a
coupling with the atmosphere or data assimilation. The Morphing EnKF [5] is
related to data assimilation by alignment [6].

2

Coupled Fire-Atmosphere Model

The work reported in this section was done in [7], where more details can be found.
Our code implements in a simpliﬁed numerical framework the mathematical ideas
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2008, Part III, LNCS 5103, pp. 46–53, 2008.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

Real-Time Data Driven Wildland Fire Modeling

47

in [8]. Instead of tracking the ﬁre by a custom ad hoc tracer code, it is now represented using a level set method [9]. Also, the ﬁre model is now coupled with WRF,
a community supported numerical weather prediction code. This adds capabilities to the codes used in previous work such as the theoretical experiments of [8]
and the reanalysis of a real ﬁre in [10]. We use features of WRF’s design to get a
natural parallelization of the ﬁre treatment and its support for data assimilation.

Fig. 1. Coupled ﬁre-atmosphere simulation. Fire propagates from two line ignitions
and one circle ignition, which are in the process of merging. The arrows are horizontal
wind at ground level. False color is ﬁre heat ﬂux. The ﬁre front on the right has irregular
shape and is slowed down because of air being pulled up by the heat created by the
ﬁre. This kind of ﬁre behavior cannot be modeled by empirical spread models alone.

We use a semi-empirical ﬁre propagation model to represent a ﬁre spreading on
→
the surface [8,11] . Given the wind speed −
v , terrain height z, and fuel coeﬃcients
R0 , a, b, and d, determined from laboratory experiments, the model postulates
that the ﬁreline evolves with the spread rate S in the normal direction to the
→
ﬁreline −
n given by
b
→
→
→
S = R + a (−
v ·−
n ) + d∇z · −
n.
(1)
0

48

J.D. Beezley et al.

We further limit the spread rate to satisfy 0 ≤ S ≤ Smax , where Smax depends
on the fuel. Based on laboratory experiments, the model further assumes that
after ignition the fuel amount decreases as an exponential function of time with
the characteristic time scale depending on the fuel type, e.g., rapid mass loss
in grass and slow mass loss in larger fuel particles (e.g., downed branches).
The model delivers the sensible and the latent heat ﬂuxes (temperature and
water vapor) from the ﬁre to the atmosphere. The heat ﬂuxes are taken to be
proportional to the amount of fuel burned, again with the coeﬃcients determined
from laboratory experiments.
We use a level set method for the ﬁre propagation. The burning area at time
t is represented by the level set {(x, y) : ψ (x, y, t) < 0}, where ψ is called the
level set function. The ﬁreline at time t is the level set {(x, y) : ψ (x, y, t) = 0}.
The level set function is initialized as the signed distance from the ﬁreline.
The level set function satisﬁes the diﬀerential equation [9]
∂ψ
+ S ∇ψ = 0
∂t

(2)

which is solved numerically by the Runge-Kutta method or order two,
ψn+1 = ψn + Δt [F (ψn ) + F (ψn + ΔtF (ψn ))] /2

(3)

with F (ψ) ≈ −S ∇ψ , using an approximation of ∇ψ from upwinded approximation of ∇ψ by Godunov’s method [9, p. 58]: each partial derivative is
approximated by the left diﬀerence if both the left and the central diﬀerences are
nonnegative, by the right diﬀerence if both the right and the central diﬀerences
are nonpositive, and taken as zero otherwise. It is advantageous that the propa→
gation speed S is deﬁned by (1) with −
n = ∇ψ/ ∇ψ on the whole domain, not
just on the ﬁreline, so it can be used directly in the diﬀerential equation (2). We
use (3) for its better conservation properties, not its accuracy. The explicit Euler
method, the obvious ﬁrst choice, systematically overestimates ψ and thus slows
down ﬁre propagation or even stops it altogether while (3) behaves reasonably
well.
The ﬁre model is two-way coupled with the atmospheric model, using the
horizontal wind velocity components to calculate the ﬁre’s heat ﬂuxes, which in
turn alter atmospheric conditions such as winds. WRF meshes can be reﬁned
only horizontally; only the ﬁnest atmospheric mesh interfaces with the ﬁre. In our
experiments to date, we have used time step 0.5s with the 60m ﬁnest atmospheric
mesh step and 6m ﬁre mesh step, which satisﬁed the CFL stability conditions
in the ﬁre and in the atmosphere.
Because WRF does not support ﬂux boundary conditions, the heat ﬂux from
the ﬁre model cannot be applied directly as a boundary condition on the derivatives of the corresponding physical ﬁeld (e.g., air temperature or water vapor
contents). Instead, we insert the ﬂux by modifying the temperature and water
vapor concentration over a depth of many cells with exponential decay away
from the boundary.

Real-Time Data Driven Wildland Fire Modeling

49

Observation
function

Synthetic
data

…
CPUn

Fire atmosphere
model

State

CPU1

State

Ensemble member 1

…
Advancing the ensemble in time

Observation
function

Synthetic
data

…
CPUm

Fire atmosphere
model

State

CPUk

State

Ensemble member N

Data assimilation

Morphing
ensemble
Kalman
filter

Parallel
linear
algebra

Real data
pool

Fig. 2. Parallel implementation of one assimilation cycle. Each ensemble is advanced in
time. Using a subset of processors, the observation function is evaluated independently
for each ensemble member. The morphing EnKF runs on all processors and adjusts
the member states by comparing the synthetic data with real data and balances the
uncertainty in the data (given as an error bound) with the uncertainty in the simulation
(computed from the spread of the whole ensemble). Currently, the ensemble of model
states are kept in disk ﬁles. The observation function uses the disk ﬁles and delivers
synthetic data back to disk ﬁles. The EnKF uses the synthetic and real data and
modiﬁes the ﬁles with the ensemble states. The model, observation function, and EnKF
are separate executables.

3

Data Assimilation

Our coding design is based on Fig. 2. Data assimilation is done using an EnKF
[12]. We can use data from airborne/space images and land-based sensors, though
work remains on making all the data available when needed. In the rest of this
section we describe how to treat various kinds of data, how synthetic image data
for the ﬁre can be obtained from the system state, and how the model states are
adjusted by in response to the data.
Our eﬀorts so far have been to get data from a variety of sources (e.g.,
weather stations, aerial images, etc.) and to compare it [13] to data from the
ﬁre-atmosphere code [8]. The observation function routines receives a state vector that is modiﬁed and returned. The state is transferred using disk ﬁles, which
is slow and must be replaced with a faster mechanism. Individual subvectors
corresponding to the most common variables are extracted or replaced in the
ﬁles. A software layer hides both the ﬁre code and the data transfer method so
that the code is not dependent on any particular ﬁre-atmosphere code.
Consider an example of a weather station that reports the location, time, temperature, wind velocity, and humidity. The atmosphere code has multiple nested
grids. For a given grid, we have to determine in which cell the weather station is
located, which is done using linear interpolation of the location. The data is is

50

J.D. Beezley et al.

determined at relevant grid points using biquadratic interpolation. We compare
the computed results with the weather station data and then determine if a
ﬁreline is in the cell (or neighboring ones) with the weather station temperature
to see if there really is a ﬁre in the cell. In the future, this will be replaced by
synthetic data created from the model state, as in Fig. 2.
The model state can be used to produce an image like one from an infrared
camera, which can be compared to the actual data in the data assimilation.
This process is known as synthetic scene generation [14] and depends on the
propagation model, parameters such as velocity of the ﬁre movement, as well as
its output (the heat ﬂux), and the input (the wind speed). We estimate the 3D
ﬂame structure using the parameters from the model, which provides an eﬀective
geometry for simulating radiance from the ﬁre scene.
Given the 3D ﬂame structure, we assume we can adequately estimate the
infrared scene radiance by including three aspects of radiated energy. These are
radiation from the hot ground under the ﬁre front and the cooling of the ground
after the ﬁre front passes, which accounts for the heating and cooling of the 2D
surface, the direct radiation to the sensor from the 3D ﬂame, which accounts
for the intense radiation from the ﬂame itself, and the radiation from the 3D
ﬂame that is reﬂected from the nearby ground. This reﬂected radiation is most
important in the near and mid-wave infrared spectrum. Reﬂected long-wave
radiation is much less important because of the high emissivity (low reﬂectivity)
of burn scar in the long-wave infrared portion of the spectrum [15].
A double exponential is used to estimate the 2D ﬁre front and cooling. We use
time constants of 75 seconds and 250 seconds and the peak temperature at the
ﬁre front is constrained to be 1075K. The position of the ﬁre front is determined
from the propagation model described in the previous section. The 3D ﬂame
structure is estimated by using the heat release rate and experimental estimates
of ﬂame width and length and the ﬂame is tilted based on wind speed. This 3D
structure is represented by a 3D grid of voxels.
We use the ray tracing code Digital Imaging and Remote Sensing Image
Generation Model (DIRSIG), which is a ﬁrst principles based synthetic image

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 3. Synthetic infrared nighttime radiance scenes of a simulated grassﬁre. The scenes
are rendered as they would be viewed by a multiwavelength camera system on an
aircraft ﬂying 3000 m above ground. (a) Shortwave infrared (0.9-1.8 μm). (b) Midwave
infrared (3.0-5.0 μm). (c) Longwave infrared (8.0-11.0 μm). Reproduced from [14].

Real-Time Data Driven Wildland Fire Modeling

51

generation model developed by the Digital Imaging and Remote Sensing Laboratory at RIT [16,17]. The 2D ground temperatures and the 3D voxels representing the ﬂame are inputs to DIRSIG, which determines the radiance from those
sources as they would be viewed by an airborne remote sensing system. The
model can produce multi- or hyper-spectral imagery from the visible through
the thermal infrared region of the electromagnetic spectrum. The radiance calculation includes radiance reﬂected from the ground and the eﬀects of the atmosphere. We validated the resulting synthetic radiance image (Fig. 3) by calculating the ﬁre radiated energy and comparing those results to published values
derived from satellite remote sensing data of wildland ﬁres [18]. We are continuing to work on synthetic image generation with the goal of replacing the computationally intensive and accurate ray tracing method with a simpler method
of calculating the ﬁre radiance based upon the radiance estimations that are
inherent in the ﬁre propagation model.
The rest of this section follows [7] and describes a morphing EnKF. The model
state consists of the level set function ψ and the ignition time ti . Both are given
as arrays of values associated with grid nodes. Unlike the tracers in [8], our grid
arrays can be modiﬁed by data assimilation methods with ease. Data assimilation
[19] maintains an approximation of the probability distribution of the state.
In each analysis cycle, the probability distribution of the state is advanced in
time and then updated from the data likelihood using Bayes theorem. EnKF
represents the probability distribution of the state by an ensemble of states and
it uses the model only as a black box without any additional coding required.
After advancing the ensemble in time, the EnKF replaces the ensemble by its
linear combinations with the coeﬃcients obtained by solving a least squares
problem to balance the change in the state and the diﬀerence from the data.
However, the EnKF applied directly to the model ﬁelds does not work well
when the data indicates that a ﬁre is in a diﬀerent location than what is in the
state. This is due to the combination of such data having inﬁnitesimally small
likelihood and the span of the ensemble does actually contain a state consistent
with the data. Therefore, we adjust the simulation state by changing the position
of the ﬁre, rather than just an additive correction alone, using the techniques
of registration and morphing from image processing. Essentially, we replace the
linear combinations of states in the EnKF by intermediate states obtained by
morphing, which leads to the morphing EnKF method [5].
Given two functions u0 and u representing the same physical ﬁeld (e.g., the
temperature or the level set function) from two states of the coupled model,
registration can be described as ﬁnding a mapping T of the spatial domain so
that u ≈ u0 ◦ (I + T ), where ◦ denotes the composition of mappings and I is the
identity mapping. The ﬁeld u and the mapping T are given by their values on a
grid. To ﬁnd the registration mapping T automatically, we solve approximately
an optimization problem of the form
u − u0 ◦ (I + T ) + T + ∇T → min .

52

J.D. Beezley et al.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 4. The morphing EnKF applied to the ﬁreline propagation model coupled with
WRF. False color and contour on the horizontal plane is the ﬁre heat ﬂux. The volume
shading is the vorticity of the atmosphere. The reference solution (a) is the simulated
data. The initial ensemble was created by a random perturbation of the comparison
solution (b) with the ﬁre ignited at an intentionally incorrect location. The standard
ENKF (c) and the morphing EnKF (d) were applied after 15 minutes. The ensembles
have 25 members each with the heat ﬂuxes shown superimposed. The standard EnKF
ensembles diverges from the data while the morphing EnKF ensemble keeps closer to
the data. Reproduced from [7].

We then construct intermediate functions uλ between u0 and u1 using [5]. For
−1
r = u ◦ (I + T ) − u0 , we have
uλ = (u + λr) ◦ (I + λT ) ,

0 ≤ λ ≤ 1.

(4)

The morphing EnKF works by transforming the ensemble member into extended
states of the form [r, T ], which are input into the EnKF. The result is then
converted back using (4). Fig. 4 contains an illustrative result.
Acknowledgements. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under grants CNS-0325314, CNS-0324910, CNS-0324989, CNS-0324876,
CNS-0540178, CNS-0719641, CNS-0719626, CNS-0720454, DMS-0623983, EIA0219627, and OISE-0405349.

Real-Time Data Driven Wildland Fire Modeling

53

References
1. Mandel, J., Beezley, J.D., Bennethum, L.S., Chakraborty, S., Coen, J.L., Douglas,
C.C., Hatcher, J., Kim, M., Vodacek, A.: A dynamic data driven wildland ﬁre
model. In: Shi, Y., van Albada, G.D., Dongarra, J., Sloot, P.M.A. (eds.) ICCS
2007. LNCS, vol. 4487, pp. 1042–1049. Springer, Heidelberg (2007)
2. Johns, C.J., Mandel, J.: A two-stage ensemble Kalman ﬁlter for smooth data assimilation. Environ. Ecological Stat. 15, 101–110 (2008)
3. Mandel, J., Bennethum, L.S., Beezley, J.D., Coen, J.L., Douglas, C.C.,
Franca, L.P., Kim, M., Vodacek, A.: A wildﬁre model with data assimilation,
arXiv:0709.0086 (2006)
4. Mallet, V., Keyes, D.E., Fendell, F.E.: Modeling wildland ﬁre propagation with
level set methodsm arXiv:0710.2694 (2007)
5. Beezley, J.D., Mandel, J.: Morphing ensemble Kalman ﬁlters. Tellus 60A, 131–140
(2008)
6. Ravela, S., Emanuel, K.A., McLaughlin, D.: Data assimilation by ﬁeld alignment.
Physica D 230, 127–145 (2007)
7. Mandel, J., Beezley, J.D., Coen, J.L., Kim, M.: Data assimilation for wildland ﬁres:
Ensemble Kalman ﬁlters in coupled atmosphere-surface models, arXiv:0712.3965
(2007)
8. Clark, T.L., Coen, J., Latham, D.: Description of a coupled atmosphere-ﬁre model.
Int. J. Wildland Fire 13, 49–64 (2004)
9. Osher, S., Fedkiw, R.: Level set methods and dynamic implicit surfaces. Springer,
New York (2003)
10. Coen, J.L.: Simulation of the Big Elk Fire using coupled atmosphere-ﬁre modeling.
Int. J. Wildland Fire 14, 49–59 (2005)
11. Rothermel, R.C.: A mathematical model for predicting ﬁre spread in wildland ﬁres.
USDA Forest Service Research Paper INT-115 (1972)
12. Evensen, G.: The ensemble Kalman ﬁlter: Theoretical formulation and practical
implementation. Ocean Dynamics 53, 343–367 (2003)
13. Chakraborty, S.: Data assimilation and visualization for ensemble wildland ﬁre
models. Master’s thesis, University of Kentucky, Department of Computer Science,
Lexington, KY (2008)
14. Wang, Z.: Modeling Wildland Fire Radiance in Synthetic Remote Sensing Scenes.
PhD thesis, Rochester Institute of Technology, Center for Imaging Science (2008)
15. Kremens, R., Faulring, J., Hardy, C.C.: Measurement of the time-temperature and
emissivity history of the burn scar for remote sensing applications. In: Paper J1G.5,
Proceedings of the 2nd Fire Ecology Congress, Orlando FL, American Meteorological Society (2003)
16. Digital Imaging and Remote Sensing Laboratory: DIRSIG users manual. Rochester
Institute of Technology (2006),
http://www.dirsig.org/docs/manual-2006-11.pdf
17. Schott, J., Brown, S.D., Raque˜
no, R.V., Gross, H.N., Robinson, G.: An advanced
synthetic image generation model and its application to multi/hyperspectral algorithm development. Canadian J. Remote Sensing 25, 99–111 (1999)
18. Wooster, M.J., Zhukov, B., Oertel, D.: Fire radiative energy for quantitative study
of biomass burning: derivation from the BIRD experimental satellite and comparison to MODIS ﬁre products. Remote Sensing Environ. 86, 83–107 (2003)
19. Kalnay, E.: Atmospheric Modeling, Data Assimilation and Predictability. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (2003)

