Protein Classiﬁcation from Protein-Domain and
Gene-Ontology Annotation Information Using
Formal Concept Analysis
Mi-Ryung Han1 , Hee-Joon Chung1 , Jihun Kim1 , Dong-Young Noh2,3, *,
and Ju Han Kim1,4, *
1

Seoul National University Biomedical Informatics (SNUBI),
2
Department of Surgery,
3
Cancer Research Institute,
4
Human Genome Research Institute,
Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea
{gene0309,joonny96,djdoc,dynoh,juhan}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract. There are a number of diﬀerent attributes to describe ontology of proteins such as protein structure, biomolecular interaction, cellular location, and protein domains which represent the basic evolutionary
units that form protein. In this paper, we propose a mathematical approach, formal concept analysis (FCA), which toward abstracting from
attribute-based object descriptions. Based on this theory, we present
extended version of algorithm, tripartite lattice, to compute a concept
lattice. By analyzing tripartite lattice, we attempt to extract proteins,
which are related to domains and gene ontology (GO) terms from bottom nodes to the top of lattice. In summary, using tripartite lattices, we
classiﬁed proteins from protein domain composition with their describing
gene ontology (GO) terms.

1

Introduction

The theory of concept (or Galois) lattices (Wille, 1884) provides a natural and
formal approach to discover and represent concept hierarchies (Carpineto et al.,
1993). Conceptual data processing (also widely known as ‘formal concept analysis’) has become a standard technique in data and knowledge processing that
has been applied for data visualization, data mining, information retrieval (using ontologies) and knowledge management. Concept (or Galois) lattice analysis
represents patterns of intersection and inclusion among dual subsets of two sets
of discrete elements (i.e. objects and attributes) (Mische et al., 2000).
Since concepts are necessary for expressing human knowledge, any knowledge
management process beneﬁts from a comprehensive formalization of concepts.
Formal concept analysis (FCA) oﬀers such a formalization by mathematizing
the concept of ‘concept’ as a unit of thought constituted of two parts: extension
and intension. If data are small, as compared with data bases in bioinformatics,
* Corresponding authors
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part II, LNCS 4488, pp. 347–354, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

348

M.-R. Han et al.

formal concept data analysis shows how this abstract technique can unfold and
better interpret the biological topics. Using formal concept data analysis, we
can focus on exploratory data analysis with meaningful concept relationships.
Therefore, in this paper, we approach protein classiﬁcation using a new extension
of lattice analysis - tripartite lattices - (Fararo et al., 1984; Mische et al., 2000)
which is based on the formal concept analysis (FCA).
We use protein, protein domain and Gene Ontology (GO) (Ashburner et al.,
2000) terms to show the intersections and inclusions among them by proposing
tripartite lattices. Protein domains represent the basic evolutionary units that
form protein. Multi-domain proteins can be made from single domain combination, and proteins with two or more domains constitute the majority of proteins
in all organisms studied. Furthermore, domains that co-occur in proteins are
more likely to display similar function or localization (Mott et al., 2002) than
domains in separate proteins. Therefore we can classify similar protein functional
groups from protein domain composition.

2
2.1

Methods
Formal Concept Analysis

We brieﬂy introduce the basic notions of Formal Concept Analysis (Ganter et
al., 1999).
Deﬁnition 1. A formal context is a triple of sets (G, M, I), where G is called
a set of objects, M is called a set of attributes, and I ⊆ G × M. The inclusion
(g, m) ∈ I is read “object g has attribute m”.
Table 1. Example data set. Formal context of Proteins (G) and GO terms describing
the proteins (M).
GO terms (M)
Protein amino acid
DNA repair
Protein binding ATPase activity
Proteins (G)
phosphorylation
Protein 1
X
X
X
Protein 2
X
X
Protein 3
X
X
Protein 4
X
Protein 5
X
X
Protein 6
X
X
X

→ In table 1, six proteins (G) are annotated with four GO terms (M) using
gene ontology information: {(g, m): (Protein 1, DNA repair, Protein amino acid
phosphorylation, ATPase activity), (Protein 2, DNA repair, Protein binding),
(Protein 3, DNA repair, ATPase activity), (Protein 4, Protein amino acid phosphorylation), (Protein 5, Protein amino acid phosphorylation, Protein binding),
(Protein 6, DNA repair, Protein amino acid phosphorylation, ATPase activity)}

Protein Classiﬁcation from Protein-Domain

349

Deﬁnition 2. For A ⊆ G and B ⊆ M: A = {m ∈ M | ∀g ∈ A (gIm)}, B =
{g ∈ G | ∀m ∈ B (gIm)}.
→ That is, in a formal context, duality relationship of a subset of proteins
denoted by A, and a subset of GO terms denoted by B. Here, A is the set of GO
terms common to the Proteins in A, and B is the set of Proteins which have all
GO terms in B. For example, {Protein 1, Protein 3} = {DNA repair, ATPase
activity}, {Protein 1} = {DNA repair, Protein amino acid phosphorylation,
ATPase activity}, {DNA repair, ATPase activity} = {Protein 1, Protein 3,
Protein 6} as shown in table 1.
Deﬁnition 3. A formal concept of a formal context (G, M, I) is a pair (A, B),
where A ⊆ G, B ⊆ M, A = B, and B = A. The set A is called the extent,
and the set B is called the intent of the concept (A, B). The concepts of a given
context are naturally ordered by the subconcept-superconcept relation deﬁned by
(A1, B1) ≤ (A2, B2): ⇔ A1 ⊆ A2 (⇔ B2 ⊆ B1 ).
→ In our case, we say (A1, B1) = {(Protein 1), (DNA repair, Protein amino acid
phosphorylation, ATPase activity)}, (A2, B2) = {(Protein 1, Protein 3), (DNA
repair, ATPase activity)} in table 1. Then subconcept-superconcept relation can
be deﬁned by the order of {Protein 1} ⊆ {Protein 1, Protein 3} and {DNA
repair, ATPase activity} ⊆ {DNA repair, Protein amino acid phosphorylation,
ATPase activity}.
We constructed a two-mode binary matrix according to the associations between
six proteins and four gene ontology terms as shown in table 1 (entering ‘X’ into
the matrix whenever a particular protein is annotated with a gene ontology
term). Each protein has more than one explicit GO term. The basic lattice
procedure applies two algebraic operations - intersection and inclusion - to a
two-mode incidence matrix (Mische et al., 2000). First, all possible intersections
between the rows of a two-mode matrix are calculated and generate all possible
intersecting subsets of GO term mapping proteins. The complete set which the
vector containing all ‘X’ is then added to complete the array of subsets, showing
which subsets are included in larger subsets. This dual ordering of sets of proteins
and GO terms constitute the lattice that can be visualized in a line diagram in
which nodes representing subsets are linked to nodes representing the larger
subsets in which they are included.
In this paper, all matrices were run through the BioLattice program designed
by Jihun Kim. The output of BioLattice program is interpreted with four diﬀerent color coded concepts; concept lattice is decomposed into four sub-structures
based on core-periphery model. (Red: The core structure is deﬁned to maximal
sublattice according to size in which every element is upper bounds of an atom.
Green: Except for the core, all lower bounds to each elements of core are communicating elements. Yellow: Independent (background) structure is deﬁned to
each sublattice that atom equals to coatoms. Gray: The other parts of concept
lattice are deﬁned to peripheral structure.).

350

M.-R. Han et al.

G = { Protein 1, Protein 2, Protein 3, Protein 4, Protein 5, Protein 6 }
M = { DNA repair, Protein binding, Protein amino acid phosphorylation, ATPase activity }
I = { (Protein 1, DNA repair), (Protein 1, Protein amino acid phosphorylation), (Protein 1, ATPase activity), (Protein 2, DNA repair), (Protein 2, Protein
binding). . .}

DNA repair

Protein binding

Protein amino acid phosphorylation

Top

C3
C8

C2

Protein 4

ATPase activity

C5
Protein 3

C6

C7

C4

Protein 1
Protein 6

Protein 2

Protein 5

Bottom

Fig. 1. Bipartite lattice: the concept lattice of the context in Table1 (Letter “C” stands
for “concept”)

Figure 1 presents a nine nodes lattice diagram based upon the protein by GO
term matrix (6 X 4). This lattice diagram can be read in two directions, beginning
at the top or the bottom. In here, {Protein 1, Protein 6} is a superconcept of
{Protein 4} and {Protein 3} because {Protein 4} and {Protein 3} is described
by a subset of the attributes describing {Protein 1, Protein 6}.

Protein Classiﬁcation from Protein-Domain

2.2

351

Tripartite Lattice: Interpenetrations Among Three Distinct
Sets of Elements

Fararo et al. introduces tripartite structural analysis and shows how bipartite
lattices can be extended to the tripartite lattices. They use persons, groups, and
organizations; or persons, cultural systems, and social systems (Fararo et al.,
1984). We investigated their analysis a step further to show the intersections and
inclusions among three sets of interpenetrating biological elements (i.e. proteins,
domains, GO terms). In this paper, tripartite lattices (theoretically generalizable
to the k-partite level) show the interpenetration among three two-mode matrices:
we use proteins by domains (PD), proteins by GO terms (PG), domains by GO
terms (DG).
Let P, G and D denote the set of Proteins, GO terms and Domains respectively. We let the number of entities in the set X by nx (where X stands for
P, G or D). Rxy denote the nx x ny-matrix in which Rxy (i, j) = 1 if the ith
element of X is linked to the jth element of Y, and Rxy (i, j) = 0, otherwise.
The matrix specifying the relationship between sets X and Y is the transpose of
that representing the relationship between Y and X.
→ Rxy = Ryx (Rxx = 0, for each X)
Table 2. Matrix structure of a tripartite lattice

GO
Protein
Domain

GO
0
RP G
RDG

Protein
RGP
0
RDP

Domain
RGD
RP D
0

Table 2 shows a symmetrical matrix with the upper right blocks composed of
transposes of three lower left blocks. There are no within set relationships.

3
3.1

Results
Bipartite Lattice

Dataset. Exploratory data analysis is ﬁrst performed using protein lists from
Krebs TCA cycle pathway and Citrate TCA cycle pathway. We test bipartite
lattice analysis using these pathways because they are one of the most investigated pathways. We use ArrayXPath which is publicly available major pathway
resources including KEGG, GenMAPP, BioCarta and PharmGKB Pathways
(Chung HJ et al., 2004). For further analysis, we have created a repository of
protein, domain and gene ontology (GO) from SwissProt/TrEMBL for protein,
InterPro for domain and Gene Ontology for GO term. In this paper, we use
these resources to extract object and attribute information, and to perform formal concept analysis. The initial letter of protein ID is ‘P’ or ‘Q’ and Domain
ID starts with three big letters ‘IPR’.

352

M.-R. Han et al.

Analysis of Bipartite lattice. We construct three two-mode binary matrices (see ﬁgure 2 (a), (b), (c)). These bipartite lattices show the relationship
between protein and protein domain, protein and protein annotated GO term,
domain and domain annotated GO term respectively (Each concept lattice of
the matrices is not shown here). Through these lattices, we can point out which
domains are common to several proteins or which GO terms are common to
several proteins or which GO terms are common to several domains. However,
the limitation of bipartite lattice analysis is that it presents only an abstract
overview of the relations between two elements. For example, Krebs TCA cycle,
Citrate TCA cycle pathways related protein ‘P36957’, ‘Q02218’ have the same
GO term ‘energy pathways’. If we want to know domain composition of those
proteins, we have to search lattice twice with the same protein IDs (protein and
protein domain, protein and protein annotated GO term). Then we can ﬁnd
that these proteins have diﬀerent domains {P36957: IPR003016, IPR000069,
IPR011053} {Q02218: IPR011603, IPR005475}. For further information, we have
to search domain related GO terms in diﬀerent concept lattice.
Protein domain

GO term

Protein domain

Protein

Protein

(a)

GO term

(b)

(c)

Fig. 2. Input matrix with attribute and object. (a) Two-mode binary matrix of Protein
domain and Protein. (b) Two-mode binary matrix of GO term and Protein. (c) Twomode binary matrix of GO term and Protein domain: Row elements are objects and
column elements are attributes.

Therefore, bipartite lattice does not show us how these protein and domain
elements come together with particular GO terms. If one more set of biological
element is added to the bipartite lattice, which is called tripartite lattice, we
can extract more compact and concrete information with three sets of biological
elements (proteins, domains, GO terms). By proposing tripartite lattice, we can
explore domain related proteins and their common GO terms simultaneously.
3.2

Tripartite Lattice

Dataset. We use Pathway crosstalk to select protein lists from random sampled pathways (see ﬁgure 3(a)) (Chung HJ et al., 2005). By random sampling,
we choose a group of pathways from Pathway crosstalk with our ﬁxed window
size (see ﬁgure 3(b)). Random sampling approach is used to obtain more accurate estimates of data statistics. Then domains and GO terms are extracted
using protein lists from below three random sampled pathways. We use distinct
domains, proteins and GO terms to make matrix (see table 2). The GO terms
are including domain annotated GO terms and protein annotated GO terms.

Protein Classiﬁcation from Protein-Domain

(a)

(b)

353

G

Fig. 3. Select speciﬁc pathways. (a) Pathway crosstalk: Calculating pairwise similarity
matrix between each pair of pathways and applying multi-dimensional scaling method
created the global crosstalk graph of major biological pathways. Yellow nodes represent BioCarta, green nodes GenMAPP, red nodes KEGG, and blue nodes PharmGKB
Pathways. (b) Three pathways are selected by random sampling with our ﬁxed window size. (Three neighboring pathways are chosen because we want to have as much
common protein attributes as possible.) This is shown in transparent red rectangular
region (BioCarta/Hs IGF-1 Signaling Pathway, BioCarta/Hs Insulin Signaling Pathway, BioCarta/Hs Inhibition of Cellular Proliferation by Gleevec Pathway).

Analysis of Tripartite lattice. Formal concept analysis is performed using
a symmetrical matrix with proteins, domains and GO terms. Among the most
speciﬁc objects, all four proteins have domain “IPR000719” in common. Below
lists are four proteins and their domain composition.
{P06213: IPR000719, IPR001245, IPR008266, IPR003961, IPR006212,
IPR009030}
{P45983: IPR000719, IPR008351, IPR003527, IPR002290, IPR008271}
{Q13233: IPR000719, IPR008271, IPR002290, IPR007527}
{P27361: IPR000719, IPR008349, IPR003527, IPR002290, IPR008271}
We can ﬁnd P45983 (Mitogen-activated protein kinase 8), Q13233 (Mitogenactivated protein kinase kinase kinase 1), P27361 (Mitogen-activated protein
kinase 3) have the same synonym of EC 2.7.1.37 by searching ENZYME (Enzyme nomenclature database). Here, P06213 (Insulin receptor) has a synonym of
EC 2.7.1.112 which is similar to EC 2.7.1.37 in that those enzymes can transfer
a phosphate from a high energy phosphate such as ATP, to an organic molecule.
<Reaction catalysed>
EC 2.7.1.37: ATP + a protein ⇔ ADP + a phosphoprotein
EC 2.7.1.112: ATP + a protein tyrosine ⇔ ADP + a protein tyrosine phosphate
Therefore, we can classify above four proteins as a similar protein functional
group. In addition, the function of each protein is described by GO terms in
tripartite lattice. So we can say that domains that co-occur in proteins are more
likely to display similar function or localization.

4

Discussion

We have investigated tripartite lattice, a new extension of lattice analysis, to
show the interpenetrations among protein, domain and GO terms. By analyzing

354

M.-R. Han et al.

bipartite lattice, we extracted an abstract overview of the relations between
two sets of biological elements. However, this analysis did not show us how
protein and domain elements come together with particular GO terms. Using
tripartite lattice, we classiﬁed proteins from protein domain composition with
their describing GO terms. Because these proteins have similar functions, we
can extract concrete information from tripartite lattice in that domains which
co-occur in proteins are more likely to show similar function or localization as
shown in GO term description.
By approaching extended version of algorithm to compute a concept lattice as
we mentioned above, proteins are classiﬁed according to protein functions. However, the graphical representations of tripartite lattices are quite complex and difﬁcult to read for large data sets. Therefore, we may consider interactive simpliﬁcation of the obtained concepts by merging conceptual hierarchies as a future step.

Acknowledgement
This study was supported by a grant from Korea Health 21 R&D Project, Ministry
of Health and Welfare, Republic of Korea (A060711), a grant from Korea Health
21 R&D Project, Ministry of Health & Welfare, Republic of Korea (01-PJ3-PG601GN07-0004), and a grant from Korea Health 21 R&D Project, Ministry of Health
& Welfare, Republic of Korea (0412-MI01-0416-0002).

References
1. Ashburner, M., Ball, C.A., Blake, J.A., Botstein, D., Butler, H., Cherry, J.M., Davis,
A.P., Dolinski, K., Dwight, S.S., Eppig, J.T. et al. (2000) Gene Ontology: tool for the
uniﬁcation of biology. The Gene Ontology Consortium. Nat. Genet. 25, 25-29
2. Carpineto, C., Romano, G. (1993) GALOIS: An order-theoretic approach to conceptual clustering. Proceedings of 10th International Conference on Machine Learning,
Amherst. pp. 33-40
3. Chung HJ, Kim M, Park CH, Kim J, Kim JH. (2004) ArrayXPath: mapping and visualizing microarray gene expression data with integrated biological pathway resources
using Scalable Vector Graphics, Nucleic Acids Res. Jul 1;32:W460-W464.
4. Chung HJ, Park CH, Han MR, Lee S, Ohn JH, Kim J, Kim JH, Kim JH. (2005)
ArrayXPath II: mapping and visualizing microarray gene expression data with biomedical ontologies and integrated pathway resources using Scalable Vector Graphics.
Nucleic Acids Res.
5. Fararo, Thomas, J., Patrick Doreian. (1984) Tripartite structural analysis: Generalizing the Breiger-Wilson Formalism. Social Networks. 6, 141-175.
6. Ganter, B., Wille, R. (1999) Formal Concept Analysis: Mathematical Foundation.
Springer, Heidelberg.
7. Mische, A., Pattison., P. (2000) Composing a civic arena: Publics, projects, and social
settings. Poetics. 27, 163-194.
8. Mott, R., Schults, J., Bork, P., Ponting, C. P. (2002) Predicting protein cellular localization using a domain projection method. Genome Res. 12, 1168-1174.
9. Wille, R. (1884) Line diagrams of hierarchical concept systems. International Classiﬁcation. 2, 77-86.

