Dynamic Bandwidth Allocation Algorithm
Based on Two-Phase Cycle for Eﬃcient Channel
Utilization on Ethernet PON
Won Jin Yoon, Woo Jin Jung, Tae-Jin Lee, Hyunseung Choo,
and Min Young Chung
School of Information and Communication Engineering
Sungkyunkwan University
300, Chunchun-dong,Jangan-gu, Suwon, Kyunggi-do, 440-746, Korea
+82-31-290-7990
{yoon1007,jwj0107,tjlee,choo,mychung}@ece.skku.ac.kr

Abstract. Ethernet passive optical network (EPON) is a low-cost and
high speed solution to the bottleneck problem. We study previous interoptical network unit (ONU) scheduling algorithm, interleaved polling
with stop (IPS).The IPS algorithm needs an idle time period between
two consecutive frame transmission cycles on uplink. In this paper, we
propose a two-phase cycle dynamic bandwidth allocation (TCDBA) algorithm to increase the channel utilization on uplink through the elimination of the idle period. And, we also evaluate the performance of the
proposed algorithm by simulations and conﬁrm its eﬀectiveness.
Keywords: Ethernet passive optical network (EPON), multipoint control protocol (MPCP), dynamic bandwidth allocation (DBA).

1

Introduction

In order to adapt data traﬃc increasing due to the advent of various multimedia
applications, EPON has been introduced[1][2]. In EPON, all data to be transmitted are encapsulated in Ethernet frames. Thus, worldwide-spread Ethernetbased LANs can be cost-eﬀectively interconnected through EPON. An EPON is
a point-to-multipoint optical network consisting of one optical line terminator
(OLT), several ONUs, and a passive optical splitter/combiner[1]. The EPON
uses multipoint control protocol (MPCP) to exchange control messages between
an OLT and ONUs for the time slot request and allocation[2].
Inter-ONU scheduling algorithms are responsible for arbitrating the transmissions of ONUs. However, the EPON dose not establish standardization of data
This work was supported by the Korea Research Foundation Grant funded by the Korean Government(MOEHRD)(KRF-2005-042-D00248) and by the MIC(Ministry of
Information and Communication), Korea, under the ITRC(Information Technology
Research Center) support program supervised by the IITA(Institute of Information
Technology Assessment), IITA-2006-(C1090-0603-0046).
Corresponding author.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 550–553, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Dynamic Bandwidth Allocation Algorithm Based on Two-Phase Cycle

551

transmission scheduling algorithm between ONUs. In order to fairly distribute
uplink resource to all ONUs, the IPS algorithm has been proposed[3]. In the IPS
algorithm, an OLT allocates the time duration based on time slot requests of
entire ONUs. However, the IPS needs the computation time to calculate time
durations to be assigned to the entire ONUs. During the computation time, any
ONU can not transmit data to the OLT. In order to use this waste time duration, Assi et al. proposed fast gate DBA (FGDBA)[4]. However, in FGDBA, if
the request volume of all the ONUs is larger than the predetermined threshold
value, the operation of the FGDBA is similar to that of the IPS. Hence, it can
not eﬃciently use the waste time duration under heavy traﬃc loads.
In this paper, in order to fully utilize uplink in EPON, we propose a TCDBA
algorithm. In TCDBA, each cycle is divided into two phases. During the ﬁrst
phase, OLT can receive data from all ONUs while computing the available time
durations to be allocated in the second phase.

2

TCDBA (Two-Phase Cycle Dynamic Bandwidth
Allocation) Algorithm

In TCDBA, a transmission cycle is divided into two phases, phases 1 and 2, in
order to eﬃcient use uplink. The time duration of phase 1 is set as the ﬁxed
value which is larger than the sum of DBA computation time and the maximum
round trip time (RTT), Tmrtt , between the OLT and ONUs. However, the time
duration of phase 2 is varied as the request information of all the ONUs. OLT can
inform all the ONUs of their available time durations before the corresponding
ONUs start their data transmissions on uplink in the phase 2. Hence, the phase 2
starts after the instant of ending phase 1.
Let Tphase1 be the sum of the DBA computation time, Tcomp , and Tmrtt . and
it is equally divided into N time slots, Ap1 . As soon as the OLT receives a request
volume Vi (bytes) from ONU i (i=1,...,N ), the OLT determines the remaining
request volume, Vip2 , for ONU i. Vip2 is calculated as max(0, Vi − Ap1 ). After the
OLT informs all the N ONUs of Ap1 , it starts DBA computation based on Vip2
for all i (i=1,...,N ) to allocate the available time slots in the upcoming phase 2.
To compute the available time slots, we ﬁrst decide the length of the current
transmission cycle, Tcycle , as follows.
N

(2 · Tg +

Tcycle = min(Tmax ,
i

Vi × 8
)),
C

(1)

where Tg is a guard time interval between the two consecutive time durations,
Tmax is the length of the maximum-permitted transmission cycle and C is the
link capacity between the OLT and all the ONUs. Thus, the time duration of
phase 2, Tphase2 , becomes the diﬀerence between Tcycle and Tphase1 . For each
ONU, the size of the minimum guaranteed time slot, Bmin , in the upcoming
phase 2 is given by (Tphase2 /N )−Tg . Based on Bmin and Vip2 , the OLT classiﬁed
all the ONUs into two subset, M and M c . M is the set of ONUs with Vip2 ≤ Bmin

552

W.J. Yoon et al.

(a) Average packet transmission delay for
IPS /FGDBA/TCDBA

(b) Normalized
throughput
IPS/FGDBA /TCDBA

for

Fig. 1. Simulation results for IPS /FGDBA/TCDBA

and M c is the complement of M . For ONU i in M , the OLT allocates time slot,
p2
p2
Ap2
i , in the phase 2. Ai is the smaller one between Bmin and Vi . To allocate
the remaining time to all the ONUs in M c , the OLT calculates the total excessive
excess
= i∈M (Bmin − Vip2 )). For ONU j in M c , the excessive time,
time (Btotal
Bjexcess , is given by
excess
Btotal
× Vjp2
Bjexcess =
(2)
p2 .
j∈M c Vj
Finally, the OLT allocates the time slot used in phase 2 to ONU j in M c as
follows.
excess
.
(3)
Ap2
j = Bmin + Bj

3

Performance Evaluation

We use an EPON architecture with 16 ONUs and an OLT that expends 200μs
for the DBA computation. The link capacity between an OLT and ONUs is
1Gbps. The maximum cycle time is set to 2ms and each ONU has a 10Mbytes
buﬀer. The guard time between two consecutive time slots is set to 1μs. The
inter-frame gap between two Ethernet frames is 12 bytes. We, also, assume that
the round trip time between the OLT and all the ONUs is the same as 200μs.
Each end-user generates high class packets with 70 bytes as a Poisson process,
and medium/low class packets as a self-similar traﬃc pattern [5].

Dynamic Bandwidth Allocation Algorithm Based on Two-Phase Cycle

553

The average delay of IPS, FGDBA, and TCDBA varying oﬀered traﬃc volume
ρ per ONU is shown in Fig. 1(a). The average packet transmission delay of the
TCDBA is always less than that of the IPS, because the IPS can not use the
uplink during the sum of Tcomp and Tmrtt . Since the TCDBA can fully use
the idle time, it transmits more upstream data traﬃc than other algorithms.
Especially, for 45Mbps≤ ρ, its delay is smaller than that of FGDBA and IPS.
Moreover, for ρ in [40Mbps, 60Mbps] the average delay of FGDBA drastically
increases as ρ increases. The reason is that some ONUs can not transmit their
upstream data during idle time, because their request volume is larger than the
predetermined threshold value. The waste of this period in FGDBA will make
the increase of the average packet transmission delay. However, in the TCDBA,
since the change of the traﬃc load dose not inﬂuence on the use of idle time, the
average transmission delay more slowly increases. Fig. 1(b) shows the normalized
throughput of IPS, FGDBA and TCDBA. Compared with the IPS and FGDBA,
the proposed TCDBA, the maximum throughputs are about 71.5%, 75%, and
87.4%, respectively. Under overload condition, i.e., 60Mbps< ρ, the maximum
throughput of TCDBA is improved about 15.9% compared with that FGDBA.

4

Conclusion

This work proposed the TCDBA algorithm in order to fully use the uplink and
improve the throughput. From the simulation results, TCDBA shows a higher
performance than other algorithms in terms of low delay and high throughput.
For further studies, the performance evaluation of the TCDBA algorithm is
required for supporting diﬀerentiated services.

References
1. M. P. McGarry, M. Maier, and M. Reisslein : Ethernet PONs: A Survey of Dynamic
Bandwidth Allocation (DBA) Algorithms. IEEE Journal of Lightwave Tech. Vol. 22
No. 11 (2004) 2483–2497
2. IEEE 802.3 Ethernet in the First Mile Study Group[Online]. Available:
http://www.ieee802.org/3/efm/public/index.html
3. J. Xie, S. Jiang, and Y. Jiang : A Dynamic Bandwidth Allocation Scheme for
Diﬀerentiated Services in EPONs, IEEE Optical Comm. Vol. 42 Issue 8 (2004)
pp. S32–S39
4. C. M. Assi, Y. YE, S. Dixit, and M. A. Ali : Dynamic Bandwidth Allocation for
Quality-of-Service Over Ethernet PONs, IEEE Journal on Sel. Areas in Comm. Vol.
21 No. 9 (2003) pp. 1467–1477
5. D. Sala and A. Gummalla : PON Functional Requirements: Services and Performance [Online]. Available: http://grouper.ieee.org/groups/802/3/efm/public/
jul01/presentations/sala 1 0701.pdf

