Licence Plate Character Recognition Using Artificial
Immune Technique
Rentian Huang, Hissam Tawfik, and Atulya Nagar
Intelligent and Distributed Systems Lab, Deanery of Business and Computer Sciences,
Liverpool Hope University, Liverpool, United Kingdom L16 9JD
{10076507,TAWFIKH,NAGARA}@Hope.ac.uk

Abstract. This paper proposes the application of Artificial Immune Technique
in Licence Plate Character Recognition (LPCR). The use of Clonal Selection
Algorithm (CSA) is composed of two main stages: (1) dynamic training
samples; and (2) a choice of the best antibodies based on the three main clonal
operations of cloning, clonal mutation and clonal selection. Once memory cells
are established it will output the classification results using Fuzzy K-Nearest
Neighbor (KNN) approach. The performance of CSA is compared to the Back
Propagation Neural Networks (BPNN) in solving a LPCR problem. The
experimental results show that the Artificial Immune Technique has a favorable
performance in terms of being more accurate and robust.
Keywords: Artificial Immune System (AIS), Clonal Selection Algorithm
(CSA), Licence Plate Recognition (LPR).

1 Introduction
Licence Plate Recognition (LPR) System combines image processing and character
recognition technology to identify vehicles by way of automatically reading their
number plates. A typical LPR process consists of three stages: 1) licence plates
location, 2) character segmentation and 3) character recognition. LPR demonstrates
particularly useful and practical vehicle identification technology as it assumes no
additional means of vehicle identity apart from the existing and legally required
number plate. Furthermore, when data gathered by an LPR system is stored and
organized within a database, more complex information-driven tasks may potentially
be performed such as, vehicle travel time calculations as well as border controls.
However, in practice it is a very difficult task due to the variety of environmental
conditions. LPR system is usually conducted under certain restrictive conditions such
as, indoor scenes, stationary backgrounds, fixed illumination, prescribed driveways,
limited vehicle speed, and at a designated range of distance between camera and
vehicle [1]. Despite these current limitations, LPR finds applications in private
parking management, traffic monitoring, automatic toll payment, surveillance and
security enforcement [2].
Numerous algorithms have previously been exploited such as, Hidden Markov
Models (HMM) [3], Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) [4], Hausdorff Distance [5],
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2008, Part I, LNCS 5101, pp. 823–832, 2008.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

824

R. Huang, H. Tawfik, and A. Nagar

Support Vector Machine [6] (SVM)-based character recognizer and template
matching that leave a lot of room for improvements [7]. The focus of this paper is to
investigate a character recognition technique using the Artificial Immune System
(AIS) based CSA. A number of adjustments are made to the basic implementation of
CSA in order to improve the performance, especially in using a new dynamic training
to establish the immune memory (collection of antibodies) for classification.
Additionally, Neural-Network results are presented to compare the performance. The
experimental results show that CSA for character recognition has a better
performance in terms of successful classification of the characters of licence plates.
CSA proved more accurate and robust compared to Neural Networks.
The rest of this paper is presented as follows: The LPR architecture in section 2
which includes a review of relevant techniques used for tackling character recognition
of LPR. Section 3 introduces our CSA and the features added to it for character
recognition. Section 4 provides the experimental details and highlights the compared
performance of the CSA in character recognition. Section 5 gives the conclusion and
proposes the future work.

2 Car Plate Recognition
Car plate recognition algorithms reported in the research are generally composed of
three main steps, 1) locating licence plates, 2) segmenting licence numbers and 3)
identifying the characters. Fig. 1 illustrates our proposed LPR.
In locating the licence plate, a colour edge detector is developed to detect the type
of edges contained within the licence plate. While, multiple licence plate candidates
are normally detected, size and shape filtering is used to remove objects that do not
satisfy some specific conditions. The target will select regions that serve as possible
licence plate boundaries. In order to achieve possible licence plate boundaries the
area-to-perimeter ratio of the candidate area is compared with the actual standard ratio
of a number plate. Once a licence plate candidate has been extracted from the image,
the licence number segmentation preprocessing component will continue to perform
three tasks, Grey-level transform, Median filtering and Binarisation. A vertical
projection is performed to segment the characters with each character image
normalized to a size of 16x16 after segmentation. Following character segmentation
from the plate region a method needs to be selected for character recognition which is
the main subject of this work.

Fig. 1. Diagram of our LPR process

Licence Plate Character Recognition Using Artificial Immune Technique

825

There has been a large number of character recognition techniques reported. HMM
for recognition begins with the pre-processing and parameterization from the region
of interests detected in the previous phase. Researchers report that the width of the
plate in the image after rescaling lies between 25% and 75% for an image width
arranging from 200 and 600 pixels. This reveals the necessity for good character
analysis when implementing HMM, which places a restriction on the effective
distance of the recognition system [3].
Various types of ANN had been used for licence plate character identification such
as the work done by Broumandnia and Fathy [8]. A self-organized Neural Network
based on Kohonen’s Self-Organized Feature Maps (SOFMs) was implemented to
tolerate noisy, deformed, broken, or incomplete characters acquired from licence
plates, which were bent or tilted with respect to the camera [9]. Probabilistic Neural
Networks (PNNs) for LPR were also introduced by Anagnostopoulos et al. [10].
Hausdorff distance is a method for LPCR that compares two binary images. Its main
problem is the computational burden. Its recognition rate is very similar to that
obtained with Neural-Network classifiers, but it is slower [5]. Kim et al. designed a
system implementing four SVMs and report an impressive average character
recognition rate. The architecture, however, is strictly designed for Korean plates [6].
A suitable technique for the recognition of single font and fixed size characters is the
pattern matching technique. The recognition process was based on the computation of
the normalized cross correlation values for all the shifts of each character template
over the sub-image containing the licence plate [7].
LPR problem continues to be a challenge for artificial intelligence solutions and
novel approaches are therefore needed to improve the performance and efficiency of
LPCR algorithm. In this work, an AIS character recognition technique based Clonal
Selection Algorithm is presented for solving LPR problem.

3 Immune Techniques for Character Recognition
Artificial Immune System is a rapidly emerging technique for developing mechanisms for learning, prediction, memory and adaptation. AIS mimics the biological
immune systems as these offer powerful and robust information processing capabilities for solving complex problems [11]. The immune system is a biological pattern
recognition and classification system which learns to distinguish the self from nonself. The immune systems behaviour is an emergent property of the entire population
of diverse agents and improves performance by weeding out the weakest players,
replacing them with agents as different as possible. The immune system is
computationally one of the least understood biological paradigms but has drawn
significant attention. AIS started to be used in many application domains including
computer security, optimization, robotics, data mining, fault detection, anomaly
detection, and pattern recognition [12].
3.1 Clonal Selection
Clonal Selection Theory, the famous theory in immunology, was put forward by
Burnet in 1978 [13]. Its main ideas lie in the fact that the antigen can selectively react

826

R. Huang, H. Tawfik, and A. Nagar

to the antibodies, which are natively produced and spread on the cell surface in the
form of peptides. When cells are exposed to an antigen, the antigen stimulates an
immune cell with appropriate receptors to proliferate (divide) and mature into
terminal plasma cells. The process of cell division generates a clone, i.e., a set of cells
that are the progenies of the single cell. In addition to proliferating and maturing into
plasma cells, the immune cells can differentiate into long-lived memory cells.
Memory cells circulate through the blood, lymph and tissues, and when exposed to a
second antigenic stimulus they commence to differentiate into large immune cells
(lymphocyte) capable of producing high affinity antibody preselected for the specific
antigen that once stimulated the primary response. Fig. 2 depicts the clonal selection
principle.

Fig. 2. Clonal Selection Principle

Clonal selection is a dynamic process of the immune system stimulated by the selfadapting antigen. Some biologic features such as learning, memory and antibody
diversity can be used in artificial immune systems to solve complex problems. De
Castro and Von Zuben proposed the first Clonal Selection Algorithm, called
CLONALG and suggested that it could be used for pattern recognition. They
generated random antibodies to be used as the target patterns in CSA. They used a set
of 12 x 10 binary images as the target patterns [14]. Utpal Garain et al. proposed a
CSA used for a 2-class problem to classify pairs of similar character patterns and
claimed promising results. Setting aside the classification power, data reduction had
been another capability of CSA [15]. Utpal Garain et al. further explored the potential
of CSA in pattern recognition by applying the CSA for a 10-class classification
problem. Empirical study with two datasets shows that the CSA has very good
generalization ability with experimental results reporting the average recognition
accuracy of about 96% [16].
3.2 Clonal Selection for LPCR
The proposed clonal selection algorithm for character recognition is composed of two
main processes: firstly, selecting samples and training these samples using CSA;
secondly, using fuzzy (KNN) approach to output the classification results for LPR.
The essentials of clonal selection are established as follows. Antigens are images

Licence Plate Character Recognition Using Artificial Immune Technique

827

stored in a matrix and represent the licence plate character of the system. Antibodies
are the candidates that go through clonal process and try to catch and represent the
common features of antigens.
The affinity between antibody and antigen is the reflection of the total combination
power located between them. For classification problem, hamming distance (HD) and
similarity functions are used to measure affinity between antigen and antibody. The
Hamming distance rule is presented below:
n

len

difference = ∑∑ posi = Abi ⊕ Ag ij

Affinity = − difference

(1)

i =1 i =1

Where Abi is the ith bit in the antibody Ab , Ag ij is the ith bit in the antigen pattern
examples Ag j and n is the number of examples for a particular pattern class. Len is
the total length of an antibody and ⊕ represents the exclusive XOR operator.
Another formula used to measure similarity (affinity) of antigen to antibody
interaction is presented as shown in Eqn (2) below:

S ( Ag 1 , Ag 2 ) =

1
−
2 2

S10 S 01 − S 00 S11

(2)

(S11 + S10 )(S 01 + S 00 )(S11 + S 01 )(S10 + S 00 )

where ( Ag1 , Ag 2 ) are the two matrices to be compared, S10 , S 01, S 00, S11 , which denote
the number of zero matches, one matches, zero mismatches, and one mismatches. The
value of S is in the range [0, 1], where 1 indicates the highest and 0 indicates lowest
similarity between the samples.
In immunology, cloning selects a number of antibodies with the highest affinity
and cloning them based on their antigenic affinities. The higher the antigenic affinity,
the higher the number of clones will be generated. The total number of clones
generated N c is defined in Equation 3 as follow:
n
⎛β ⋅N ⎞
N c = ∑ round ⎜
⎟
⎝ i ⎠
i =1

(3)

where β is a multiplying factor, N is the total number of antibodies, round (.) is the
operator that rounds its argument toward the closet integer.
i

i*

In clonal mutation, the clone set C is used to produce mutated offspring C . The
higher the affinity an antigen has, the smaller the mutation rate. The algorithm for
mutation is described in Fig. 3. The Equation is defined as follows:
⎛ t ⎞
⎛
⎜ 1− ⎟
⎜
Δ(t , y ) = y 1 − r ⎝ T ⎠
⎜
⎝

λ

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

(4)

where t is the iteration number, T is the maximum iteration number, r is a
random value in the range [0, 1], and λ is used to decide the nonconforming degree.

828

R. Huang, H. Tawfik, and A. Nagar

i

Find the maximum and minimum in population C .
For each Ab , do
Generate a random value in the range [0, 1], named mr
Generate another random value in the range [0, 1], named t0
If mr < mutation_rate
If t0 >=0
Ab = Ab + Δ(t , max − Ab )
else Ab = Ab - Δ(t , Ab − min )
return Ab
__________________________________________________________________
Fig. 3. Mutation rate control algorithm

The final operation is clonal selection which includes hamming distance and
similarity threshold selections. Hamming distance threshold defines the antibodies
allowed to stay for further memory cell selection. The similarity threshold defines the
antibodies allowed to be added into memory cells to become detectors. The value of
the Hamming distance threshold should be adjusted empirically such that the
antibodies have the ability to detect new cases correctly.
3.3 Dynamic Training Algorithm
One antigen (UK mandatory typeface) from each class and antibodies generated by
basic clonal selection has been chosen to initialize the immune memory. After
initialization, real characters were passed to a dynamic training algorithm, and the
immune memory cells training and testing go hand in hand to obtain a better memory
cell for classification. The clonal dynamic training algorithm is shown as Fig. 4.
While No. <= size of antigens
Selected an antigen Ag and start to train
Classify the antigen using the current updated memory cells
If Classification strategy recognized antigen, start with another antigen
Otherwise generate antibodies Ab s randomly and calculate the affinity
Select n Ab s having the highest affinity and clone them
Apply hypermutation to the clone set C i to produce mutated offspring C i*
Re-calculate the HD between Ag and C i* . Select Ab s for next step
Calculate similarity between Ab and Ag Select matured Ab for memory cells
Stop training if the required number of matured antibodies is generated
End when all antigens been trained
____________________________ _____________________________________
Fig. 4. Dynamic Training algorithm

Licence Plate Character Recognition Using Artificial Immune Technique

829

Classification is implemented by a fuzzy (KNN) approach, proposed by Keller in
[17], which provides an improvement on existing classification techniques. For the
testing, pattern was passed through the memory cells as the fuzzy KNN selected k
closest memory cells from the immune memory. The selected memory cells were then
grouped according to their class labels with the class of the largest sized group
identifying the testing pattern.

4 Experiments and Results
Three different dataset resources ‘LPR0’, ‘LPR1’ and ‘LPR2’ have been collected
from a car park, road, street and petrol stations within the UK. LPR0 consisted of 950
samples of licence plates that will be used for training. LPR1 and LPR2 are two
datasets containing 400 samples to test the performance of the systems. Characters
extracted from LPR0 data were grouped into two parts: digits and letters. The digits
have 10 classes (0 to 9) and the letters have 23 classes (A to Z without Q, O, I).
Experiments were carried out through two different training methods. (1) Single pass
training, where each antigen produces the same number of antibodies, (2) Dynamic
training, described in section 3.3.
In both training, all the antibodies were first generated based on the mandatory
typeface. Each antigen produced 30 antibodies before generating them from LPR0.
These antigens only generated 10 antibodies each. The HD Threshold was 25 for
digits and 50 for characters; the Similarity Threshold was 0.93 for digits and 0.87 for
letters. The initial population for antibodies was 30 and hypermutation probability
was 0.05. All parameters were determined by experimentation.
Classification results are also depended on the classification strategy. The effect of
k in fuzzy KNN classification is examined and shows that k=5 for the digits and k=7
for letters gave the best performance with K=7 giving a better combined performance.
Improvement can be further achieved by dividing the letters into G1 and G2. Table 1
presents the results for both training. The results proved that dynamic training reduced
the difficulties for Single pass such as, large numbers of immune memory cells, low
recognition accuracy, time wasted in training and recognizing.
G1:

G2:
Table 1. Two different training results for CSA

Parameter K
K=5
K=7
K=9

Digits Accuracy %
Single Dynamic
96.5
98.5
95
96.5
93
95

Letters Accuracy %
Single
Dynamic
86
88
89
92.4
85
89

Table 2 presents the results for best training and testing (C=correct, I=Incorrect)
for our Licence Plate Character Recognition.

830

R. Huang, H. Tawfik, and A. Nagar
Table 2. Training & testing results for CSA

Data set
Accuracy%

Training
LPR0
Digits Letters
96.5
92.4

Testing
LPR1
C
1I >2I
89.5 3.0 7.5

Testing
LPR2
C
1I >2I
83.5 7.5 9.0

The performance of our CS based approach has also been compared to Back
Propagation Neural Networks [18]; a feed-forward neural network consisting of three
layers has been employed. In this case, the multilayer perceptron (MLP) model had
256 nodes in the input layer and 20-50 in hidden layers which were determined
empirically.
Letters are divided into N1, N2 so the confusion of similar characters could be
corrected by Neural-Networks. The initial results using ANN for the performance of
the digit network were sufficiently successful. The results are shown in table 3.
N1:

N2:
Table 3. Training & testing results for ANN

Data set
Accuracy%

Training
LPR0
Digits
Letters
94.3
90.5

C
84.5

Testing
LPR1
1W
>2W
6.0
9.5

C
81.0

Testing
LPR2
1W
>2W
9.0
10.0

From the experiments, the clonal selection algorithm has shown that it can provide
sufficient data to make generalizations from examples and can also successfully
classify previously unseen examples of its training classes. Adjustments to the basic
algorithm improved performance and illustrated how clonal selection could be used in
LPCR.
Compared to our neural network approach the proposed AIS based method was
found to be better than ANN by more than 2 percents in training and more than 3
percent in testing. The algorithm has been made to increase good candidate memory
cells and reduce the training time. But the main weakness lies in the efficiency of the
algorithm as the time taken to generate the memory cells could be seen to make it
unattractive for time-dependent applications such as most real-world problems.

5 Concluding Remarks
The paper reports on the use of clonal selection algorithm for its application for
Licence Plate Character Recognition. The clonal selection algorithm can be
characterized as a good alternative and a more competitive approach whereby
individual antibodies are competing with the whole population cooperating as an
ensemble of individuals to present the final solution. The experimental results
consistently show that the proposed algorithm has high classification precision.

Licence Plate Character Recognition Using Artificial Immune Technique

831

Moreover, when compared with BPNN the average performance of CSA is more
accurate and robust. Specifically, the proposed algorithmic structure was not
evaluated on a fixed location; the image is acquired manually in various views and
illumination conditions in order to closely resemble real world situations.
Licence Plate Recognition is always an important research topic of artificial
intelligent systems. Future work include increasing the size of the test set,
improvement of the detection accuracy and classification speed, and the hybridization
of CSA with Higher Order Neural Networks (HONNs) can be carried out later on.

References
1. Chang, S.L., Chen, L.S., Chung, Y.C., Chen, S.W.: Automatic licence plate recognition.
IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 5(1), 42–53 (2004)
2. Wu, C., On, L.C., Weng, C.H., Kuan, T.S., Kengchung, N.G.: A Macao Licence Plate
Recognition System. In: Proceedings of Fourth International Conference on Machine
Learning and Cybernetics, Guangzhou, vol. 7, pp. 4506–4510 (2005)
3. Duan, T.D., Hong Du, T.L., Phuoc, T.V., Hoang, N.: Building an automatic vehicle licence
plate recognition system. In: Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. Sci. RIVF, pp. 59–63 (2005)
4. Hu, Y., Zhu, F., Zhang, X.: A Novel Approach for License Plate Recognition Using
Subspace Projection and Probabilistic Neural Network. In: Wang, J., Liao, X.-F., Yi, Z.
(eds.) ISNN 2005. LNCS, vol. 3497, pp. 216–221. Springer, Heidelberg (2005)
5. Martín, F., García, M., Alba, L.: New methods for automatic reading of VLP’s (Vehicle
Licence Plates). In: Proc. IASTED Int. Conf. SPPRA (2002)
6. Kim, K.I., Jung, K., Kim, J.: Color Texture-Based Object Detection: An Application to
License Plate Localization. In: Lee, S.-W., Verri, A. (eds.) SVM 2002. LNCS, vol. 2388,
pp. 293–309. Springer, Heidelberg (2002)
7. Anagnostopoulos, C., Anagnostopoulos, I., Loumos, V., Kayafas, E.: A Licence PlateRecognition Algorithm for Intelligent Transportation System Applications. IEEE
Transaction on Intelligent Transportation Systems 7(3) (September 2006)
8. Broumandnia, A., Fathy, M.: Application of pattern recognition for Farsi licence plate
recognition. In: The ICGST Int. Conf. Graphics, Vision and Image Processing (GVIP),
vol. 2, pp. 25–31 (2005)
9. Chang, S.-L., Chen, L.-S., Chung, Y.-C., Chen, S.-W.: Automatic Licence Plate
Recognition. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 5(1) (March 2004)
10. Anagnostopoulos, C., Alexandropoulos, T., Boutas, S., Loumos, V., Kayafas, E.: A
template-guided approach to vehicle surveillance and access control. In: Proc. IEEE Conf.
Advanced Video and Signal Based Surveillance, pp. 534–539 (2005)
11. de Castro, L.N., Timmis, J.: Artificial Immune systems: A Novel Paradigm to Pattern
Recognition. In: Corchado, A.J., Fyfe, C. (eds.) Artificial Neural Networks in Pattern
Recognition, pp. 67–84. university of Paisley (2003)
12. Timmis, J., Knight, T., De Castro, L.N., Hart, E.: An Overview of Artificial Immune
Systems. Natural Computation Series, 51–86 (2004)
13. Burnet, F.M.: Clonal Selection and After. Theoretical Immunology. In: Bell, G.I.,
Perelson, A.S., Pimbley Jr, G.H. (eds.), pp. 63–85. Marcel Dekker Inc., New York (1978)
14. de Castro, L.N., Von Zuben, F.J.: aiNet: An Artificial Immune Network for Data Analysis.
In: Sacker, R.A., Newton, C.S. (eds.) Data Mining: A Heuristic Approach. Idea Publishing
Group, Hershey (2001)

832

R. Huang, H. Tawfik, and A. Nagar

15. Garain, U., Chakraborty, M., Majumder, D.: Improvement of OCR Accuracy by Similar
Character Pair Discrimination: an Approach based on Artificial Immune System. In: The
18th Int. Conf. on Pattern Recognition (ICPR), vol. 2, pp. 1046–1049 (2006)
16. Garain, U., Chakraborty, M.P., Dasgupta, D.: Recognition of Handwritten Indic Script
Using Clonal Selection Algorithm. In: Bersini, H., Carneiro, J. (eds.) ICARIS 2006.
LNCS, vol. 4163, pp. 256–266. Springer, Heidelberg (2006)
17. Keller, J.M., Gray, M.R., Givens Jr., J.: A Fuzzy K-Nearest Neighbor Algorithm. IEEE
Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics 15(4), 580–585 (1985)
18. Nijhuis, J.A.G., ter Brugge, M.H., Helmholt, K.A., Pluim, J.P.W., Spaanenburg, L.,
Venema, R.S., Westenberg, M.: Car licence plate recognition with neural networks and
fuzzy logic. In: Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Neural Netw., vol. 5, pp. 2232–2236 (1995)

