UTChem – A Program for ab initio Quantum Chemistry
Takeshi Yanai1, Haruyuki Nakano2, Takahito Nakajima2,3, Takao Tsuneda2, So Hirata4,
Yukio Kawashima5, Yoshihide Nakao2, Muneaki Kamiya2, Hideo Sekino6, and
Kimihiko Hirao2, 5
1

Oak Ridge National Laboratory, PO Box 2008 MS6367
Oak Ridge TN 37831-6367, USA
2
Department of Applied Chemistry, School of Engineering,
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan 113-8656
3
PREST, Japan Science and Technology Corporation (JST)
4
William R Wiley Environmental Molecular Sciences Laboratory
Battelle, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
K1-96, P.O.Box 999, Richland, WA 99352, USA
5
Institute for Molecular Science
Myodaiji, Okazaki, Japan 444-8585
6
Department of Knowledge-based Information Engineering
Toyahashi University of Technology
Toyohashi, Japan 441-8580

Abstract. UTChem is a quantum chemistry software developed by Hirao’s
group at the University of Tokyo. UTChem is a research product of our work
to develop new and better theoretical methods in quantum chemistry.

1 Introduction
Present molecular quantum theory is highly sophisticated, and has evolved
dramatically. Software forms a basis for computational chemistry. However, it is not
an easy task for an individual/group to develop a comprehensive new program
package in ab initio quantum chemistry from scratch. Several years ago, we decided
to accept this challenge. In view of the availability of such good programs as
Gaussian, Gamess, Molcas, NWChem, etc., one may question the relevance of a new
program package. We have three arguments for our project. (1) First, we believe that
healthy competition is very important in science. (2) Second, we can have a good
harvest by doing research using other programs, but it is an abortive flower. We could
not make a true breakthrough if we were circumscribed by current software
limitations. (3) Third, in spite of the excellent performance of other programs, there
are important and powerful methods that others cannot yet handle. We have
developed new methodologies in quantum chemistry, particularly the multireferencebased perturbation theory for describing chemical reactions and excited states,
relativistic molecular theory to treat heavy elements, parameter-free (less) exchange
and correlation functionals in DFT, highly efficient algorithms for calculating
molecular integrals over generally contracted Gaussians, etc. UTChem is a research
product of our work to develop new and better theoretical methods in quantum
chemistry. Most of the codes have been developed recently by Hirao’s group at the
P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2660, pp. 84–95, 2003.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

UTChem - A Program for ab initio Quantum Chemistry

85

University of Tokyo. The basic philosophy behind UTChem is to develop methods
that allow an accurate and efficient computational chemistry of electronic structure
problems for molecular systems in both the ground and excited states. We have started
joint developments with a few coalition partners, who are contributing their codes to
UTChem. Their contributions have enhanced the capabilities of UTChem to carry out
well-developed methods such as RPA (by Sekino), MPn, CI, CC, etc (by Hirata on
TCE project),[1] which are standard in most quantum chemistry programs. We are
aiming ultimately at better performance than other programs. UTChem will soon be
ready for distribution. Here you will be able to see the features of UTChem. UTChem
contains a large number of improvements and some interesting new features, which
others cannot match.

2

Synthetic Design and Conception for Implementation of
UTChem

A packaging of UTChem got started in a situation that researchers and students in
Hirao laboratory had accomplished their implementations individually on independent
developmental environments. The accomplishments are covering wide range of
capabilities enough to do a sequence of ab initio calculations without using other
extant distributions as follows,
1) multireference perturbation method (MRMP, MCQDPT),
2) multiconfigurational self-consistent field method (QCAS, GMC, CASVB),
3) relativistic 1/2-component method (RESC, DK3),
4) relativistic 4-component method (DHF, DKS),
5) one- and two-electron integrals,
6) direct and conventional self-consistent field method,
7) density functional theory (OP, PFREE),
8) dynamics and simulation involving QM/MM,
9) response theory for Hartree-Fock and density functional theory.
Our synthetic design and conception are basically coming from a practical necessity
on how smooth and stressless compilation of the above existing program codes can be
carried out. The fundamental structure we desire is that UTChem should be a program
suite which enables developer groups to develop separately executable programs of
their owns individually with no consolidation into one binary. This approach is based
on a development philosophy that programmer groups can program as freely as
possible with no disturbance of serious problems and fatal bugs of the damaged codes
the other programmer groups have committed, and no intruder of the other developer
groups into their own pretty codes and motivations.
Technically, through a sequence of calculations using separated binaries, what the
individual program binaries share with each other is data files compliant with the file
formats the developers have specified. UTChem itself just governs a number of rules
of the file interfaces, (i.e., no subroutine interfaces, no program rules, ...), which are
an exclusive way to connect the individual executable binaries. This design is simple
and widely used in other program systems, meanwhile a method to control several
program binaries has to be implemented so as to distribute them as a reliable and
usable program suite. In UTChem, Python language is used to provide a high-level

86

T. Yanai et al.

and flexible script to control and manage the calculation flows consisted of separately
executed programs. We believe that this packaging approach also widens
accessibility, in which various developers also easily contribute their own program to
UTChem.
As to practical calculation flows, figure 1 depicts a flowchart in UTChem. After the
frontend program reads a given input file, required one- and two-electron AO
integrals are calculated. HF/KS-SCF as well as TD-HF/DFT for excitation energies
and Local MP2 are carried out with 2e AO integrals directly-driven or restored from
disk. The single-reference electron correlation theories such as configuration
interaction theory (CISD, CISDT, CISDTQ), coupled-cluster theory (CCD, LCCD,
CCSD, LCCSD, QCISD, CCSDT, CCSDTQ), and Møller-Plesset perturbation theory
(MP2, MP3, MP4) achieved by tensor contraction engine (TCE) are following the
integral transformation. Multiconfigurational calculations including MCSCF and
perturbation (MRMP and MCQDPT) method are connected with AO integral part and
HF-SCF part. After the above single-point energy calculations, if necessary and
executable, the derivative energies with respect to the nuclear coordinates are derived.
The gradients are used in the geometry optimization code and dynamics simulation
including QM/MM.

Input file
frontend

1e/2e ints.

MCSCF

SCF

CASVB

TD-HF/DFT

MCQDPT

LMP2
MO Transform

TCE

Gradient
Optimization
Simulation

Fig. 1. Schematic calculation flowchart in UTChem

UTChem - A Program for ab initio Quantum Chemistry

87

2. 1 INTEGRA

INTEGRA is currently a primal module of UTChem program suite, which we started
to write from scratch in Jun 1999. Fortran 90 language is chosen for writing codes in
point of its simplicity and flexibility even for quantum chemists reluctant to overcome
the computational complexity. Our scientific motivation of the initial implementation
of INTEGRA was to develop an efficient integral method for generally contracted
Gaussian-type orbitals (GTOs). The successful achievement of the correlation
consistent basis sets developed by Dunning[2] and the atomic natural orbital (ANO)
basis sets by Almlöf and Taylor[3] has spurred demands of the efficient two-electron
integral program based on the general contraction scheme. The difficulty in efficient
calculations using general contraction scheme is that the generally contracted GTOs
are in nature composed of quite a few primitive GTOs, and the conventional ab initio
programs and algorithms are designed to calculate the segmentally contracted GTOs.
Recently Ishida has reported an efficient formulation for electron repulsion integrals
(ERIs) using accompanying coordinate expansion (ACE) method.[4] His formulation
can yield a formulation of ERIs requiring the lowest FLOP counts in the ever reported
formulations, and especially the reduction of FLOPs for ERIS over highly contracted
GTOs is outstanding. We have developed a new integral method oriented to the
generally contracted Gaussian-type orbitals (GTOs), and succeeded to implement an
efficient integral code SPHERICA onto INTEGRA.[5] Our algorithm successfully
specialized to the general contraction scheme with exploiting the efficiency of
Ishida’s formulation could lead to FLOP count dependence against the degree of
contraction K and the number of contracted GTOs N as
FLOPs = x1K 4N + x2 K 3N 2 + y1 K 2N 3 + y2 KN 4 + z N 4.

(1)

Comparing with the segmental contraction scheme, which gives FLOP count
dependence as,
FLOPs = N 4 ( xK 4 + y K 2 + z ),

(2)

our algorithm gains a drastic efficiency in O(N3+ KN2). The name of the code
SPHERICA is coming from a capability to calculate ERIs over spherical harmonics
generally contracted GTOs efficiently without transformation from Cartesian indices.
Table I shows the CPU times to calculate benzene molecule using ANO basis sets on
the single CPU of IBM RS/6000 260 model. Currently the integral code SPHERICA
is contributing to a direct and conventional SCF routine, in which a robust orbital
optimization using direct inversion in the iterative subspace, DIIS, the symmetry
usage within D2h and subgroup, DFT numerical grid-quadrature routine for the
exchange-correlation potentials, and the parallelization using Global Array[6] have
been implemented.
Historically INTEGRA has got an integrated platform for other implementations
toward post-SCF routine, such as the integral transformation routine, the timedependent Hartree-Fock / density functional theory (TD-HF/DFT) routines, the
single-reference many-electron correlation routines achieved by TCE, and so on,
except MR2D and S&D. The relativistic calculation code REL4D is also
programmatically included in INTEGRA. Even though several applications are

88

T. Yanai et al.

consolidated into one binary INTEGRA, a switch specified in a command option
allows each application to execute independently, and therefore schematically each
application can be regarded as an independent binary. The reason why developers
have been working to write codes mainly in INTEGRA without getting their codes an
individual binary is just for convenience of the program interface of INTEGRA and
Fortran90 environment. Remarkably, the contributors of RPA and TCE were willing
to work on cooperative coding on INTEGRA.
To summarize, INTEGRA efficiently provides the following basic integrals
necessary for ab initio calculations with Cartesian and spherical harmonics basis,
1) one-electron integrals and first derivatives (overlap, core Hamiltonian and first
dipole moment)
2) two-electron integrals and first derivatives,
3) one- and two-electron integrals transformed into MO indices.
The parallelized HF/KS-SCF and parallelized TD-HF/DFT can be calculated using
directly driven integrals. The detail features on DFT, TCE and REL4D modules are
mentioned in other sections.
Table 1. CPU times (sec.) to calculate Fock matrix in SCF calculation for benzene molecule.

ANO-S
ANO-S
ANO-L
ANO-L

Primitive /
Contracted GTOs
C: 10s6p3d / 3s2p1d
H: 7s3p / 2s1p
C: 10s6p3d / 4s3p2d
H: 7s3p / 3s2p
C: 14s9p4d / 3s2p1d
H: 8s4p / 2s1p
C: 14s9p4d3f /
4s3p2d1f
H: 8s4p3d / 3s2p1d

Number of
SPHERICA
basis

HONDO

MOLCAS

114

379

2,710

237

192

870

17,500

358

114

1,003

4,330

796

264

6,080

125,000

4,910

2.2 MR2D – Multi-Reference 2nd-Order Perturbation Theory and Its
Derivatives
MR2D is a program for a multistate multireference perturbation theory, the quasidegenerate perturbation theory with MC-SCF reference functions (MC-QDPT) [7]. In
this PT, state-averaged CAS-SCF is first performed to set reference functions, and
then an effective Hamiltonian is constructed, which is finally diagonalized to obtain
the energies of interest. This theory includes multireference Møller–Plesset (MRMP)
PT (the case that the set of reference functions reduces to a single function).[8]
Let the reference functions be CAS-SCF wavefunctions,

α = ∑ CA A .
A

The effective Hamiltonian to second order is given by

(3)

(H

)

(0 − 2)
eff
αβ

= α H β +

UTChem - A Program for ab initio Quantum Chemistry

89

β H I I H α 
1  α H I I H β
+

.
∑
(0)
(0)
2 I 
Eβ − EI
Eα(0) − EI(0)


(4)

Substituting the second-quantized operator into H, we obtain an explicit formula
using molecular integrals and orbital energies instead of matrix elements,
u u
( H eff(0− 2) )αβ = EαCASδαβ − ∑ α E pq B CB ( β )∑ ε − ε pe+eq∆E
pq , B
e
e
q
Bα


u pe g eqrs
α E pq , rs B CB ( β )  ∑
pqrs , B
 e ε e − ε q + ε r − ε s + ∆EBα

g pers ueq
g parb g aqbs
1
+∑
+ ∑

2 ( a ,b ) ε a − ε q + ε b − ε s + ∆EBα 
e ε e − ε q + ∆EBα

−

−

∑

∑

pqrstu , B

α E pq , rs ,tu B CB ( β )∑
e

g pers geqtu

ε e − ε q + ε t − ε u + ∆EBα

(5)

+ (α ↔ β ) ,

where upq and gpqrs and are one and two electron integrals, respectively, and EB is
the difference between the energies of the zeroth order state and configuration
EB(0)íE (0). The orbital labels {i, j}, {a}, and {e} are for doubly occupied, active, and
external orbitals, respectively, and {a´, b´} run over both active and external orbitals,
and the suffix of the generator {p, q, r, s, t, u} run over only active orbitals. The terms
including doubly occupied orbitals are omitted in this equation. See Ref. [7]for the
full formula. Note that the MRMP energy is also calculated with the formula by
setting the number of the states to one.
The formula including doubly occupied orbitals might look tedious. However, the
energy can be calculated just a sum of simple terms, hence rather simple. The
computation is done with the coupling coefficient driven method. These coupling
coefficients are sparse and can be pre-screened according to the condition,

(v

L

)

pq rs
B
αβ

= α E pq ,L, rs B CB ( β ) > δ ,

(6)

where δ = 1 × 10í8 is usually sufficient to keep the energy accuracy better than 10í5
hartree. Thus the multiple summations for active orbitals in Eq. (6), which seemingly
scales as the power of the number of active orbitals, are actually diminished
considerably.
The computational time strongly depends on the systems calculated: in large CAS
cases, the coupling coefficient computation occupies the most of CPU time, and in
large basis set cases, integral transformation occupies the time. However, roughly, we
can say that MR2D runs in memory, disk, and CPU time comparable to the CAS-SCF
computation itself.
MR2D has —not only the option for CAS— also options for general configuration
spaces.[9] For general configuration space cases, additional non-CAS terms appear as
well as CAS terms, Eq. (6). The non-CAS terms may be calculated through

90

T. Yanai et al.

(H

)

(2)
non-CAS αβ

= vT (α )gw ( β )

(2)

I H A C A (α ) ,

(3)

with

v I (α ) =
w I (β ) =

∑

B∈ref

∑

A∈ref

I H B CB ( β )

(E

(0)
β

− EB(0) ) .

(4)

The intermediate determinants/CSFs I are constructed by exciting one or two
electron(s) from the reference determinants/CSFs within the active orbital space. In
general, the number of I is not large, and thus they may be managed in computer
memory.
Analytic gradients are not available in the current version.
2.3 TCE – Combination with Tensor Contraction Engine

UTChem also supports a spectrum of single-reference many-electron theories such as
configuration-interaction theory (CISD, CISDT, CISDTQ), coupled-cluster theory
(CCD, LCCD, CCSD, LCCSD, QCISD, CCSDT, CCSDTQ), and Møller-Plesset
perturbation theory (MP2, MP3, MP4). To expedite the time-consuming and errorprone processes of deriving the working equations of these complex theories and
implementing efficient computer programs on the basis of these equations, we have
taken a unique approach --- we have developed a symbolic manipulation program
(Tensor Contraction Engine or TCE)[1] that automated the both processes of the
formula derivation and program synthesis. Provided a well-defined ansatz of a
second-quantized many-electron theory, TCE performs valid contractions of creation
and annihilation operators according to Wick's theorem, consolidates identical terms,
and reduces the expressions into the form of tensor contractions acted upon by
permutation operators. Subsequently, it determines the order of contractions having
the minimal operation and memory cost, factorizes common contractions (defines
intermediate tensors), and identifies reusable intermediates. The resulting ordered list
of binary tensor contractions, additions, and index permutations is translated into an
optimized program that is combined with UTChem. The programs synthesized by
TCE take advantage of spin, spatial, and index permutation symmetries
simultaneously to minimize the number of arithmetic operations and storage
requirement, adjust the peak local memory usage by index range tiling, and support
parallel I/O interfaces and dynamic load balancing for parallel executions. TCE not
only expedites the daunting task of deriving and implementing various many-electron
theories, but also enhances portability, maintainability, and extensibility of the
synthesize program, facilitates parallelization and other laborious optimization of the
programs which may be tailored to a particular computer architecture, and helps
design and tests new many-electron theories which may be too complex to be handcoded. Currently, the TCE-generated many-electron theories are limited to nonrelativistic Hartree-Fock reference wave functions, but the extension to relativistic 2and 4-component reference wave functions is underway.

UTChem - A Program for ab initio Quantum Chemistry

91

2. 4 LMP2 – An MP2 Method with Localized Molecular Orbitals
Local MP2 (LMP2), which is based on the second-order Møller–Plesset perturbation
theory, is an electron correlation method with localized molecular orbitals. Local
correlation methods efficiently estimate the dynamical electron correlation in
comparison with conventional canonical methods.
Using orthogonal localized occupied orbitals we have developed and implemented
the local MP2 method based on the idea developed by Head-Gordon and coworkers.
A subset of non-orthogonal correlation functions (the orbital domain) is assigned to
each of the localized occupied orbitals using a distance criterion and excitations from
localized occupied orbitals that are arranged into subsets. The correlation energy is
estimated using a partial diagonalization and an iterative efficient method for solving
large-scale linear equations. The orbital domain sizes are found to be independent of
the molecular size, and the present local MP2 method covers about 98–99% of the
correlation energy of the conventional canonical MP2 method.
Generally, the correlation energy of the second-order Møller-Plesset method is
given as
r
r
1r r
T = −1V ,
E2 = V t T
(5)
4

(

)

r
r
where the vector T is the electronic excitation amplitude and vector V is a vector
described by the two-electron repulsion integrals as

Viajb = (ia jb ) − (ib ja ) .

(6)

The terms i and j denote occupied orbitals, and the terms a and b denote the nonorthogonal virtual orbitals. The matrix ∆ is described by
∆iajb ,

i ′a ′j ′b ′

= (F2 )ia ,i ′a ′ (S 2 ) jb, j ′b′ + (S 2 )ia ,i ′a ′ (F2 ) jb , j ′b ′ .

(7)

Using the overlap and Fock matrices, the matrices F2 and S2 in Equation (6) are
described as follows

(F2 )ia ,i′a′ ≡ Fii′ S aa′ − S ii′ Faa′ ,
(S 2 )ia ,i′a′ ≡ S ii′ S aa′ .

(11)

The non-iterative local MP2 method that was developed by Head-Gordon et al. has
to simultaneously diagonalize both the F2 and S2 matrices to obtain the matrix ∆-1.
Since the side length of both of these two matrices is the number of occupied orbitals
times the number of neighboring virtual orbitals, then these diagonalizations require a
high computational cost for large-sized molecules.
In our improved method, this particular step is divided into two steps, which
r
involve the diagonalization of the S2 matrix, and the iterative solving of the T vector
without diagonalizing matrix F2. Since S2 is a block diagonal matrix within subspaces
consisting of same occupied orbitals, then it is easy to diagonalize it. After
diagonalizing the S2 matrix, the vectors of small norms are excluded to avoid a linear
r
dependence in the virtual space. In the next step, the T vector is solved by an
iterative method without diagonalizing matrix F2.

92

T. Yanai et al.

2.5 DFT – Density Functional Theory

Density functional theory (DFT) is a methodology that usually solves the Kohn-Sham
(KS) self-consistent field (SCF) equation. In this program, as usual in packages of
computational chemistry, the matrix algorithm of the KS method is implemented with
a basis set.
The main characteristics of this DFT program are as follows;
1. Johnson’s linear-scaling method[10] is implemented.
Numerical calculations are carried out only for grid points where the adopted
Gaussian-type basis functions provide inneglegible values.
2. A screening scheme is carried out for the weight and loop of grids.
Stratmann-Scuseria-Frisch’s weight and microbatch schemes of grid points[11]
are also employed. Screenings are also performed for the values of Fock matrix
element and electron density.
3. Calculational process is optimized for general contraction Gaussian basis
functions.
4. OP correlation functional[12,13] and long-range exchange correction (LRXC)
scheme[14,15] are implemented.
5. Data of grids are stored in core memory.
In this program, various types of functionals are available besides OP correlation.
2.6 REL4D – Relativistic Molecular Theory

One of the main features in the UTChem program package is to be able to consider
the relativistic effects. The relativistic effect has been considered as an essential factor
to figure out molecular structures, chemical activities, or various properties of heavyelement systems theoretically. Recently many quantum chemists have dedicated a lot
of efforts to the calculation and treatment of the electronic structures of polyatomic
systems including heavy elements, which are involved in many interesting chemical
and physical phenomena. They still present unique difficulties to the theoretical study.
Before recent years the relativistic effect had ever been thought less important for
chemical properties because the relativity appears primarily in the core electrons,
which had been believed to be unlikely to affect chemically active valence regions
dramatically. Recent studies, however, have revealed not only quantitatively but also
qualitatively that the relativistic effect plays essential and comprehensive roles in total
natures of molecular electronic structures for heavy-element systems. We are
nowadays convinced that the relativistic effect is definitely important for the accurate
theoretical treatment of heavy-element systems as well as the electron correlation
effect.
We have recently developed several relativistic molecular theories including fourcomponent relativistic and approximate quasi-relativistic approaches. For the fourcomponent relativistic approach, which is the rigorous relativistic treatment using the
four-component spinors explicitly, our development starts from derivation of the
analytical form of the basis spinor. In the four-component case we have to manage to
get rid of the variational collapse coming from using the finite basis sets. We have
proposed the efficient four-component basis spinors using the generally contracted
kinetically balanced Gaussian-type spinors, which are taken from the analytical spinor
forms corresponding to the one-electron hydrogenic system, and maintain the

UTChem - A Program for ab initio Quantum Chemistry

93

variational stability through the kinetic balance condition. Furthermore, our
contraction basis spinors have merits to give the correct behavior to the atomic limit,
and require significantly less number of small-component basis spinors than the
conventional decoupled scalar spin-orbitals used in the pioneering four-component
programs MOLFDIR and DIRAC. We have formulated and implemented DiracHartree-Fock (DHF)[16] and Dirac-Kohn-Sham (DKS)[17] methods, which have
been made computationally feasible by exploiting the highly efficient integral method
for two-electron repulsion integrals over the two-component basis spinors.
Adoption[18] of the ACE formula proposed by Ishida[3] and the transfer relation
proposed by Head-Gordon and Pople[19] make our algorithm efficient. It is shown
that our four-component method is the most straightforward and efficient way by
comparing with the other four-component relativistic methods and programs.
Even though we have spent much effort to develop the four-component method,
still, the relativistic method using four-component spinors demands severe
computational efforts to solve, and has a lot of difficulties to be applied to the largesize molecules. Thus, we have been proposed as the quasi-relativistic approximation
instead of solving Dirac equation with the fully four-component spinors. Chemists’
interest is devoted to the electronic solution, although the four-component
calculations provide the eigenstates for not only electronic states but also positronic
ones. The motivation of two-component approximation is to obtain the electronic
states without treating the positonic solution explicitly. However, since the relativistic
effect appearing in the electronic states is closely related to the positronic states in the
four-component language, the problem of two-component method is how we can
effectively retrieve the effect lost by neglecting the positronic solutions within the
framework of the two-component Hamiltonian. In our recent works, we have
developed the two kinds of two-component quasi-relativistic method using the
RESC[20,21] and higher-order Douglas-Kroll (DK)[22,23] Hamiltonian. The RESC
Hamiltonian has been derived from the eliminating small component equation with
the relativistic substitutive correction. The higher-order DK Hamiltonian is the
effective Hamiltonian obtained by transforming the Dirac Hamiltonian by an
exponential-type unitary operator based on the philosophy of DK transformation[24,25] The exponential-type operator, which we have proposed, can
simplify the formulation and implementation of the higher-order transformation by
taking full advantage of the Baker-Cambell-Hausdorff expansion. Both twocomponent methods have the excellent features that they contain no singularity,
therefore, and variationally treat the relativistic effect on the same footing as the
electron correlation.
The resulting four-component relativistic and approximate quasi-relativistic codes
have been packed in a program suite named REL4D, which is currently a part of the
UTChem program package. The efficient ERI engine contributes to the performance
for generating relativistic molecular integrals. In the self-consistent field (SCF)
routine, several techniques have been implemented; the restricted open-shell
treatment proposed by Davidson, the direct and conventional SCF methods, and the
direct inversion in the iterative subspace (DIIS) method. The numerical gridquadrature routine for the exchange-correlation potentials is implemented for our
DKS scheme. The (SS|SS) integrals can be treated near the SCF convergence in the
direct SCF approach.

94

T. Yanai et al.

2.7 S&D – Simulation and Dynamics

S&D is a program for executing molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo simulations.
Ab initio molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo simulations can be carried out.
Molecular dynamics simulations are carried out in microcanonical (NVE) ensemble.
Verlet’s algorithm and Gear’s algorithm can be selected for integrating the equation of
motion. Ab initio molecular dynamics can be performed with any approach in
UTChem, in which the energy gradients are available. Monte Carlo simulations are
performed in canonical (NVT) ensemble. In Monte Carlo simulation using ab initio
energies, the energies are calculated in other programs. Simulated annealing and the
replica exchange method (REM)[26,27,28,29] are also available for both classical and
ab initio Monte Carlo simulations. In REM, a number of non-interacting replicas of
the original system at different temperatures are simulated independently and
simultaneously. REM is a powerful tool to obtain the global minimum in systems with
many local minima, and difficult to optimize. Periodic boundary condition or
spherical (image) boundary condition can be selected in the simulations.
The Quantum Mechanical (QM) / Molecular Mechanical (MM) method is available
in UTChem. Simulation using QM/MM energies and gradients can be performed as
well. QM/MM calculation can be carried out in Hartree-Fock methods and density
functional theories. Geometry optimization using QM/MM is not available in the
current version.
Acknowledgments. This research was supported in part by a grant-in-aid for
Scientific Research in Specially Promoted Research "Simulations and Dynamics for
Real Systems" from the Ministry of Education, Science, Culture, and Sports of Japan,
and by a grant from the Genesis Research Institute. Tensor Contraction Engine is a
product of Battelle and Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, and its development
has been funded by the U.S. Department of Energy, the Division of Basic Energy
Science, Office of Science under contract DE-AC06-76RLO 1830 with Battelle.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.

5.
6.
7.
8.

Webpage of the Tensor Contraction Engine (TCE) project is placed on
http://www.cis.ohio-state.edu/~gb/TCE/.
T. H. Dunning Jr., J. Chem. Phys. 90, 1007 (1989).
J. Almlöf and P. R. Taylor, J. Chem. Phys. 86, 4070 (1987).
K. Ishida, Int. J. Quantum Chem. 59, 209 (1996); K. Ishida, J. Chem. Phys. 109, 881
(1998); K. Ishida, J. Comput. Chem. 19, 923 (1998); K. Ishida, J. Chem. Phys. 111, 4913
(1999).
T. Yanai, K. Ishida, H. Nakano, and K. Hirao, Int. J. Quantum Chem. 76, 396, 2000.
Global Aarray (GA) toolkit developed in Pacific Northwest National Laboratory,
http://www.emsl.pnl.gov:2080/docs/global.
H. Nakano, J. Chem. Phys. 99, 7983 (1993); H. Nakano: Chem. Phys. Lett. 207, 372
(1993).
K. Hirao, Chem. Phys. Lett. 190,374 (1992); K. Hirao, Chem. Phys. Lett. 196, 397
(1992); K. Hirao, Intern. J. Quantum Chem. Symp. 26,517 (1992).

UTChem - A Program for ab initio Quantum Chemistry
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.

95

H. Nakano, J. Nakatani, and K. Hirao, J. Chem. Phys. 114,1133 (2001); H. Nakano, R.
Uchiyama, and K. Hirao, J. Comput. Chem. 23, 1166 (2002).
C. A. White, B. G. Johnson, P. M. W. Gill and M. HeadGordon, Chem. Phys. Lett. 253,
268 (1996).
R. E. Stratmann, G. E. Scuseria and M. J. Frisch, Chem. Phys. Lett. 257,213 (1996).
T. Tsuneda, T. Suzumura and K. Hirao, J. Chem. Phys. 110, 10664 (1999).
T. Tsuneda, T. Suzumura and K. Hirao, J. Chem. Phys., 111, 5656 (1999).
H. Iikura, T. Tsuneda, T. Yanai, and K. Hirao, J. Chem. Phys. 115,3540 (2001).
M. Kamiya, T. Tsuneda and K. Hirao, J. Chem. Phys.,117, 6010 (2002).
T. Yanai, T. Nakajima, Y. Ishikawa, and K. Hirao, J. Chem. Phys. 114, 6526 (2001).
T. Yanai, H. Iikura, T. Nakajima, Y. Ishikawa, and K. Hirao, J. Chem .Phys. 115, 8267
(2001).
T. Yanai, T. Nakajima, Y. Ishikawa, and K. Hirao, J. Chem. Phys. 116, 10122 (2002).
M. Head-Gordon and J. A. Pople, J. Chem. Phys. 89, 5777 (1988).
T. Nakajima and K. Hirao, Chem. Phys. Lett. 302, 383 (1999).
T. Nakajima and K. Hirao, J. Chem. Phys. 113, 7786 (2000).
T. Nakajima, T. Suzumura, and K. Hirao, Chem. Phys. Lett. 304, 271 (1999).
T. Nakajima and K. Hirao, Chem. Phys. Lett. 329, 511 (2000).
M. Douglas and N. M. Kroll, Ann. Phys. (N.Y.) 82, 89 (1974).
B. A. Hess, Phys. Rev. A 33, 3742 (1986).
K. Hukushima and K. Nemoto, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 65, 1604 (1996).
C. J. Geyer and E. M. Keramidas (Ed.), Computing Science and Statistics: Proceedings of
the 23rd Symposium on the Interface, Interface Foundation, Fairfax Station 156 (1991).
R. H. Swendsen and J.-S. Wang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 57, 2607 (1986).
Y. Ishikawa, Y. Sugita, T. Nishikawa, Y. Okamoto, Chem. Phys. Lett. 333, 199 (2001).

