Prediction of Protein Interactions by the Domain and
Sub-cellular Localization Information¶
Jinsun Hong and Kyungsook Han*
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Inha University, Inchon 402-751, Korea
khan@inha.ac.kr

Abstract. There has been a recent interest in the computational methods for
predicting genome-wide protein interactions due to the availability of genome
sequences of several species, the difficulty of detecting whole protein
interactions in higher species even with the current high-throughput
experimental methods, and the common perception of the data generated by
high-throughput experimental methods as noisy data. However, data predicted
by computational methods as well as that detected by high-throughput
experimental methods inherently contain extremely many false positives.
Several methods have been developed for estimating the reliability of
experimental protein interaction data, but there are few for predicted interaction
data. This paper presents a prediction method of protein-protein interactions
using the protein domain and sub-cellular localization information, and
experimental results of the method to the protein-protein interactions in human.

1 Introduction
An intrinsic problem with high-throughput methods for detecting protein-protein
interactions is that data generated by the methods are extremely noisy, even more so
than is the case for gene expression data, so one cannot simply use the data blindly
[1]. More than half of current high-throughput data are estimated to be spurious [2].
Although it is possible to focus on interactions with higher reliability using only those
supported by two or more sources of evidence, this approach invariably throws out
the majority of available data [1].
In an attempt to improve the reliability of interaction data, we have recently
generated a new set of interaction data using protein domain [3-5] and sub-cellular
localization. This paper presents a scoring scheme for assessing the reliability of the
protein interaction data predicted by a computational method called homologous
interactions, and experimental results of the scheme to the protein-protein interactions
in human. The scoring method is more general than a typical method of selecting cofunctional or co-localized protein pairs only since some pairs of proteins interact more
frequently than others despite their different functions or locations in a cell. The
protein-protein interaction data predicted by the method was compared to the
¶

This work was supported by the Ministry of Information and Communication of Korea under
grant IMT2000-C3-4 and by KOSEF through the Systems Bio-Dynamics Research Center.
*
To whom correspondence should be addressed.
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3516, pp. 1024 – 1027, 2005.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

Prediction of Protein Interactions

1025

experimental data in HPRD (http://www.hprd.org/), and the results show that the
method predicts reliable protein-protein interactions and is useful for assessing the
reliability of protein-protein interactions.

2 Prediction Methods and Experimental Results
The prediction system of protein-protein interactions is composed of two parts:
predicting protein interactions and assessing the reliability of the predicted
interactions (Fig. 1).

Fig. 1. Architecture of the prediction system of protein-protein interactions

The interaction prediction part extracts relevant data (for example, protein names
and sequences, sub-cellular localizations, domains and their amino acid sequences,
and known protein-protein interactions) from Ensembl (http://www.ensembl.org/),
HPRD (http://www.hprd.org/), InterPro (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/), and NCBI
(http://www.ncbi.nih.gov/), and removes redundant data. Suppose a protein X with
domains a, b, and c and protein Y with domains d and e. When proteins X and Y
interact each other, we can predict 6 domain-domain interactions of (a, d), (b, d), (c,
d), (a, e), (b, e), (c, e), which are in turn used to predict new protein-protein
interactions. PSI-BLAST [6] is used to identify domains from protein sequences.
The reliability assessing part constructs a score matrix from the interaction
frequency at a specified sub-cellular localization, and the score matrix is used to
evaluate the reliability of predicted protein-protein interactions. The information on
protein, protein-protein interactions, and sub-cellular localization was obtained from
HPRD that has human protein-protein interactions with the sub-cellular localization
information. The sub-cellular localization schema of MIPS (http://www.mips.gsf.de/)
was used to classify 20 sub-cellular localizations in human.
The sub-cellular localization score (Sl) was computed using equation 1, in which
I l ( p i , p j ) is the number of interactions between proteins pi and pj in a same
compartment l, and N is the number of proteins that participate in protein-protein
interactions. Interactions with the sub-cellular localization score Sl = 0 are the cases in
which source or target protein has no sub-cellular localization information.

1026

J. Hong and K. Han

S l ( pi , p j ) =

1
N

∑I (p , p
l

i

j

)

(1)

We constructed 2,272 domain-domain interactions between 1,712 human domains
and predicted 5,188 protein-protein interactions between 4,205 human proteins. In the
reliability assessing part, localization ID from 1 to 20 was assigned to 5,188 proteinprotein interactions and the value of a score matrix was applied to these interactions.
3,839 protein-protein interactions have higher value than 0 and others have value of 0.
We compared the predicted data by our system to the experimental data in HPRD.
Fig. 2 shows Sl scores in the range from 0 to 2 for the two data sets. A vertical axis
presents an accumulated percentage at each score. In the experimental data of HPRD,
there were 1,336 protein-protein interactions (37%) of 3,611 protein-protein
interactions with Sl = 0. In the predicted data by our system, there were 1,349 proteinprotein interactions (26%) of 5,188 protein-protein interactions with Sl = 0. This
indicates that the prediction system generates more reliable interactions than the
experimental data of HPRD.
Fig. 3 shows the sub-cellular localization distribution that includes cytoplasm,
extra-cellular, membrane, nucleus between existing experimental 1,179 interactions
obtained from BIND database and 5,188 interactions predicted by our system. In
general, our system contains more protein interactions than existing experimental data
in most cell compartments, and much more protein interactions in nucleus.
100%

100%

80%

80%

60%

60%

40%

40%

20%

20%
0%

0%
0

0.5

1

1.5

0

2

0.5

1

1.5

2

Fig. 2. Sl scores of the HPRD data (left) and those of our system (right)

1200

300

900

200
600

100

300
0

0
C

E

M

N

C

E

M

N

Fig. 3. The sub-cellular localization distribution of the BIND data (left) and our data (right). C:
Cytoplasm, E: Extra-cellular, M: Membrane, N: Nucleus

Prediction of Protein Interactions

1027

We also computed the Interaction Generality (IG) values [7] to assess the
reliability of protein-protein interactions. The IG value of an interacting protein pairs
A-B is defined as the number of proteins directly interacting with protein A or B.
Proteins with IG value less than 5 were 76% of proteins that participates in 3,839
predicted proteins-protein interactions.

3 Conclusions
This paper presented an intuitive, computationally feasible scoring scheme for
measuring the reliability of a large-scale data set of protein-protein interactions, and
for filtering potentially false positives in the data set. The number of potential artifacts
can be substantially reduced be removing data with low score from the data set. Since
the reliability score is computed for individual protein interactions in a data set, and
the score can be directly used to filter out spurious interactions (that is, those
interactions with low scores) from the data set. The overall reliability of the entire
data set can also be computed by taking the average scores of the interactions in the
data set. In this study we computed sub-cellular localization scores only, but the
scoring scheme is general enough to incorporate any number of subscores depending
on the sources of information available.

References
1. D'haeseleer, P., Church, G.: Estimating and improving protein interaction error rates.
Proceedings of the Computational Systems Bioinformatics Conference (2004) 208- 215
2. von Mering, C, Krause, R., Snel, B., Cornell, M., Oliver, S.G., Fields, S., Bork, P.:
Comparative assessment of large-scale data sets of protein–protein interactions. Nature 417
(2002) 399-403
3. Antonina, A., Dave, H., Steven, E.B., Tim, J. P.H., Cyrus, C., Alexey, G. M.: SCOP
database in 2004: refinements integrate structure and sequence family data. Nucl. Acids.
Res. 32 (2004) D226-D229
4. Einat, S., Hanah, M.: Correlated Sequence-signatures as Markers of Protein-Protein
Interaction. J. Mol. Biol. 311 (2001) 681-692
5. Lappe, M., Park, J., Niggemann, O., Holm, L.: Generating protein interaction maps from
incomplete data: application to fold assignment. Bioinformatics 17(2001) 149-156
6. Altschul, S.F., Madden, T.L., Schffer, A.A., Zhang, J., Zhang, Z., Miller, W., and Lipman,
D.J.: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein database search
programs. Nucleic Acids Res. 25 (1997) 3389-3402
7. Saito, R., Suzuki, H., Hayashizaki., Y.: Interaction generality, a measurement to assess the
reliability of a protein-protein interaction. Nucleic Acids Res. 30 (2002) 1163-1168

