Self-consistent 2D Compact Model for Nanoscale
Double Gate MOSFETs
S. Kolberg1, T.A. Fjeldly2, and B. Iñiguez3
1,2

UniK – University Graduate Center and Norwegian University of Science
and Technology, N-2027 Kjeller, Norway
{kolberg,torfj}@unik.no
3
Universitat Rovira i Virgili (URV),
Tarragona, E-43001, Spain
benjamin.iniguez@urv.net

Abstract. 2D modeling results of the electrostatics and the drain current in
nanoscale DG MOSFETs are presented. The modeling of the 2D capacitive
coupling within the device is based on the conformal mapping technique. In
moderate above-threshold conditions, we obtain self-consistent results, which
are in excellent agreement with numerical simulations.

1 Introduction
In nanoscale double gate (DG) MOSFETs, the electron barrier topology is a critical
factor when determining conduction paths and currents in the device. A prerequisite
to obtaining a precise description of such devices is to include two-dimensional (2D)
effects in the models, based on a self-consistent solution of the 2D field pattern in the
device. In such an approach, short-channel effects and scaling properties will be
intrinsic to the model which, accordingly, will require only a minimal parameter set of
clear physical origin.
The basic modeling problem is to obtain an analytical or semi-analytical solution
of a 2D Poisson's equation where the four contacts (source, drain and the two gates)
and the dielectric gaps define the boundary conditions. According to the superposition
principle, Poisson's equation can be separated into a 2D Laplace equation for the
capacitive coupling and the remainder involves the potential distribution established
by the body charges [1 - 10]. The latter can usually be treated by simplifying
considerations.
The Laplace problem for the DG MOSFET can be solved in different ways. One
possibility is to perform a full Fourier expansion of the potential or by using a loworder truncation [1-4]. A corresponding procedure by means of expansion in Bessel
functions has been used for cylindrical surrounding gate transistors [5]. An alternative
approach is to apply the conformal mapping technique [6], which was first used for
classical, long-channel MOSFETs [7]. Later, the technique was enhanced and applied
to sub-100 nm devices [8] and to the subthreshold regime of undoped, nanoscale DG
MOSFETs [9,10]. Here, we present new modeling results based on this technique
applied to a wider range of operation.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part IV, LNCS 3994, pp. 607 – 614, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

608

S. Kolberg, T.A. Fjeldly, and B. Iñiguez

In Section 2, we discuss the conformal mapping as applied to the Laplaces problem
in DG MOSFETs. In Section 3, we present a classical analysis of the self-consistent
electrostatics of the device at gate voltages where the concentration of free electrons
is significant.
The specific device considered is assumed to have a gate length of L =25 nm, a
silicon thickness of tSi = 12 nm, a p-type body doping of Na =1015 cm-3, an aluminum
metal gate, and a high-k gate insulator (nitrated Si-oxide) with a relative permittivity
of 7 and a thickness of tox = 1.6 nm [11]. In such a small device volume, the depletion
charge can be neglected. Because of the small dimensions of this device, the drain
current will have the character of both drift-diffusion and ballistic transport. However,
we only consider the drift-diffusion formalism since it allows us to make comparisons
with numerical calculations using the Atlas simulator from Silvaco.

2 Conformal Mapping and Capacitive Coupling
The method of conformal mapping is applied since the solution of the Laplace
equation is more easily derived in the new plane into which the device is mapped.
This solution is then mapped back to the normal plane using a mapping function for
the coordinates between the two planes.
2.1 Conformal Mapping
The device body described in the normal (x, y) -plane, as depicted in Fig. 1 (with 2D
equipotential lines indicated), is mapped into the upper half of a complex (u, iv) plane.

Fig. 1. Schematic view of the DG MOSFET device structure indicating the 2D equipotential
lines associated with capacitive coupling between the contacts

The boundary of the body is mapped into the real u-axis [9], as shown in Fig. 2.
The iv-axis represents the gate-to-gate symmetry line through the body center. To
simplify the discussion, we replace the insulator of thickness tox by an electrostatically
equivalent silicon layer of thickness t'ox=toxεs/εox, where εs and εox are the permittivities
of the silicon and the insulator, respectively. Laplace's equation is then considered for
this extended body whose boundary is defined by the inner surfaces of the gate
electrodes, the source, the drain, and the insulator gaps in the four corners between the
contacts. In the strongly doped source and drain contacts, the depletion widths will be

Self-consistent 2D Compact Model for Nanoscale Double Gate MOSFETs

609

Fig. 2. The body of the DG MOSFET mapped into the upper half of the (u, iv)-plane. The insets
show the mapping functions for the u-axis (lower), the iv-axis (upper left) and the circle with
radius 1/√k. These represent the boundary, the gate-to-gate symmetry line, and the source-todrain symmetry line, respectively.

small compared to the body dimensions and can be neglected, although the potential
drops within this region should be counted.
The mapping of the boundary is defined by the following Schwartz-Christoffel
transformation [5,9,10]:
z = x + iy =

L F (k , w)
2 K (k )

where

F (k , u ) =

w

∫0

dw'

(1 − w' )(1 − k w' )
2

2

2

(1)

Here, F(k,u + iv) is the elliptic integral and K(k) ≡ F(k,1) is the complete elliptic
integral, both of the first kind. The modulus k is a constant between 0 and 1
determined by the geometric ratio L/(tsi + 2t'ox). For real arguments in the standard
range 0 ≤ u ≤1, ample approximate expressions, series expansions, and iteration
routines exist for F(k,u). F(k, u + iv) can also be expressed in terms of the standard
elliptic integral for some other values of the argument, both real and complex. In
addition, routines exist for calculating the values for general complex arguments w.
Note that in Fig. 2, u = 0 corresponding to x = 0 defines the middle point on the
upper gate contact (Gate 1). The four corners of the body map to u = ±1 and u = ±1/k.
The middle point in the lower gate contact (Gate 2) is at u = ±∞ or v = ∞.
For the boundary, the mapping functions are given by the following expressions in
terms of the standard elliptic integral (note that F(k,-u) = - F(k,u)).
Gate1:

x=

L F (k , u )
,
2 K (k )

y=0

(2)

610

S. Kolberg, T.A. Fjeldly, and B. Iñiguez

S and D:

L
x=± ,
2

(

⎡
⎛
1 − k 2u 2
y = (tSi + 2t 'ox )⎢1 − F ⎜ 1 − k 2 ,
⎜
1− k2
⎢
⎝
⎣

x=

Gate2:

L ⎛ 1 ⎞
F ⎜ k , ⎟ K (k ),
2 ⎝ ku ⎠

⎞
⎟ K 1− k2
⎟
⎠

)⎤⎥⎥
⎦

y = tSi + 2t 'ox

(3)

(4)

For the present device, where k = 0.4278, the mapping function for the boundary is
shown in the lower part of Fig. 2. The gate-to-gate symmetry line, which corresponds
to the imaginary axis in the w-plane, has the following mapping function [10]:
G1-G2 sym. line:

⎛
v
y = (t Si + 2t 'ox ) F ⎜ 1 − k 2 ,
⎜
1 + v2
⎝

x = 0,

(

⎞
⎟ K 1− k2
⎟
⎠

)

(5)

Similarly, the source-to-drain symmetry line maps into a circle of radius 1/√k about
the origin of the w-plane as follows,
S–D sym. line:

x=

⎞
L ⎛2 k
F⎜
, cos(θ )⎟⎟
2 ⎜⎝ 1 + k
⎠

⎛2 k ⎞
⎟,
K ⎜⎜
⎟
⎝1 + k ⎠

y=

t Si + t 'ox
2

(6)

where θ is the angle measured anticlockwise from the positive u-axis. The mapping
functions for these two symmetry lines are shown in the upper left and right insets of
Fig. 2, respectively.
Once the potential distribution has been calculated in the (u, iv)-plane, it can be
mapped back into the (x, iy)-plane using the above expressions.
2.2 Capacitive Coupling
The potential distribution throughout the body can generally be expressed as [6]
ϕ (u , v ) =

v

π

ϕ (u ')
∫ (u − u ')2 + v 2 du '
−∞
∞

(7)

where φ(u') is the electrostatic potential along the boundary, i.e. for all values of u',
and the integral runs over the entire boundary. The major contributions to this integral
come from the four equipotential contacts and minor terms come from the insulator at
the four corners. In the limit of zero insulator thickness, Eq. (7) results in the
following analytical expression for the potential distribution in the w-plane [10],
⎧
⎫
⎡
−1 ⎛ 1 − ku ⎞
−1 ⎛ 1 + ku ⎞ ⎤
⎟⎥ + (VGS1 − VFB ) × ⎪
⎟ − tan ⎜
⎪(VGS 2 − VFB )⎢π − tan ⎜
kv
kv
⎠
⎝
⎠
⎝
⎣
⎦
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎡ −1 ⎛ 1 − ku ⎞
1 ⎪⎪⎡ −1 ⎛ 1 − u ⎞
−1 ⎛ 1 + u ⎞ ⎤
−1 ⎛ 1 − u ⎞⎤ ⎪
ϕ (u , v ) = ⎨⎢ tan ⎜
⎟ + tan ⎜
⎟⎥ + Vbi ⎢ tan ⎜
⎟ − tan ⎜
⎟⎥ ⎬
π ⎪⎣
⎝ v ⎠
⎝ v ⎠⎦
⎝ kv ⎠
⎝ v ⎠⎦ ⎪
⎣
⎪
⎪
⎡ −1 ⎛ 1 + ku ⎞
⎤
+
u
1
⎞
−1 ⎛
⎪+ (Vbi + VDS )⎢tan ⎜
⎪
⎟ − tan ⎜
⎟⎥
⎝ kv ⎠
⎝ v ⎠⎦
⎣
⎩⎪
⎭⎪

(8)

In our calculations, the effects of a finite insulator thickness are included. VGS1
and VGS2 are the potentials of Gate 1 and Gate 2, respectively, referred to the
source contact, VFB is the flat-band voltage for the gates and the silicon body, Vbi is

Self-consistent 2D Compact Model for Nanoscale Double Gate MOSFETs

611

the built-in voltage of the source and drain, and VDS is the drain-source voltage. Along
the two symmetry lines, Eq. (8) simplifies somewhat. Moreover, the mapping
functions along these lines can be expressed in terms of the unity-range elliptic
integrals.
The potential distribution according to Eq. (8) will dominate the behavior of the
device in the subthreshold regime. Using the general mapping function of Eq. (1), the
potential profile can now be transformed back to the z-plane. Fig. 3 shows φ(x, y) for
the present device in subthreshold using VGS1 = VGS2= -0.45 V and VDS = 0.5 V.

Fig. 3. Potential distribution over the extended body at subthreshold condition (VDS = 0.5 V and
VGS1 = VGS2 = -0.45 V) calculated from Eq. (8) and mapped to the (x,y)-plane using the mapping
functions discussed in Section 2.1

We note that the potential distribution has a saddle point near the device center,
corresponding to the minimum barrier energy for electron conduction between source
and drain. With increasing drain voltage, the barrier minimum is steadily lowered and
shifted from the device center towards the source. This drain-induced barrier lowering
(DIBL) is intrinsic to the present formalism as expressed in Eq. (8) [9,10]. An
excellent agreement between the present model and numerical calculations using the
Atlas device simulator has been demonstrated [10].
With increasing gate voltage, the barrier gate-to-gate energy profile is lowered and
flattens. Eventually, the barrier minimum shifts to the silicon-insulator interfaces.
When we approach this regime, the induced electron density will be sufficiently high
to significantly influence the device electrostatics, requiring a self-consistent analysis
(see Section 3).
The device threshold voltage VT can be defined in several ways, for example, in
terms of a minimum current level, a minimum electron sheet density, or, as is usually
done for the classical MOSFET, as the gate bias that causes a band bending by twice
the silicon body Fermi potential at the barrier minimum. Using the latter definition,
we find from the potential distribution of Eq. (8) that VT = -0.47 V for symmetric
gates and zero drain bias [10]. For the other definitions, VT will be higher.

612

S. Kolberg, T.A. Fjeldly, and B. Iñiguez

3 Self-consistent Modeling in Moderate Inversion
In moderate inversion, the contribution of the electrons to the body potential
distribution is comparable to that of the capacitive coupling. We assume a classical
electron distribution and consider specifically the gate-to-gate energy barrier at the
middle of the device for VGS1 = VGS2 and VDS = 0 V. The shift in position and
magnitude of the barrier at finite VDS (DIBL-effect) is embedded in the 2D expression
of Eq. (8) and therefore carries over to the calculation of the modified, self-consistent
gate-to-gate barrier profile. For the drain current modeling (see Section 4), we have
adopted a simplified approach where we assume that the gate-to-gate potential
distribution for finite values of VDS retains the same, near-parabolic form as for VDS =
0 V, but scaled to reflect the correct barrier minimum as dictated by the DIBL-effect.
Along the gate-to gate symmetry line, we superimpose the 1D potential
contribution φ1(y) from the free electrons and the 2D contribution φ2(y) from the
capacitive coupling to obtain the total potential
ϕ ( y ) = ϕ1 ( y ) + ϕ 2 ( y )

(9)

Classically, φ1(y) is determined by integrating twice the 1D Poisson equation for
the total potential using Boltzmann statistics for the electron density inside the silicon
layer. This leads to a self-consistent expression for φ1(y) in the form of an integral
equation. To solve this, we approximate φ(y) by a symmetric parabolic form with a
maximum deviation φm from its boundary value VGS – VFB. For thin devices as here,
this approximation is found to agree very well with numerical simulations within the
operating range considered. By adding the resulting, explicit expression for φ1(y) to
φ2(y) from Eq. (8) in Eq. (9), we obtain the following implicit, algebraic equation
from which the parameter φm can easily be extracted,
⎡4

⎛ 1 ⎞

⎤

ϕ m = ⎢ tan −1 ⎜⎜
⎟⎟ − 1⎥ (Vbi − VGS + V FB ) −
⎝ k⎠ ⎦
⎣π

⎛ V − V FB + ϕ m − ϕ b
qn i (t Si + 2t ' ox )
exp⎜⎜ GS
Vth
8ε s
⎝

⎧
⎛ ϕm ⎛
2t ' ox
πVth
⎪
⎜1 −
× ⎨sgn (ϕ m )
erf ⎜
⎜ V ⎜ tsi + 2t '
ϕ
m
ox
⎪⎩
⎝ th ⎝

2

⎞ ⎞ Vth
⎟⎟ ⎟ +
⎟
⎠⎠ ϕm

⎡ ⎛ ϕ
⎢exp⎜ − m
⎢ ⎜ Vth
⎣ ⎝

⎛
2t ' ox
⎜⎜1 −
+ 2t ' ox
tsi
⎝

⎞
⎟⎟
⎠

2

⎞
⎟⎟
⎠

(10)

⎞ ⎤ ⎫⎪
⎟ − 1⎥
⎟ ⎥⎬
⎠ ⎦ ⎪⎭

Here, erf is the error function and sgn returns the sign of its argument. Fig. 4a) shows
a comparison of the potential φm versus applied VGS for VDS = 0 V as calculated from
Eq. (10) and simulated classically from Atlas. Note that in the model calculations, we
have adjusted Vbi to include the effects of a finite depletion width inside the source
and drain. We observe an excellent agreement between the model and the simulation
within the range of VGS considered.

4 Drain Current Modeling
The small dimensions of the present device indicate that the drain current will have
the character of both drift-diffusion and ballistic/quasi-ballistic transport. Here, we
discuss a drain current model based the classical drift-diffusion formalism.

Self-consistent 2D Compact Model for Nanoscale Double Gate MOSFETs

613

For this device, the barrier topography at maximum is relatively rigid, i.e., it is
little affected by the drain current for a reasonable set of bias voltages within the
subthreshold and moderate inversion regimes. This allows us to use the following
simple, explicit drift-diffusion model for the current that relies on the shape of the
barrier near its maximum [12],

I DD = qWμ n n s ( x )

dV F ( x )
≈ qWμ nVth 1 − e −VDS
dx

(

Vth

)

L

∫0

dx
n so ( x )

(11)

Here, W is the device width, VF(x) is the quasi-Fermi potential in the channel, ns(x) is
the sheet electron density of the channel, and nso(x) is the same density in the absence
of drain current (constant VF from source through the barrier). Note that with IDD
obtained from Eq. (11), we can go back and find an estimate of the true VF(x). If
necessary, this, in turn, can be used to derive a self-consistent expression for IDD,
where the effect of the current on the barrier profile is included.
Fig. 4b) shows a comparison between the modeled drift-diffusion current obtained
from Eq. (11) and the corresponding current using the Atlas device simulator. Note
that in this model calculation, we have adjusted the effective gate length slightly to
account for the true path length of the carriers through the channel. Again, we observe
an excellent agreement between modeled and simulated results within the range of
VGS considered.

a)

b)

Fig. 4. Comparison of φm versus VGS for VDS = 0 V (a) and drift-diffusion current versus VGS
for VDS = 0.1 V, 0.2 V and 0.3 V (b) between calculations based the present model (Eqs. (9) and
(11)) (solid curves) and numerical simulations performed with Atlas (symbols)

5 Conclusion
We have developed a precise, compact 2D model for nanoscale DG MOSFETs for the
subthreshold and the moderately strong inversion regimes of operation. The 2D
modeling is based on conformal mapping techniques and a self-consistent analysis of
the energy barrier topography, that include the effects of both the capacitive coupling
between the contacts and the presence of electrons. Assuming a drift-diffusion
transport mechanism, the drain current calculated from the present model and from

614

S. Kolberg, T.A. Fjeldly, and B. Iñiguez

numerical simulations (Atlas) show excellent agreement. Extensions of the model to
include the strong inversion regime, quantum effects, and ballistic/quasi-ballistic
transport are under way.

Acknowledgement
This work was supported by the European Commission under contract no. 506844
(SINANO) and the Norwegian Research Council under contract No. 159559/130
(SMIDA). We acknowledge the donation of TCAD tools from Silvaco.

References
1. Woo, J. S., Terrill, K.W., Vasudev, P. K.: Two-dimensional analytic modeling of very thin
SOI MOSFETs. IEEE Trans. Electron Devices. vol. 37 (1990) 1999-2005
2. Frank, D. J., Taur, Y., Wong, H.-S. P.: Generalized scale length for two-dimensional
effects in MOSFETs. IEEE Electron Device Letters. vol. 19 (1998) 385-387
3. Oh, S.-H., Monroe, D., Hergenrother, J. M.: Analytic Description of Short-Channel Effects
in Fully-depleted Double Gate and Cylindrical, Surrounding-Gate MOSFETs. IEEE
Electron Device Letters. vol. 21. no. 9 (2000) 1173-1178
4. Liang, X., Taur, Y.: A 2-D analytical solution for SCEs in the 2D MOSFET. IEEE Trans.
Electron Devices. vol. 51. no. 8 (2004) 1385-1391
5. Iñíguez, B. Hamid, H. A., Jiménez, D., Roig, J.: Compact Model for Multiple Gate
MOSFETs. Proc. of the Workshop on Compact Modeling, Anaheim, CA (2005) 52-57
6. Weber, E.: Electromagnetic fields, vol. 1 - Mapping of Fields. Wiley, New York (1950)
7. Klös, A., Kostka, A.: A new analytical method of solving 2D Poisson’s equation in MOS
devices applied to threshold voltage and subthreshold modeling. Solid-State Electronics.
vol. 39 (1996) 1761-1775
8. Østhaug, J., Fjeldly, T. A., Iniguez, B.: Closed-form 2D modeling of sub-100nm
MOSFETs in the subthreshold regime. J. Telecom. and Information Techn.. vol. 1/2004,
(2004) 70-79
9. Kolberg, S., Fjeldly, T. A.: 2D modeling of nanoscale DG SOI MOSFETs in the
subthreshold regime, accepted for publication in Journal of Computational Electronics
10. Kolberg, S., Fjeldly, T. A.: 2D Modeling of Nanoscale Double Gate SOI MOSFETs Using
Conformal Mapping. Physica Scripta, accepted for publication in Physica Scripta
11. Template device for modeling and simulation defined within the European Commission
Network of Excellence project SINANO (http://www.sinano.org/).
12. Fjeldly, T. A., Shur, M. S.: Threshold Voltage Modeling and the Subthreshold Regime of
Operation of Short-Channel MOSFETs. IEEE Trans. Electron Devices. vol. 40, (1993)
137-145

