Model of Mechanical Interaction of Mesenchyme
and Epithelium in Living Tissues
Jiˇr´ı Kroc
Department of Mechanics, University of West Bohemia in Pilsen
Univerzitni 22, 306 14 Pilsen, Czech Republic
kroc@c-mail.cz
http://www.c-mail.cz/kroc

Abstract. Developmental biology describes how tissues, organs, and
bodies are made from living cells. There exists a large body of biological
data about developmental processes but there is still not ultimate understanding of how the whole orchestra of all involved processes is working.
It is the place where mathematical modelling could help to create biologically relevant models of morphological development. The morphological
development could be mathematically decomposed into three distinct but
mutually interconnected parts, namely to mechanical response of tissues,
signalling by chemicals, and switching of cells into diﬀerent types by a
gene regulatory network. This paper is focussed to the part dealing with
mechanical interaction of growing mesenchyme and epithelium within a
living tissue modelled by a set of nodes interconnected by deformable
bars as in tensegrity models.

1

Introduction

Developmental biology is describing—simply said—how the whole body of a living creature could be created from a single cell. It is a very vital ﬁeld that produce
a lot of genetic, signalling and morphological data—but current knowledge does
not cover the whole ﬁeld so far. New, clever experimental approaches bring a
constant ﬂux of data. The most important point is that there is not unique
understanding of how those single parts are working together. From a certain
distance and using a kind of metaphor, we could say that we roughly know how
every single player perform its part but we do not understand how the whole
orchestra is working. This is the point where mathematical models take their
part. They enable us to build adequate models of developmental biology using
biologically relevant input data where outputs could be directly compared to
another biologically observed data.
From the mathematical point of view, the whole problem could be easily
decomposed into three distinct parts. Namely, evolution of morphology—i.e.,
topology in the mathematical sense—by growth, signalling by speciﬁc chemicals
This work was supported by the Czech Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports
under grant number MSM 4977751303.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part IV, LNCS 3994, pp. 847–854, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

848

J. Kroc

produced by diﬀerent types of cells, and actions of gene regulatory network
which tells every single cell if it has to undergo—in the speciﬁc morphological
and chemical context—a cell type change or not.
The whole problem becomes quite complicated not only due to size of growing
morphology but, as well, due to size of gene regulatory network itself. Therefore,
there is a good reason to start with a much simpler case that will capture the
essence of this type of modelling. The natural beginning is to model growth of
a tooth. From biological point of view, it is well known that most of—if not
all—interactions among all cells in developing tooth are encapsulated inside of
growing tooth egg and its subsequent stages.
A growing tooth egg enter several developmental stages going from the egg,
across cap, bell and to the ﬁnal shape. It is well known that the crucial role
in development of mammalian tooth—having crown with a relatively complex
structure—is played by epithelial and mesenchyme growth which compete one
with the other in speed of growth. Mesenchyme is encapsulated in epithelium, i.e.
epithelium grows in two-dimensions and mesenchyme in three-dimensions. This
leads to the situation that some parts of epithelium—which generates mechanical
force—are imposed to higher strains. Places which encounter larger strains are
transformed into so called knots—via gene regulatory network—which inﬂuence
speed of growth of epithelium in surrounding and naturally leads to creation of
crown by invagination of epithelium into mesenchyme.
Mathematical model of morphological development of one tooth will be
built—and published in a series of papers—using complex systems where cellular automaton is employed as the mathematical tool expressing the complexity
of the model through its parts [1, 2, 3], i.e. growth by cell division, signalling
to neighbouring cells by chemicals and transformation of cells into diﬀerent cell
types due to gene regulatory network. Concept of cellular automata enables a
very detailed—spatially and in time—deﬁnition of behaviour of every part of
the simulated topology. Some models of morphological development are already
known but the problem is that they do not fully reﬂect biologically observed
behaviour, e.g. some non-local computations of mechanical interactions are used
what is not in coherence with biological observations. Those models typically
use simpliﬁed gene regulatory networks, they do not work with correct mechanical interactions of cells, and use some other simpliﬁcations which might lead to
improper biological outputs.
The general idea of the CA-model of mechanical behaviour of mesenchyme
presented here comes from the tensegrity models [4, 5, 6, 7, 8] where the structure
is composed from a set of two generic types of elements, one is under compression
load (bars) and the other one under tensile load (strings). Spatial combination of
those two types of elements leads to light and stable structures which are able to
sustain large loads compared to classical structures. In the model, we work only
with bars interconnecting nodes—originally located in the centre of each cell—
where one node belongs exactly to one cell. We employ knowledge achieved in
structural design [9, 10, 11] regarded to elastic properties of structures to model
mesenchyme but we know that behaviour of epithelium is richer then is used

Model of Mechanical Interaction of Mesenchyme and Epithelium

849

there. Gene regulatory network and diﬀusion of chemicals will be involved in the
model later.

2

Model

The model of the mesenchymal and pseudo-epithelial interaction is built step
by step. Firstly, one-dimensional model of mesenchyme and pseudo-epithelium
is deﬁned, studied, and carefully tested on tensile and compressible examples of
metallic materials. Then a two-dimensional model is proposed with special attention to mesenchyme where mechanical properties of epithelium are simpliﬁed.
It is fascinating how mechanical force could be created in living cells and tissues
[12, 13, 14, 15]. It is known that cells are working with small local actions leading
to large global shape and force changes. We use ad hoc mechanisms leading to a
very similar mechanical eﬀects as in living tissues.
The model works with a network of nodes interconnected by bars. Each cell
manage one node, see Figure 1. Bars are deformable by tension and compression.
Strain is deﬁned as
L(t) − L0
,
(1)
(t) =
L0
where L0 is the initial length and L(t) is its actual value at given time t. Use of
this equation allows working with relative values used in the Hook’s law.
The Hook’s law represents linear dependence of force/stress on strain and is
deﬁned as
F (t)
=E· ,
(2)
σ(t) =
A
where σ(t) is stress [N/M2 ], F (t) is force [N], and A is the cross-section of bars
[m2 ]. This equation is elastic—i.e., linear—for the whole range of strain what is
rather physically unrealistic because it allows to compress material to physically
impossible strains.
Therefore, force F is composed from two distinct parts. One is deﬁned by
Hooks law for tensile and compressible deformation which is taken from Equation
2, and the other one represents incompressibility of material. In our case, we
expect that material could not be compressed below = −0.8 of its original
length L0 .
F = E·A· ,

∈ (−0.8, +∞),

= −0.08,

F < E · A · (−0.8).

(3)

In words, there is linear dependence of force F on strain above = −0.8, and
the constant value of = −0.8 is taken for force below the value of E · A · (−0.8)
due to incompressibility.
The reason why we use—as the ﬁrst approximation—such dependence of force
F on strain is strictly deﬁned by one well known physical constrain. It is known
that compressibility of solids and liquids has a limit. The value of compression
from the principle could not go bellow = −1; it is even very diﬃcult to approach

850

J. Kroc

values close to it. It stems from the law of mass conservation because mass could
not be compressed to negative volumes.
To elucidate what happen if we take linear dependence of stress/force on
deformation the following sequence of values of L which is computed from L0
by multiplication it with a factor of 2, 1.1, 0.9, 0.5, and 0.01 is inserted into
Equation 1 and gives equal to 1, 0.1, -0.1, -0.5, and -0.99, respectively. There
is an obvious limit in compression equal to = −1.
If force F depends on strain linearly in the case of compression then we
could not apply force lower then (−E · A). Values bellow are not physically
relevant. Therefore, we have to use some kind of nonlinear dependence of force
on deformation in region of compression as is done, for example, in Equation 3.
The following set of three equations 4, 5, and 6 represents local equilibria for
three types of cells used in the two-dimensional model, i.e. for top, bulk, and
bottom—similarly for the left and right—cells
(k,l)∈((−1,0),(0,−1),(1,0))
(k,l)∈((−1,0),(0,−1),(1,0),(0,1))
(k,l)∈((1,0),(0,1),(−1,0))

ext
F (k,l) + Fsurf
=0

F

(k,l)

+

ext
Fbulk

(4)

=0

(5)

F (k,l) + F f ix = 0

(6)

where F ext represents an externally applied force to the cell in our case and F f ix
represents ﬁxing force applied at the bottom, left, and right border cells. The
last equation 6 represents the situation where cells are ﬁxed during the whole
simulation to the initially deﬁned locations. Force F f ix balance the other forces,
and therefore, no movement of those cells occurs. It could be simply done by
keeping of all cell coordinates constant through the whole simulation.
In one-dimensional case—where a column of cells/bars is taken and the only
allowed deformation works vertically—,no equilibrium is computed at the bottom cell. The position is simply kept constant, i.e. the coordinates x and y are
constant.
Vertical displacement of the top cell yN in the one-dimensional case is computed according to Equations 1, 2 and 4 (where (k,l) = {(0,-1)}) and gives the
following formula for tensile deformation
yN (t + 1) =

F ext
· L0 + yN (t) + L0
E ·A

(7)

Vertical displacement of bulk cells in the one-dimensional case is computed
from Equations 1, 2, and 5 (where (k,l) = {(0,-1),(0,1)})—and after certain
rearrangement—by mere averaging of positions
yN (t + 1) =

1
(yN +1 (t) + yN −1 (t))
2

(8)

it could be done due to use of the linear Hooks law in compression. Please, note
which simulation steps are taken on the left and right sides of the equation.
Vertical displacement of all cells in the case of compression works with the same
equations as in the case of tensile deformation.

Model of Mechanical Interaction of Mesenchyme and Epithelium

851

(i, j+1)

(i, j) original
(i+1, j)

(i−1, j)

(i, j) taken
(i, j) estimated

(i, j−1)

Fig. 1. The ﬁgure depicting the main idea of the used algorithm. The original position
of the point managed by the updated cell (i, j) is moved to the taken value according
to values provided by four neighbouring cells which lays on the line connecting the
original position with the estimated one.

Displacements in the two-dimensional case behaves in a much more complicated way then in the one-dimensional one. The main idea of the algorithm is
explained in the Figure 1. Whereas in the one-dimensional case the new position
of the central cell could be simply computed by averaging positions of upper and
lower cells, in the two-dimensional case we have to use an iteration method to
ﬁnd an estimated value.
In Figure 1, original position of the point managed by the updated cell (i, j)
is expected to be moved to the estimated position—given by solution of the
equilibrium equations—which is the optimal solution of the problem regarded to
data given by the neighbouring cells (i − 1, j),(i, j − 1),(i + 1, j), and (i, j + 1).
If the point is moved to this estimated position then local change could be too
fast and the updating algorithm looses its stability. Such instability could be
removed when we take some value laying on the line interconnecting original
and estimated value—called taken value. The distance from original point to the
taken one is a predeﬁned fraction p from the distance of original and estimated
points. Situation at the top cells is similar to the situation explained for the bulk
cells except the fact that only three neighbouring cells are presented there, i.e.
(i − 1, j),(i, j − 1), and (i + 1, j).
Initially, the position of the cell under consideration is estimated using equations 4, 5 and 6 representing local equilibrium at the node. The algorithm used to
ﬁnd new position of nodes is working with halving of intervals in two dimensions.
Then deformation limits are tested and the value called estimated achieved, i.e.
compression could not go bellow = −0.8. Finally, p% shift of the old position
towards the estimated position of the cell under consideration is taken where p
is typically equal to 10% or 20%.

3

Results and Discussions

Vertical displacement of the top cell yi was tested for several diﬀerent external
forces F ext computed according to Equation 7 for tensile deformation and for

852

J. Kroc

compression in the one-dimensional case. It gives theoretically expected values.
Testing of two-dimensional case was done for unloaded and loaded cases. Analysis
of results is not as straightforward as in the one-dimensional case.
The following topology and data are used in the two-dimensional case—a
block of 10 × 10 nodes which is anchored by cells laying at the left, bottom,
and right edges of this block. The only cells allowed to move are those laying
at the top edge of the block including all bulk cells. Cells number 5, 6, and
7 located at the top line of the block of cells—counted from left to right—are
subjected to the external force F = −2.5 or −20 acting downwards, see Figure 2.
Bars are having the Young modulus of E = 105 ; the cross-section of them is
A = 0.01 · 0.01 = 10−4 , the incompressibility threshold is set to 0.2, and the
initial distance of nodes L0 = 0.1.
Snapshots depicting evolution of topology of a block of 10×10 nodes subjected
to the force F = −2.5 or −20 which acts downwards at 5th, 6th, and 7th cell
at the top block of cells could be seen in Figures 2 and 3. In the ﬁgures, nodes
are depicted without bars. Several important observations were made upon this
sequence. Firstly, symmetry breaking is present in the model because cells are
moving to the left in the horizontal direction what is the most profound eﬀect
at the top cells. Secondly, as expected, the largest deformation is present at
the place where external forces are applied. Thirdly, applied force squeeze the
block and some top cells without applied external force are moved upwards for
F = −20, e.g. third and fourth top nodes from the left. All those observations
are coherent with experiments.
Model allows use of volume forces and it is possible to change the Young
modulus locally from a place to a place but those properties of the model are
not studied in this contribution. It is reserved for the future use of the model
and for better description of behaviour of living tissues.
Solutions of the local equilibria equations 4, 5, and 6 have to be found by
an iterative formula because it is the well known fact that there does not exist,
in general, an analytical solution of a set of two or more nonlinear equations.
It is found that presented algorithm fails when large simulation steps are used,

1.0

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

y

y

1.0

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.4
x

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

x

Fig. 2. Two conﬁgurations taken at simulation steps 100 and 300—depicting evolution
of topology of a block of 10 × 10 nodes stressed by force the F = −20 N

Model of Mechanical Interaction of Mesenchyme and Epithelium

853

Fig. 3. A cumulative plot of all positions of all nodes for all simulated steps from 0 to
300 for the force F = −20 N is shown here. Trajectories belonging to diﬀerent nodes
could be easily distinguished.

i.e. when the value of p is approaching or equal to one. The reason is simple.
Algorithm could exchange positions of neighbouring nodes for large steps, what
is not physically acceptable. It automatically leads to instability of simulation
and mixing of nodes. The proposed CA-model is working with physically relevant
values as models using ﬁnite element method (FEM) do.
The topology used in this contribution represents the ﬁrst, testing step towards a new model of tooth growth. The model describing behaviour of mesenchyme is deﬁned here, i.e. mesenchyme is pressed by force from the top by a
force that pseudo-epithelium generates, but—in general—mesenchyme could be
pressed from any direction. In the future model, mechanical inﬂuence of epithelium would be taken into the game together with a gene regulatory network, and
signalling chemicals produced according to this network which switch cells from
one type into another one.

4

Conclusions

The ﬁrst part—i.e. mechanical behaviour of mesenchyme and pseudoepithelium—of the model describing morphological development of tooth is proposed and tested in this contribution. In this model, mechanical inﬂuence of
epithelium is mimicked by use of external force acting at the top side of square
block of cellular automata cells. Hence, the CA-model is prepared to take into
account mechanical inﬂuence of epithelium generating mechanical pressure to
mesenchyme. It is shown that a tissue composed from living cells could be simulated by use of a tensegrity like structure which is composed from a set of nodes
mutually interconnected by deformable bars.

854

J. Kroc

References
1. T. Toﬀoli and N. Margolus. Cellular Automata Theory. MIT Press, Cambridge,
1987.
2. A. Ilachinski. Cellular Automata: A Discrete Universe. World Scientiﬁc Publishing
Co. Pte. Ltd., New Jersey, London, Singapore, Hong Kong, 2001.
3. S. Wolfram. A New Kind of Science. Wolfram Media Inc., Champaign, 2002.
4. D.E. Ingber. The architecture of life. SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, 278(1):48–57,
Jan 1998.
5. D.E. Ingber S.R. Heidemann P. Lamoreux and R.E. Buxbaum. Opposing views
on tensegrity as a structural framework for understanding cell mechanics. J Appl
Physiol, 89(4):1663–1670, Oct 2000.
6. P. Lamoreux S.R. Heidemann and R.E. Buxbaum. Opposing views on tensegrity as
a structural framework for understanding cell mechanics. J Appl Physiol, 89:1670–
1674, Oct 2000.
7. D.E. Ingber. Opposing views on tensegrity as a structural framework for understanding cell mechanics - rebuttals. J Appl Physiol, 89:1674–1677, Oct 2000.
8. D.E. Ingber S.R. Heidemann P. Lamoreux and R.E. Buxbaum. Opposing views on
tensegrity as a structural framework for understanding cell mechanics - rebuttals.
J Appl Physiol, 89:1677–1678, Oct 2000.
9. P. Hajela and B. Kim. On the use of energy minimization for ca based analysis in
elasticity. Struct Multidisc Optim, 23:24–33, Dec 2001.
10. E. Kita and T. Toyoda. Structural design using cellular automata. Struct Multidisc
Optim, 19:64–73, Mar 2000.
11. Z. Gurdal and B. Tatting. Cellular automata for design of truss structures with
linear and nonlinear response. In 8th AIAA/USAF/NASA/ISSMO Symposium on
Multidisciplinary Analysis and Optimization, pages 1–11, Long Beach, CA, Sep
2000. American Institute for Aeronautics and Astronautics.
12. Pilot F. and Lecuit T. Compartmentalized morphogenesis in epithelia: From cell
to tissue shape. DEVELOPMENTAL DYNAMICS, 232(3):685–694, Mar 2005.
13. Hay E.D. The mesenchymal cell, its role in the embryo, and the remarkable signaling mechanisms that create it. DEVELOPMENTAL DYNAMICS, 233(3):706–720,
Jul 2005.
14. Ball EMA and Risbridger GP. Activins as regulators of branching morphogenesis.
DEVELOPMENTAL BIOLOGY, 238(1):1–12, Oct 2001.
15. S.R. Heidemann and D. Wirtz. Towards a regional approach to cell mechanics.
TRENDS in Cell Biology, 14(4):160–166, Apr 2004.

