A Symbolic Approach to Vagueness Management
Mazen El-Sayed and Daniel Pacholczyk
University of Angers, 2 Boulevard Lavoisier, 49045 Angers Cedex 01, France
{elsayed,pacho}@univ-angers.fr

Abstract. We study knowledge-based systems using symbolic manyvalued logic and multiset theory. In previous papers we have proposed a
symbolic representation of nuanced statements like “John is very tall”.
In this representation, we have interpreted some nuances of natural
language as linguistic modiﬁers and we have deﬁned them within a
multiset context. In this paper, we continue the presentation of our
symbolic model and we propose new deduction rules dealing with
nuanced statements. We limit ourselves to present new generalizations
of the Modus Ponens rule.
Keywords: knowledge representation and reasoning, imprecision,
vagueness, many-valued logic, multiset theory.

1

Introduction

The development of knowledge-based systems is a rapidly expanding ﬁeld in
applied artiﬁcial intelligence. The knowledge base is comprised of a database and
a rule base. We suppose that the database contains facts representing nuanced
statements, like “Jo is very tall”, to which one associates truth degrees. The
nuanced statements can be represented more formally under the form “x is mα
A” where mα and A are labels denoting respectively a nuance and a vague or
imprecise term of natural language. The rule base contains rules of the form “if
x is mα A then y is mβ B” to which one associates truth degrees.
Our work presents a symbolic-based model which permits a qualitative management of vagueness in knowledge-based systems. In dealing with vagueness,
there are two issues of importance: (1) how to represent vague data, and (2) how
to draw inference using vague data. When imprecise information is evaluated in
a numerical way, fuzzy logic which is introduced by Zadeh [11,12], is recognized
as a good tool for dealing with aforementioned issues and performing reasoning
upon common sense and vague knowledge-bases. In this logic, “x is mα A” is considered as a fuzzy proposition where A is modeled by a fuzzy set which is deﬁned
by a membership function. This one is generally deﬁned upon a numerical scale.
The nuance mα is deﬁned such as a fuzzy modiﬁer [3,10,12] which represents,
from the fuzzy set A, a new fuzzy set “mα A”. So, “x is mα A” is interpreted
by Zadeh as “x is (mα A)” and is regarded as many-valued statement. A second
formalism, refers to a symbolic many-valued logic [4,10], is used when imprecise
information is evaluated in a symbolic way. This logic is the logical counterpart
P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2659, pp. 109–119, 2003.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

110

M. El-Sayed and D. Pacholczyk

of a multiset theory introduced by De Glas [4]. In this theory, the term mα linguistically expresses the degree to which the object x satisﬁes the term A. So,
“x is mα A” means “x (is mα ) A”, and then is regarded as boolean statement.
In other words, “mα A” does not represent a new vague term obtained from A.
In previous papers [7,8], we have proposed a symbolic-based model to represent
nuanced statements. This model is based on the many-valued logic proposed by
Pacholczyk [10]. Our basic idea has been to consider that some nuances of natural language can not be interpreted as satisfaction degrees and must be instead
deﬁned such as linguistic modiﬁers. Firstly, we have proposed a new method to
symbolically represent vague terms of natural language. The basic idea has been
to associate with each vague term a new symbolic concept called “rule”. This
symbolic concept is an equivalent to the membership function within a fuzzy
context. By using the new concept, we have deﬁned linguistic modiﬁers within
a multiset context. In this paper, our basic contribution has been to propose
deduction rules dealing with nuanced information. For that purpose, we propose deduction rules generalizing the Modus Ponens rule in a many-valued logic
proposed by Pacholczyk [10]. We notice that the ﬁrst version of this rule has
been proposed in a fuzzy context by Zadeh [12] and has been studied later by
various authors [1,3,9]. This paper is organized as follows. In Sect. 2, we present
brieﬂy the basic concepts of the M-valued predicate logic which forms the backbone of our work. Section 3 introduces brieﬂy the symbolic representation model
previously proposed. In Sect. 4, we study various types of inference rules and
we propose new Generalized Modus Ponens rules in which we use only simple
statements. In Sect. 5, we propose a generalized production system in which we
deﬁne more Generalized Modus Ponens rules in more complex situations.

2

M-Valued Predicate Logic

Within a multiset context, to a vague term A and a nuance mα are associated
respectively a multiset A and a symbolic degree τα . So, the statement “x is mα
A” means that x belongs to multiset A with a degree τα . The M-valued predicate
logic [10] is the logical counterpart of the multiset theory. In this logic, to each
multiset A and a membership degree τα are associated a M-valued predicate A
and a truth degree τα −true. In this context, the following equivalence holds: x
is mα A ⇔ x ∈α A ⇔ “x is mα A” is true ⇔ “x is A” is τα −true. One supposes
that the membership degrees are symbolic degrees which form an ordered set
LM = {τα , α ∈ [1, M ]}. This set is provided with the relation of a total order:
τα ≤ τβ ⇔ α ≤ β, and whose smallest element is τ1 and the largest element is
τM . We can then deﬁne in LM two operators ∧ and ∨ and a decreasing involution
∼ as follows: τα ∨ τβ = τmax(α,β) , τα ∧ τβ = τmin(α,β) and ∼ τα = τM +1−α . One
obtains then a chain {LM , ∨, ∧, ≤} having the structure of De Morgan lattice
[10]. On this set, an implication → and a T-norm T can be deﬁned respectively
as follows: τα → τβ = τmin(β−α+M,M ) and T (τα , τβ ) = τmax(β+α−M,1) .
Example 1. For example, by choosing M=9, we can introduce: L9 ={not at all,
little, enough, fairly, moderately, quite, almost, nearly, completely}.

A Symbolic Approach to Vagueness Management

111

In the following of this paper we focus our intention on the management of
statements which are nuanced by linguistic modiﬁers. So, we consider that mα
A represents a multiset derived from A, and “x is mα A” is a many-valued
statement.

3

Representation of Nuanced Statements

Let us suppose that our knowledge base is characterized by a ﬁnite number of
concepts Ci . A set of terms Pik 1 is associated with each concept Ci , whose respective domain is denoted as Xi . The terms Pik are said to be the basic terms
connected with the concept Ci . As an example, basic terms such as “small”,
“moderate” and “tall” are associated with the particular concept “size of men”.
A ﬁnite set of linguistic modiﬁers mα allows us to deﬁne nuanced terms, denoted as “mα Pik ”. In previous papers [7,8], we have proposed a symbolic-based
model to represent nuanced statements of natural language. In the following, we
present a short review of this model. We have proposed ﬁrstly a new method to
symbolically represent vague terms. In this method, we suppose that a domain
of a vague term, denoted by X, is not necessarily a numerical scale. This domain
is simulated by a “rule” (cf. Fig. 1) representing an arbitrary set of objects.
Our basic idea has been to associate with each multiset Pi a symbolic concept
which represents an equivalent to the membership function in fuzzy set theory.
For that, we have introduced a new concept, called “rule”, which has a geometry
similar to a membership L-R function and its role is to illustrate the membership graduality to the multisets. In order to deﬁne the geometry of this “rule”,
we use notions similar to those deﬁned within a fuzzy context like the core, the
support and the fuzzy part of a fuzzy set [12]. We deﬁne these notions within
a multiset theory as follows: the core of a multiset Pi , denoted as Core(Pi ),
represents the elements belonging to Pi with a τM degree, the support, denoted
as Sp(Pi ), contains the elements belonging to Pi with at least τ2 degree, and the
fuzzy part, denoted as F (Pi ), contains the elements belonging to Pi with degrees
varying from τ2 to τM −1 . We associate with each multiset a “rule” that contains
the elements of its support (cf. Fig. 3). This “rule” is the union of three disjoint

small

moderate

tall
X

Fig. 1. Representation with “rule” of a domain X
1

In the following, we use the same notation Pik to represent either a vague term Pik ,
the multiset Pik and the predicate Pik associated with it.

112

M. El-Sayed and D. Pacholczyk

µA(x)

[Li]2

Core(A)
L(x)

[Li]8

b

b+β

Supp(A)

Fig. 2. A membership L-R function

...

[Ri]2
(b)

Sp(Pi)

τ2 τ3 τ4 τ 5 τ 6 τ7 τ8

F(A)

a

[Ri]8

Ci
X

a-α

...

R(x)

τΜ

τ 8 τ7 τ6 τ5 τ 4 τ3 τ2

(a)

X

X

Sp(Pi)

Fig. 3. Representation with “rule”

subsets: the left fuzzy part, the right fuzzy part and the core. For a multiset Pi ,
they are denoted respectively by Li , Ri and Ci . We suppose that the left (resp.
right) fuzzy part Li (resp. Ri ) is the union of M-2 subsets, denoted as [Li ]α
(resp. [Ri ]α ), which partition it. [Li ]α (resp. [Ri ]α ) contains the elements of Li
(resp. Ri ) belonging to Pi with a τα degree. In order to keep a similarity with
the fuzzy sets of type L-R, we choose to place, in a “rule” associated with a
multiset, the subsets [Li ]α and [Ri ]α so that the larger α is, the closer the [Li ]α
subsets and [Ri ]α are to the core Ci (cf. Fig. 3). That can be interpreted as
follows: the elements of the core of a term represent the typical elements of this
term, and the more one object moves away from the core, the less it satisﬁes the
term. Finally, we have denoted a multiset Pi with which we associate a “rule”
as Pi = (Li , Ci , Ri ), and we have introduced symbolic parameters which enable
us to describe the form of the “rule” and its position in the universe X. These
parameters have a role similar to the role of numerical parameters which are
used to deﬁne a fuzzy set within a fuzzy context.
3.1

Linguistic Modiﬁers

By using the “rule” concept we have deﬁned the linguistic modiﬁers. We have
used two types of linguistic modiﬁers.
- Precision Modiﬁers: The precision modiﬁers increase or decrease the precision
of the basic term. We distinguish two types of precision modiﬁers: contraction
modiﬁers and dilation modiﬁers. We use M6 = {mk |k ∈ [1..6]} ={exactly,
really, ∅, more or less, approximately, vaguely} which is totally ordered by
j ≤ k ⇔ mj ≤ mk (Fig. 4).
- Translation Modiﬁers: The translation modiﬁers operate both a translation
and precision variation (contraction or dilation) on the basic term. We use
T9 = {tk |k ∈ [1..9]} ={extremely little, very very little, very little, rather
little, ∅, rather, very, very very, extremely} totally ordered by k ≤ l ⇔ tk ≤ tl
(Fig. 5). The translation amplitudes and the precision variation amplitudes
are calculated in such a way that the multisets tk Pi cover the domain X.
In this paper, we continue to propose our model for managing nuanced statements. In the following, we focus our intention to study the problem of exploitation of nuanced statements.

A Symbolic Approach to Vagueness Management
τ2 τ3 τ4 τ5 τ6 τ7 τ8
τ 2 τ 3 τ 4 τ 5 τ6 τ 7 τ 8
τ2 τ3 τ4 τ5 τ6 τ7 τ8
τ2 τ3 τ4 τ5 τ6 τ7 τ8
τ2 τ3 τ4 τ 5 τ 6 τ7 τ8
τ2 τ3 τ4 τ5 τ6 τ7

Extremely little Pi

τΜ
τΜ
τΜ

τ 8 τ 7 τ 6 τ5 τ4 τ 3 τ 2
τ8 τ7 τ6 τ5 τ4 τ3 τ2
τ8 τ7 τ6 τ5 τ4 τ3 τ2

τΜ
τΜ
τ τΜ τ
8

113

vaguely Pi

very little Pi
rather little Pi

more or less Pi

τ8 τ7 τ6 τ5 τ4 τ3 τ2
τ8 τ7 τ6 τ5 τ4 τ3 τ2
8

very very little Pi

approximately Pi

τ7 τ6 τ 5 τ 4 τ3 τ2

Pi
really Pi
exactly Pi

Pi
rather Pi
very Pi
very very Pi
Extremely Pi
X

Fig. 4. Precision modiﬁers

4

Fig. 5. Translation modiﬁers

Exploitation of Nuanced Statements

In this section, we treat the exploitation of nuanced information. In particular,
we are interested to propose some generalizations of the Modus Ponens rule
within a many-valued context [10]. We notice that the classical Modus Ponens
rule has the following form: If we know that {If “x is A” then “y is B” is true
and “x is A” is true} we conclude that “y is B” is true. Within a many-valued
context, a generalization of Modus Ponens rule has one of the following forms:
F1- If we know that {If “x is A” then “y is B” is τβ -true and “x is A ” is
τ -true} and that {A is more or less near to A}, what can we conclude for
“y is B”, in other words, to what degree “y is B” is true?
F2- If we know that {If “x is A” then “y is B” is τβ -true and “x is A ” is
τ -true} and that {A is more or less near to A}, can we ﬁnd a B such as
{B is more or less near to B} and to what degree “y is B ” is true?
These forms of Generalized Modus Ponens (GMP) rule have been studied ﬁrstly
by Pacholczyk in [10]. In this section, we propose new versions of GMP rule in
which we use new relations of nearness.
4.1

First GMP Rule

In Pacholczyk’s versions of GMP, the concept of nearness binding multisets A
and A is modeled by a similarity relation which is deﬁned as follows:
Deﬁnition 1. Let A and B be two multisets. A is said to be τα -similar to B,
denoted as A ≈α B, if and only if: ∀x|x ∈γ A and x ∈β B ⇒ min{τγ → τβ , τβ →
τγ } ≥ τ α .
This relation generalizes the equivalence relation in a many-valued context as the
similarity relation of Zadeh [12] has been in a fuzzy context. It is (1) reﬂexive:
A ≈M A, (2) symmetrical: A ≈α B ⇔ B ≈α A, and (3) weakly transitive:
{A ≈α B, B ≈β C} ⇒ A ≈γ C with τγ ≥ T (τα , τβ ) where T is a T-norm.
By using the similarity relation to model the nearness binding between multisets,
the inference rule can be interpreted as: {more the rule and the fact are true}
and {more A and A are similar }, more the conclusion is true. In particular,
when A is more precise than A (A ⊂ A) but they are very weakly similar, any

114

M. El-Sayed and D. Pacholczyk

conclusion can be deduced or the conclusion deduced isn’t as precise as one can
expect. This is due to the fact that the similarity relation isn’t able alone to
model in a satisfactory way the nearness between A and A. For that, we add
to the similarity relation a new relation called nearness relation whose role is
to deﬁne the nearness of A to A when A ⊂ A. In other words, it indicates the
degree to which A is included in A.
Deﬁnition 2. Let A and B be two multisets such that A ⊂ B. A is said to be
τα -near to B, denoted as A ❁α B, if and only if {∀x ∈ F(B), x ∈β A and x ∈γ
B ⇒ τα → τβ ≤ τγ }.
The nearness relation satisﬁes the following properties: (1) Reﬂexivity: A ❁M
A, and (2) Weak transitivity: A ❁α B and B ❁β C ⇒ A ❁γ C with τγ ≤
min(τα , τβ ). In the relation A ❁α B, the less the value of α is, the more A is
included in B. We can notice that the properties satisﬁed by the nearness relation
are similar to those satisﬁed by the resemblance relation proposed by BouchonMeunier and Valverde [2] within a fuzzy context. Finally, by using similarity and
nearness relations, we propose a ﬁrst Generalized Modus Ponens rule.
Proposition 1. Let A and A be predicates associated with the concept Ci , B be
predicate associated with the concept Ce . Given the following assumptions:
1. it is τβ -true that if “x is A” then “y is B”
2. “x is A ” is τ -true with A ≈α A.
Then, we conclude : “y is B” is τδ -true with τδ = T (τβ , T (τα , τ )).
If the predicate A is such that A ❁α A, we conclude: “y is B” is τδ -true with
τδ = T (τβ , τα −→ τ ).
Example 2. Given that “really tall” ≈8 “tall” and “really tall” ❁8 “tall”, from
the following rule and fact:
- if “x is tall” then “its weight is important” is true2
- “Pascal is really tall” is quite-true,
we can deduce: “Pascal’s weight is really important” is almost-true.
4.2

GMP Rules Using Precision Modiﬁers

In the previous paragraph we calculate the degree to which the conclusion of the
rule is true. In the following, we present two new versions of GMP rule in which
the predicate of the conclusion obtained by the deduction process is not B but
a new predicate B which is more or less near to B. More precisely, the new
predicate is derived from B by using precision modiﬁers3 (B = mB). The ﬁrst
version assumes that the predicates A and A are more or less similar. In other
words, A may be less precise or more precise than A. The second one assumes
that A is more precise than A.
2
3

In our many-valued logic, “completely true” is equivalent to “true” in classical logic.
The deﬁnitions of these are presented in appendix A.

A Symbolic Approach to Vagueness Management

115

Proposition 2. Let A and A be predicates associated with the concept Ci , B be
predicate associated with the concept Ce . Let the following assumptions:
1. it is τβ -true that if “x is A” then “y is B”
2. “x is A ” is τ -true with A ≈α A.
Let τθ = T (τβ , T (τα , τ )). If τθ > τ1 then there exists a τn(δ) −dilation modiﬁer
m, with τδ ≤ T (τα , τβ ), such that: “y is mB” is τ -true and τ = τδ −→ τθ .
Moreover, we have: B ⊂ mB and mB ≈δ B.
This proposition prove that if we know that A is more or less similar to A,
without any supplementary information concerning its precision compared to A,
the predicate of the conclusion obtained by the deduction process (mB) is less
precise than B (i.e. B ⊂ mB) and which is more or less similar to B. In the
following proposition, we assume that A is more precise than A.
Proposition 3. Let A and A be predicates associated with the concept Ci , B be
predicate associated with the concept Ce . Let the following assumptions:
1. it is τβ -true that if “x is A” then “y is B”
2. “x is A ” is τ -true with A ❁α A.
Let τθ = T (τβ , τα −→ τ ). If τθ > τ1 then there exists a τn(δ) −contraction
modiﬁer m, with τδ ≥ τβ −→ τα , such that: “y is mB” is τ -true and τ =
T (τδ , τθ ).
Moreover, we have: mB ❁δ B.
This proposition prove that from a predicate A which is more or less near to
A we obtain a predicate mB which is more or less near to B. More precisely,
if A is more precise than A then mB is more precise than B. The previous
propositions (2 and 3) present two general cases in which we consider arbitrary
predicates A . In the following, we present two corollaries representing special
cases of propositions 2 and 3 in which we assume that the rule is completely true
and that A is obtained from A by using precision modiﬁers.
Corollary 1. Let the following rule and fact:
1. it is true that if “x is A” then “y is B”
2. “x is mk A” is τ -true where mk is a τγk −dilation modiﬁer.
If T (∼ τγk , τ ) > τ1 then we conclude:
“y is mk B” is τ -true, with τ =∼ τγk −→ T (∼ τγk , τ ).
Example 3. Given the following data:
- if “x is tall” then “its weight is important” is true,
- “Jo is more or less tall” is moderately-true.
Then, we can deduce: “Jo’s weight is more or less important” is moderately-true.

116

M. El-Sayed and D. Pacholczyk

Corollary 2. Let the following rule and fact:
1. it is true that if “x is A” then “y is B”
2. “x is mk A” is τ -true where mk is a τγk −contraction modiﬁer.
Then, we conclude that: “y is mk B” is τ -true.
Example 4. Given the following data:
- if “x is tall” then “its weight is important” is true,
- “Pascal is really tall” is moderately-true.
Then, we can deduce: “Pascal’s weight is really important” is moderately-true.
These two corollaries present a particular form of graduality of inference. This
form is known as graduality by means of linguistic modiﬁers [5]. It enables us
to obtain, from a fact whose predicate A is nuanced by linguistic modiﬁers, a
conclusion whose predicate is also nuanced by linguistic modiﬁers.

5

Generalized Production System

In this section, we present some generalizations of Modus Ponens rule in more
complex situations. More precisely, we study the problem of reasoning in 4 situations:
1. When the antecedent of the rule is a conjunction of statements.
2. When the antecedent is a disjunction of statements.
3. In presence of propagation of inferences. In other words, when the conclusion
of the ﬁrst rule is the antecedent of the second rule, and so on.
4. When a combination of imprecision is possible. In other words, when we have
some rules which have the same statement in their conclusion parts.
So, we present the following 4 propositions representing inference rules in these
situations.
Proposition 4 (Antecedent is a conjunction). Given the following assumptions:
1. if “x1 is A1 ” and ... and “xn is An ” then “y is B” is τβ -true,
2. for i = 1..n, “xi is Ai ” is τ i -true,
3. for i = 1..n, Ai ≈αi Ai .
Then, we can deduce: “y is B” is τδ -true with τδ = T (τβ , T (τα1 , τ 1 )) ∧ ... ∧
T (τβ , T (ταn , τ n )).
If, for i = j .. k, the predicates Ai are such that Ai ❁αi Ai , we can deduce: “y
is B” is τδ -true with τδ = τδ1 ∧ ... ∧ τδn and τδi = T (ταi −→ τ i , τβ ) if i ∈ [j, k]
and τδi = T (τβ , T (ταi , τ i )) if not.

A Symbolic Approach to Vagueness Management

117

Proposition 5 (Antecedent is a disjunction). Given the following assumptions:
1. if “x1 is A1 ” or ... or “xn is An ” then “y is B” is τβ -true,
2. for i = 1..k, “xi is Ai ” is τ i -true,
3. for i = 1..k, Ai ≈αi Ai .
Then, we can deduce: “y is B” is τδ -true with τδ = T (τβ , T (τα1 , τ 1 )) ∨ ... ∨
T (τβ , T (ταk , τ k )).
If, for i = j .. L, the predicates Ai are such that Ai ❁αi Ai , we can deduce: “y
is B” is τδ -true with τδ = τδ1 ∨ ... ∨ τδk and τδi = T (ταi −→ τ i , τβ ) if i ∈ [j, L]
and τδi = T (τβ , T (ταi , τ i )) if not.
Proposition 6 (Propagation of inferences). Given the following assumptions:
1. if “x is A” then “y is B” is τβ -true,
2. if “y is B” then “z is C” is τγ -true,
3. there exists τ > τ1 such that “x is A ” is τ -true,
4. there exists τα such that A ≈α A .
Then, we can deduce: “z is C” is τδ -true, with τδ = T (T (τβ , τγ ), T (τα , τ )).
If the predicate A is such that A ❁α A, then we can deduce: “z is C” is τδ -true,
with τδ = T (T (τβ , τγ ), τα −→ τ ).
Proposition 7 (Combination of imprecisions). Given the following assumptions:
1. for i = 1..n, if “xi is Ai ” then “y is B” is τβi -true,
2. for i = 1..n, “xi is Ai ” is τ i -true,
3. for i = 1..n, Ai ≈αi Ai ,
then we can deduce that: “y is B” is τδ -true with τδ = T (τβ1 , T (τα1 , τ 1 )) ∨ ... ∨
T (τβn , T (ταn , τ n )).
If, for i = j .. k, the predicates Ai are such that Ai ❁αi Ai , then we can deduce:
“y is B” is τδ -true with τδ = τδ1 ∨...∨τδn and τδi = T (ταi −→ τ i , τβi ) if i ∈ [j, k]
and τδi = T (τβi , T (ταi , τ i )) if not.
We present below an example in which we use the GMP rules presented in
this section. In this example, we use index cards written by a doctor after his
consultations. From index cards (ICi ) and some rules (Rj ), we wish deduce a
diagnosis.
Example 5. Let assume that we have the following rules in our base of rules.
R1 − “If the temperature is high, the patient is ill” is almost true,

118

M. El-Sayed and D. Pacholczyk

R2 − “If the tension is always high, the patient is ill” is nearly true,
R3 − “If the temperature is high and the eardrum color is very red, the disease
is an otitis” is true,
R4 − “If fat eating is high, the cholesterol risk is high” is true,
R5 − “If the cholesterol risk is high, a diet with no fat is recommended” is true.
Let us assume now that we have an index card for a patient and we want to
deduce a diagnosis.
F1 −
F2 −
F3 −
F4 −

“the
“the
“the
“the

temperature is rather high” is nearly true,
tension is always more or less high” is almost true,
eardrum color is really very red” is quite true,
fat eating is very very high” is moderately true.

Using the GMP rules previously presented, we deduce the following diagnosis:
D1 −
D2 −
D3 −
D4 −

“the patient is ill” is almost true,
“the disease is an otitis” is almost true,
“the cholesterol risk is high” is true,
“a diet with no fat is recommended” is true.

Let us assume that we have the following relations: “rather high” ❁7 “high”,
“more or less high” ≈8 “high”, “really very red” ❁8 “very red” and “very very
high” ❁2 “high”. Then, the diagnosis (D1 - D4 ) are obtained as follows.
-

6

D1
D2
D3
D4

is
is
is
is

obtained
obtained
obtained
obtained

by
by
by
by

applying
applying
applying
applying

proposition
proposition
proposition
proposition

7
4
1
6

to
to
to
to

(F1 , F2 ) and (R1 , R2 ),
(F1 , F3 ) and R3 ,
F4 and R4 ,
F4 and (R4 , R5 ).

Conclusion

In this paper, we have proposed a symbolic-based model dealing with nuanced
information. This model is inspired from the representation method on fuzzy
logic. In previous papers, we have proposed a new representation method of nuanced statements. In this method, we have deﬁned a vague term by symbolic
parameters given by an expert in a qualitative way. By using this representation, we have deﬁned some linguistic modiﬁers in a purely symbolic way. In this
paper, we proposed some deduction rules dealing with nuanced statements and
we presented new Generalized Modus Ponens rules. In these rules we can use
either simple statements or complex statements.

A Symbolic Approach to Vagueness Management

119

References
1. J.F. Baldwin. A new approach to approximate reasoning using fuzzy logic. Fuzzy
sets and systems, 2:309–325, 1979.
2. B. Bouchon-Meunier and L. Valverde. A ressemblance approach to analogical
reasoning function. Lecture notes in computer science, 1188:266–272, 1997.
3. B. Bouchon-Meunier and J. Yao. Linguistic modiﬁers and imprecise categories.
Int. J. of intelligent systems, 7:25–36, 1992.
4. M. De-glas. Knowledge representation in fuzzy setting. Technical Report 48,
LAFORIA, 1989.
5. J. Delechamp and B. Bouchon-Meunier. Graduality by means of analogical reasoning. Lecture notes in computer science, 1244:210–222, 1997.
6. D. Dubois and H. Prade. Fuzzy sets in approximate reasoning: Inference with
possibility distributions. Fuzzy sets and systems, 40:143–202, 1991.
7. M. El-Sayed and D. Pacholczyk. A qualitative reasoning with nuanced information.
8th European Conference on Logics in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (JELIA 02), 283–295,
Italy, 2002.
8. M. El-Sayed and D. Pacholczyk. A symbolic approach for handling nuanced information. IASTED International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Applications (AIA 02), 285–290, Spain, 2002.
9. L.D. Lascio, A. Gisolﬁ, and U.C. Garcia. Linguistic hedges and the generalized
modus ponens. Int. J. of intelligent systems, 14:981–993, 1999.
10. D. Pacholczyk. Contribution au traitement logico-symbolique de la connaissance.
PhD thesis, University of Paris VI, 1992.
11. L.A. Zadeh. Fuzzy sets. Information and control, 8:338–353, 1965.
12. L.A. Zadeh. A theory of approximate reasoning. Int. J. Hayes, D. Michie and L.
I. Mikulich (eds); Machine Intelligence, 9:149–194, 1979.

