A Question Understanding Model Based on Knowledge
Points for Chinese Question Answering Service in
E-Learning
Zheng-Hong Wu1, Ming Li1, and Huamin Feng2
1

School of Information Science & Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai
200062, P.R. China
wzh_hongzheng@hotmail.com, mli@ee.ecnu.edu.cn,
ming_lihk@yahoo.com
2
Key Laboratory of Security and Secrecy of Information, Beijing Electronic Science and
Technology Institute, Beijing 100070, P.R. China
fenghm@besti.edu.cn

Abstract. Question answering service in e-learning environment is an
important issue. Chinese semantic analysis is a key bottleneck for question
answering service to understand question’s content. This paper proposes a
question understanding model to understand and process syntactic and semantic
structure. In this paper, we analyzed a lot of questions from students, and
clustered questions based on knowledge points. The question understanding
model is made to get question focus and question type. According to question
focus and question type, the question answering service can precisely know the
question’s answer by locating knowledge point’s attribute. This method could
more perfectly understand semantic content of questions than using pure
Chinese semantic analysis. It is very useful for students to study in a selflearning environment.
Keywords: Question Answering, Knowledge Point, E-Learning.

1 Introduction
Nowadays, question answering (Q&A) has become an important research field with
the rapid development of the Internet. However, current Q&A systems are far below
human expectations. This is because natural language is not easy to process and
interactive Q&A is even harder to model. Q&A research is a multidisciplinary field,
and systems are usually integrated from many techniques and resources. Information
Retrieval (IR), Natural Language Processing (NLP), Information Extraction (IE),
Machine Learning, and even Software Engineering techniques are all needed to build
a Q&A system. Most Q&A system would be an ideal way for people to search for
information. Since 1999, many international question answering contests have been
held, such as TREC (Ellen M. Voorhees 2003, 2004, 2005), CLEF, and NTCIR.
Results from the TREC evaluations ((Kwok et al., 2000) (Radev et al., 2000) (Allen et
al., 2000)) showed that Information Retrieval (IR) techniques alone are not sufficient
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part III, LNCS 4489, pp. 493–500, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

494

Z.-H. Wu, M. Li, and H. Feng

for finding answers with high precision. The Webclopedia project at the USC
Information Sciences Institute (Hovy 2000, 2001) pursued a semantics-based
approach to answer pinpointing that relies heavily on parsing. They want to provide
much more accurate answers for users. Some researchers were working on designing
the Q&A methodologies, such as Debra T. Burhans (2005), Dan Moldovan (2005),
and Humphreys (2000), etc. Some researchers researched the question stem, e.g. who,
where or how much and eventually one of the question concepts. But the stem is
ambiguous (for example what), as described in (Harabagiu et al., 2000) (Radev et al.,
2000) (Srihari and Li, 2000). There are only a handful research teams working on
Chinese QA, which may explain why the first Chinese QA contest was only held at
this year’s NTCIR workshop (2005). New Chinese question taxonomy respectively
from approach and semantic viewpoints was presented (Youzheng Wu et al.). Hybrid
architecture for answering Chinese factoid questions from news documents was
proposed (Cheng-Wei Lee et al.).
Frequently, question reformulations use different words, but imply the same
answer. Moreover, many equivalent answers are phrased differently. That is the main
trouble in solving Q&A. Current Q&A systems are far below human expectations.
This is because natural language is not easy to process and interactive Q&A is even
harder to model. Since natural language is full of noise, it is important to deal with
real data. Noisy or inconsistent information could be filtered out to achieve better
performance. Q&A also has the same features in e-learning. And Q&A is an
important part in e-learning for students. But, Chinese semantic analysis is a key
bottleneck in Q&A field.
How to solve these difficulties is very important for Q&A system. Firstly, we
collected a lot of questions from students and textbooks. Then, we analyzed these
question samples. We found that a question from students in e-learning course always
asks content about some knowledge point. Moreover, each question’s answer is
connected with one attribute of knowledge point. Knowledge is composed by
knowledge points. Attributes of knowledge point are the followings: knowledge name,
definition, characteristic, function, and so on. The same attribute can reformulate
question use different words, namely different question types, but simply the same
answer. So, questions have some special features from students in e-learning. Every
question has two important features. One is that a question is almost related with some
knowledge points. This feature is named question focus. The other is that the
question’s answer is some attributes of one or more knowledge points. This second
feature is named question type or knowledge attribute. At the same time, we found
another key feature. Though different questions, they are always related with one or
more knowledge points. And their answers are these knowledge points’ attributes. So
questions can be classified into simple question and complex question based on the
number of knowledge points involved in one question sentence. If the question focus
relates to one knowledge point, it is called simple question. And its answer can be
found from an attribute of the knowledge point. Complex question is defined that its
question focus is connected with several knowledge points. Complex question is
divided into several kinds according to the relationship of knowledge points (ZhengHong Wu et al., 2004). Then, Knowledge base is constructed by ontology. Each

A Question Understanding Model Based on Knowledge Points

495

attribute of knowledge point can be found by linking this knowledge point. If these two
features are determined, the answer can be retrieved from knowledge base.
Combining early research (Zheng-Hong Wu et al., 2005), we modeled question
item from two novel angels based on knowledge points. One is question focus. The
other is knowledge attribute. Two novel angels are helpful in locating answer in this
paper. Section 2 gives the overview of the architecture of Q&A service. According to
Neural Network Classifier (NNC) and knowledge base, Section 3 describes process of
generating question understanding model including question item and question panel,
and gives the experiment system. Finally, Section 4 makes a simple conclusion and
describes some possible future works.

2 Question Answering Service
Figure 1 shows how the question answering service works. The first part is inputting
questions by interface. This part classifies question type and question focus through
question item. Question item is constructed by Neural Network Classifier (NNC).The
second part is setting up knowledge point base, synonymy base and answer base.
And, the third part is mining answer.

Question
Answering
Service

Questions
Textbook

I

Question Panel
Question Type

Knowledge Attribute

Question Focus

Knowledge Point

Knowledge Base

III
II

Answer

Knowledge Point Base
Synonymy Base
Answer Base

Fig. 1. Question Answering Service

In the beginning, the service retrieves question from the interface. And, question
focus and question type could be created (step I) according to the question item. Then,
the service uses data mining to locate the knowledge point in knowledge base (step
II). Finally, the service is to generate answer (step III). Students then would be able to
see the answer item by simply using their web browser.

496

Z.-H. Wu, M. Li, and H. Feng

3 Operation Flow of Generating Question Panel
This section goes through the question item by clustering abundant question
examples. From the knowledge point, Table 1 details question focus and question
type. There are three sub-sections in this section, and each sub-section represents a
key for different parts in the service architecture as Figure 2 shows. The three keys
are the knowledge base (step I-2), question item modeling (step I-3) and question
panel (step I-4).

I-1

I-2

Knowledge Base

Questions
Knowledge Point Base
Synonymy Base

Textbook

Neural
Network
Classifier

I-3

Question Item

Question Type

Knowledge Attribute

Question Focus

Knowledge Point

I-4

Question Panel

Fig. 2. Flow of Question Panel

Figure 2 shows the flow of generating question panel. The architecture of question
panel could be seen as four parts: the first part is sampling questions from students
and textbooks (step I-1); the second part is setting up synonymy base (step I-2); and,
the third part is to model question item by classing question type and question focus
on the base of the synonymy base and Neural Network Classifier (step I-3); the fourth
part is generating question panel (step I-4). The repeated flow indicates the question
item would be changed from time to time. Finally question panel is made by question
item. Students then would be able to see the question panel by simply using their web
browser.
3.1 Modeling Question Item
In the beginning, we collected thousands of questions from students and textbooks.
Then, we concluded that student inputting a question is to know some content about
one or some knowledge points, which is the attribute of knowledge point. Additionally,

A Question Understanding Model Based on Knowledge Points

497

a question is composed by question focus and question type. The question focus is
knowledge point. The question type is to know attribute of one or more knowledge
points. Finally, we found that questions could be modeled according to the number of
knowledge points. Therefore, we can classify questions from two angels. One is the
number of knowledge. The other is the attribute involved in questions.
Table 1. Question Attribute Clustering and Statistics

Q.C.

Simple

Complex

Q.T. (K.A.)

Example of question

Q.F. (K.P.)

What…(Definitio
n/Concept…)

What (definition) is optical fiber
communication?

Optical
fiber
communication

What/How…(Fu
nction/Use/
Meaning/…)
How/What…(Me
chanism/Theory/
…)
How/What…(Ap
plication…)

What is the meaning of developing
intelligent network?

intelligent network

How (mechanism) to avoid
disturber from the same frequency?

disturber from
the same frequency

Describe the method that realizes
the global communication using
synchronous satellite.

What/How…(Fe
ature/…)

What are the features of satellite
communications?

global
communication
using synchronous
satellite
satellite
communications

What/How…(Str
ucture/Compone
nt/Kind…)
…

What components compose the
optical fiber communication?

optical
fiber
communication

…

…

What/How…(Dif
ference/Comparis
on/Relating…)

What is the difference between
transmission and convection?

Transmission,
convection

What/How…(Re
ason/Influence/
…)

What special demand for modem in
mobile communication?
What is the influence from waste
and chromatic dispersion of optical
fiber
in
optical
fiber
communication system?

…

…

Modem,
mobile
communication
waste, chromatic
dispersion
of
optical
fiber,
optical
fiber
communication
system
…

Q.C.: Question Class; Q.T.: Question Type; Q.A.: Question Attribute; Q.F.: Question
Focus; K.P.: Knowledge Point;
Taking questions in Modern Communication Technology for example, Table 1
shows the question type and question focus. The model of question item could be seen
as two parts: the first part is simple question (from Q.C.) which involves one
knowledge point (from Q.F. (K.P.)); the second part is complex question (from Q.C.)
which involves two or more knowledge points (from Q.F. (K.P.)).

498

Z.-H. Wu, M. Li, and H. Feng

As we can see within Table 1, any question is about some attribute of knowledge
points. One attribute may be expressed by similar words. For instance, mechanism,
theory and other synonymy standard the same attribute for knowledge point, e.g.
Q1: How does the signal microwave communication work?
Q2: What is the working mechanism/theory of microwave communication?
Q1 and Q2 use different words, but imply the same answer, namely the same
attribute of knowledge point.
So, synonymy words are ranged (Table 1) to express the same attribute after
studying those question examples. Using sampling more questions, more synonymy
words could be found by clustering. And more exact attribute kinds could be set up.
Simple question is focused on one knowledge point’s attribute. These are several
attributes in a knowledge point, including concept, function, feature, and others. The
answer of question mainly aims at these attributes (from Q.T. (K.A.)).
Complex question’s answer focused on the attribute among several knowledge
points regarding one knowledge point as prerequisite. Complex question can be
classified into two main sub-classes. One is the comparison of these knowledge points
to know the difference or respective strongpoint. The other is that which influences
one knowledge point to other knowledge points, or how does one knowledge point
function at others.
According to the above features, NNC is introduced in this paper to set up question
item. NNC implemented through neural network method. During a learning session,
each example of the question, representing a single question feature vector, must be
pre-classified by a human expert. The NNC processes training examples and induces
rules for extracting question features from further unclassified examples, to be used
by the question item. According to the synonymy base, NNC can discriminate
question focus and question type from questions for the question item.
3.2 Knowledge Base
Knowledge base is built based on ontology. It includes knowledge point base,
synonymy base and answer base. Knowledge point base is designed according to
question’s focus. Synonymy base is designed according to question’s type. Answer
base is designed by knowledge attribute.
First, the question is put. Use logic calculation to get question item. Question focus
and question type are determined. According to question focus, the service could
know exact knowledge point. Then the knowledge attribute is determined by question
type. Finally, the service matches the answer by pitching the attributes of knowledge
point.
3.3 Question Understanding Model
Based on question item and knowledge base, we set up a question panel using Visual
Studio.NET to implement the question answering service. Figure 3 shows the
question panel. When a student logs on and asks a question, the service can present
this question panel for the student.

A Question Understanding Model Based on Knowledge Points

499

In this question panel, if you click knowledge attribute, a new windows will tell
you the examples of attribute, such as definition, mechanism etc. If the question
includes several knowledge points, you should input underline among several
knowledge point names. For instance, the question: What (definition) is optical fiber
communication? This question is generated in Figure 3. Through the panel, the
service can precisely know his/her question’s content to avoid trouble from semantic
analysis using Natural Language Understanding. This question panel is very simple
and effective for students in Q&A.
Question Panel
Question Answering Service

Knowledge Point Name
Optical fiber
communication

Knowledge Attribute
definition

Find

Fig. 3. Question Panel for Students

4 Conclusions and Future Directions
This paper focuses on setting up a question understanding model to support question
answering for self-learning in e-learning course. To reach the goal, we collected a lot
of questions and analyzed them from the number of knowledge point and attribute of
that. Questions were clustered by using NNC. Subsequently, question panel was built
to get question focus and question type. Then, knowledge base was set up. Finally, the
question could be precisely understood through question understanding model. The
service could provide the student answer. This model was tested in the network
college in CCNU. This method has some efficiency in Q&A, especially in simple
question. But this model should be improved in deal with complex question.
Question answering service becomes more and more important in e-learning field.
We should have a more accurate method to reach accurately and adaptively present
answer. Furthermore, because the clustering attributes should be more precise, we
have to improve the method of clustering question type, knowledge attribute and
synonymy base. Besides, we also need to establish a perfect and friendly question
model.
Acknowledgements. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under the project grant numbers 60573125 and 60672114, and by
the Key Laboratory of Security and Secrecy of Information, Beijing Electronic Science
and Technology Institute under the project number KYKF 200606 of the open
founding.

500

Z.-H. Wu, M. Li, and H. Feng

References
1. Voorhees, E. M.: Overview of the TREC 2005 Question Answering Track. Proc., the
Thirteenth Text Retrieval Conference (TREC 2005), 2006
2. Voorhees, E. M.: Overview of the TREC 2004 Question Answering Track. Proc., the
Thirteenth Text Retrieval Conference (TREC 2004), (2005) 52–62
3. Voorhees, E. M.: Overview of the TREC 2003 Question Answering Track. Proc., the
Twelfth Text Retrieval Conference (TREC 2003), (2004) 54–68
4. Burhans, D. T., Shapiro, S. C.: Defining Answer Classes using Resolution Refutation.
Special Issue of the Journal of Applied Logic on Questions and Answers: Theoretical and
Applied Perspectives, Available online 18 Jan. 2006, (2006) 279–295
5. Shapiro, S. C.: A Logic of Arbitrary and Indefinite Objects, in: Principles of Knowledge
Representation and Reasoning. Proc., the Ninth International Conference (KR-2004),
AAAI Press, (2004) 565–575
6. Fleischman, M., Hovy, E., Echihabi, A.: Offline Strategies for Online Question
Answering: Answering Questions Before They Are Asked. Proc., 41st Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, (2003) 1–7
7. Ferret, O., Grau, B., Hurault-Plantet, M., Illouz, G., Jacquemin, C., Masson, N., Lecuyer,
P.: QALC- the Question-Answering System of LIMSI-CNRS. Proc., the Text Retrieval
Conference (TREC-9), (2000) 316–326
8. Moldovan, D., Rus, V.: Logic Form Transformation and its Applicability to Question
Answering. Proc., ACL 2001
9. Moldovan, D., Pasca, M., Harabagiu, S., Surdeanu, M.: Performance Issues and Error
Analysis in an Open-Domain Question Answering System. Proc., ACL 2002
10. Wu, Y.-W., Wu., Z.-H., et al.: Generating Personalized Answer by Constructing Question
Situation. Springer LNAI, (2006) 731–739
11. Wu, Y.-W., Wu., Z.-H., et al.: Personalized Intelligent Question Answering Algorithm in
E-learning. The Fourth International Conference on Machine Learning & Cybernetics
(ICMLC-2005) 3299–3303
12. Wu, Y.-Z., Zhao, J., Xu, B.: Chinese Question Classification from Approach and Semantic
Views. Information retrieval technology (Second Asia Information Retrieval Symposium,
AIRS 2005, Jeju Island, Korea, Oct. 2005, proceedings) Asia Information Retrieval
Symposium No2, (2005) vol. 3689, 485–490
13. Lee, C.-W., et al.: Perspectives on Chinese Question Answering Systems. Proc., the
Workshop on the Sciences of the Artificial (WSA 2005), Taiwan, (2005)
14. Lee, C.-W., et al.: ASQA: A Hybrid Architecture for Answering Chinese Factoid
Questions. http://www.iis.sinica.edu.tw/~thtsai/paper/Rocling2005_Demo.pdf

