Soot Particle Deposition within Porous
Structures Using a Method of Moments –
Lattice Boltzmann Approach
Bernhard F.W. Gschaider, Claudia C. Honeger, and Christian E.P. Redl
Christian-Doppler-Laboratory for Applied Computational Thermoﬂuiddynamics,
Mining University Leoben,
Franz-Josef-Strasse 18, 8700 Leoben, Austria

Abstract. This paper deals with the combination of two computational methods to simulate the ﬂow of particle laden ﬂuids through porous
structures: the Lattice Boltzmann Method (LBM) which is a method
to solve the Navier-Stokes equation in complex geometries and the Method of Moments (MoM) which describes the time evolution of nonhomogeneous particle distributions. The combination of these methods
makes it possible to take phenomena into account that depend on particle
size and size distribution of the transported material. It is also possible
to simulate changes in the size distribution.

1

Introduction

The simulation of particle laden ﬂows covers a large area of useful applications e.g. emissions of internal combustion engines, transport of pollutants in the
ground-water, aerosols in the atmosphere.
Most of these applications involve the need to simulate a large number of
particles with a non-uniform size distribution. This size distribution is described
by a Probability Density Function (PDF). The shape of this PDF may change
due to coagulation, nucleation or the breaking-up of particles.
A typical example for combined ﬂuid-particle ﬂow is the exhaust gas ﬂow of
combustion engines. A variety of problems arise within this ﬁeld of application.
One of these is the soot particle laden gas ﬂow through particulate ﬁlter materials. The purpose of these simulations is to judge the eﬃciency of the ﬁlter
material with respect to deposition of soot particles on the pore walls.
One diﬃculty with the simulation of ﬂows inside porous materials is the
complexity of the pore geometry. This makes it hard to generate a body ﬁtted
computational grid essential for traditional methods of ﬂow simulation like the
Finite Volume Method. Therefore a Lattice Boltzmann Method (LBM), which
is especially well suited for complex geometries, is used. The computational domains for the LBM can be generated automatically from computer tomography
or reconstructed using statistical correlations.
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3039, pp. 564–571, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

Soot Particle Deposition within Porous Structures

2

565

Lattice Boltzmann Method

A standard incompressible formulation of the Lattice Boltzmann equation is
used for simulating the ﬂuid ﬂow [1] [2].
The incompressible Lattice Boltzmann equation can be written as :
fi (t + 1, x + ei ) = fi (t, x) −

1
(fi (t, x) − fi eq (t, x))
τ

(1)

where the equilibrium distributions are given by
fi eq = ti {p + p0 (

eiα uα
uα uβ eiα eiβ
(
− δαβ ))} + Si
+
cs 2
cs 2
2cs 2

(2)

In the above equations, p0 is a reference pressure, fi are the distribution
functions and ei are the lattice vectors. Si is a volumetric source term which
may result from the particle transport. The lattice dependent weighting factors
for the D2Q9 model are t0 = 4/9 for the rest particle distribution, t1−4 = 1/9
for the cartesian directions and t5−8 = 1/36√for the diagonal directed lattice
vectors. The lattice speed of sound is cs = 1/ 3.
The hydrodynamic quantities can be obtained by computing the moments of
the particle distribution functions :
p=

fi

(3)

fi ei

(4)

i

p0 u =
i

The relaxation parameter τ is related to the viscosity as follows:
τ=

6ν + 1
2

(5)

Due to the tremendous computational overhead transport equations for species are not solved within the LBM framework but by other means, e. g. ﬁnite
diﬀerences. Another limiting factor is the poor numerical characteristics of LB
equations for scalar transport. As it is essential to have a minimum of numerical
diﬀusion for the transport of the moments in the MoM in this works a Van-Leer
ﬂux splitting scheme [3] is adopted to solve the transport equations for these
moments. The ﬂuid ﬂow is solved by the LBM which accuracy for laminar ﬂows
is widely accepted (see e.g. [4]).

3

Particle Models

The appropriate particle model for the presented approach under discussion must
include the possibility to simulate a large number of particles of diﬀerent sizes
and also needs to account for their change in size.

566

3.1

B.F.W. Gschaider, C.C. Honeger, and C.E.P. Redl

Comparison of Particle Models

Traditionally there are two approaches to model particles: The Lagrangian approach, where each particle is simulated individually by calculating its motion
due to inertia and the drag force caused by the ﬂuid. This approach can simulate
the size changes in the particle population by detecting collisions between individual particles. The disadvantage of this approach is that only a limited number
of particles can be treated with the available computational power. An example
of a Lagrangian particle model in combination with a Lattice Boltzmann solver
can be found in the papers of Redl et al [5] or Filippova et al [6].
The other approach is the Eulerian particle model. In this model the particles
are represented by a density φ of particles of uniform size and properties. These
particles are transported by the ﬂuid without deviating from the streamlines
using the usual transport equation:
∂ρφ
∂
=
∂t
∂xi

ρui φ − D

∂φ
∂xi

=S

(6)

In order for this approach to be valid the particles have to be small enough:
Fdrag
rµv
∝ 3 2
Finertial
r ρv

1

(7)

This approach allows an unlimited number of particles, but it can not model
changes in the particle size distribution.
An approach, that is widely used together with the LBM, is the usage of a cellular automata formulation where the number of particles in each computational
cell is stored. Particle transport and deposition are updated at each time-step
by calculating the probability that a particle moves to a neighboring cell (using
the velocities from the ﬂow solution) and moving the corresponding number of
particles. These models allow for a much larger number of particles than the
Lagrangian particle model, but they assume a homogeneous particle population
and they don’t take particle-particle interactions into account. They have been
successfully used for the calculation of snow and sand transport ([7],[8]).
3.2

Method of Moments (MoM)

In order to take account for the change in particle size distribution, particles
are separated into classes of mass mi = i∆m where the particle class i contains
Ni particles. The evolution of these particle classes can be described by the
Smoluchowski model [9]:
∞

dN1
β1,j N1 Nj
=−
dt
j=1
1
dNi
=
dt
2

(8)
∞

i−1

β1,i−j Nj Ni−j −
j=1

i = 2, . . . , ∞

βi,j Ni Nj
j=1

(9)

Soot Particle Deposition within Porous Structures

567

with the collision operator βi,j describing the probability that two particles from
the particle classes i and j coagulate. To simulate the complete evolution of the
particle population, all these equations would have to be solved simultaneously
which of course is not feasible for non-trivial PDFs.
An alternative approach is the Method of Moments (MoM). The MoM is
based on the moments of the particle population:
mri Ni

Mr =

(10)

i

Moment M0 equals the total number of particles, moment M1 is equivalent to the
total mass of the particles. The higher order moments correspond to statistical
measures of the PDF and consequently its shape.
Knowing all the moments Mr is equivalent to knowing the exact size distribution of the particles. However, to reconstruct an approximation of the PDF
only a small number of moments is needed (according to Frenklach [10] a number
of 6 moments is suﬃcient for most applications).
The changes of the moments can be calculated from the changes of the particle classes (8):
S0 =
S1 =
S2 =

dM0
dt

=−

dM1
dt

=0

dM2
dt

=

1
2

∞

∞

βi,j Ni Nj

(11)

i=1 j=1

(12)

∞

∞

ijβi,j Ni Nj

(13)

i=1 j=1
∞ ∞

S3 =

dM3
dt

ij 2 βi,j Ni Nj . . .

=3

(14)

i=1 j=1

For speciﬁc collision terms βi,j (for an example see [11]) the sums in these
formulas can be reduced to expressions that involve only a ﬁnite number of terms
that are expressed by moments Mr (where r isn’t necessarily an integer number).
These moments can be approximated from the known moments by interpolation.
The transport of the PDF is implemented by the usual transport equation
(6) using the time evolutions of the moments (11) - (14) as source terms:
∂ρMr
∂
=
∂xi
∂t

ρui Mr − D

∂Mr
∂xi

= Sr

(15)

Equation (15) is the transport equation for the moment Mr . The source term
Sr is the source term as calculated in equations (11)-(14). In the general case
for the calculation of these source terms the values of the other moments are
needed (coupling the calculation of the moments).
Solving equation (15) for the moments is equivalent to solving (6) for each
particle class: each particle with a mass mi carries a contribution to Mr of mri .
All Ni particles in class i have a moment Ni mri for which we could solve (6). If
these equations are added for all particle classes and we use (10), we get to (15).

568

4

B.F.W. Gschaider, C.C. Honeger, and C.E.P. Redl

Implementation

The Method of Moments has been integrated into the existing LBM solver. Due
to the explicit nature of the LBM the calculation of the ﬂow solution and the
particle transport can be easily decoupled: at each time-step the new solution
of the Navier-Stokes equations is calculated by the LBM. Then the transport
equations (15) for the moments are solved using that ﬂow solution.
Then the source terms Sr are calculated from equations (11) - (14). For
general collision terms βi,j fractional moments Mf have to be used, which are
interpolated from the (known) integer moments. Because there are several orders
of magnitude between the moments, which leads to numerical instabilities in the
interpolation, the interpolation is performed with the logarithms of the moments
making the computation of the sources much stabler (this is possible because
the moments (10) are positive).
In addition to the source terms from particle-particle interactions, in the
computational cells next to walls, a source term for the particle deposition on
the walls is calculated (these are obviously the only source terms S1 for the mass
density M1 ). For each computational cell a separate variable ρdep for the density
of the deposited soot is introduced. The equation
∂ρdep
= −S1
∂t

(16)

for the deposited soot is solved. As soon as ρdep reaches a critical density ρf ull
(which is known from weight measurements of deposited soot) the computational
cell is marked as full. It is then treated like a wall boundary cell by the LBM
and soot can deposit in the neighboring cells.
An alternate approach is to treat the deposited soot as a permeable medium
and allow the ﬂow of air through through the soot modiﬁed by the DarcyForchheimer term. This method also allows for the treatment of partially ﬁlled
cells and therefor a more accurate ﬂow solution. The disadvantage is that the
additional source term for the Navier-Stokes equations degrades the stability of
the LBM.
The necessity to store seven additional scalars (6 moments and the deposition
density) per volume cell increases the memory consumption of the simulation
moderately. More signiﬁcant is the increase in CPU-time, as the calculation of
the particle transport and the source terms have to be performed at every timestep and are computationally intensive.

5

Results

Two simulation results are shown to illustrate the capabilities of the Method
of Moments: the ﬁrst simulation is a simple case that illustrates the eﬀect of
the particle coagulation. The second case shows particle ﬂow in a more complex
geometry.

Soot Particle Deposition within Porous Structures

5.1

569

Deposition in a Channel

The ﬁrst simulation shows laminar ﬂow through a channel at a constant pressure
gradient. Soot particles are inserted at the left end of the channel, and deposit
eventually on the channel walls and on the rectangular obstacle located at the
right end of the channel. The results are shown in ﬁgure 1. The obstacles are
shown in light grey, the deposited soot is shown in black. The values of the
moments are depicted by isolines.

No coagulation

coagulation

M0

M1

M2
Fig. 1. Soot deposition in a channel with obstacle. The same simulation is shown with
and without coagulation

In the ﬁrst column the simulation without coagulation is shown. The second
column shows the same simulation, but the PDF changes due to coagulation.
For both simulations the result at the same time is given.
The images in the ﬁrst line show the particle density, M0 . Coagulation causes a reduction in particle density in ﬂow direction. The second line shows the
material density M1 , which is nearly the same in both cases (diﬀerences near
the obstacles are due to the diﬀerent ﬂow ﬁelds caused by the diﬀerent soot depositions). The last line shows the moment M2 which corresponds to the width
of the PDF which is much smaller in the coagulation case.
The amount of deposited soot is larger in the case of coagulation, because
the larger particles tend to deposit.more easily.

570

5.2

B.F.W. Gschaider, C.C. Honeger, and C.E.P. Redl

Deposition on a Pore Structure

The pictures in ﬁgure 2 show ﬂuid-particle ﬂow through a more realistic structure, reconstructed from existing porous material. The average pore radius is 0.1
millimeters.

Fig. 2. Deposition in porous material. The left picture shows a two-dimensional reconstruction of a pore with deposited soot and soot density. The right picture shows a
three-dimensional simulation of soot deposition on a pore structure. Stream line of the
velocity, soot density in the air and soot deposited on the pore are visible

The left picture in ﬁgure 2 was obtained from a two dimensional simulation.
The pore itself is shown in light gray, deposited soot in black. Flow through the
pore structure goes from the left to the right and is driven by a constant pressure
diﬀerence, that was applied at the boundaries. A soot distribution is inserted at
the inlet. The density M1 of the soot in the air is shown in shades of gray.
It can be clearly seen, that the density of the soot in the air drops due to the
deposition of the soot on the pore structure.
The deposited soot changes the ﬂow distribution through the pore and therefore the permeability of the ﬁlter and the ﬁltration eﬃciency.
The picture on the right of ﬁgure 2 is taken from a 3D simulation of a similar
pore. The pore walls are represented by the the cubes. The air ﬂows through
the pore structure from the left to the right (four “stream tubes” depict the
ﬂuid velocity). Soot is inserted at a small fraction of the inﬂow (soot density is
shown by the gray fog). Soot deposition on the pore is shown by the dark gray
isosurfaces.

6

Conclusion

The Method of Moments for soot particle tracking and deposition is successfully combined with the Lattice Boltzmann Method. Particle coagulation and
deposition can be easily implemented by this approach.

Soot Particle Deposition within Porous Structures

571

Application of the suggested approach has been shown for two cases: Soot
deposition in simple geometries and realistic porous structures.
The combination of these two methods makes it possible to perform simulations in a wide range of applications, where complex geometries and changing
particle density functions are encountered.

References
1. Chen, S., Doolen, G.D.: Lattice boltzmann method for ﬂuid ﬂos. Ann. Rev. Fluid
Mech. (1998)
2. Yu, D., Mei, R., Luo, L.S., Shyy, W.: Viscous ﬂow computations with the method
of lattice boltzmann equation. Progress in Aerospace Sciences (2003)
3. Leer, B.V.: Toward the ultimate convervative diﬀerence scheme v. Journal of
Computational Physics (1979)
4. Luo, L.S.: The lattice gas and lattice boltzmann methods: Past, present and future. In: Proceedings ”International Conference on Applied Computational Fluid
Dynamics”, Beijing, China. (2000)
5. Redl, C., Wassermayr, C., Leixnering, J.: On the numerical simulation in foam
ﬁlter design for diesel exhaus gas systems. In: Proceedings ”International Congress
for Engine Combustion Process”, Munich, Germany. (2003)
6. Filippova, O., H¨
anel, D.: Lattice-boltzmann simlation of gas-particle ﬂow in ﬁlters.
Computers & Fluids (1997)
7. Chopard, B., Masselot, A., Dupuis, A.: A lattice gas model for erosion and particle
transport in a ﬂuid. Computer Physics Communications (2000)
8. Dupuis, A., Chopard, B.: Lattice gas modeling of scour formation under submarine
pipelines. Journal of Computational Physics (2002)
9. Smoluchowski, M.: Versuch einer mathematischen theorie der koagulationskinetik
kolloider l¨
osungen. Zeitschrift f¨
ur physikalische Chemie (1917)
10. Frenklach, M.: Method of moments with interpolative closure. Chemical Engineering Science (2002)
11. Kazakov, A., Frenklach, M.: Dynamic modeling of soot particle coagulation and
aggregation: Implementation with the method of moments and application to highpressure laminar premixed ﬂames. Combustion and Flame (1998)
12. McGraw, R., Wright, D.L.: Chemically resolvedaerosol dynamics for internal mixtures by the quadrature method of moments. Journal of Aerosol Science (2003)
13. Wu, J., Hu, B.X., Zhang, D., Shirley, C.: A three-dimensional numerical method of
moments for groundwater ﬂow and solute transport in a nonstationary conductivity
ﬁeld. Advances in Water Resources (2003)

