No Speculation under Expectations in
Awareness
Ken Horie1 and Takashi Matsuhisa2
1

2

Advanced Course of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Ibaraki National
College of Technology
Department of Liberal Arts and Sciences, Ibaraki National College of Technology,
Nakane 866, Hitachinaka-shi, Ibaraki 312-8508, Japan.
mathisa@ge.ibaraki-ct.ac.jp

Abstract. We present the extended notion of pure exchange economy under uncertainty, called an economy with awareness structure,
where each trader makes decision under his/her awareness and belief
and has strictly monotone preferences. We show the no speculation theorem: If the initial endowment is ex-ante Pareto optimal then
there exists no other expectations equilibrium in awareness for any price.
Keywords: Pure exchange economy, Awareness, Belief, No speculation, Expectations equilibrium, Ex-ante Pareto optimum.

1

Introduction

This article relates economies and distributed knowledge. The purposes are the
two points: First we present an extended notion of economy under uncertainty,
called an economy with awareness structure, where each trader makes decision
in his/her awareness and belief under incomplete information. Secondly we show
the following ‘no trade theorem’ under generalized expectations equilibrium in
the extended economy:
No speculation theorem. In a pure exchange economy under uncertainty,
the traders are assumed to have an awareness structure and to have strictly
monotone preferences. If the initial endowment is ex-ante Pareto optimal then
there exists no other expectations equilibrium in awareness.
Recently researchers in such ﬁelds as economics, AI, and computer science
have become interested in reasoning of belief and knowledge. There are pragmatic
concerns about the relationship between knowledge (belief) and actions. Of most
interest to us is the emphasis on situations involving the distributed knowledge
(belief) of a group of agents rather than that of a single agent. At the heart
of any analysis of such situations as a conversation, a bargaining session or a
Corresponding author. Partially supported by the Grant-in-Aid for Scientiﬁc Research(C)(2)(No.14540145) in the Japan Society for the Promotion of Sciences. Dedicated to Professor Shoji Koizumi on the occasion of his 80th birthday
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3039, pp. 915–922, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

916

K. Horie and T. Matsuhisa

protocol run by processes is the interaction between agents. A agent in a group
must take into account not only events that have occurred in the world but also
the knowledge of the other agents in the group.
As for as concerned in economic situations, many authors have shown that
there can be no speculation in an economy under uncertainty (e.g Kreps [7];
Milgrom and Stokey [12]; Morris [13] and others1 ). The serious limitations of
their analysis are to assume ‘partition’ structure as information the traders receive, and to assume common-knowledge on traders’ willingness to trade. From
the epistemic point of view, the partition structure represents the traders’ knowledge satisfying the postulates: ‘Truth’ T (what is known is true), the ‘positive
introspection’ 4 (that we know what we do) and the ‘negative introspection’ 5
(that we know what we do not know). The postulate 5 is indeed so strong that
describes the hyper-rationality of traders, and thus it is particularly objectionable. Also is the common knowledge assumption because the notion of common
knowledge is deﬁned by an inﬁnite recursion of all of individual knowledge.
This raises the question to what extent results as the no speculation theorem
depend on both common knowledge and the information partition structure
(or the equivalent postulates of knowledge). The answer is the results which
strengthen the Milgrom and Stokey’s theorem. In this article we weaken the
conditions: symmetry, reﬂexivity, transitivity and common-knowledge. As has
already been pointed out in Geanakoplos (1989), this relaxation can potentially
yield important results in a world with imperfectly Bayesian agents.
This article is organized as follows: In Section 2 we present our formal model:
First we recall belief and awareness together with the associated information
structure. Secondly we give economies with awareness structure, and we extend
the notion of rational expectations equilibrium for economies with incomplete
information to the economies with awareness structure. In Section 3 we explicitly
state the no speculation theorem as above and prove it. Finally we discuss related
results and conclude by giving some remarks on the assumptions of our results.

2

The Model

Let Ω be a no-empty ﬁnite set called a state space, T a set of ﬁnitely many at
least two traders {1, 2, . . . , t, . . . n} (n ≥ 2), and let 2Ω denote the ﬁeld 2Ω that
is the family of all subsets of Ω. Each member of 2Ω is called an event and each
element of Ω called a state.
2.1

Awareness and Belief

We present a model of awareness according to Matsuhisa and Usami [11]2 . A
belief structure is a tuple Ω, (Bt )t∈N in which Bt : 2Ω → 2Ω is trader t’s
1
2

The references cited in Fudenberg and Tirole [5], footnote 3, p.543
This model follows from E. Dekel, B. L. Lipman and A. Rustichini [3]. A diﬀerent
approach of awareness models is discussed in R. Fagin, J.Y. Halpern, Y. Moses and
M.Y. Vardi [4].

No Speculation under Expectations in Awareness

917

belief operator. The interpretation of the event Bt E is that ‘t believes E.’ An
awareness structure is a tuple Ω, (At )t∈T , (Bt )t∈T in which Ω, (Bt )t∈T is a
belief structure and At is t’s awareness operator on 2Ω such that Axiom PL
(axiom of plausibility) is valid:
PL

Bt E ∪ Bt ( Ω \ Bt E ) ⊆ At E

for every E in 2Ω .

The interpretation of At E is that ‘t is aware of E.’ The axiom PL says that t is
aware of E if he believes it or if he believes that he does not believe it. An event
E is said to be t’s evident belief if T ⊆ Bt T . We can think of it as embodying
the essence of what is involved in t making his/her direct observations.
2.2

Associated Information Structure

M. Bacharach [1] introduces the strong epistemic model that coincides with the
Kripke semantics corresponding to the modal logic S5.3 Further he deﬁnes the
information partition induced from the knowledge operator of the epistemic model.4 Following his line we generalize the notion of information partition as follows.
Deﬁnition 1. The associated information structure (Pt )t∈T with an awareness
structure Ω, (At ), (Bt ) is the class of t’s associated information function Pt of
Ω into 2Ω deﬁned by Pt (ω) = E∈ 2Ω {E | ω ∈ E ⊆ Bt E}. (If there is no event
E for which ω ∈ E ⊆ Bt E then we take Pt (ω) to be no-deﬁned.) The domain of
Pt denoted by Dom(Pt ) is the set of all the states at which Pt is deﬁned.
We call Pt (ω) t’s evidence set at ω, which is interpreted as the basis for all t’s
evident beliefs. This is because each t’s evident belief E is decomposed into a
union of all evidence sets contained in E.
We note that each mapping Pt is reﬂexive on its domain in the below sense:
The mapping Pt : Ω → 2Ω is said to be reﬂexive if
Ref

ω ∈ Pt (ω)

for every ω ∈ Dom(Pt ),

and it is said to be transitive if:
Trn

ξ ∈ Pt (ω) implies Pt (ξ) ⊆ Pt (ω) for any ξ, ω ∈ Dom(Pt ).

Furthermore Pt is said to be symmetric if:
3

The strong epistemic model is a tuple Ω, (Kt )t∈T , in which t’s knowledge operator
Kt : 2Ω → 2Ω satisﬁes the ﬁve postulates: For every E, F of 2Ω ,

N Kt Ω = Ω;
4 Kt F ⊆ Kt Kt F ;
4

K
5

Kt (E ∩ F ) = Kt E ∩ Kt F ;
Ω \ Kt F ⊆ Kt (Ω \ Kt F ).

T

Kt F ⊆ F ;

t’s information partition Pt induced from the knowledge operator Kt is deﬁned by
Pt (ω) = T ∈2Ω {T ∈ 2Ω | ω ∈ Kt T }.

918

Sym

K. Horie and T. Matsuhisa

ξ ∈ Pt (ω) implies Pt (ξ)

ω for any ξ, ω ∈ Dom(Pt ).

Remark 1. The strong epistemic model can be interpreted as the awareness
structure Ω, (At ), (Bt ) such that (Ω, Bt ) is the Kripke semantics corresponding to the logic S5. In this situation it is easily veriﬁed that At must be the
trivial operator; i.e. At (F ) = Ω for every F ∈ 2Ω . We note that for each t,
the associated information function Pt is a partition of the state space Ω with
Dom(Pt ) = Ω in the strong epistemic model.
2.3

Economy with Awareness Structure

A pure exchange economy under uncertainty is a tuple T, Ω, e, (Ut )t∈T , (πt )t∈T
consisting of the following structure and interpretations: There are l commodities
in each state of the state space Ω, and it is assumed that Ω is ﬁnite and that the
consumption set of trader t is IRl+ ; e(t, ·) : T × Ω → IRl+ is t’s initial endowment;
Ut : IRl+ × Ω → IR is t’s von-Neumann and Morgenstern utility function; πt is a
subjective prior on Ω for a trader t ∈ T . For simplicity it is assumed that (Ω, πt )
is a ﬁnite probability space with πt full support 5 for all t ∈ T .
Deﬁnition 2. A pure exchange economy with awareness structure is a structure
E A = E, (At )t∈T , (Bt )t∈T , (Pt )t∈T , in which E is a pure exchange economy such
that Ω, (At )t∈T , (Bt )t∈T , (Pt )t∈T is an awareness structure with (Pt )t∈T the
associated information structure. By the domain of the economy E A we mean
Dom(E A ) = ∩t∈T Dom(Pt ). We always assume the below condition:
A-0

Dom(E A ) = ∅.

Remark 2. An economy under asymmetric information is an economy E A in
which Ω, (At )t∈T , (Bt )t∈T is given by the strong epistemic model by Bacharach [1].
We denote by Ft the ﬁeld generated by {Pt (ω)| ω ∈ Ω} and denote by
Πt (ω) the atom containing ω ∈ Ω. We denote by F the join of all Ft (t ∈ T );
i.e. F = ∨t∈T Ft , and denote by {Π(ω)| ω ∈ Ω } the set of all atoms Π(ω)
containing ω of the ﬁeld F = ∨t∈T Ft .
We shall often refer to the following conditions: For every t ∈ T ,
A-1 t’s endowment e(t, ·) is Ft -measurable with t∈T e(t, ω) > 0 for all ω ∈ Ω.
A-2 For each x ∈ IRl+ , the function Ut (x, ·) is Ft -measurable.
A-3 For each ω ∈ Ω, the function Ut (·, ω) is continuous, increasing, strictly
quasi-concave and non-saturated 6 on IRl+ .
A-4
For all t ∈ T , Dom(E A ) = Dom(Pt )
5
6

That is, πt (ω) = 0 for every ω ∈ Ω.
That is, for any x ∈ IRl+ there exists an x ∈ IRl+ such that Ut (x , ω) > Ut (x, ω).

No Speculation under Expectations in Awareness

919

An assignment x is a mapping from T ×Ω into IRl+ such that for every ω ∈ Ω
and for each t ∈ T , the function x(t, ·) is at most F-measurable. We denote by
Ass(E A ) the set of all assignments for the economy E A . By an allocation we
mean an assignment a such that for every ω ∈ Ω, t∈T a(t, ω) ≤ t∈T e(t, ω).
We denote by Alc(E A ) the set of all allocations.
We introduce the revised notion of trader’s expectation of utility in E A . By
t’s ex-ante expectation we mean Et [Ut (x(t, ·)] := ω∈Dom(Pt ) Ut (x(t, ω), ω)πt (ω)
for each x ∈ Ass(E A ).7 The interim expectation Et [Ut (x(t, ·)|Pt ] is deﬁned by
Ut (x(t, ξ), ξ)πt ({ξ} ∩ At ({ξ})|Pt (ω)).8

Et [Ut (x(t, ·)|Pt ](ω) :=
ξ∈Dom(Pt )

An allocation x in an economy E A is said to be ex-ante Pareto-optimal if
there is no allocation a such that Et [Ut (a(t, ·)] ≥ Et [Ut (x(t, ·)] for every t ∈ T ,
with at least one inequality strict.

2.4

Expectations Equilibrium in Awareness

A price system is a non-zero F-measurable function p : Ω → IRl+ . We denote
∆(p) the partition induced by p, and denote by σ(p) the ﬁeld generated by
∆(p). The budget set of a trader t at a state ω for a price system p is deﬁned by
Bt (ω, p) := { x ∈ IRl+ | p(ω) · x ≤ p(ω) · e(t, ω) }.
Let ∆(p) ∩ Pt : Dom(Pt ) → 2Ω be deﬁned by (∆(p) ∩ Pt )(ω) := ∆(p)(ω) ∩
Pt (ω); it is plainly observed that the mapping ∆(p) ∩ Pt satisﬁes Ref. We denote
by σ(p) ∨ Ft the smallest σ-ﬁeld containing both the ﬁelds σ(p) and Ft , and
denote by Πt (p)(ω) the atom containing ω. We note that Πt (p)(ω) = (∆(p) ∩
Πt )(ω). We shall give the extended notion of rational expectations equilibrium.
Deﬁnition 3. An expectations equilibrium for an economy E A under reﬂexive
information structure is a pair (p, x), in which p is a price system and x is an
allocation satisfying the following conditions:
RE 1 For all t ∈ T , x(t, ·) is σ(p) ∨ Ft -measurable.
RE 2 For all t ∈ T and for every ω ∈ Ω, x(t, ω) ∈ Bt (ω, p).
RE 3 For all t ∈ T , if y(t, ·) : Ω → IRl+ is σ(p) ∨ Ft -measurable with
y(t, ω) ∈ Bt (ω, p) for all ω ∈ Ω, then Et [Ut (x(t, ·))|∆(p) ∩ Pt ](ω) ≥
Et [Ut (y(t, ·))|∆(p) ∩ Pt ](ω) pointwise on Dom(Pt ).
RE 4 For every ω ∈ Ω, t∈T x(t, ω) = t∈T e(t, ω).
The allocation x in E A is called an expectations equilibrium allocation for E A .
7
8

Where it is noted that ξ ∈ Ω in the summation runs over the domain of Pt .
It should be noted that we use not the usual notion of posterior πt ({ξ}|Pt (ω)) but
the revised one πt ({ξ} ∩ At ({ξ})|Pt (ω)). For the discussion why this improvement of
the notion of posterior is needed, see Matsuhisa and Usami [11] (Section 4).

920

K. Horie and T. Matsuhisa

We denote by RE(E A ) the set of all the rational expectations equilibria of a
pure exchange economy E A with awareness structure, and denote by R(E A ) the
set of all the expectations equilibrium allocations for the economy. We can establish the existence theorem of the expectations equilibrium for a pure exchange
economy E A with awareness structure.
Theorem 1. Let E A be a pure exchange economy with awareness structure satisfying the conditions A-1, A-2, A-3 and A-4. Then there exists an expectations
equilibrium for the economy; i.e., RE(E A ) = ∅.
Proof. Can be given in the same line of Matsuhisa [8].

3

No Speculation Theorem

We can now state the main theorem explicitly and prove it.
Theorem 2. Let E A be a pure exchange economy with awareness structure satisfying the conditions A-1, A-2, A-3 and A-4. Suppose that the initial endowment e is ex-ante Pareto optimal in E A . If (p, x) is an expectations equilibrium
for E A for some price system p then x = e.
Before proceeding with the proof we shall show the below propositions: Let E A (ω) denote the economy with complete information
T, (e(t, ω))t∈T , (Ut (∗, ω))t∈T for each ω ∈ Ω. We set by W (E A (ω)) the set
of all the competitive equilibria for E A (ω), and we denote by W(E A (ω)) the set
of all the competitive equilibrium allocations for E A (ω).
Proposition 1. Let E A be a pure exchange economy with awareness structure
satisfying the conditions A-1, A-2, A-3 and A-4. The set of all expectations
equilibrium allocations for R(E A ) coincides with the set of all the assignments
x such that x(·, ω) is a competitive equilibrium allocation for the economy with
complete information E A (ω) for all ω ∈ Dom(E A ); i.e.,
R(E A ) = {x ∈ Alc(E A )| There is a price system p such that
(p(ω), x(·, ω)) ∈ W (E A (ω)) for all ω ∈ Dom(E A )}.
Proof. 9 In view of the conditions A-1, A-2 and A-3, it follows from the existence theorem of a competitive equilibrium that for each ω ∈ Ω, there exists a
competitive equilibrium (p∗ (ω), x∗ (·, ω)) ∈ W (E A (ω)) (C.f.; Debreu [2]). We take
a set of strictly positive numbers {kω }ω∈Ω such that kω p∗ (ω) = kξ p∗ (ξ) for any
ω = ξ. We deﬁne the pair (p, x) as follows: For each ω ∈ Ω and for all ξ ∈ Π(ω),
p(ξ) := kω p∗ (ω) and x(t, ξ) := x∗ (t, ω). It is noted that x(·, ξ) ∈ W (E A (ω))
because E A (ξ) = E A (ω), and we note that ∆(p)(ω) = Π(ω).
We shall verify that (p, x) is an expectations equilibrium for E A : In fact, it
is easily seen that p is F-measurable with ∆(p)(ω) = Π(ω) and that x(t, ·) is
9

The proof is given in the similar line of Matsuhisa, Ishikawa and Hoshino [10] (Proposition 2).

No Speculation under Expectations in Awareness

921

σ(p) ∨ Ft -measurable, so RE 1 is valid. Because (∆(p) ∩ Pt )(ω) = Π(ω) for
every ω ∈ Dom(E A ), it can be plainly observed that x(t, ·) satisﬁes RE 2, and it
follows from A-2 that for all t ∈ T , Et [Ut (x(t, ·))|∆(p) ∩ Pt ](ω) = Ut (x(t, ω), ω)
On noting that E A (ξ) = E A (ω) for any ξ ∈ Π(ω), it is plainly observed that
(p(ω), x(t, ω)) = (kω p∗ (ω), x∗ (t, ω)) is also a competitive equilibrium for E A (ω)
for every ω ∈ Dom(E A ), and it can be observed by the above equation that RE
3 is valid for (p, x), in completing the proof.
Proposition 2. Let E A be a pure exchange economy with awareness structure
satisfying the conditions A-1, A-2, A-3 and A-4. Then an allocation x is exante Pareto optimal if it is an expectations equilibrium allocation for E A relative
to a price system.
Proof. Let (p, x) be an expectations equilibrium for E A . It follows from Proposition 1 that (p(ω), x(·, ω)) is a competitive equilibrium for the economy E A (ω)
at each ω ∈ Dom(E A ). Therefore in viewing the well known fundamental theorem of welfare in the economy with complete information E A (ω), we can plainly
observe that for each t and for all ω ∈ Dom(E A ) = Dom(Pt ), x(·, ω) is Pareto
optimal in E A (ω), and we conclude that x is ex-ante Pareto optimal.
Proof of Theorem 2. Let (p, x) ∈ RE(E A ). It follows from Proposition 2 that
x is ex-ante Pareto optimal in E A . Suppose to the contrary that x = e. Since
e is ex-ante Pareto optimal in E A it can be observed that there exist an s ∈ S
such that Es [Us (e(s, ·))] > Es [Us (x(s, ·))]. Therefore, it can be plainly veriﬁed
that for some ω0 ∈ Dom(Ps ), Us (e(s, ω0 ), ω0 ) > Us (x(s, ω0 ), ω0 ). On the other
hand, it follows from Proposition 1 that (p(ω0 ), x(·, ω0 )) ∈ W (E A (ω0 )), thus
Us (x(s, ω0 ), ω0 ) > Us (e(s, ω0 ), ω0 ) in contradiction. This completes the proof.

4

Related Results and Remarks

We shall discuss related results: Welfare in economics and Core equivalence.
Finally we give some remarks about the conditions A-1 to A-4.
The converse of Propositions 2 can be proved by the similar way in Matsuhisa
and Ishikawa [9] (Proposition 4). Therefore we can characterize welfare under
the expectations equilibrium for the economy E A : Let E A be a pure exchange
economy with awareness structure satisfying the conditions A-1, A-2, A-3 and
A-4. An allocation is ex-ante Pareto optimal if and only if it is an expectations
equilibrium allocation for E A relative to some price system.
Matsuhisa [8] introduces the notion of ex-post core in the economy for modal
logic KT. Based on the article of Matsuhisa, Ishikawa and Hoshino [10] he
establishes the core equivalence theorem in the economy equipped with nonatomic measure on the traders space: The ex-post core in the economy for KT
coincides with the set of all its rational expectations equilibria. We can extend

922

K. Horie and T. Matsuhisa

the core equivalence theorem into the economy with awareness structure, and
we shall report it in near future.
It well ends some remarks about the auxiliary assumptions A-1 to A-4 in
results in this article. Could we prove the theorems without four conditions A-1,
A-2 and A-3. The answer is no vein. The suppression of any of these assumptions
renders the existence theorem of expectations equilibrium for E A (Theorem 1)
vulnerable to the discussion and the example proposed in Remarks 4.6 of Matsuhisa and Ishikawa [9]. Could we prove the theorems removing out A-4? The
answer is no again. If t’s associated information function Pt does not satisfy Ref
then his/her expectation with respect to a price cannot be deﬁned at a state
because it is possible that ∆(p)(ω) ∩ Pt (ω) = ∅ for some ω ∈ Ω.

References
1. Bacharach,M.: Some extensions of a claim of Aumann in an axiomatic model of
knowledge. Journal of Economic Theory 37 (1985) 167-190.
2. Debreu, G.: Existence of competitive equilibrium. In Arrow, K.J. and Intriligator, M.D., (eds): Handbook of Mathematical Economics, Volume 2. North-Holland
Publishing Company, Amsterdam (1982) 697-744.
3. Dekel,E., Lipman,B.L. and Rustichini,A.: Standard state-space models preclude
unawareness. Econometrica 66 (1998) 159-173.
4. Fagin,R., Halpern,J.Y., Moses,Y. and Vardi, M.Y.: Reasoning about Knowledge.
The MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, London, England, 1995.
5. Fudenberg, D. and Tirole, J.,Game Theory. MIT Press, Cambridge USA, xxii+579,
1991
6. Geanakoplos, J.: Game theory without partitions, and applications to speculation
and consensus, Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper No.914 (1989) (Available in
http://cowles.econ.yale.edu)
7. Kreps, D.: A note on fulﬁlled expectations equilibrium, Journal of Economic
Theory 14 (1977) 32-44.
8. Matsuhisa, T.: Core equivalence in economy for modal logic, in P.M.A. Sloot, D.
Abramson et al. (eds): Computational Science-ICCS 2003, Proceedings, Springer
Lecture Notes of Computer Science, Vol. 2658 (2003) 74-83.
9. Matsuhisa, T. and Ishikawa, R.: Rational expectations can preclude trades.
Preprint, Hitotsubashi Discussion Paper Series 2002-1 (2002) (Available in
http://wakame.econ.hit-u.ac.jp/).
10. Matsuhisa, T., Ishikawa, R. and Hoshino, Y., 2002. Core equivalence in economy
under generalized information. Working paper. Hitotsubashi Discussion Paper Series No.2002-12 (2002) (Available in http://wakame.econ.hit-u.ac.jp/)
11. Matsuhisa,T. and Usami,S.-S.: Awareness, belief and agreeing to disagree. Far East
Journal of Mathematical Sciences 2 (2000) 833-844.
12. Milgrom, P. and Stokey, N.: Information, trade and common knowledge, Journal
of Economic Theory 26 (1982) 17-27.
13. Morris, S.: Trade with heterogeneous prior beliefs and asymmetric information,
Econometrica 62 (1994) 1327-1347.

