Application of Static Adaptive Grid Techniques for
Regional-Urban Multiscale Air Quality Modeling
Daewon Byun1, Peter Percell1, and Tanmay Basak2
1 Institute for Multidimensional Air Quality Studies,
312 Science Research Bldg. University of Houston, Houston, Tx 77204-5007
{dwbyun, ppercell}@math.uh.edu
http://www.imaqs.uh.edu
2 Department of Chemical Engineering, I.I.T. Madras, Chennai – 600 036, Inida
tanmay@iitm.ac.in

Abstract. Texas Air Quality Study 2000 revealed that ozone productivity in the
Houston Ship Channel area was abnormally higher than other comparable cities
in USA due to the large emissions of highly reactive unsaturated hydrocarbons
from petrochemical industries. Simulations with popular Eulerian air quality
models were shown to be inadequate to represent the transient high ozone
events in the Houston Ship Channel area. In this study, we apply a multiscale
Eulerian modeling approach, called CMAQ/SAFE, to reproduce the measured
ozone productivity in the Houston Ship Channel and surrounding urban and rural areas. The modeling tool provides a paradigm for the multiple-level regional and local air quality forecasting operations that can utilize modern computational infrastructure such as grid computing technologies allowing to harness computing resources across sites by providing programmatic and highbandwidth data linkage and establishing operational redundancy in the case of
hardware or software failures at one operational site.

1 Introduction
Air quality in the Houston area suffers from high ozone levels. It is aggravated, by
the considerable amounts of emissions of Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs) from
chemical processing plants distributed along the Houston Ship Channel and mobile
NOx (NO and NO2) emissions from the traffics in the metropolitan area. In the presence of sunlight, VOCs and NOx react in complex ways to form ozone. These concentrated local emissions (typically within sub-domains of size less than 4 km) pose a
challenge for existing computational models such as the EPA Models-3 Community
Multiscale Air Quality Modeling System (CMAQ) [1] in their current form. For
example, during the recent TexAQS 2000 campaign, a wide variety of experimental
measurements identified large and frequent Transient High Ozone Events (THOEs),
i.e., spikes of ozone, that appear to be directly associated with releases of reactive
unsaturated hydrocarbons near the Houston Ship Channel and in adjacent areas [2, 3].
On the other hand, simulations of air quality for the same period of time, using the
existing emissions data and the highest resolution of the computational models, often
fail to reproduce THOEs.
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3515, pp. 814 – 821, 2005.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

Application of Static Adaptive Grid Techniques

815

CMAQ utilizes a regular grid approach that encounters difficulties in reproducing
the ozone productivity measured in the Houston Ship Channel area during the
TexAQS 2000 experiment, while a simpler Lagrangian model can be shown to successfully reproducing the observed behavior through the adjustment of input emissions, meteorological conditions, and back-ground chemical conditions. One approach to improve CMAQ is to increase the resolution of both horizontal advection
and diffusion through the refinement of the underlying computational mesh, possibly
irregular, quadrilateral mesh focused on a sub-domain of a regular rectangular CMAQ
grid representing the density of emissions distribution. In the “Static Adaptive Finemesh Eulerian” (SAFE) modeling approach, we utilize the finite difference/volume
algorithms on general quadrilateral meshes having the logical, but not necessarily
geometric, structure of a regular rectangular grid. The algorithms now being used are
extensions of ones that are already used in CMAQ with regular rectangular meshes.
The advantages of utilizing SAFE grids are that they limit the computational expense
of a highly refined grid to a user defined subdomain of interest and allow a variable
degree of refinement inside the chosen subdomain.

2 Implementation Techniques
2.1 CMAQ Enhancements
The SAFE version of the CMAQ (CMAQ/SAFE) dynamically nests a subdomain
with a refined SAFE quadrilateral grid inside of a coarser standard grid called the
parent grid. Computations proceed in lock step on both the parent and SAFE grids,
with the SAFE grid dynamically receiving interpolated boundary concentrations for
tracked species from the latest results on the parent grid. This is dynamic one-way
nesting. Normal nesting of CMAQ grids, say a 4km grid inside of a 12-km grid, is
done with separate executions of CCTM, first on the 12-km grid and then, after a
boundary condition file has been generated from the results on the 12km grid, the run
on the 4km grid reads in the boundary condition file. CMAQ/SAFE does dynamic
nesting because a future goal is to do two-way nesting, with the run on the refined
SAFE grid dynamically feeding its results back to the parent grid. When no initial
conditions are available on the SAFE grid, the initial conditions are simply interpolated in space from the initial conditions being used on the parent grid.
To be able to run on a SAFE mesh, “SAFE aware” versions of a number of process
subroutines were created. In many cases this just required that the subroutine be
modified to process the list of cells in the SAFE grid, rather than in the parent grid.
The following briefly describes a list of CMAQ processes modified to create a SAFE
version of the associated code:
•
•

Reading External Meteorological and Emission Inputs: Data are read at the
parent grid resolution and then interpolated in space to the SAFE grid to provide dynamic boundary conditions.
Horizontal Mass Transport Processes: Horizontal advection and diffusion algorithms were modified to be “SAFE aware”

816

D. Byun, P. Percell, and T. Basak

•
•

Vertical Mass Transport Processes: No modification was needed for the vertical advection and diffusion processes because the same horizontal SAFE
mesh is used at all vertical layers
Single Cell Processes: Processes such as Chemistry required modifications to
aware the new SAFE data structures.

Other processes, such as Plume-in-Grid modeling, Cloud processes and Aerosol modeling, that are not as significant in modeling ozone production, are not yet supported
on SAFE grids.
2.2 Grid Structures
The CMAQ/SAFE code and data structures have been designed to work with any
horizontal mesh of non-degenerate convex quadrilateral cells that reversibly maps
to a regular rectangular grid. This restriction permits use of techniques such as
operator splitting that have traditionally been used in air quality modeling on uniform rectangular grids for the irregular grid system. It also simplifies data management tasks and CMAQ's present rectangular data infrastructure based on I/O
API can be utilized as is. In principle, if a user supplied the positions of all the
nodes of any such a grid, then that data could easily be read into the SAFE data
structures and used for a simulation.

Fig. 1. Demonstration of the structural equivalence of a SAFE grid on an irregular domain with
a regular rectangular grid

At this point, a few simple static grid generation algorithms are available as options
through CMAQ/SAFE. These algorithms require a very small amount of input data to
define the SAFE subdomain and its mesh in terms of the rows and columns of the
parent grid. A good deal of work has been done on grid generation algorithms, especially algorithms that automatically adapt the mesh to particular problem and solution
features. Investigating such algorithms and incorporating them into CMAQ is a possible area for future work.

Application of Static Adaptive Grid Techniques

817

2.3 Horizontal Transport on a SAFE Mesh
The governing conservation equation for trace species advection is

∂φ
+ ∇ ⋅ (φ V ) = 0
∂t

(1)

where φ is the concentration (as a volume density) of a trace species, and V is the
velocity vector of the wind (again, after transformation to the computing coordinate
system). The solution method is the same for both air and the trace species, so we
shall present the approach used in terms of a trace species. In order to discretize the
advection equation on a SAFE mesh, we consider each quadrilateral SAFE cell to be a
control volume. With the approximations that φ is constant on each cell and that the
velocity vector V is constant along each cell edge, over the duration of a time step
∆t we get the equation

∆ (Aφ )
= −(LEφ νE • VE - LWφ νW • VW) - (LNφνN • VN - LSφ νS • VS)
∆t
where A is the area of the cell, L is the length of an edge and
vector to an edge, as shown in Figure 2.

LN, ν N, VN

(2)

ν is the unit normal

LE, ν E, VE

LW, ν W, VW

A, φ

LS, ν S, VS

Fig. 2. A typical quadrilateral cell in a SAFE mesh. The arrows show the direction of the unit
normal vectors ν

By rearranging Equation (2), and splitting it into the (nominal) West-East and SouthNorth directions, we get

∆φ EW = −
∆φ NS = −

∆t ( LEφ νE • VE - LWφ νW • VW)
A
∆t ( LNφ EW νN • VN - LSφ EW νS • VS)
A

(3)

818

D. Byun, P. Percell, and T. Basak

With this splitting we can advance the advection solution a time step by sending the
first piece for each row of quadrilaterals and the second piece for each column of
quadrilaterals to a solver for one dimensional advection. This is done by telling the
solver that Lν • V is a speed and A is a “distance” step. The solver has the job of
finding a good approximation to the average value of φ for the area (Lν • V) ∆t that

flows through an edge of the cell over a time step. Then φaveLν • V∆t is the total
mass that flows through the edge over the time step. Note that this formulation is
guaranteed to conserve mass, but the amount of mass movement between cells is
subject to approximation error.
The equation for horizontal diffusion is

∂φ
= ∇ • (ρJKH∇q )
∂t

(4)

ρJ is the density of air times the Jacobian determinant of a coordinate transformation, KH is a scalar eddy diffusivity dependent on wind deformation and q = φ / ρJ

where

is mixing ratio. In CMAQ/SAFE this equation is now handled like the advection equation, with the mass flux ρJKH∇q replacing φV. In fact, it is sufficient to use the resulting version of Equation 0 directly, without operator splitting and a higher order approximation method as in the one dimensional advection solver being used.

3 CMAQ/SAFE Simulation Results
The domain for our studies of CMAQ/SAFE is shown in Figure 3. This is a domain
that contains Houston, the Houston ship channel, Galveston and surrounding areas.
For a parent grid with 4km cells, the cells in the skewed mesh average out to 2km
cells, while the smallest cells in the other mesh are 1km and the cells in the corner
areas are 2km cells. Users can choose arbitrary boundary nodes following an irregularly shaped enclosure to adapt the grid to a non-rectangular domain of interest.

Fig. 3. Subdomain and SAFE mesh used for comparing selected horizontal and vertical results
on the parent grid and SAFE grid

Application of Static Adaptive Grid Techniques

819

3.1 Transport Process of CMAQ/SAFE
Here, we simulated transport processes only, i.e., horizontal and vertical advection
and diffusion, using non-reactive tracer species with artificially controlled initial
and boundary conditions. The test validates the use of SAFE meshes and the modifications of the advection and diffusion solution algorithms. We compared results
(not shown here) for the small subdomains that were obtained with the parent grid’s
4km mesh, the irregular rectangular SAFE mesh, and the skewed SAFE mesh. The
study shows good agreement between the results on the three different grids, with
the results on the SAFE grids obviously showing more pronounced local variation.
All 3 meshes are coarse enough so that we cannot expect exact agreement. An important thing to notice is that even though the two SAFE grids are distinctly different, the differences in the computed concentrations are quite small. Clearly the
choice of mesh, at this degree of refinement, does not change the qualitative results,
but does give slightly different local variation in concentrations, which is to be
expected.
3.2 Effects of SAFE Mesh on Nonlinear Chemistry
We have tested CMAQ/SAFE with transport, emissions and the SAPRC99 gas-phase
chemistry mechanism. The parent grid has a 4-km mesh and the SAFE grid used here
has a variable rectangular mesh with cell edges either 1-km or 2-km (see Figure 3). It
contains 120 columns and 108 rows or 12,960 cells. The grid resolution affects the
simulated ozone production because it is produced through the nonlinear chemical
reactions of the VOC and NOx species. When the emissions of either VOC or NOx
species are dispersed in a too larger cell and fail to represent the actual atmospheric
conditions, the model would not be successful in generating observed ozone concentrations.
Figure 4 shows NOx concentration peaks in the Houston downtown area, with
high volume of traffics, thus large NOx emissions. SAFE grid provides a more detailed distribution of NOx. However, because the road network is wide spread over
the large downtown area, there is not much difference in the peak values. On the
other hand, when highly reactive VOC species are emitted in a small but concentrated industrial area, such as the Houston Ship Channel, the model grid should be
sufficiently small to properly describe NOx-VOC concentration ratios to replicate
real atmospheric conditions. Figure 4 also contrasts the resulting ozone concentration differences. The CMAQ/SAFE with higher grid resolution can successfully
simulate the high ozone event in the Houston. It is evident in Figure 5 that the high
ozone concentration from the CMAQ/SAFE resulted from the higher HCHO concentrations, which in turn was produced through the photo-oxidation of the highly
reactive VOC emissions from the Ship Channel industries. Aircraft measurements
during the TexAQS studied showed the presence of high HCHO and ozone plumes
in around and downwind of the Houston Ship Channel area. Only when the NOxVOC concentration ratios are properly represented, the model can simulate the high
ozone concentrations observed.

820

D. Byun, P. Percell, and T. Basak

Fig. 4. Comparison of NO2 (top) and O3 (bottom) concentrations between the parent grid (left)
and SAFE grid (right)

4 Conclusions
The goal of this study was to implement CMAQ the capability to efficiently focus
computing resources for enhanced resolution of its science processes in geographical areas where the user needs an extra degree of detail. The SAFE grid in the target sub-window is a more refined and more flexible grid, e.g., with rectangular, or
even quadrilateral cells, whose shape and size can vary within the grid. The solution
on the SAFE grid provides more detail inside its sub-window, but currently does
not improve the solution on the parent grid. At this time, many of the science processes have been extended to work simultaneously on a regular “parent” grid and a
SAFE grid on a single targeted sub-window. Further enhancement tasks under
development are; (1) two-way nesting solution to utilize the refined sub-grid results
feed back to the parent grid, and (2) multiple SAFE domains inside the same parent
grid. For example, this capability could be used to improve modeling of the air
quality interaction between two large, but separate, cities, such as Houston and
Dallas within Texas. The two-way nesting capability described above is needed to
realize an improvement in the interaction between improved solutions in multiple
SAFE windows.

Application of Static Adaptive Grid Techniques

821

Fig. 5. Vertical cross section over the Ship Channel area of HCHO (top) and O3 (bottom) for
the parent mesh (left) and the SAFE mesh (right)

References
1. Byun, D.W. and Ching, J.K.S.: Science algorithms of the EPA Models-3 Community Multiscale Air Quality (CMAQ) Modeling System”. EPA-600/R-99/030, U.S. EPA. (1999)
(available at http://www.epa.gov/asmdnerl/models3/doc/science/science.html )
2. Byun, D.W., Kim, S.-T., Cheng, F.-Y., Kim, S.-B., Cuclis, A., and Moon, N.-K.: Information Infrastructure for Air Quality Modeling and Analysis: Application to the HoustonGalveston Ozone Non-attainment Area, J. Environmental Informatics, 2(2) (2003) 38-57
3. Daum, P.H., L. I. Kleinman, S. R. Springston, L. J. Nunnermacker, Y.-N. Lee, J.
Weinstein-Lloyd, J. Zheng, and C. M. Berkowitz: A comparative study of O3 formation in
the Houston urban and industrial plumes during the 2000 Texas Air Quality Study. Journal
of Geophysical Research, 108(D23) (2003) 4715, doi:10.1029/2003JD003552.

