DEM in 3D Simulation of Influencing Factors of
Deformation Properties and p-y Curves of a Laterally
Loaded Pile
Xiao Zhao-ran1 and Wang Junlin2
1

School of Civil Engineering and Architecture, Henan University of Tecnology, Zhengzhou
2
School of Environmental and Water conservancy, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou

Abstract. Based on structural similarity principles, a scale model of a laterally
loaded pile was established to numerically simulate and study the problem of
lateral soil-pile interaction by distinct element method in 3 dimensions. Level
displacements of the pile and soil resistance around the pile related to the
factors of the pile’s diameter, the pile’s rigidities and soil properties. According
to the above distinction classification method, the factors of the pile’s diameter,
the pile’s material rigidities and internal frictional coefficient of soil around the
pile were analyzed in detail to find different quantity influences on the
mechanics characters of horizontal displacements of the pile and the p-y curve.
Keywords: laterally loaded pile; p-y curves; distinct element method; reducedscale model.

1 Introduction
Piles of buildings mainly withstand vertical axial loads in general foundation
engineering, but piles in river ports, bridges, high buildings, offshore oil extraction
platforms, shoring buildings and aseismatic buildings also simultaneously
withstand horizontal loads of wind force, wave force, ship impacting force, earth
pressure, seismic force and so on. In the oceanic engineering, the problems of piles
and their stabilities are concerned mostly by design apartments currently, since
40% ~ 50% of a oceanic engineering s cost is focused on groundwork[1]. At
present, the horizontal ultimate bearing and the bearing behavior of a laterally
loaded pile are taken seriously but not settled well in geological engineering,
because of laterally loaded piles wide application. Level distortion of the pile
and the p-y curve relate to the factors of the pile’s diameter, the pile’s rigidities
(material) and soil conditions. In order to determine bearing capacity of the pile, it
is necessary to numerically analyze scientifically and reasonably different quantity
influences by the factors of the pile’s diameter, the pile’s rigidities (material) and
soil conditions on the mechanics characters of horizontal displacements of the pile
and the p-y curve.

’

’

The horizontal bearing properties of a pile largely depend on deformation
characteristics of soil around the pile, and its capabilities of bearing horizontal loads
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part III, LNCS 4489, pp. 1214–1222, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

DEM in 3D Simulation of Influencing Factors of Deformation Properties

1215

greatly relate to microscopic mechanical properties and the relation between
microscopic structure and macroscopic mechanical phenomenon of soil[2]. With the
aid of distinct element theory’s special advantage in simulating mechanical problems
of dispersed medium, the microscopic structure of soil around a pile has been
simulated and analyzed with distinct element method while the pile is bearing lateral
loads in the article. The above influent factors could be reasonably considered
according to the rules of the lateral deformation of the pile and the p-y curve, in order
that the design scheme was chose reasonably and the property of bearing lateral loads
of the pile-soil system were enhanced.

2 Model Establishments
2.1 Establishing the Reduced-Scale Model
The loads and stresses of the pile-soil system were mainly produced by its own weight,
and they also controlled the distortion and the destruction of the structure. But a less
sizes model could not reappear the characteristic of the prototype, since its gravity was
much lower than the prototype. The only way of solving this problem was enhancing
the gravity of the reduced-scale model so as to equal the prototype s gravity. So the
stress-strain relationship of the model was the same as that of prototype.
A 1/n (n was the reduced ratio) pile-soil reduced-scale model has been simulated in
distinct element method under a condition of the acceleration of ng (g is gravity
acceleration) or the density gravity of nγ ( γ is density gravity of the raw material).
Since it was absolutely equivalent between the gravitational fields of the model and
the prototype, the model had equal stress and strain, similar distortion and same
destructive mechanism with the prototype. Therefore, the reduced-scale model could
reappear the characteristics of the prototype. At the same time, soil was divided into
inner layer soil near the pile and outer layer soil far away the pile in order not to
destroy the pile-soil constitutive relationship. The grain diameter of the former soil
was close to grain diameter of middle sand, and the grain diameter of the latter soil
was slightly bigger than the former. Partial reduced-scale factors of the reduced-scale
model relative to its prototype were listed in Table 1[4].

’

Table 1. Reduced-scale factors of a reduced-scale model relative to its prototype
Measure

Prototype

Length
Area
Volume
Quality
Density
Acceleration
Force
Stress
Strain

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

Reduced-scale model
(gravitational acceleration of ng)
1/n
1/n2
1/n3
1/n3
1
n
1/n2
1
1

1216

Z.-r. Xiao and J. Wang

2.2 Choice of Calculation Parameters
According to experiment conditions in reference [4], the size of the model box was
45.7cm (length) 25.7cm (width) 25.7cm (high). The pile diameters of the model
piles were 0.6cm, 1.2cm and 2.4cm, and the length was 16.8cm. Under the
acceleration of 50g (n=50), the diameters of prototype piles corresponding to that of
the model piles were 0.3m, 0.6m and 1.2m, and the length was 8.4m.
Sand in the model box was formed by rigid granules, and the box was made from
walls. There were normal and tangential distortion rigidities and frictional
coefficients among granules and walls. The tangential and normal rigidities of walls
were equal. The rigidities of four peripheral walls were10 times of the rigidities of
sand, and the rigidities of the bottom wall were 10 times of peripheral walls.
Parameters of the model were listed in Table 2. It is necessary to point out that the
parameters of soil and pile foundation were user-defined in the DEM numerical
simulation, and they were not their own real physical indexes. The model
constitution was shown in Fig. 1. The formed granules were balanced under their
own gravity (The acceleration of gravity was 50g). The granule aggregate was about
16.8cm high, the porosity percent of soil was 38.9%, and the porosity ratio of soil
was 0.637 after being balanced.

×

×

2.3 Loading Manner of the Model
The loading mode of continuous classification that was the same as the single pile
experiment of vertical static loads was adopted in the model formed under itself
gravity, i.e. the result documents were saved after the pile-soil system was balanced
fully under every level
load, and then next load
was
forced.
The
simulation loads of the
model were divided into
ten levels, and the
ordinal steps were
20N, 28N, 36N, 44N,
52N, 60N, 68N, 72N,
76N and 80N. On the
base of the reducedscale parameters in
Fig. 1. The distinct element model in 3D of a laterally loaded pile
Table 1, external loads
forced on the model were 50kN, 70kN, 90kN, 110kN, 130kN, 150kN, 170kN,
180kN, 190kN and 200kN in turn from the point of view of the prototype.

3 Results Analysis of Numerical Simulation
In order to reduce the dimension effect of the reduced-scale model, partial coordinates
used dimensionless form. In figures y was the lateral displacement on top of the pile,

DEM in 3D Simulation of Influencing Factors of Deformation Properties

1217

Table 2. The collection table of basic factors of the distinct element model in 3D
Types

ρ

R

M

Ks

Kn

μ

Sand

2650

1.3~3.0

1.85

1.0e4

1.0e4

0.6/0.8/1.0

Pile

3000

6.0/12.0/24.0

5.0e4/5.0e
5/5.0e6

5.0e4/5.0e5/5.0
e6

0.7

Note:

ρ ——density of granules ( kg ⋅ m −3 ); R——radius of granules (mm);
—— Tangential rigidity ( N ⋅ m−1 );
——frictional coefficient.

factor of granule radius;
(N ⋅m

−1

); μ

Ks

M——magnification

K n —— normal

rigidity

z represented the distance from some position to the head of the pile, D was the
diameter of the model pile, and H was the length of the model pile.
3.1 Effect Analysis of Diameter of the Pile
The normal and tangential stiffness of the pile was supposed to be 500 kN ⋅ m −1 ,
diameters of 0.3m, 0.6m and 1.2m of the pile were chose to calculate and analyze.
3.1.1 Effect of Diameter of the Pile on the Flex Displacement of the Pile
Fig. 2 told us that the pile size had notable effect on the flex curve of lateral
displacement of the pile. The pile diameter was the bigger, the lateral displacement of
the single pile was the
smaller under the same
lateral load. The lateral
displacement on top of the
pile increased by 55% when
the pile diameter reduced
from 0.6m to its half; the
lateral displacement on top of
the pile reduced by 87%
when the pile diameter
increased from 0.6m to its
two times. Besides, the
model pile gradually became
from an elastic pile to a rigid
pile with increasing the pile
diameter.
Therefore,
enlarging the pile diameter
Fig. 2. Effect of diameter of the pile on flex displacement
could obviously control the
distribution of the pile
lateral displacement of the
pile.

1218

Z.-r. Xiao and J. Wang

3.1.2 Effects of Diameter of the Pile on the p-y Curve the Pile
The following p-y curves were chose at the positions of distances 0.31L, 0.46L and
0.62L from the top of the pile. The diameter (or width) of the pile was one of the
effect parameters to analyze the p-y curve.

Fig. 3. Effect of diameter of the single pile on the p-y curves of the pile

The pile diameter was the bigger; soil resistance p was the bigger under definite
situations in Fig. 3. The relationship between the ultimate soil resistance around the
pile and the pile diameter was roughly linear. The emulational results of the model
pile comparatively approached the Broms’s viewpoints [5].
3.2 Effect Analysis of Connected Stiffness of the Pile
The bearing force of the pile was relevant to its elastic modulus, and the elastic
modulus was corresponding to the connected stiffness of the model pile. The pile
diameter was unchangeable and while analyzing the effect of the pile connected
stiffness on laterally loaded properties of the pile, i.e. D=0.6m, but the normal
stiffness and tangential stiffness in the connected pile model were variational. The
connected stiffness of the pile was listed in Table 3.

DEM in 3D Simulation of Influencing Factors of Deformation Properties

1219

3.2.1 Effect of Connected Stiffness of the Pile on the Flex Displacement of the
Pile
The simulation result of Fig. 4 indicated that the flexibility of the pile and the
displacement along the pile in the lateral load direction were the bigger while the
connected stiffness of the pile were
the smaller. But the pile displacement
was not sensitive to its connected
stiffness, which it may be relevant to
being more rigid of the pile.
3.2.2 Effect of Connected Stiffness
of the Pile on the p-y Curve
of the Pile
It was supposed that the p-y curve of
the laterally loaded pile was not
relevant to the pile stiffness in
references of [6, 7]. But the analysis
results of Briaud[8] and others
indicated stiffness of the pile had
some effect on the p-y curve of the
Fig. 4. Effect of connected stiffness of the pile
single pile in the shallow soil.
on flex displacement distribution of the pile
Simulation results were shown in
Fig. 5.
The analytical results indicated the p-y curve of the laterally loaded single pile was
not sensitive to the material modulus, i.e. connected stiffness. This conclusion was
consistent with that in reference [9]. But the connected stiffness was the bigger, the
lateral resistance of soil would be developed deeper, so the transform point of the
resistance moved down, and the lateral resistance of below soil increased, which was
beneficial to enhancing the lateral bearing capacity of the pile.
3.3 Effect Analysis of Internal Frictional Coefficient of Soil
The mainly parameters of soil were water content, density, void ratio, plastic index,
liquid index, compression coefficient, compression modulus, internal frictional angle
and so on. Only the internal frictional coefficient of soil was considered while
simulating in the article. In order to analyze the effect of internal frictional angle of
Table 3. The normal stiffness and tangential stiffness of the pile
Number

K s / kN ⋅ m

−1

K n / kN ⋅ m −1

1

2

3

50

500

5000

50

500

5000

1220

Z.-r. Xiao and J. Wang

Fig. 5. Effect of connected stiffness of the single pile on the p-y curves of the pile
Table 4. Parameters of internal frictional coefficients of soil
Number
Internal frictional coefficients

μ

1

2

3

0.6

0.8

1.0

soil on the lateral bearing character of the pile, normal stiffness and tangential
stiffness were supposed to be 500 kN ⋅ m −1 , and the diameter of the pile was 0.6m.
Three selective internal frictional coefficients were listed in Table 4.
3.3.1 Effect of Internal Frictional Coefficient of Soil on the Flex Displacement of
the Pile
The effect of the character of the soil around the pile on the flex displacement
distribution of the pile was little. The lateral displacement of the pile did not reduce
notably when the internal frictional coefficient of soil gradually increased, which was
shown as in Fig. 6.

DEM in 3D Simulation of Influencing Factors of Deformation Properties

1221

Fig. 6. Effect of internal frictional coefficient of soil on flex displacement distribution of the
pile

3.3.2 Effect of Internal Frictional Coefficient of Soil on the p-y Curve of the Pile

Fig. 7. Effect of internal frictional coefficient of soil on the p-y curves of the pile

1222

Z.-r. Xiao and J. Wang

4 Conclusions
Compared with other numerical simulation methods, the superiority of distinct
element method in 3D was that it was only necessary to assign some microscopic
basic parameters (such as contact rigidities and frictional coefficient and so on)
between granules when it was used to cope with the problem of pile-soil interaction
under lateral loads. The constitutive relationship of the pile-soil system could formed
automatically, thus choosing the constitutive relationship and determining the
corresponding parameters could be avoided, and the simulation results tended to
being realer. In addition, on the base of similitude between the reduced-scale model
and the prototype, the gravitational field of the model absolutely equaled that of the
prototype. The analysis results indicated that the reduced-scale model could basically
reappeared properties of stress, strain, distortion and so on.
The factors of the pile’s diameter, the pile’s material rigidities and internal
frictional coefficient μ of soil around the pile were analyzed in detail to find
different quantity influences on the mechanics characters of horizontal displacements
of the pile and the p-y curve in the article. Based on the similarity of the reduced-scale
model to the prototype, the numerical simulation results indicated that the connection
of microscopic structural change with macroscopic mechanical action, the bearing
behavior of the laterally loaded pile, and microscopic structural response could be
simulated well by 3D DEM. However, since it was ambiguous of the corresponding
relationships between microscopic parameters and macroscopic model parameters,
only qualitative and semi-quantitative researches of the model have been done, but it
was difficult to contrast with the theoretical calculation results in detail, which was
the further study when distinct element procedure was applied.

References
[1] Wu Hengli. Solutions of laterally loaded piles by composite stiffness principle with
biparameter method (second edition). Beijing: People transportation press, 2000.
[2] Liu Wenbai. Experimental study and particle flow code numerical simulation of extended
foundation with aeolian sand under the action of uplift loading. Shanghai: Doctoral
dissertation. Tongji University, 2003.
[3] Cundall P A, Strack O D L. A discrete numerical model for granular assembles[J].
Geotechnique, 1979, 29(1): 47-65.
[4] Ricard Ramos. Centrifuge Study of Bending Response of Pile Foundation to a Lateral
Spread Including Restraining Effect of Superstructure [D]. New York: Doctor of
Philosophy. Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute Troy, New York,1999.
[5] Broms BB. Lateral resistance of piles in cohesionless soils. J Soil Mech Found Div –
ASCE 1964;90(3):123–56.
[6] O’Neill MW, Murchison JM. An evaluation of p–y relationships in sands. Research Report
No. GT-DF02-83, Department of Civil Engineering, University of Houston; 1983.
[7] Reese LC, Cox WR, Koop FD. Analysis of laterally loaded pile in sand. In: Proceedings of
the Sixth annual offshore technology conference, Houston (TX). Paper no. 2080; 1974.
[8] Briaud JL, Smith TD, Meyer BJ. Using the pressuremeter curve to design laterally loaded
piles. In: Proceedings of the fifteenth annual offshore technology conference. Houston,
(TX). Paper no. 4501; 1983.
[9] Chia-Cheng Fan, James H.Long. Assessment of existing methods for predicting soil
response of laterally loaded piles in sand. Computers and Geotechnics, 2005, 32:274-289.

