Preliminary Study on Unsupervised Classification of
Remotely Sensed Images on the Grid
Jianqin Wang1, Xiaosong Sun1, Yong Xue1,2*, Yincui Hu1, Ying Luo1,
Yanguang Wang1, Shaobo Zhong1, Aijun Zhang1, Jiakui Tang1, and Guoyin Cai1
1

Laboratory of Remote Sensing Information Sciences, Institute of Remote Sensing
Applications, Chinese Academy of Sciences, P. Box 9718, Beijing 100101, China
2
Department of Computing, London Metropolitan University, 166-220 Holloway Road,
London N7 8DB, UK
{tian1.wang@163.com,y.xue}@londonmet.ac.uk

Abstract. Grid is a new technology. With corresponding middleware it can
give strong computing power. In this paper we mainly discuss the middleware
technology and architecture used in remote sensing image classification
algorithm. Because unsupervised classification middleware is the key of the
classification middleware algorithms, we study the alternant-unsupervised
middleware and put forward a non-alternant unsupervised middleware scheme.
Based on this scheme, main factors which effect the performance of nonalternant unsupervised classification are analyzed.

1 Introduction
"Grid" computing has emerged as an important new field, distinguished from
conventional distributed computing by its focus on large-scale resource sharing,
innovative applications, and, in some cases, high-performance orientation [1]. They
defined "Grid problem", which is defined as flexible, secure, coordinated resource
sharing among dynamic collections of individuals, institutions, and resources –what
they referred to as virtual organizations(VO).
The term "the Grid" was coined in the mid 1990s to denote a proposed distributed
computing infrastructure for advanced science and engineering [2]. There are several
famous grid projects today. Access Grid(ww.fp.mcs.anl.gov/fl/access grid) lunched in
1999 and mainly focused on lecture and meetings-among scientists at facilities
around the world. European Data Grid sponsored by European union, mainly in data
analysis in high-energy physics, environmental science and bioinformatics. Grid
Physics Network (GriDPhyN) [5] lunched in 2000 and sponsored by NSF mainly in
data analysis for four physics projects: two particle etectors at CERN’s Large Hadron
Collider, the Laser Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory, and the Sloan
Digital Sky Survey. Information Power Grid [6] is the NASA’s computational support
for aerospace development, planetary science and other NASA research. International
Virtual DataGrid Laboratory (iVDGL)[7] sponsored by NSF and counterparts in
Europe, Australia, and Japan in 2002. Network for Earthquake Engineering and
Simulation labs (NEESgrid) (www.neesgrid.org) intended to integrate
*

Corresponding author

M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3039, pp. 981–988, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

982

J. Wang et al.

computing environment for 20 earthquake engineering labs. TeraGrid
(www.teragrid.org) is the general-purpose infrastructure for U.S. science: will
link four sites at 40 gigabits per second and compute at up to 13.6 teraflops. U.K.
National Grid [8] sponsored by U.K Office of Science and Technology. Unicore
(www.unicore.de) is a seamless interface to high-performance Education and
Research computer centers at nine government, industry and academic labs
The famous Grid focused on spatial information includes SpaceGrid, EnvirGrid and
EarthObsevation Grid. ESA’s SpaceGrid is an ESA funded initiative
(http://sci2.esa.int/spacegrid).
EnvirGrid main goals are generalization of Earth Science application infrastructure
to become GRID-aware, extend GRID access to European Environmental and Earth
Science application to large science communities, to value adding and commercial
communities, …, and demonstrate collaborative environment for Earth Science.
Dozens of satellites constantly collecting data about our planetary system 24 hours a
day and 365 days a year. Large scale of satellite data needed to be processed and
stored in real time or almost real time. Real time processing in remote sensing is very
significant in some cases, such as fire and flood. So far real time processing in remote
sensing confronts much difficulties in one single computer, or even impossibility.
Computing grid which is integrated by series of middlewares provide a way to solve
this problem [3]. The following is our preliminary study on unsupervised
classification middleware on the grid platform.

2 Middleware on Unsupervised Classification on Grid Platform
Classification is a important field in digital remote sensing image processing. Almost
all classification algorithms involve processing pixel value one by one. Large amount
of remote sensing data classification will take too long time. Luckily, emerging grid
technology can provide large computing power in the Internet as the security type.
The grid computing nodes resource distribute loosely. They may be supercomputers
or common PCs with heterogeneous architecture. The grid computing nodes resource
distribute loosely. They may be supercomputers or common PCs with heterogeneous
architecture. Classification middlewares on grid platform can solve this problem.
2.1 Testbed of Telegeoprocessing Grid Platform
Telegeoprocessing grid platform in Institute of Remote Sensing Application, Chinese
Academy of Science is an advanced High-Throughput Computing grid using condor
which copyright is Computer Sciences Department, University of WisconsinMadison. Heterogeneous computing nodes including two sets of Linux computers and
WINNT 2000 professional computers and one set of WINNT XP computer provide
stable computing power. The grid pool uses java universe to screen heterogeneous
characters. It is a fundamental bare computing platform and can not run remote
sensing image processing program. So remote sensing image processing middlewares
running on grid pool are inevitable. Common users can use the heterogeneous grid

Preliminary Study on Unsupervised Classification of Remotely Sensed Images

983

and share its strong computing power to process remote sensing images with
middlewares as if in one supercomputer.
IP
192.168.0.5
192.168.0.3
192.168.0.102
192.168.0.111
192.168.0.6

Name
Manager.linux
Wjq.linux
Tele1.linux
Tele2.linux
Client2.linux

Arch-OS
Itel/Linux
Intel/WIN50
Intel/WIN50
Intel/WIN51
Intel/Linux

Role
Manager/client
Client
Client
Client
Client

2.2 A Simple Unsupervised Classification Algorithm Description
The aim of the classification middleware on grid is to divide jobs into several
assignments and submit them to the computing pool. The rule of dividing jobs is: the
more simple the dividing type can be used, the better it is. Difference among all the
heterogeneous computing nodes resource determine this rule. With the same
algorithm, the amount of the remote sensing image data is the most significant one of
all the factors of impacting the classification speed. Naturally, dividing jobs can be
transferred into dividing data and sending data to several grid nodes properly
Training areas can be chosen beforehand in the supervised classification algorithm.
Then interoperation among the divided areas doesn’t exist at all. Dividing assignment
is relevantly easy. Contrarily, There exists strong correlation among all the divided
data parts in the unsupervised classification. Mean center of classification must
change dynamically according to computing result of every time’s cycle. So the key
technology of classification middlewares is to solve unsupervised classification
middleware.
Dynamical clustering method is a typical algorithm of all the unsupervised
classification algorithms. Every pixel can be classified into corresponding K class
group individually according to least -squares rule. The algorithm iterates over three
steps:
1. Compute the mean of each cluster.
2. Compute the distance of each point from each cluster by computing its distance
from the corresponding cluster mean. Assign each point to the cluster it is nearest
to.
3. Iterate over the above two steps till the sum of squared within group errors cannot
be lowered any more. Vector x is the pixel value. The K-means algorithm
partitions data into K clusters. The solution is then a set of K centers, each of
which is located at the centroid of the data for which it is the closest center. For a
partition P of the elements in {1,2…m}, denote by P (i) the cluster assigned to i
and C(j) the centroid of cluster j. The intent of the K-means algorithm is the
minimization of the objective function
m

Ep (i ) = ∑ dist (i, C ( P(i )))
i =1

(1)

984

J. Wang et al.

Where dist ( x, c ) is the distance between the vectors x and c. In this experiment, we
define the distance as the Euclidean distance

dist ( x, c) = x, c

(2)

2.3 Alternant Unsupervised Classification Middlewares Test on the
Telegeoprocessing Grid Testbed
Test Data Resource and Ground
We employ IKONOS satellite dada as remote sensing image resource. IKONOS
satellite images were acquired on 26 April 2002 with approximately 1 m and 4 m
spatial resolution in the visible (panchromatic) and relatively broad bands in the blue,
green, red, and near-infrared portions of the spectrum, respectively. We use bands of
blue, green, red, and near-infrared for about 4m spatial resolution. Test ground
surrounds Olympic park in Beijing.

Fig. 1. The test area showed by IKONOS satellite blue band

Architecture of Alternant Unsupervised Classification Middleware on Grid
Testbed
Alternant middleware can provide friendly interface to users. Figure 2 shows the
architecture of alternant unsupervised classification middleware development.
User just expresses the number of jobs, which he wants to divide the job into
through the user interface. JDMM that denotes job dividing manager module can
divide job according to the user’s demand. JSMM (Job submission manage module)
can submit jobs to grid platform. CJMM is circulating job monitoring manage module
the duty of which is monitoring when every job’s result can be sent back for each
loop. It also computes the new mean center through RRM, which receives result.

Preliminary Study on Unsupervised Classification of Remotely Sensed Images

985

CJMM sends message to JSMM when the classification precision is not compatible to
the user’s demand. DFVM is data fusion and visualization module. It can fuse the
divided result and give user visualization of the classification.

Fig. 2. Architecture of alternant unsupervised classification middleware

2.4 Non-alternant Unsupervised Classification Middleware Study
Alternant unsupervised classification middleware is natural to come to our minds. But
alternant algorithm must employs result from every grid node of each loop. Thus
job’s submission of this time must wait for result of the last time. Frequent
communication among grid nodes prolongs computing time. All the computing nodes
may be heterogeneous and super-performed nodes must wait for common-performed
nodes. Then the total time can be expressed as following:

Ttotal = n ∗ max{Tgrid _ node }+ n ∗ Tcommunication

(3)

where:
n: times of loop;
Tgrid_node: computing time of one grid node for each loop;
Tcommunication: communication time of each loop.
It is obvious that alternant unsupervised middleware algorithm is not the ideal one. So
non-alternant unsupervised middleware is expected. We image that each job partition
data should be computed individually and be submitted only once. After computing
they can be fused and displayed. Through deep analysis we find that we can try to
solve this problem for several reasons. Object can be distinguished and classified
whatever in one whole image or in divided parts according to brightness of every

986

J. Wang et al.

pixel. The most important issue we care about is which type every object can be
classified and the difference among different objects .We can do not care about the
brightness of the whole core center. We set the classified number of each divided part.
The problem may be that each divided part must be classified into given class number
but it may be less the number in just one divided part. Through amalgamating
dynamically class number through critical threshold we can adjust the class number in
each divided part. Then classifying effect in each part can be almost the same as in
one whole image after properly matching colors.

Fig. 3. Architecture of non-alternant unsupervised classification middleware

The assignment can be submitted only once. DFVM (data fusion and visualization
module) gives users classification result when JMM (job monitoring module) finding
the end result. The following pictures are the classification result comparison between
single computer and non-alternant in grid pool. The effect shows almost little
difference and approve we can employ this way to exploit our non-alternant
middleware in grid environment. To distinguish vegetations from other objects we
employ NDVI algorithm (>=0.281) [4].

2.5 Performance Test Using Non-alternant Middleware on Grid Platform
Non-alternant middleware has advanced performance relative to alternant one. Multicomputing nodes in grid environment can give strong computing power. But the idea
that the lesser time the assignment can take, the more job will be divided to is not
always true. To find out which factor affect the performance most we have several
test on this grid platform. Using non-alternant classification middleware we divide
assignment into 4 and 16 job units individually. Test result is shown in the following
table:

Preliminary Study on Unsupervised Classification of Remotely Sensed Images

Number of jobs
divided
1
4
16

Time (full resource)
Second
35
25
39

987

Time (partial resource)
Second
28
41

When all the grid nodes are free, assignment divided into 4 sub-jobs takes about
25seconds and less than on single computer. But the same assignment divided into 16
sub-jobs takes longer time on the contrary for about 39 seconds. While computers in
grid nodes are partially used, the time the same assignment takes will be longer than
the free station.
Relationship between the number of the sub-jobs and the number of the computing
nodes directly infects the performance of non-alternant classification middleware.
When the number of the sub-jobs is almost the same as that of the computing nodes
the performance of the middleware will be good. But when the number of the subjobs is far more than that of the computing nodes all the sub-jobs will wait in the
working queues and the performance will fall.

Fig. 4. Classification result on single computer.

Fig. 5. Classification on Grid platform

3 Conclusions
Grid technology is very effective method for remote sensing image classification. It
can give strong computing power in grid environment. Unsupervised classification
middleware is the key technology of classification algorithms because of its alternant
character. Developing non-alternant middleware of unsupervised classification can
successfully use grid to classify remote sensing image objects. It is a good experience
for other middleware used in remote sensing image processing. The number of
divided sub-jobs must be proper according the actual station of the grid resource. If
the number of divided sub-jobs is too more, the performance will be fall on the
contrary in the special grid environment.

988

J. Wang et al.

Acknowledgement. This publication is an output from the research projects "CAS
Hundred Talents Program", "Digital Earth" (KZCX2-312) funded by Chinese
Academy of Sciences and “Dynamic Monitoring of Beijing Olympic Environment
Using Remote Sensing” (2002BA904B07-2) funded by the Ministry of Science and
Technology, China.

References
1.

I. Foster, C. Kesselman, S. Tuecke The Anatomy of the Grid, Intl J. Supercomputer
Applications, 2001.
2. Foster, I. and Kesselman, C. (eds.). The Grid: Blueprint for a New Computing
Infrastructure. Morgan Kaufmann, 1999.
3. Jianqin Wang, Yong Xue, and Huadong Guo, 2003, A Spatial Information Grid Supported
Prototype Telegeoprocessing System. In Proceedings of 2003 IEEE International
Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium (IGARSS’2003) held in Toulouse, France on
21-25 July 2003.
4. F. Hirota, M. Morisugi, F. Weihua, and H. Imura: “A study on evaluations for vegetation
in urban area with GIS and high-resolution satellite data – Reexamination of method to
extract vegetation zones with the precedent satellite data -”, Proceedings of 29th Annual
meeting of
Environmental Systems Research 2001, pp. 163 - 168, 2001.
5. Grid Physics Network. http://www.griphyn.org/index.php
6. W. E. Johnston, IPG Chief Architect. Information Power Grid.
http://www.ipg.nasa.gov/
7. IVDGL Grid. http://www.ivdgl.org/
8. UK e-Science Grid Support Center. http://www.grid-support.ac.uk/

