Structure-Based Integrative Computational and
Experimental Approach for the Optimization
of Drug Design*
Dimitrios Morikis1, Christodoulos A. Floudas2, and John D. Lambris3
1

Department of Chemical and Environmental Engineering, University of California,
Riverside, CA 92521, USA
dmorikis@engr.ucr.edu
2
Department of Chemical Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA
floudas@titan.princeton.edu
3
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
lambris@mail.med.upenn.edu

Abstract. We present an integrative approach for the optimization in the design
of peptides which are candidates to become therapeutic agents. This approach is
based on the structure of the peptide ligand when structural information on the
protein target is not available. Our approach combines (i) NMR spectroscopy,
(ii) structure determination by distance geometry, simulated annealing, and
global optimization methods, restrained with NMR-derived or deduced
restraints, (iii) molecular dynamics simulations, based on NMR low energy,
averaged minimized, or ensemble of structures, (iv) in silico sequence selection
using integer linear optimization, (v) fold specificity using deterministic global
optimization, and (vi) peptide synthesis, mass spectrometry characterization,
and activity measurements. The optimization of the design of the 13-residue
cyclic peptide compstatin is presented as a paradigm for the application of our
approach. The same principles can be applied for the design of small proteins
with desired properties and function.

1 Introduction
We present an overview of our integrative approach for peptide-drug discovery. This
approach is based on the peptide structure and it incorporates classical and novel
features for drug design methodologies. The approach integrates several methods,
computational and experimental, for structural analysis, structure determination,
sequence and structure prediction, and structure-activity correlations, including
spectroscopy, spectrometry, molecular dynamics simulations, integer linear
optimization and global optimization, and binding constant and IC50-value activity
*

This work was supported by grants from NIH and NSF.

V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3515, pp. 680 – 688, 2005.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

Structure-Based Integrative Computational and Experimental Approach

681

measurements. We will present brief descriptions for the use and integration of the
computational and experimental methods. We will follow with a specific example for
the application of our approach on the optimization of the peptide compstatin, a potent
inhibitor against the abnormal (or unregulated) function of the complement system
(part of innate immunity).
Our approach can be used for the optimization in the design of active peptide
analogs, with the aim to improve their activity. Optimally, the structures of both the
ligand peptide and the target protein or the active (binding) site of the target protein
are desirable. In this paper we focus on ligand-based design, using the structure of the
peptide when the structure of the protein is not available. This is often the case for
large or unstable proteins, which are not yet amenable to structure determination by
crystallography (X-ray or neutron diffraction) or NMR methods.

2 Methods
Figure 1 presents the interplay of the computational and experimental methods used in
our approach. The methods used in the various steps will be briefly described below.

NMR spectroscopy

Dynamic snapshots
! Molecular dynamics
simulations

Structure determination
! Distance geometry
! Simulated annealing

Structure determination
! Global optimization

Rational optimization
! Structure-activity correlations
! Sequence & structure template(s)
Computational combinatorial optimization

In Silico sequence selection
! Distance dependent force field
! Integer linear optimization
Rank-ordered list of sequences
Fold specificity
! Folding calculation (Astro-Fold)
! Folding around template (Astro-Fold)
! Probability of folding to the template
Experimental studies
! Peptide synthesis or expression
! Mass spectrometry characterization
! Activity measurements

Experimental binding studies
! SPR
! ITC

Fig. 1. Flow of information in our integrative drug design and optimization approach

682

D. Morikis, C.A. Floudas, and J.D. Lambris

2.1 NMR Spectroscopy
Multi-dimensional and multi-nuclear NMR spectroscopy is used to determine the
secondary structure and tertiary or quaternary contacts of peptides and proteins [1].
Typically, two-dimensional NMR spectra are sufficient for structural analysis of
peptides. In cases of overlapping cross peaks three-dimensional heteronuclear NMR
spectra may be necessary to increase spectral resolution. Heteronuclear NMR spectra
require, in most cases, 15N- and or 13C-labeled samples, prepared by expression rather
than chemical synthesis methods.
The measured NMR parameters are chemical shifts, spectral linewidths and
heights, areas, or volumes, coupling constants, and nuclear Overhauser effects
(NOEs). The chemical shifts are used to assign specific resonances for protons and
13
C and 15N. Patterns of chemical shifts are used to identify the amino acid systems.
Deviations of chemical shifts in structured peptides from their random coil values,
plotted as differences or chemical shift indices, are used to distinguish helical, betastrand, and random coil secondary structures. Temperature variation of chemical
shifts often points to the formation of hydrogen bonded secondary structure, when
plotted in the form of temperature coefficients. In certain triple resonance NMR
spectra, connectivities of chemical shifts are used to identify the protein backbone by
piecing together the backbone N, Cα, C' atoms, and side chain Cβ atoms. Coupling
constants are also used to distinguish well-formed helical from beta-strand secondary
structures. NOEs are used to determine through space dipolar interactions of protons
in proximity of less than 5.5-6 Å. Specific sequential and medium range NOE
connectivity patterns are used to determine secondary structure and to distinguish
helices, strands, and turns, from extended or random conformations. Long range
NOEs are used to identify tertiary and inter-molecular contacts in the case of
complexes. Spectral linewidths are used to determine relaxation parameters and to
identify aggregation or binding.
2.2 Structure Determination Using NMR Restraints
Distances and backbone and side chain torsion angles are typically used as
experimental restraints, together with restraints from chemical knowledge for covalent
geometry and nonbonded interactions, in computational methods for the
determination of three-dimensional structures of peptides [2]. Distances are derived
from NOEs and torsion angles are derived from J-coupling constants, sometimes in
combination with NOEs. The structure determination protocols are based on the
minimization of an energy function using parameters and topologies from a specific
force field, in the Cartesian or torsion angle space.
Distance Geometry and Molecular Dynamics-Based Simulated Annealing.
Distance geometry methods are based on the metric matrix theorem which allows for
the conversion of distances among a set of points in three-dimensional
Euclidian space into Cartesian coordinates. Because not all atom pair distances are

Structure-Based Integrative Computational and Experimental Approach

683

known in the metric matrix, large distances need to be assigned and subsequently
reduced using the triangle inequality. In some instances, the distance geometry
method is the first step in structure determination followed by simulated annealing
regularization of the structures. Alternatively, simulated annealing methods are used
alone.
Molecular dynamics-based simulated annealing for the determination of threedimensional structures using NMR restraints is a simplified implementation of regular
(unrestrained) molecular dynamics in vacuum (without the presence of explicit
solvent molecules or implicit solvation energy term) [2]. The potential energy
function has the form E=Ecovalent+Enonbonded+Eexperimental, where Ecovalent=Ebond+Eangle+
Etorsion+Echiral,planar, and Eexperimental=Edistance+Etorsion+(Echemicalshift+Ecouplingconstant). The
terms in parentheses are optional or entered during the later stages of the calculations.
Ecovalent and Enonbonded are empirical energy terms from known chemical principles.
Enonbonded is typically a simplified repel potential term that accounts for van der Waals
and electrostatic interactions of nonbonded atom pairs. In certain instances or at later
stages in the calculations, deduced hydrogen bonds can be used in the form of
distance restraints. The structure determination protocols are iterative procedures
involving the stepwise addition of restraints and tests for the correctness of the
assigned restraints.
Deterministic Global Optimization. Global optimization methods have been tested
first for the structure determination of peptides using NOE restraints [3]. The structure
determination formulation represents a general nonconvex constrained global
optimization problem, a class of problems for which several methods have been
developed. In this work, the formulations are solved via the αBB deterministic global
optimization approach, a branch and bound method applicable to the identification of
the global minimum of nonlinear optimization problems with twice-differentiable
functions [4]. The global minimization of a detailed atomistic energy force field
Eforcefield is performed over the set of independent torsion angles, which can be used to
describe any possible configuration of the system. The bounds on the torsion angles
are enforced by simple box restraints. Finally, a set of distance constraints, which are
nonconvex in the internal coordinate system, are used to constrain the system. The
energy function has the form Eforcefield=Eelectrostatic+EvanderWaals+EHbond+Etorsion.
2.3 Molecular Dynamics Simulations
Molecular dynamics simulations using implicit solvent representation are performed
to scan rapidly the conformational space of peptides and proteins [1]. The initial
structures are the complete ensemble of NMR-derived structures, the averaged
minimized structure, or the lowest energy structure. The empirical energy function
has the form E=Ecovalent+Enonbonded+Esolvation, where Ecovalent includes the covalent
geometry energy terms Ebond+Eangle+Etorsion+Echiral,planar, Enonbonded includes the
nonbonded interaction terms EvanderWaals+Eelectorstatic+(EHbond), and Esolvation is an
appropriate impicit solvation model energy term. Simulation times in the range of 1-

684

D. Morikis, C.A. Floudas, and J.D. Lambris

10 ns are typically sufficient for peptides. Energy minimizations are performed before
and after the molecular dynamics simulations.
Individual snapshots during a trajectory are analyzed to examine (i) flexibility
using the RMSD of backbone and side chain atoms and calculated B-factors, (ii)
secondary structure using backbone torsion angles and hydrogen bonding, and (iii)
tertiary structure using side chain contacts. Pairwise nonbonded interactions
between side chains are determined by plotting the total potential energy, the van
der Waals energy, and electrostatic energy. This type of analysis evaluates the role
of side chains in packing and stability. Molecular dynamics also provide free energy
differences of different conformations and motional amplitudes for conformational
inter-conversion.
2.4 Rational Design and Optimization
Rational design and optimization depends on the availability of three-dimensional
structures [5,6]. In rational design the structures or structural information of active
analogs from NMR and computational methods (see above) are used to identify the
critical for binding and activity physico-chemical properties and their spatial
arrangement. This is done in combination with experimental binding and activity
measurements (see below) by determining structure-(dynamics-binding)-activity
correlations. The parentheses denote often optional steps; however these steps are
necessary in our opinion because in several cases the lowest energy structure derived
from NMR or crystallography is not the one that binds. It is not unusual for the ligand
or the protein active site to undergo structural rearrangements upon binding.
Structure-(dynamics-binding)-activity correlations are used to optimize the peptide by
rationally replacing or modifying its building blocks. Ligand-based Pharmacophore
and QSAR (quantitative structure-activity relationship) approaches use rational design
for the construction of pharmacophore models. Peptide pharmacophore models can be
used to identify matching low molecular mass organic molecules from appropriate
databases. It is usual in rational design to incorporate non-natural amino acids or
amino acids substituted with specific chemical groups (e.g., methylation, etc), which
need parameterization for the computational methods described below.
2.5 Computational Combinatorial Design and Optimization
A two-stage method for the de novo peptide and protein design has been recently
introduced. This method is based on sequence and structural templates of active
analogs, determined from NMR- or crystallographically-derived structures, or from
snapshots of molecular dynamics trajectories. The first step of the method involves
sequence selection and the second step involves fold validation.
Sequence Selection. The sequence selection step relies on a constrained integer linear
programming (ILP) model [7,8]. Sequences compatible with given sequence and
backbone templates are identified by minimizing an empirical potential describing

Structure-Based Integrative Computational and Experimental Approach

685

pairwise distance-dependent interactions. This potential assigns energy values for
amino acid interactions, based on the Cα-Cα separation distance for each amino acid
pair. The type of amino acids (side chains) is implicitly included in the interaction
potentials. The solution of this ILP problem allows the identification of a rank ordered
list of the low lying energy sequences, which are used in the second step, the
prediction of fold stability and specificity, described next.
Prediction of Fold Specificity. This step is used to distinguish the most optimal
sequences from those identified in the sequence selection step (above) according to
rigorous quantification of conformational probabilities [7,8]. Conformational
ensembles are generated for the selected sequences under two sets of conditions. First,
the structure is allowed to vary around the template structure, with imposed
fluctuations. The fluctuations can be based on the structural boundaries defined by the
NMR ensemble, on the RMSDs of molecular dynamics structures, or some arbitrary
fluctuation. Second, a free folding calculation is performed with limited number of
restraints, as needed (e.g., disulfide bridges, etc), but with the underlying template
structure not being enforced. The ensembles of conformers resulting from the two
folding calculations are used to calculate the probabilities. The formulation of the
folding calculations is similar to the structure determination calculations using
deterministic global optimization (described above). The calculations are performed
with ASTRO-FOLD framework [9].
2.6 Experimental Peptide Synthesis and Binding and Activity Measurements
Sample preparation is typically performed using solid state peptide synthesis or
expression methods and tested for integrity using mass spectrometry. Biological
assays for activity measurement in the form of IC50 values are used to assess the
strength of the peptide inhibitors. The IC50 value is the peptide concentration at
50% inhibition. Direct inhibition or competition assays using ELISA methods are
used, depending on the specifics of the experiment. Binding data using surface
plasmon resonance (SPR) and isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) methods are
often necessary to correlate structure with binding and activity and to form
hypotheses [1].

3 Results: The Example of Compstatin
The 13-residue peptide compstatin is an inhibitor of the complement system, with
sequence I[CVVQDWGHHRC]T-NH2, where brackets denote cyclization through a
disulfide bridge [5]. The complement system is part of innate immunity and acts
together with adaptive immunity to fight infection by foreign pathogens. The
complement system is finely regulated by fluid phase or cell-bound regulators and is
programmed to recognize “self” from “non-self”. When this regulation brakes down,

686

D. Morikis, C.A. Floudas, and J.D. Lambris

as is the case in several autoimmune diseases and pathological situations, the
complement system turns against “self” and attacks host tissues. Currently there is no
drug in the clinic that regulates the abnormal complement activation.
Compstatin was identified by constructing and testing a phage-displayed random
peptide library against binding to complement component C3 [10], a converging
component of the complex pathways of complement activation. The threedimensional structure of compstatin was determined using NMR data and
computational methods restrained with NMR-derived restraints. The computational
methods were hybrid distance geometry/simulated annealing [11] and global
optimization [3]. Subsequently, optimization of the sequence of compstatin was
performed using rational design based on NMR structural studies (but not
computational complete structure determination) and structure-activity correlations,
which yielded several active analogs with up to 4-fold higher inhibitory activity
than the parent peptide [6]. The rational design determined that 7 of the 13 amino
acids of compstatin were indispensable for activity, and provided the following
sequence template for further optimization: Ac-X[CVXQDWGXXXC]X-NH2
(called active sequence template), where the 6 amino acids marked with X were
optimizable [5]. The active sequence template was used for the construction of a
second round of phage-displayed peptide library and binding experiments against
C3 (called experimental combinatorial optimization). This round of optimization
yielded four more active analogs, with one of them being 4-fold more active than
the parent peptide [12]. The active sequence template and the NMR-derived
structure of compstatin were also used as the first test case of the novel
computational combinatorial approach described above, which predicted several
active analogs [7,8]. Among the active analogs that were synthesized and
experimentally tested for activity were 5 analogs with 6- to 14-fold higher
inhibitory activities than the parent peptide [7,8,13]. Subsequent rounds of rational
design, using the same active sequence template and NMR-based structural studies
identified several active analogs with up to 99-fold higher inhibitory activities than
the parent peptide [13]. Several of these analogs are peptidomimetics because they
are built using combinations of natural and non-natural amino acids. Table 1 shows
the major breakthroughs in the optimization of the design of compstatin, from each
of the various optimization rounds.
Besides IC50 activity measurements that were performed for each synthesized
analog, kinetic and thermodynamic binding studies were performed using surface
plasmon resonance [12,14], and isothermal titration calorimetry [15]. The structural,
binding, and activity studies were useful to form testable structure-binding and
structure-activity hypotheses.
Finally, quasi-dynamic pharmacophore models have been generated using
snapshots from molecular dynamics simulations of several active and inactive
compstatin analogs [16,17]. Upon selection of proper geometric and physico-chemical
properties to represent the spatial arrangement of the pharmacophore points, one
model allowed for the distinction of active from inactive analogs [17].

Structure-Based Integrative Computational and Experimental Approach

687

Table 1. Benchmarks in the optimization of the design of compstatin*
Peptide
Sequence
RIA
Year
Ref.
I
I[CV V QDWGHHRC]T-NH2
1
1996
10
II
Ac-I[CV V QDWGAHRC]T-NH2
4
2002
6
III
Ac-L[CV V QDWGWHRC]G-NH2
4
2003
12
IV
Ac-I[CV Y QDWGAHRC]T-NH2
14
2003
7,8
V
Ac-I[CV W QDWGAHRC]T-NH2
45
2005
13
VI
Ac-I[CV(2Nal)QDWGAHRC]T-NH2
99
2005
13
*RIA, relative inhibitory activity. Bold face indicates additions/substitutions responsible for
the increase in inhibitory activity. Ac, acetylation; 2Nal, 2-naphthylalanine.

4 Conclusions
We have described a ligand-based approach for the optimization of active peptides,
which are candidates to become therapeutics. This approach involves the interplay of
a variety of computational and experimental methods. The compstatin example
presented here, has demonstrated the effectiveness of our ligand-based approach in
the absence of structural information for the C3 target, the structure of which thus far
has not been determined. We expect that similar mixed computational and
experimental approaches will also be useful when the structures of both, the free
ligand and the free target, and/or their complex, are available.

References
1. Morikis, D., and Lambris, J.D.: Physical methods for structure, dynamics and binding in
immunological research. Trends Immunol. 25 (2004) 700-707
2. Güntert, P.: Structure calculation of biological macromolecules from NMR data. Quart.
Rev. Bioph. 31 (1998) 145-237
3. Klepeis, J.L., Floudas, C.A., Morikis, D., Lambris, J.D.: Predicting peptide structures
using NMR data and deterministic global optimization. J. Comp. Chem. 20 (1999) 13541370
4. Floudas, C.A.: Deterministic global optimization: theory, methods and applications,
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, The Nederlands (2000)
5. Morikis, D., Soulika, A.M., Mallik, B., Klepeis, J.L., Floudas, C.A., and Lambris, J.D.:
Improvement of the anti-C3 activity of compstatin using rational and combinatorial
approaches. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 32 (2004) 28-32
6. Morikis, D., Roy, M., Sahu, A., Troganis, A., Jennings, P.A., Tsokos, G.C., and Lambris
J.D.: The structural basis of compstatin activity examined by structure-function-based
design of peptide analogs and NMR. J. Biol. Chem. 277 (2002) 14942-14953
7. Klepeis, J.L., Floudas, C.A., Morikis, D., Tsokos, C.G., Argyropoulos, E., Spruce, L.A.,
Lambris, J.D.: Integrated computational and experimental approach for lead optimization
and design of compstatin variants with improved activity. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 125 (2003)
8422-8423
8. Klepeis, J.L., Floudas, C.A., Morikis, D., Tsokos, C.G., and Lambris, J.D.: Design of
peptide analogues with improved activity using a novel de novo protein design approach.
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 43 (2004) 3817-3826

688

D. Morikis, C.A. Floudas, and J.D. Lambris

9. Klepeis, J.L. and Floudas, C.A.: ASTRO-FOLD: a combinatorial and global optimization
framework for ab initio prediction of three-dimensional structures of proteins from the
amino acid sequence. Biophys. J. 85 (2003) 2119-2146
10. Sahu, A., Kay, B.K., Lambris, J.D.: Inhibition of human complement by a C3-binding
peptide isolated from a phage-displayed random peptide library. J. Immunol. 157 (1996)
884-891
11. Morikis, D., Assa-Munt, N., Sahu, A., Lambris, J.D.: Solution structure of compstatin, a
potent complement inhibitor. Protein Sci. 7 (1998) 619-627
12. Soulika, A.M., Morikis, D., Sarrias, M.R., Roy, M., Spruce, L.A., Sahu, A., Lambris, J.D.:
Studies of Structure-Activity Relations of Complement Inhibitor Compstatin. J. Immunol.
171 (2003) 1881-1890
13. Mallik, B., Katragadda, M., Spruce, L.A., Carafides, C., Tsokos, C.G., Morikis, D., and
Lambris J.D.: Design and NMR characterization of active analogs of compstatin
containing non-natural amino acids. J. Med. Chem. 48 (2005) 274-286
14. Sahu, A., Soulika, A.M., Morikis, D., Spruce, L.A., Moore, W.T., and Lambris, J.D.:
Binding kinetics, structure-activity relationship, and biotransformation of the complement
inhibitor Compstatin. J. Immunol. 165 (2000) 2491-2499
15. Katragadda, M., Morikis, D., and Lambris, J.D.: Thermodynamics studies on the
interaction of the third complement component and its inhibitor, compstatin. J. Biol.
Chem. 279 (2005) 54987-54995
16. Mallik, B., Lambris, J.D., Morikis, D.: Conformational inter-conversion of compstatin
probed with molecular dynamics simulations. Proteins 53 (2003) 130-141
17. Mallik, B. and Morikis D.: Submitted (2005)

