Geostatistical Computing in PSInSAR Data Analysis
Andrzej Lesniak and Stanislawa Porzycka
AGH University of Science and Technology Krakow, Poland
lesniak@agh.edu.pl, porzycka@agh.edu.pl

Abstract. The presented paper describes the geostatistical analysis of
PSInSAR data. This analysis was preceded by short description of PSInSAR
technique. The geostatistical computations showed in this article were
performed with the R open-source software containing the gstat package. The
analysis contains variograms computing (directional variograms) and ordinary
kriging interpolation. The computationally costly problems in geostatistical
analysis of PSInSAR data were discussed.
Keywords: geostatistics, ground deformations, interferometry, kriging,
PSInSAR.

1 Introduction
The computations in geosciences frequently require working with different types of
data. Nowadays the satellite data are used very often. Among them we can distinguish
radar and multispectral images. Both types derive information for each pixel of the
images. Quite often, geoscientists have to analyze these remote sensing data in
relation to ground measurements, which are usually performed for irregular and rare
grid due to economical and physical constraints. Comparing large remotely sensed
data with ground measurements is not only an extremely important task, but also a
very computationally costly challenge. An example of a computationally intensive
processing component in geographic data analysis is kriging, which is a geostatistical
method of interpolation.
This paper presents the analysis of PSInSAR data. PSInSAR method is
dynamically developed branch of satellite radar interferometry. Nowadays many
institutions have implemented the PSInSAR technique to monitor ground
deformations. This technique cannot constitute an independent tool to study ground
displacements and PSInSAR data have to be joined with other measurements. The
analysis of PSInSAR data, which are huge data sets, meets several computational
problems. In this paper the analysis of PSInSAR data was performed with the use of
geostatistical methods. The main goal of this analysis was to interpolate values of
ground displacements at unmeasured locations to produce maps, which can be easily
analyzed together with satellite images or with interferograms. Performed
interpolation gives us the opportunity to do a useful comparison between different
datasets. This work points the main computationally costly problems in geostatistical
analysis of PSInSAR data.
G. Allen et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2009, Part I, LNCS 5544, pp. 397–405, 2009.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

398

A. Lesniak and S. Porzycka

2 PSInSAR Data Set
Scientists from the Politecnico di Milano (POLIMI) elaborated the PSInSAR
(Permanent Scatterer Interferometry SAR) technique in the nineties of the 20th
century. This method exploits sets of dozens SAR images in order to detect small (not
bigger than several centimeters per year), long period ground deformations [1]. SAR
(Synthetic Aperture Radar) is a form of radar mounted on the satellite. It emits its
own microwave radiation towards the surface of the Earth and records the amplitude
and phase of the signal, which returns to the radar antenna (each pixel of the radar
image contains information about the phase and amplitude of backscattered signal).
PSInSAR technique derives information about ground deformations only for PS
points. PS points are stable radar targets, which means that PS points have time stable
amplitude and phase in all exploited radar images. These stable radar targets
correspond very well with man-made features on the ground, such as buildings,
bridges, viaducts and etc., therefore the density of PS points is much higher in urban
areas (even more than 1000 PS/km2) than it is in rural areas. PSInSAR method
provides information about ground displacements for large areas of interest, even
exceeding 10 000 km2. The spacing of PS points is usually very irregular. PSInSAR
technique uses archival images, dating back to 1992, and giving us the opportunity to
reconstruct previous ground deformations. This method enables to detect
displacements with average annual rate equal to 0.1 mm/yr. Despite the fact that
PSInSAR technique cannot be an independent tool for ground movements monitoring,
it complements considerably the conventional leveling and GPS surveying.
PSInSAR data, which have been presented in this paper, describe small, longlasting ground displacements, which occurred in the Upper Silesian Coal Basin
(Southern Poland) in the years between 1992 and 2003. In this region the intensive
coal exploitation has been carried on for more than two hundred years. This
exploitation and complicated geological structure (a lot of faults) makes this area
particularly endangered with terrain deformations. PSInSAR data for Upper Silesian
Coal Basin were obtained as a result of 79 SAR images processing. These radar
images were performed by ESA’s satellites (ERS-1, ERS-2 and ENVISAT). In the
studied region, which covers more than 1200 km2, about 120 000 PS points were
identified (Fig. 1). For each of them the average annual motion rate (mm/year) and
value of coherence were calculated. For 30 000 of these PS points the values of
monthly, relative ground deformation were also determined. Locations of PS points
correspond very well with the land development. In this region there are also areas
without PS points. These areas represent agricultural regions, forests and areas with
strong ground displacements caused directly by mining activity (in this last case areas
without PS points are located usually exactly above exploitation parcels) [2]. For the
Upper Silesian Coal Basin the subsidence phenomenon is characteristic. The values of
average annual motion rates in this region range from -39 mm/yr to 25 mm/yr. In
order to explain the origin and mechanism of ground deformations in this studied
region the PSInSAR data have to be analyzed together with geological,
hydrogeological and mining data. This analysis has to be preceded by exploratory
PSInSAR data study and interpolation of displacements at unobserved locations.

Geostatistical Computing in PSInSAR Data Analysis

399

Fig. 1. Location of 30 000 PS points in the area of Upper Silesian Coal Basin (southern Poland)

3 Geostatistical Analysis of PSInSAR Data
The PSInSAR data analysis was performed with the use of geostatistical methods.
Geostatistics is a subset of statistics specializing in analysis and interpretations of
geographically referenced data [3]. In geostatistics a spatial autocorrelation among
sample data is described. This autocorrelation is modeled by a semivariogram, which
plots the semivariance as a function of distance. The semivariogram (empirical,
experimental) can be estimated from Nh sample data pairs z(si) and z(si+h) for a
number of distances (or distance intervals) hj by Eq.(1).

γˆ ( h~j ) = 2 N1

Nh

h

∑ ( z( s ) − z (s
i =1

i

i

~
+ h)) 2 , ∀h ∈ h j

(1)

The semivariograms provide insight into the spatial structure of a random process.
One of the main goals of geostatistics is to predict values of variable at unobserved
locations (in space or in time). Kriging is the geostatistical method of prediction. It is
based on the theory of the regionalized variables [4]. Interpolation of value of variable
at an unmeasured location is based on observations of its value at nearby locations. A
standard version of kriging is called ordinary kriging. The predictions are made as in
Eq.(2).
n

zˆOK = ∑ wi ( s0 ) z ( si ) = λT0 z
i =1

(2)

400

A. Lesniak and S. Porzycka

where the λ0 is a vector of kriging weights (wi) and z is the vector of n observations of
primary locations. The values of kriging weights should reflect the true spatial
autocorrelation structure and they are given by ordinary kriging equation system
Eq.(3):
T

−1

⎡ w0 ( s0 ) ⎤ ⎡ γ ( s1 , s1 ) L γ ( s1 , s n ) 1 ⎤ ⎡ γ ( s0 , s1 ) ⎤
⎢ M ⎥ ⎢ M
⎥
O
M
M ⎥⎥ ⎢⎢
M
⎢
⎥=⎢
⎥
⎢ wn ( s0 )⎥ ⎢γ ( s n , s1 ) L γ ( s n , s n ) 1 ⎥ ⎢γ ( s0 , s n )⎥
⎢
⎥ ⎢
⎥ ⎢
⎥
1
0⎦ ⎣ 1 ⎦
L
⎣ ϕ ⎦ ⎣ 1

(3)

where φ is called Langrange multiplier. In addition to the estimation we can also
calculate the prediction variance (variance of the prediction error) Eq.(4):
n

2
σˆ OK
= C − ∑ wi ( s0 )C ( s0 , si ) + ϕ

(4)

i =1

where C(s0,si) is the covariance between the new location and the sampled point pair
and C is a sill (upper bound) of semivariogram. Values of prediction variance derive
information about quality of used kriging model.
Geostatistical analysis of PSInSAR data for the area of Upper Silesian Coal Basin
was performed using R with gstat package. R is a language and environment for
statistical computing and graphics. It provides methods for advanced statistical
analysis. Gstat is a package, which derives functions for geostatistical analysis. The
PSInSAR data analysis was done for 1240 randomly selected PS points and includes
four main steps (excluding the exploratory data analysis): semivariogram estimation,
kriging, calculation of prediction variance and cross-validation. All calculations were
performed on a PC.
In the first part of the analysis the values of empirical (experimental) semivariograms
were computed. In order to check how the data's variation depends on the relative
orientation of data locations the four directional semivariograms were calculated. They
were performed for directions: 0, 45, 90 and 135 (where 0 is North and 90 is East)
(Fig. 2). In the next step of analysis the isotropic semivariogram was created (Fig. 3).
The obtained isotropic semivariogram has a shape suggesting a spherical model. This
model was adjusted by weighted least-squares (Fig. 3). In case of selected PSInSAR
data the distance at which the semivariogram reaches the sill (range) is equal 12.2 km
and beyond this range no correlation exists between two values of ground displacements
at PS points.
The isotropic semivariogram estimation is a computationally time-consuming task
but it has to be executed only once per data set. The same situation holds also for
semivariogram theoretical model fitting. The semivariograms calculation can cause
more problems in case of anisotropy that can be modeled by defining range ellipse
[5]. In this case several directional semivariograms have to be calculated and then for
each of them the theoretical models have to be fitted. Figure 4 shows the relation
between numbers of used PS points and semivariogram computational times. The
relation is distinctly non-linear. In case of large PSInSAR dataset necessity of
calculation more than one semivariogram causes meaningful increase of
computational time.

Geostatistical Computing in PSInSAR Data Analysis

401

Fig. 2. Directional semivariograms for four directions (0 is North, 90 is East)

Fig. 3. Experimental isotropic semivariogram with fitted theoretical model

The goal of the next step in the geostatistical analysis of PSInSAR data was to
predict values of ground deformations at unmeasured locations. This task was
performed using ordinary kriging method. For PSInSAR data it is important to predict
the values of variable for very dense grid. It is essential when the results of
interpolation are used to study the stability of individual buildings. In case of
PSInSAR data, kriging computations are hindered because of location of PS points,
which is very irregular. In this work the values of subsidence were predicted for the
grid with only 20000 nodes. The results of kriging are presented in the Fig. 5.
Kriging is an example of computationally intensive method because it requires the
solution of a large linear system for each grid node. In the case of large datasets analysis

402

A. Lesniak and S. Porzycka

(like PSInSAR dataset) kriging it is too computationally demanding to be run on a PC
or low performance computing platform. The kriging produces the best results when the
largest possible number of known points is used to predict values in no measured
location [6]. This is the most expensive option. In case of PSInSAR data analysis even
several thousand points can be used to estimate the variable for one grid node.
The computational time of kriging proceeding also increases when the
interpolation is done for the dense grid. In this work the computational times for
kriging proceeding were measured in the R. In the first case the elapsed time was
measured in relation to the number of grid nodes where the values of ground
deformations were predicted. In this case the number of PSInSAR data was constant

Fig. 4. Timing results for isotropic semivariogram algorithm for different numbers of PS points

Fig. 5. Ordinary kriging output for average annual motion rate [mm/yr]

Geostatistical Computing in PSInSAR Data Analysis

403

and equal to 1240 PS points. For the studied area five regular grids were prepared.
The numbers of nods of these grids were corresponding to: 1250, 5000, 20000 and
80000 nodes. As it can be seen in the Fig. 6 the relation between the computational
time and the number of grid nodes is linear e.g. double increase of grid nodes causes
double increase of kriging computational time.
In the second case the number of grid nodes was constant and equal to 5000 nodes.
In this part of work the relation between kriging computational times and numbers of
PS points (used to interpolate values at grid nodes) was studied. It should be
underlined that the spacing of PS points is irregular and the subsets of PS points were
selected randomly. The number of PS points was changed from 83 to 2395 points. In
this case the relation between the computational time and the number of PS points is
non-linear (Fig. 7). It can be evaluated that for 120 000 PS points the computational
time equals about 5 days and 13 hours. In order to reduce this time the kriging
algorithm can be performed in parallel environment [7].

Fig. 6. Timing results for kriging algorithm for different numbers of grid nodes

Fig. 7. Timing results for kriging algorithm for different numbers of PS points

404

A. Lesniak and S. Porzycka

In the third part of analysis the map of prediction variance was performed (Fig. 8).
The ability of kriging to produce this kind of map is what separates it from other
spatial interpolation methods.
In the last part of the geostatistical analysis the leave-one-out cross validation
method was used to pinpoint the most problematic PS points. This algorithm of leaveone-out cross validation is a very computationally costly procedure. In this method
the value of variable for each individual point is assessed against the whole data set.
Each data point is visited and the prediction is done with kriging method, but without
using the observed value. Fig. 9 presents the timing results for leave-one-out cross
validation algorithm for different numbers of PS points. The number of PS points was
changed from 83 to 1241 points. The relation between the computational time and the
number of PS points is non-linear.

Fig. 8. Map of prediction variance

Fig. 9. Timing results for cross validation algorithm for different numbers of PS points

Geostatistical Computing in PSInSAR Data Analysis

405

4 Conclusions
The geostatistical analysis of PSInSAR data gives good results, yet it is a very
computationally costly procedure. In this work the analysis was performed only for
1240 PS points selected randomly from the dataset which includes 120 000 PS points.
Kriging is the most computationally costly task in geostatistical analysis of ground
deformation. This task is also crucial because kriging results constitute the base for
the geological interpretations. The maps of kriging output and prediction variance
obtained in this work and complemented by different kind of data (geological,
hydrogeological, mining) enable to determine the relations between values of
subsidence and mining activity and geological structure of studied region. The
interpolation of ground displacements for very dense grid give us also opportunity to
monitor stability of individual objects on the ground e.g. buildings.
For small datasets the geostatistical analysis can be run on a PC but in case of the
whole PSInSAR dataset it is necessary to use high performance computing platform
or distributed architectures. In order to perform the geostatistical analysis for all
120 000 PS points the parallel kriging algorithm has to be prepared. Designing this
algorithm the very strong irregularity in data locations has to be taken into
consideration.

References
1. Ferretti, A., Prati, C., Rocca, F.: Permanent Scatterers in SAR Interferometry. IEEE
Transaction on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 39(1), 8–20 (2001)
2. Lesniak, A., Porzycka, S.: Environment monitoring using satellite radar interferometry
technique (PSInSAR). Polish Journal of Environmental Studies 17(3A), 382–387 (2008)
3. Goovaerts, P.: Geostatistics for Natural Resources Evaluation. Oxford University Press,
New York (1997)
4. Weckernagel, H.: Multivariate Geoststistics. Springer, Heidelberg (1995)
5. Bivand, R.S., Pebesma, E.J., Gomez-Rubio, V.: Applied Spatial Data Analysis with R.
Springer, New York (2008)
6. Border, S.: The use of indicator kriging as a biased estimator to discriminate between ore
and waste. Applications of Computers in the Mineral Industry, University of Wollongong,
N.S.W (1993)
7. Kerry, K.E., Hawick, K.A.: Kriging Interpolation on High-Performance Computers. In:
Bubak, M., Hertzberger, B., Sloot, P.M.A. (eds.) HPCN-Europe 1998. LNCS, vol. 1401, pp.
429–438. Springer, Heidelberg (1998)

