A Web Portal for Regional Projection of
Weather Forecast Using GRID Middleware
A.S. Coﬁ˜
no, D. San-Mart´ın, and J.M. Guti´errez
Dept. of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
University of Cantabria. Santander, 39005, Spain
{antonio.cofino,daniel.sanmartin,manuel.gutierrez}@unican.es
http://www.meteo.unican.es

Abstract. Weather forecast is a complex multi-disciplinary problem
which requires a cascade of diﬀerent scientiﬁc tools, from diﬀerential
equation solvers to high-dimensional statistical and data-mining algorithms. The demand for high-resolution predictions is continuously increasing due to the multiple applications in hydrology, agronomy, etc.,
which require regional meteorological inputs. To ﬁll the gap between the
coarse-resolution lattices used by global weather models and the regional
needs of applications, a number of statistical downscaling techniques have
been proposed. In this paper we describe a Web portal which integrates
the necessary tools with Grid middleware allowing for distributed data
access and computing. The portal is part of the ENSEMBLES EU-funded
project and allows end users to interactively downscale weather predictions using a web browser. Both the architecture and the usage of the
portal are described in this paper.
Keywords: Grid computing, weather forecast, statistical downscaling,
problem-solving environments, data mining, Web portals.

1

Introduction

Weather forecast is a complex interdisciplinary problem which involves several
scientiﬁc disciplines to model and simulate the atmosphere dynamics in order to
predict its future evolution. During the last four decades, several atmospheric
circulation models have been developed and successively improved to include
new interactions with other main climate components: hydrosphere, cryosphere,
listhosphere and biosphere. Nowadays, the resulting Global Circulation Models
(GCMs) are numerically solved on coarse-grained resolution grids covering the
world, providing a low-resolution description of the future state of the atmosphere (temperature, humidity, geopotential, wind components, etc.) for a particular future period of time (e.g., next week, month, or season). These models
are also forced with diﬀerent future green-house gas emission scenarios to obtain
a future estimate of the climate change for the next century. The computational
requirements of this problem have recently increased with the adoption of the
“ensemble forecast” methodology to deal with uncertainty. Ensemble methods
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part III, LNCS 4489, pp. 82–89, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

A Web Portal for Regional Projection of Weather Forecast

83

compute a probabilistic prediction of the atmospheric variables, based on several
integrations of the circulation models started from perturbed initial conditions,
or perturbed models (see [1] for more details).
The main shortcoming of GCMs is that their spatial resolution is currently
constrained by both computational and physical considerations to a scale of
hundreds of kilometers; for instance, Fig. 1(a) shows the land-sea mask used by
these models with a resolution of one degree (aprox. 100 km at middle latitudes).
However, meteorological phenomena such as rainfall, vary on much more local
scales, as it can be observed analyzing high-resolution observation databases.
For instance, Fig. 1(b) shows the location of 2600 stations in Spain, with records
of daily temperature and precipitation during the last 60 years (Fig. 1(c) shows
the accumulated precipitation pattern for February 1945, exhibiting high spatial
variability). This spatial and temporal high-resolution information is required
in diﬀerent application domains to feed impact models with meteorological information in order to characterize the future evolution of key socio-economic
sectors, such as water resources, crop yields, and power consumption.

Fig. 1. (a) Land-ocean mask with one degree resolution; the inset shows a magniﬁcation
of the Iberian peninsula. (b) Network of 2650 stations in Spain with daily records. (c)
High-resolution interpolated precipitation (0.2 degrees) for February 1949.

To ﬁll this gap between model outputs and end user requirements, a number of
diﬀerent statistical and machine learning techniques have been developed (downscaling methods). These techniques use the information contained in meteorological databases of GCM simulations in combination with simultaneous historical

84

A.S. Coﬁ˜
no, D. San-Mart´ın, and J.M. Guti´errez

high-resolution observations to infer statistical models relating predicted circulation patterns to observations at local points (see [2,3] for an overview). Some of
these methods are more eﬃcient than others for diﬀerent regions and variables.
For instance, the STARDEX project intercompared over 20 diﬀerent statistical
downscaling methods. The skill was found to vary depending on the particular
method, variable, season and region, with the latter variation dominating [4].
Thus, for each particular application a range of the better statistical downscaling methods should be tested and validated to achieve the maximum skill and a
proper representation of uncertainties. This is a complex task for end-users from
applied knowledge domains, since it requires an appropriate statistical background to deal with the downscaling methods and certain computing expertise
to deal with geographically distributed data in diﬀerent formats.
The Statistical Downscaling Portal (SDP) described in this paper has been
designed and developed in order to facilitate the downscaling task to end-users
through a user-friendly Web portal. In this form, users can obtain their downscaled data testing and validating diﬀerent methods in a transparent form not
worrying about the details of the downscaling techniques and the data formats
and access. This paper describes both the portal architecture and its application
to practical problems. In Sec. 2 we give a brief overview of the ENSEMBLES
project and describe the planned climate simulations which will be available
from the portal for downscaling purposes. In Sec. 3 we illustrate the use of the
portal considering an example of seasonal forecast in the North of Spain. Finally,
in Sec. 4 we describe the implementation of the portal using Grid middleware.

2

The ENSEMBLES Project. Seasonal Forecast

The statistical downscaling portal is being developed as a part of the EU-funded
ENSEMBLES project (for more details see [5] and www.ensembles-eu.org). The
goal of this project is to develop an ensemble prediction system based on the principal state-of-the-art global circulation models developed in Europe. These models will be used in diﬀerent of experiments to provide seasonal forecasts, decadal
forecasts, and climate change scenarios. In particular, the seasonal simulations
will provide the scientiﬁc community with huge amounts of high-dimensional
information to explore and validate the skill of these predictions in diﬀerent regions of the world. This task will require intensive computational eﬀort due to
the volume of information and the complexity of the algorithms involved in the
analysis. Each seasonal simulation runs for six months, providing the forecasted
daily state of the atmosphere for this period.
One of the ENSEMBLES project’s aims is maximizing the exploitation of the
results by linking the outputs of the ensemble prediction system to a range of
applications, including agronomy, energy, water resources, insurance and weather
risk management. This requires eﬃcient downscaling tools to ﬁll the gap between
model output resolution and user needs. The portal described in this paper was
designed for this purpose and provides user-friendly web access to statistical
downscaling techniques and simulations produced in ENSEMBLES.

A Web Portal for Regional Projection of Weather Forecast

3

85

The Downscaling Web Portal

Downscaling methods work by obtaining a statistical model which relates predictors (gridded values of atmospheric variables) to predictands (high-resolution
surface observations of goal variables; mainly temperature and precipitation). In
the so-called Perfect Prog approach the parameters of these models are ﬁtted
using long historical data records. For this purpose, there is a number of model
simulation databases (called reanalysis) covering long periods (for instance, the
ERA40 reanalysis contains daily information for the period 1957-2002) and simultaneous observation networks (for instance, there is a network of over 2600
stations covering Spain with daily information since 1950, see Fig. 1(b)). With
these two sources of information a number of diﬀerent downscaling algorithms
can be calibrated for a region and variable of interest. The resulting models
can be later applied to regionally project outputs from ENSEMBLES seasonal
models. According to this, the downscaling portal has been organized in three
sequential steps: selecting the region of interest and the predictors, selecting the
predictands and selecting and applying the downscaling method.
3.1

Selecting the Region of Interest

After login as a guest (restricted functionality) or as a registered user, the ﬁrst
step in the downscaling portal is selecting the region of interest and the desired
predictors that shall be used to ﬁt the downscaling methods. To this aim, the
portal allows the user to visually select a lattice with the desired resolution
over a geographical area and to include the desired variables from the reanalysis
to be used as predictors (4D cubes of reanalysis information). This process is
carried out by clicking and dragging in the “predictors” window (see Fig. 2a)
and entering the information such as region, lattice resolution, variables, etc.
Once the zone and predictors have been deﬁned, several internal processes
are computed to obtain statistical information needed at a later stage of the
downscaling process (principal components, clustering, etc.). This information
can be visualized in the lower panels of the window. The deﬁned regions and
predictors can be stored in the portal to be used in future sessions. The region
manager (see Fig. 2b) allows the user to visualize and load the stored regions.
3.2

Selecting the Stations and the Local Variable of Interest

Once the region of interest and the predictors have been selected, the user can
move to the second window (“predictand” tab) and select the network and stations within the region where local forecasts are to be computed. The portal
includes some public information such as the Global Station Network (GSN)
data, which includes daily observations of precipitation, temperature, etc., for
some thousand stations in Europe during the last 50 years. The user can also
upload private data to the portal which will be only available for authorized
users. The selection of the desired network and the particular stations and the
variable to be used in the study is also visually done in a browser window. For

86

A.S. Coﬁ˜
no, D. San-Mart´ın, and J.M. Guti´errez

(a)

(b)

Fig. 2. (a) “Predictors” tab to deﬁne the region of interest and the predictors to be
used in the downscaling process. (b) Region and predictors manager.

Fig. 3. “Predictand” selector for the desired network and variable

A Web Portal for Regional Projection of Weather Forecast

87

instance, Fig. 3 shows a set of stations in the small region of the North of Spain
shown with the dashed box in Fig. 2(a). In this case, maximum temperature is
the variable of interest.
3.3

Selecting and Running Downscaling Methods

After selecting the predictors and predictand over a region of interest, the portal allows the user to choose among diﬀerent downscaling methods from the
categories “weather typing”, “regression” or “weather generators”. These methods can be applied for diﬀerent seasonal experiments (including the DEMETER
project and ENSEMBLES’s experiments) selecting the desired models, years
and seasons from a matrix containing all the possible combinations to downscale model outputs to local stations (see Fig. 4(a)). This matrix illustrates the
complexity of this problem, since each box is a possible downscaling job (the
completed jobs are shown in green color). For instance, there is a total of 50
(years) × 12 (seasons) × 3 (models) × 6 (lead time) = 1800 possible downscaling jobs for the DEMETER experiment. Therefore, an eﬃcient design of the
computational load is required in order to develop an interactive portal where
users can run several jobs simultaneously. In the next section we show how this
problem is solved using GRID.
In the near future, this portal will be extended to cover regional projection of
climate change scenarios to obtain local estimations of future variables of interest
(including an estimation of the associated uncertainty).

Fig. 4. Downscaling window with the downscaling methods and the matrix of possible
downscaling experiments (combining the GCMs, seasons, years and lead times)

88

4

A.S. Coﬁ˜
no, D. San-Mart´ın, and J.M. Guti´errez

Implementation with GRID Middleware

GRID computing is a new paradigm for Internet-based distributed computing. It
enables the development of interactive problem-solving environments integrating
the sharing, selection, and aggregation of geographically distributed autonomous
resources, such as computers and databases [6]. The developers of GRIDs applications need to address numerous challenges: security, heterogeneity, resource
management, application decomposition, etc. A number of projects around the
world are developing technologies (middleware) to run complex applications addressing and testing those challenges. This portal will be implemented in the
framework of the 6th EU FP EELA project (see www.eu-eela.org) using its
infrastructure based on gLite middleware (see cern.ch/glite).
Fig. 5 shows the design of the portal, which has been implemented using
Java technology. On the one hand, the portal can operate using the local
meteo.unican.es cluster. In this case, in addition to the local data, the portal
can access distributed datasets through OPeNDAP protocol to remote storage
servers. OPeNDAP technology (see www.opendap.org) allows exposing scientiﬁc datasets in the Web (mainly global model outputs) and subsetting this
datasets using HTTP protocol. When the necessary information is ready to
run a downscaling job requested by a user, the portal send the data and a
Matlab script to the local server queue. The scripts to run downscaling jobs
are based on the open-source toolbox MeteoLab developed by our group (see
www.meteo.unican.es/MeteoLab for details).

HSQL
DataBase

Climate Data Storage

MATLAB
engine

Remote data

User profiles

OpenDAP

Portal

meteo.unican.es
cluster

Storage Element
Local data

Computing
Element

user
interface

Other computing
and storage elements

TOMCA

Users
WEB Environment

Grid Infrastructure

Fig. 5. Scheme of the portal showing the Web and GRID components

On the other hand, the portal will use grid middleware to run the jobs in the
GRID using EELA’s testbed. In this case, the portal acts as a user interface to
the GRID, where a resource broker ﬁnds and provides resources to run the job
according to the speciﬁcations given in the job submission template (in this case,
Matlab enabled sites are requested). Apart from the computational resources,
the GRID provides distributed data access through the gLite catalog facility

A Web Portal for Regional Projection of Weather Forecast

89

(LFC). Therefore, the datasets stored in the GRID do not need to be submitted,
but just conveniently speciﬁed the catalog Logical File Name (LFN).
This portal will integrate resources (computing and datasets) from both grid
and traditional computing communities, which use heterogeneous authentication
methods. Therefore, the portal works with two security alternatives: a local
schema based on local authentication and authorization, which is managed by
the web portal itself using a database of user proﬁles, and a second schema which
permits the user to conﬁgure his proﬁle to use grid security infrastructure (GSI,
see www.globus.org/toolkit/docs/4.0/security/) based on X.509 allowing
the access to the GRID environment resources. The authorization management
is based in Virtual Organization Membership (VOMS) provided by the gLite
middleware. This conﬁguration allows to the user make a Single Sign-On (SSO)
to store (encrypted) diﬀerent credentials to access multiple external resources.

5

Conclusions

In this paper we have presented a statistical downscaling portal to ﬁll the gap
between weather forecast modelers (data producers) and application developers (data consumers). This portal integrates datasets from model outputs and
observations datasets and uses statistical modeling tools to project model outputs to local observations, which can be geographically distributed in diﬀerent
regions of interest. To this aim, a GRID approach is presented to make available
geographically distributed compute and storage resources using the portal. This
work is based in gLite middleware used in EELA project and brings together
Europe and Latin-America scientiﬁc communities.
Acknowledgments. The authors are grateful to the 6th FP EU projects ENSEMBLES (GOCE-CT-2003-505539) and EELA (2004-026409) and to the CICYT project CGL2005-06966-C07-02/CLI for partial support of this work.

References
1. Gneiting, T., Raftery, A.E.: Weather Forecasting with Ensemble. Science 310 (2005)
248-249
2. Wilby, R.L. and T.M.L. Wigley: Downscaling General Circulation Model Output.
A Review of Methods and Limitations. Progress in Physical Geography 21 (1977),
530-548.
3. Zorita, E. and H. von Storch: The analog method as a simple statistical downscaling technique: comparison with more complicated methods. Journal of Climate 12
(1999) 2474-2489.
4. Goodess, C. M. et al. An intercomparison of statistical downscaling methods for
Europe and European regions: Assessing their performance with respect to extreme
temperature and precipitation events. Climate change, in press.
5. Hewitt, C.D and Griggs, D.J.: Ensembles-based predictions of climate changes and
their impacts. Eos 85 (2004) 566.
6. Foster, I. and Kesselman, C. (2003). The Grid 2: Blueprint for a New Computing
Infrastructure. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers.

