A Method for Local Tuning of Fuzzy
Membership Functions
Ahmet Çinar
Firat University, Faculty of Eng. Computer Engineering , 23119, Elazig, Turkey
acinar@firat.edu.tr

Abstract. In this paper, a new method based on genetic algorithms is proposed
for local tuning of fuzzy membership functions. For this purpose, the local
adjustment is employed on the initial membership functions. Genetic algorithm
is used to investigate discrete points that will be modified on the membership
functions Hence, global adjustment does not require and the processing time
required for tuning of membership functions is decreased.

1 Introduction
In this paper, the initial base values of membership functions are not changed, only
local modifications are made. The basic of the study is as following:
Step 1: Discretization of initial membership functions. Step 2: Finding the
membership functions that will be modified by genetic algorithms and tuning. Step 3:
Reconstructing the membership functions and applying to system.

2 Discretization of Initial Membership Functions
For this process, the geometric support construction method is used. The set of
polygonal segments of boundary curve is located in the any list. And then, the
construction of the polygonal support is achieved such that the distance any segment
and portion of the curve it represent must be bounded. Hence, refinement of curve
will be more important and correct in the any highly curved regions on the boundary
curve.

3 Tuning Membership Functions by Using Genetic Algorithms
Figure 1 depicts diagram of proposed method for local tuning of fuzzy membership
functions.
The following sections describe each block seen above.
Block 1: Dedicating control points to membership functions.
Block 2: Fitness Function.
In this block, how to make changes on the population is described. For this goal,
initial membership function is passed through certain fitness function and the obtained
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3516, pp. 945 – 949, 2005.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

946

A. Çinar

Fig. 1. The diagram of the proposed method

value is operated to genetic operator. Therefore, some individuals are founded. In this
study, a function dependent on system input output is used as fitness function. It is
known that, a fitness function is generated a certain integer value. Whereas, this
method is not appropriate for this study due the fact that the direct fitness function did
not explained. The following section describes the proposed fitness function. Figure 5
depicts genetic individuals and control points. These control points are produced by
means of aforementioned method in block 1. This process is the population dedicating
process on the control points and making up control points on the initial membership
function.
For example; let control point value be 11. First, log value of control point is
obtained, such as m=log2(11)=3.3 . If m is not integer number, it is rounded for
example
3.3
to
4.
Therefore,
population
values
are
follows:
0001,0010,0011,0100,0101, 0110,0111,1001,1010,1011,1100. The m value is used as
bit number.

Fig. 2. Control points on the initial membership function

If the rule base table and system input output response are known, fitness function
is used as following: Let us know the input output response for any system. a[ ],b[ ]
and c[ ] are three sets. Let c[ ] be response with respect to a[ ] and b[ ]. Control
points at distance ε1 is changeable. But, we have to know which points be modified.

A Method for Local Tuning of Fuzzy Membership Functions

947

For that reason, a[ ] and b[ ] sets are used. Figure 3 shows control points that will
change with respect to ε1 value.

Fig. 3. The values with respect to input=35 and input2=65 and relationship control points

After finding these control points, the output value is obtained by means of any
defuzzyfication method such as middle of maximum.
ui: The ith value of u membership functions
µ (u i ) : The value of ui membership functions.
l

u* =

∑ .µ (u ).u
i

i

i =1

(1)

l

∑ µ (u )
i

i =1

If the obtained result is similar to output c[ ] with respect to ε1, then any changes
does not require on this population. In the proposed method, value ε1 is as half of
distance between of two points as shown in figures 4. If the error is bigger than ε1,
then generic operators are used on population. Figure 4 depicts simple geometric
operations for value ε1.

Fig. 4. The using method for value ε1

The mutation is applied to discrete points changed. It is known that, only a bit is
changed in the simplest manner for the mutation process. A new population after this
operation will be different. This new population has to convert in the appropriate for
system. This operation is achieved in block 3.

948

A. Çinar

Block 3: Converting to control points of new population value.
In this block, new population values are converted to control points. Let original
point be genetic individual with respect to 0010 value. Figure 5 shows this position.

Fig. 5. Original point and its position after modification

According to using bit numbers, the actual location of point is as follows:
x,y value is 0010, x+t,y+t value is 0011, x-t,y+t value is 0001,x-t,y-t value is
0110,x+t,y-t value is 1010. If bit number is 4, there is no problem. But the bit number
is bigger than 4, then only right 4 bits are used. Also, let bit number be 5 and 00100.
Then only using 0100 is appropriate. If bit number is less than 4, then, a bit is added
on the left side. If bit value is 010, then it is used as 0010.
In this way, after computing actual coordinate values and making up memberships
functions, according to system response, modifications of membership function is
considered. If it needs, new population is passed through fitness function.

Fig. 6. The adjusted membership functions

4 Conclusion
In this study, a distinct method based on genetic algorithm for local adjustment of
fuzzy membership functions is presented. Instead of global adjustment, local
adjustment is achieved. Thus, the fast and accurate process is achieved with respect to
system input-output response. By means of proposed method, initial fuzzy
membership functions are selected, and then very much little changes on the

A Method for Local Tuning of Fuzzy Membership Functions

949

membership function are done. Consequently the global changes such as gradientdescent method are avoided.

References
1. D.E. Goldberg, Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization and Machine Learning,
Addison Wesley , 1989
2. H. Nomura, I. Hayashi, N.Wakai, A self-tuning method of fuzzy control by descent
method, in Proc 4th IFSA congress, Engineering, pp.49-52, 1991
3. H.J.Zimmermann ,Fuzzy programming and linear programming with several objective
functions, Fuzzy Sets and Systems, vol.1, pp.44-45,1978
4. Kuo Ting, Hwang Shu-Yuen, A Genetic Algorithm With Disruptive Selection, IEEE
Transaction On Systems, Man, And Cybernetics-Part B: Cybernetics, Vol. 26, No. 2, April
1996
5. Wang Chi-Hsu,Wang Wei-Yen, Fuzzy B-Spline Membership Function (BMF) And Its
Application In Fuzzy-Neural Control, IEEE Transactions On System Man And
Cybernetics, Vol. 25, No.5, May 1995
6. Zadeh L. , Fuzzy sets , Inf. Control, Vol:8, pp:338-353, 1965.

