A Study on the Indoor Real-Time Tracking System
to Reduce the Interference Problem*
Hyung Su Lee1,2, Byunghun Song2, and Hee Yong Youn1,**
1 School of Information and Communication Engineering,
Sungkyunkwan University, 300 Chunchun Jangan Suwon,
Kyunggido 440-746 South Korea
hslee@keti.re.kr, youn@ece.skku.ac.kr
2 Korea Electronics Technology Institute,
68 Yatap Dong Pundang Sungnam, Kyunggido, 463-816, South Korea
bhsong@keti.re.kr

Abstract. The real-time tracking system is an essential component in the development of low cost sensor networks to be used in pervasive and ubiquitous
computing. In this paper we address the interference problem of the sensor network platform that uses ultrasonic for location tracking. We also present a novel
scheme reducing the error rate caused by interference, which is particularly
suited for supporting context-aware computing. It is achieved by considering
the speed variance of the mobile node and thereby correcting the interference
errors. Performance evaluation using an actually implemented platform, Pharos,
reveals that the proposed scheme outperforms the three existing schemes. It also
identifies that error rate decreases as the number of packets transmitted for distance estimation increases, while it increases as the speed of the mobile node
increases.
Keywords: Indoor tracking, interference problem, location-aware, sensor network, ubiquitous.

1 Introduction1
The wireless sensor network is an emerging technology that may greatly aid humans
by providing ubiquitous sensing, computing and communication capabilities through
which people can more closely interact with the environment wherever they go. To be
context-aware, one of the central issues in the sensor network is location- aware and
tracking, whose goal is to monitor the path of a moving object. Ubiquitous and pervasive environment presents opportunities for a rich set of location-aware applications
such as car navigation and intelligent robots, interactive virtual games, habit monitoring, logistics service, tracking, etc [1,2]. Typical indoor applications require better
accuracy than what the current outdoor location systems provide. Outdoor location
technologies such as GPS [3] have poor indoor performance because of the harsh
* This research was supported by the Ubiquitous Autonomic Computing and Network Project,
21st Century Frontier R&D Program in Korea and the Brain Korea 21 Project in 2005.
** Corresponding author.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part IV, LNCS 3994, pp. 910 – 917, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

A Study on the Indoor Real-Time Tracking System

911

nature of indoor environments. Indoor environments often contain substantial
amounts of metal and other reflective materials that affect the propagation of radio
frequency signals in non-trivial ways, causing severe multi-path effects, dead-spots,
noise, and interference [4,5,6].
Cricket is an indoor location system for pervasive and sensor-based computing environments such as those envisioned by MIT's Project Oxygen [7]. Cricket has been
widely adopted as the indoor tracking platform. It provides fine-grained location information such as space identifiers, position coordinates, and orientation to the applications running on handhelds, laptops, and sensor nodes. However, Cricket has serious interference problem when the cricket-based node moves.
In this paper we present a novel scheme reducing the interference problem of the
location tracking system that is particularly suited for supporting context-aware computing. It is achieved by considering the speed variance of the mobile node and
thereby correcting the interference errors. The proposed location platform is called
Pharos and the new algorithm for interference problem is called IAA (Interference
Avoidance Algorithm). Performance evaluation using the actually implemented platform, Pharos, reveals that the proposed scheme outperforms the three existing
schemes in terms of the error rate in the location estimation. It also identifies that the
error rate decreases as the number of packets transmitted for distance estimation increases, while it increases as the speed of the mobile nodes increases.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We first present the related works in
Section 2. In Section 3 we describe the proposed new algorithm and system. Section 4
illustrates the performance evaluation of the proposed scheme. Our conclusions and
future work are presented in Section 5.

2 The Related Works
2.1 Localization Method with Cricket
The researchers distinguish two different indoor location architectures. The active
mobile architecture has an active transmitter on each mobile device, which periodically broadcasts a message on a wireless channel. The receivers deployed in the infrastructure like the ceilings and walls listen to such broadcasts and estimate the distance
to the mobile device on each broadcast they hear. This architecture has a limited scalability in the ubiquitous environment. In contrast, the passive mobile architecture
exchanges the locations of the transmitter and receiver. Here, the beacons deployed at
known positions in the infrastructure periodically transmit their location or identity on
a wireless channel, and the passive receivers on mobile devices listen to each beacon.
Each mobile device estimates its distance to every beacon it hears and uses the set of
distances to estimate its position [6,7]. There exist merit and demerit in the two methods above. Generally, mobile nodes are tightly constrained in terms of transmission
power, on-board energy, processing capacity and storage. Therefore, Cricket employed the passive mobile architecture.
Cricket decided to use a combination of RF and ultrasound hardware to enable a
listener to determine the distance to the beacons, from which the closest beacon can
be more unambiguously inferred. Figure 1 shows how a cricket achieves this by

912

H.S. Lee, B. Song, and H.Y. Youn

measuring the one-way propagation time of the ultrasonic signals emitted by a beacon, taking advantage of the fact that the speed of sound in air (about 1.13 ft/ms at
room temperature) is much smaller than the speed of light (RF) in air. On each transmission, a beacon concurrently sends information about the space over RF, together
with an ultrasonic pulse. When a listener hears the RF signal, it uses the first few bits
as training information and then turns on its ultrasonic receiver. It then listens to the
ultrasonic pulse, which will usually arrive a short time later. The listener uses the time
difference between the receipt of the first bit of RF information and the ultrasonic
signal to determine the distance to the beacon. Of course, the value of the estimated
distance is not as important as the decision on which the closest beacon is. The use of
time-of-flight of signals for measuring the distance is not a new concept.

Fig. 1. Measuring the location of a Cricket

2.2 Interference Problems
While Cricket has an attractive property that its decentralized beacon network is easy
to configure and manage, it comes in the absence of explicit coordination. There is no
explicit scheduling or coordination between the transmissions of different beacons
that may be in close proximity, and the listeners do not transmit any information to
avoid compromising privacy. This lack of coordination can cause RF transmissions
from different beacons to collide, and may cause a listener to wrongly correlate the
RF data of one beacon with the ultrasonic signal of another, yielding false results.
Furthermore, ultrasonic reception suffers from severe multi-path effects caused by
reflections from the walls and other objects, and these are orders of magnitude longer
in time than RF multi-path because of the relatively long propagation time for sound
waves in air. In fact, this is one of the reasons why it is hard to modulate data on the
ultrasonic signal, which makes it a pure pulse. Thus, the listener’s task is to gather
various RF and ultra-sound (US) samples, deduce and correlate the {RF,US} pairs
that were sent concurrently by different beacons, and choose the space identifier sent
from the pair with the smallest distance [7].

A Study on the Indoor Real-Time Tracking System

913

To better understand the effects of interference and multi-path (due to reflected
signals) on distance estimation, we characterize different RF and ultrasonic signals
that a listener can hear in Figure 2. Consider the RF and ultrasonic signals sent by a
beacon, A, and an interfering beacon, I. The listener potentially hears the followings.
We only need to consider the cases when a US pulse arrives while some RF signal is
being received. The reception of the first ultrasonic signal US-A, US-RA, US-I, or
US-RI while RF-A is being received will cause the listener to calculate the distance to
A using the time interval between the detection of RF-A and the particular ultrasonic
signal. This is because the listener, after receiving the RF signal from a beacon, waits
for the first occurrence of an ultrasonic pulse to determine the distance. All subsequent ultrasonic receptions during the reception of the RF message are ignored. Of
course, if the direct signal US-A is the first one to be received, the listener correctly
estimates the distance to A. However, wrong correlation of any other ultrasonic signal
with RF-A could be problematic. RF-A is the RF signal from A, US-A is the direct
ultrasonic signal from A, US-RA is the reflected ultrasonic signal from A, RF-I is the
RF signal from I, US-I is the direct ultrasonic signal from I, and US-RI is the reflected
ultrasonic signal from I, respectively.

Fig. 2. The effect of interference problem

2.3 The Existing Solution for Interference Problem
Priyantha et al. [8] developed and compared three simple algorithms determining the
closest beacon and overcoming the interference problem discussed above. These algorithms are useful with fixed or slowly moving nodes.
z

z

Majority Algorithm
This is the simplest algorithm, which pays no attention to estimating the distance
but simply picks the beacon of the highest frequency in the received data set.
This algorithm does not use ultrasonic signals for determining the closest beacon, and as we find from our experiments, its performance is not good. We consider this algorithm primarily for the comparison with other algorithms.
MinMean Algorithm
Here, the listener calculates the mean distance from each unique beacon for the
set of data points. Then, it selects the beacon with the minimum mean as the
closest one. The advantage of this algorithm is that it can be computed with
small information as a new sample updates the mean in a straightforward way.

914

z

H.S. Lee, B. Song, and H.Y. Youn

The problem with this algorithm is, however, that it is not immune to the multipath effects that cause the distance estimates to display modal behavior; where
computing a statistical metric like mean (or median) is not reflective of any actual beacon position.
MinMode Algorithm
Since the distance estimates often show a significant modal behavior due to reflections, this approach of highest-likelihood estimate computes the per-beacon
statistical modes over the past n samples (or time window). For each beacon, the
listener then picks the distance corresponding to the mode of the distribution, and
uses the beacon that has the minimum distance value among the modes.

3 The Proposed System
The aforementioned interference avoidance algorithms show good performance for
only slowly moving node. Especially, referring to the result above, the MinMode
algorithm performs the best. However, since the nodes have relatively high mobility
in real-life, a different log is chosen for the mobile node to correctly distinguish the
real data from the noise provided by a same beacon, disregarding any presence of
interference.
The log value increases proportionally to the speed of the mobile node; the faster
the mobile nodes move, the greater the log value is. In this paper we consider the
speed variance of the mobile node and propose a technique for correctly measuring
the distance of the mobile node by correcting the interference errors.
3.1 Interference Avoidance Algorithm (IAA) Using Speed Prediction
Figure 3 shows a mobile node moving from A(XA, YA) to B(XB, YB) during a time interval ΔT(TB ―TA). The beacons are placed apart with a constant distance M. If DA
and DB are the distance measured at time TA and TB, respectively, the speed prediction
ΔVreal can be derived with the following equation.

ΔVreal =

B−A
ΔT

(1)

The mobile node is considered to be out of range if ΔT does not satisfy the following equation.

ΔT ≤

M
( if ΔT × Vreal ≥ M , then out of range)
Vreal

(2)

The speed of the mobile node moving from A to B can be predicted using the following equation.

ΔV pred = αΔVlast + (1 ― α )ΔVhistory (0 ≤ α ≤ 1)

(3)

The predictive value Dpred of DB can be derived by applying the reversed trilateration to Eq. (3). Eventually, any value exceeding Dpred is regarded as an error caused
by interference and thus excluded from the calculation to obtain correct DB value.

A Study on the Indoor Real-Time Tracking System

915

Fig. 3. The relationship between the velocity and distance measurement

3.2 Hardware Architecture
Figure 4 shows the Pharos system developed for real-time tracking of localization in
indoor environments. The Pharos is compatible with MIT's Cricket. The Pharos contains a TI MSP430 processor with 8 kilobytes of flash memory for program and 512
bytes of SRAM for data. It uses a 2.4GHz RF wireless transceiver and three LEDs for
output indication. A low power 40 KHz ultrasonic transceiver is used for distance
measurement.

Fig. 4. The Pharos real-time tracking platform and hardware block diagram

4 Performance Evaluation
The experiment aims at determining the system performance when the listener is
mobile. For a mobile listener, being able to obtain accurate location information in
short time is important. The listener crosses the boundary at two speeds each time (vt
= 1, 3). Each time the listener crosses a boundary, a transition event and a timestamp
are logged. Once crossing the boundary, the listener remains standstill for a short
period of time to determine how long it takes to stabilize to a correct value, and then
the experiment is repeated for the next boundary. When analyzing the data, the logged

916

H.S. Lee, B. Song, and H.Y. Youn

transition events are used to determine the node’s actual location with respect to the
location reported by the listener. Note that in this experiment, the listener is always
located relatively close to the boundaries.
100

100

90
80

80

MinMean
70

MinMean

70

MinMode

60

IAA

50
40

Error Rate (%)

Error Rate (%)

Majority

90

Majority

IAA

50
40

30

30

20

20

10

10

0

MinMode

60

0
10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

Number of Packet (#N)

(a) vt = 1m/sec

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

Number of Packet (#N)

(b) vt = 3m/sec

Fig. 5. The error rates for a mobile Pharos listener

Figure 5 shows the location error rate at the listener for the four algorithms compared. The error rate is calculated over the number of packets during which the listener moves around a location with a velocity (vt). Referring to the result above the
proposed IAA performs the best among the four inference algorithms. Figure 5(a)
shows that the IAA reduces the error rate to below 5% when the number of packets is
larger than 60. Note that the error rate of the interference avoidance algorithms increases if the moving speed of the node increases. It is also evident that large number
of packets transmitted to estimate the location provide better results than with small
number of packets, which is expected since a larger transmission counts provides the
algorithm with more information to work on.

5 Conclusion and Future Work
We have studied how to overcome the problems in the existing methods measuring
the distance in indoor ubiquitous environment. Through actual experiment, we found
that real-time tracking is difficult because of interference between the sensor nodes. In
this paper we have presented a new IAA (Interference Avoidance Algorithm) for
reducing the error in the location identification due to interference within the infrastructure based sensor network by considering the velocity of the moving node. The
proposed IAA calculates the distance using the velocity predicted based on the previously measured velocity. The calculated distance corrects the error induced by interference. We also proposed a formula for velocity prediction and implemented a real
platform. The experiment results show that the proposed IAA can reduce the error to
below 5%, and it is always better than the existing interference avoidance algorithms.
As the speed of the moving object grows, the results show that the error rate slightly
increases as expected.

A Study on the Indoor Real-Time Tracking System

917

The proposed Pharos is intended for use indoors or in urban areas where outdoor
systems like the Global Positioning System (GPS) do not work well. It can provide
distance ranging and positioning of the precision of between 1cm and 3cm. Our future
work directions include extending the prototype and using it for further applications.
We also plan to develop a more efficient inference algorithm. We hope that the findings in this paper will be helpful for design and implementation of real-time tracking
system in ubiquitous computing environment.

References
[1] P. Bahl and V. Padmanabhan, “RADAR: An In-Building RF-Based User Location and
Tracking System,” in Proc. of the IEEE INFOCOM‘00, Vol.2, pp. 755-784, March 2000.
[2] J. Hightower, G. Boriello and R. Want, “SpotON: An indoor 3D Location Sensing Technology Based on RF Signal Strength,” University of Washington CSE Report 2000-02-02,
Feb. 2000.
[3] J. Liu, P. Cheung, L. Guibas, and F. Zhao, “A Dual-Space Approach to Tracking and Sensor Management in Wireless Sensor Networks,” in Proceedings of ACM WSNA’02, pp.
131-139, Sept. 2002.
[4] J. Cadman, “Deploying Commercial Location-Aware Systems,” in Proceedings of 2003
Workshop on Location-Aware Computing, pp. 4-6, Jan. 2003.
[5] D. Ganesan, B. Krishnamachari, A. Woo, D. Culler, D. Estrin and S. Wicker, “Complex
Behavior at Scale: An Experimental Study of Low-Power Wireless Sensor Networks,”
Technical Report UCLA/CSD-TR 02-0013, Jan. 2002
[6] A. Mainwaring, J. Polastre, R. Szewczyk, D. Culler, and J. Anderson, “ Wireless Sensor
Networks for Habitat Monitoring,” in Proc. of ACM WSNA’02, pp. 88-97, Sept. 2002.
[7] N. Priyantha, and H. Balakrishnan, “The Cricket Indoor Location System: Experience and
Status.,” in Proc. of the 2003 Workshop on Location-Aware Computing, pp. 7-9, Jan. 2003.
[8] N. Priyantha, A. Chakraborty, and H. Balakrishnan, “The Cricket Location-Support System,” in Proc. of 6th Annual ACM International Conference on Mobile Computing and
Networking (MOBICOM), pp. 32-43, Aug. 2000.

