Multiscale Three-Phase Flow Simulation Dedicated to
Model Based Control
Dariusz Choiński, Mieczyslaw Metzger, and Witold Nocoń
Faculty of Automatic Control, Electronics and Computer Science,
Silesian University of Technology,
ul. Akademicka 16, 44-100 Gliwice, Poland
{dariusz.choinski, witold.nocon, mieczyslaw.metzger}@polsl.pl

Abstract. Multiphysics and multiscale three-phase flow simulation is proposed
for model based control. Three-phase flow is considered by means of particles
movement in a pipe with two-phase gas and liquid vacuum pumping. The presented model and simulation algorithm were implemented using a software system working in real-time mode. The software system can simulate a part of the
pipe net with configured pipe profile, pump station and valve parameters and
also inlet mixture composition. In addition, the system includes algorithm for
pressure control.
Keywords: Multiphisics and multiscale modelling and simulation, three-phase
flow, particle movement, model based process control.

1 Introduction
Unsteady two-phase flow is a challenging problem for control engineering. Such type
of flow is typical for vacuum pumping technology like vacuum sewerage system (see
e.g. [1],[2],[3],[4]) and also in petrol applications (see e.g. [5],[6]). Complexity of the
problem is increasing when three phase flow is considered by means of particles
movement in a pipe. Such system needs unsteady flow in order to avoid plugging by
insoluble parts and particles. The sawtooth lifts, which are used for uphill liquid
transport and the same type of pipe profile are necessary for uphill liquid transport
and when no valves are opened, no liquid transport takes place, causing medium in
the pipe to lie in the low spots. Only part of the pipe cross section is occupied by
liquid, so that momentum transfer from air to liquid takes place largely trough the
action of shear stresses. Although, the complex system of pipes with complicated
profiles as well as with three-phase flow control is difficult for investigation, the control system can improve vacuum pumping system ability with an application of model
based control algorithms after simulation for model validation.
Complexity of the model should be adjusted to the requirements of the real-time computing involved in the control system. Even non-standard efforts such as special methods
for real-time simulation [7] slightly improve computing possibility for the problem under
consideration. Fulfilment of these requirements can help modelling of multiphysics and
multiscale system (see e.g. [8], [9], [10]). Multiphysics-multiscale approach couples
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2008, Part II, LNCS 5102, pp. 261 – 270, 2008.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

262

D. Choiński, M. Metzger, and W. Nocoń

calculations at different scales for two-phase flow and particle movement as the third
phase. A specially rearranged three-phase model with simulation implementation for
control purposes is presented in this paper. Mathematical descriptions such as two-phase
gas-liquid modelling, modelling particle movement in the liquid pipeline, modelling two
phase-flow through pipe inclinations, already known when investigated separately, have
been implemented together for the presented investigations.
The presented model and simulation algorithm were implemented using a software
system working in real-time mode. The software system can simulate a part of the
pipe net with configured pipe profile, pump station and valve parameters and also
inlet mixture composition. The system also includes algorithm for pressure control.
Multiscale approach reduced the number of parameters sent between pipe sections.
This gives the ability to connect particular programs using TCP/IP protocol in different computers for parallel simulation of a wide net of pipes and valves.

2 Problem Under Consideration and Two-Phase Flow
Mathematical Model
The paper deals with a mechanized system of pipe transport that uses differences in
gas pressure to move the liquid. The system requires a normally closed vacuum valve
and a central vacuum pump station. The pressure difference between atmosphere and
vacuum becomes the driving force that propels the liquid to the vacuum station. For
two-phase flow (gas and liquid) the momentum equations can be written separately
for each phase and such description is sufficient for the present properties of the
whole flow. In such a model the phases are treated as if they were separated and as if
they were flowing in unspecified parts of the cross section. Both phases have different
velocities and fluid viscosities. The gas compression is the main reason to differ air
velocity from water velocity [11][12][13] and it is considered in the presented simulation. The presented model was developed under assumption that is based on vacuum
pipes network designer instruction. Such approach gives possibilities of easier model
calibration and validation. The pressure drop caused by separated phase flow can be
correlated using the Lockhart-Martinelli method [14,15]. The pressure drop multipliers Φ l2 and Φ 2g are defined as follows:
⎛ ΔP ⎞
⎜
⎟
⎝ L ⎠ Mix
⎛ ΔP ⎞
⎛ ΔP ⎞
⎜
⎟
⎜
⎟
Φ 2g
⎝ L ⎠g
⎝ L ⎠l
2
X = 2 =
=
⎛ ΔP ⎞
⎛ ΔP ⎞
Φl
⎜
⎟
⎜
⎟
⎝ L ⎠ Mix ⎝ L ⎠ g
⎛ ΔP ⎞
⎜
⎟
⎝ L ⎠l

where: ⎛⎜ ΔP ⎞⎟

⎝ L ⎠ Mix

,
(1)

- pressure drop gradients along the pipe section which can be measured

and controlled. Next gradients are calculated and depend on liquid and gas phase
correlation,

Multiscale Three-Phase Flow Simulation Dedicated to Model Based Control
⎛ ΔP ⎞ ⎜
⎟
⎝ L ⎠l

⎛ ΔP ⎞
⎜
⎟
⎝ L ⎠g

263

pressure gradient for flow of liquid along the pipe section,

- pressure gradient for flow of gas along the pipe section.

The pressure drop gradient along the whole pipe is evaluated based on the measured absolute pressure in a vacuum station, absolute pressure in a pipe connected to a
valve or to previous part of pipe net and also boundary conditions determined by pipe
profile inclination angle. Pressure gradient for the flow of liquid and gas along the
pipe section is calculated from Lockhart-Martinelli parameter X2. The parameter X2
may be evaluated in terms of air mass friction [14]:

x=

Gg

(2)

G Mix

Gg [kg/s m2] – the superficial mass flux of gas is calculated from the volume flow of
the vacuum pump in pump station multiplied by density of gas corrected with
pressure, temperature and humidity using Brietty-Bridgeman real gas state equation [14,15]. The simulation procedures should take advantage of the fact that
gas is compressible and its specific volume is a function of pressure, temperature
and humidity. For example, the absolute pressure varies between 15kPa and 65
kPa, specific volume of air changes between 5.61 m3/kg and 1.294 m3/kg, (ratio
4.3:1). For wet air (humidity 80%) the ratio is 4.5:1. Liquid is considered incompressible.
GMix [kg/s m2] – the superficial mass flux of gas mass and liquid mass measured in the
pump station.
Gl=GMix-Gg [kg/s m2] – the superficial mass flux of the liquid measured in the pump
station as volume of liquid multiplied by liquid density corrected to the ambient
temperature. The mass of gas and liquid is used for model validation. These parameters are investigated during real system design.
The Lockhart-Martinelli parameter X2 is defined as:
⎛ 1− x ⎞
X2 =⎜
⎟
⎝ x ⎠

1.8

⎛ ρg
⎜
⎜ρ
⎝ l

⎞⎛ μ l
⎟⎜
⎟⎜ μ
⎠⎝ g

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

0.2

(3)

where:

ρg – gas density [kg/m3], ρl – liquid density [kg/m3], μg – dynamic gas viscosity [Pa
sec], μl – dynamic liquid viscosity [Pa sec].
The separate side-by-side flow of gas and liquid is considered. When the vacuum
valve is closed, liquid is at the bottom of the pipe, respectively to sawtooth profile of
the pipe. The pipe is divided into sections with similar liquid level and pressure loss
in the steady state. Initial conditions of the liquid level can be adjusted during simulation. Additional liquid level simulates solid wastes, the velocity of which is much
slower than liquid linear velocity.

264

D. Choiński, M. Metzger, and W. Nocoń

The liquid and air momentum, Ml and Mg respectively, can be calculated as
follows:
M l = Gl S ,
(4)

M g = Gg S ,

(5)

where: S – cross section of the pipe [m2], Sa – cross section occupied by gas [m2], Sw –
cross section occupied by liquid [m2].
For further consideration, void fraction α and mass fraction of gas ω are used and
are defined as follows:

α=

ω=

Sg
S

(6)

,

Mg
G Mix S

.

(7)

The above equations are valid, assuming the following condition:

dω
=0 .
dx

(8)

The pipe is subdivided into n sections of length L. The liquid level in a section is
the same as for boundary condition. For the separated flow, assuming equilibrium,
force balance equation for gas phase is as follows:
−m

⎛ dωG Mix ⎞
⎟ ω 2 G Mix 2
2K g ⎜
⎜ μg ⎟
⎛ dP ⎞
⎝
⎠
−⎜
⎟ =
dρ g
⎝ dL ⎠ g

,

(9)

where: d – internal tube diameter [m].
For laminar flow Kg=16 and m=1, for turbulent flow Kg=0.046 and m=0.2. The
Reynolds number necessary for choosing of the flow type is calculated as follows:
Re Mix =

GMix d

ωμ g + (1 − ω )μl

.

(10)

Pressure drop calculation for liquid phase is based on Hazen-William formula
[14,15]. This formula is used as a design guide for vacuum sewerage and coefficients
for several tube types are described. Generally, an empirical relationship for the friction head loss hL [m] in a PVC pipe segment typically used for vacuum sewerage,
may be expressed in a form:
1.2128 ⎛ G
hl = 4.87 ⎜⎜ l
d
⎝ ρl

1.85

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

.

(11)

Multiscale Three-Phase Flow Simulation Dedicated to Model Based Control

265

The pipe is subdivided into sections with varying cross section occupied by the
liquid (see Fig. 1).

Fig. 1. Multiscale diagram of computing; l – liquid, g – gas, Mix – gas+liquid, p – particle, S –
cross section of the pipe, Θ - pipe inclination angle, h – friction head loss, G – superficial mass
flux, V – velocity, P – pressure, L – pipe segment length.

The initial conditions for the simulation should start from the set up of the liquid
volume in the particular section of the pipe in the steady state. The program automatically calculates the slop of the pipe section properly to the volume in the previous,
current and the next part. This set up assumes the pressure drop profile for gas phase
and the friction head loss. The following initial conditions are: maximum absolute
pressure of the pump station, buffer capacity of the vacuum pump, minimum start
pressure for valve opening and the time period during the valve closure. Volume
inserted to the pipe while the valve is opened and particle contents are established as
well. The valve is located at the first pipe segment, while the pump station is located
at the last segment. The output from the pipe can be connected not only to the pump
station, but also to the next pipe segment or another simulated system using TCP/IP
protocol. Respectively, the first segment can be connected to the last segment of another pipe. For clear presentation of flow, the pipe is presented as straight, while the
effect of the sawtooth profile are the varying liquid levels (see Fig. 2).
In the particular steps of the simulation algorithm for the two-phase flow scale, the
following values are calculated:

• Static absolute pressure of the gas phase in the relationship to pressure drop
profile.
• Differential pressure for pipe segment
• Density and viscosity of gas and liquid phase

266

D. Choiński, M. Metzger, and W. Nocoń

• Superficial mass flux of gas and liquid
•
•
•
•

New volume of liquid in the pipe section
Continuity of equation by liquid phase mass balance in the whole pipe is checked
Pressure correction for proper mass balances
Medium velocity for mixture, gas and liquid phase with respect to the pipe cross
section
• Calling the coarse scale for friction head loss correction
pipe cross-section in steady state

pipe cross-section in steady state transformed to model

gas
liquid
particle

only vertical
and horizontal
forces

Fig. 2. Model simplifying for coarse scale

3 Multiscale Particle Motion Simulation
For particle motion simulation 2-D coarse scale is implemented. The stratified, annular and slug flow are considered. Types of two-phase flows are determined by gas and
liquid superficial mass flux, cross section of pipe occupied by liquid and the inclination angle of pipe profile. The coarse grid is used for simulation of bubble and particles motion, pressure drop for liquid phase and friction head loss. Simulated bubble
movement and local liquid velocity enables calculation of particle behaviour: motion
and sedimentation. The grids are considered in particular pipe segments with assumption that density and viscosity are constant, enabling simple momentum calculation.
For example, in the pipe with inner diameter of 0.05 [m] the boundary conditions are
as follows [2]: Stratified flow for: Gg<2 and Gl<100; Annular flow for: Gg >10 and
Gl <1000; Slug flow 10> Gg >2 and 100< Gl <100.
Resolution of the grid can be different for the particular pipe segment and is selected to the estimated gas bubble diameter based on empirical investigation. The grid
is considered for the particular pipe segment as far as bubble behaviour is concerned
and for the whole pipe as far as particle motion and sedimentation are concerned.
The matrix construction for the grid representing liquid and gas phase in pipe for
investigation of the bubble motion in pipe segment starts from calculation of liquid
level inclination angle to the gas velocity vector and onset slug flow based on empirical equation [15]:

Multiscale Three-Phase Flow Simulation Dedicated to Model Based Control

⎡⎛ ρ
G g ≥ Gl + 0.487 ⎢⎜ l
⎢⎣⎜⎝ ρ g

267

1

⎤2
⎞
⎟ gh g ⎥ ,
⎟
⎥⎦
⎠

(12)

where: hg – the height of the gas pocket during slug flow.
For the accurate friction head loss correction in the two-phase slug flow the prediction of the liquid holdup is necessary. The dimensionless correction factor RS equals
[16]:

⎡ ⎛
ρ V d ⎞⎤
RS = exp ⎢− ⎜⎜ 0.45Θ + 2.48 • 10 −6 l Mix ⎟⎟⎥
μ l ⎠⎥⎦
⎢⎣ ⎝

(13)

where: Θ - the pipe inclination angle in radians (0..1.57)
In practice, mixture velocity VMix value is usually low hence practically, the correction factor mainly depends on pipe inclination angle. The most important factor is
slug flow condition that is described by gas bubble to liquid motion. The matrix for
pipe segment is divided into a moving window with resolution 3x3. Motion of this
window is parallel to the liquid velocity vector. Matrix in the window describes simple relation between liquid and gas elements representative for investigated stratified,
annular and slug flow. In this step, elements of the matrix which represent particles
are moving parallel to liquid elements. In case of the slug flow, scrolling direction is
upwards, otherwise it is downwards.
The proper gas, liquid and particle volume, summarized momentum and maximum
height of the gas pockets for slug flow are checked after scrolling the whole segment.
The matrix constructed by contact of matrixes representing pipe segments is used for
investigation of particle motion. In such investigations, a moving window is also used
but in opposite direction and dimension of the window along the pipe is 6, across the
pipe it is 3. For every matrix element that represents particle, a velocity vector based
on the near 17 elements is calculated and this vector determines a target matrix element. After that, the matrix element that represents the particle is being interchanged
with target element. Also, liquid volume in pipe segment is calculated and corrected.
The last step is calculation of friction head loss factor which is proportional to the
value derived using the above equation and the height of the gas pocket after particle
motion correction. During stratified flow of particles the gravity force vector is considered. For gas phase in this flow case, the most significant force vector depends on
uplift pressure.
Simulation program is prepared as a stand-alone application dedicated only to the
presented model as a real-time simulator of the distributed object with controller and
communication interface for real controller connection. Calculation complexity, realtime simulation and 3D graphs for on-line presentation of the distributed parameters
object require a program that is well optimized for speed and size.

4 Selected Results and Concluding Remarks
The simulation investigations show, that the best way to force movement of undesirable particles in the inclined pipes is to destabilise the flow (see Fig. 3).

268

D. Choiński, M. Metzger, and W. Nocoń

Fig. 3. Visualization of the pipe segment (with reduced resolution for print); start of the unsteady process (top), movement of the particles (bottom)

35

slug flow

p ip e le n g th [m ]

30

25

20

annular flow

15

10

particle trace
5
2

4

6

8
tim e [s]

10

12

14

Fig. 4. Time changes of normalized density for three-phase flow. Vacuum being controlled at
the pipe output. The valve is opened at t=4 s.

For clear presentation of flow, the pipe is presented as straight, while the effect of
the sawtooth profile are the varying liquid levels. At the beginning of simulation experiment, a number of particles lie at the bottom of sawtooths (black points), whereas
the liquid at the end of the pipe becomes unsteady (white bubbles in the liquid). The
transient response presented at the bottom window shows the situation in which some
of the particles jump over the sawtooths and move in the desired direction.
Additional information is presented in 3D diagrams, in which the x-t profiles are
presented (see Figs. 4 and 5).
The x variable in Figs. 4 and 5 represents the normalized density at the pipe cross
section, hence the ratio of the averaged density for three phases and liquid density.
For higher densities, the color on the plot is darker. For steady state, the density gradient corresponds to the pipe leveling. “averaged color” corresponds to annular flow,
hence to the mixing of different phases. A clearly visible color gradient displaced
with respect to the pipe leveling accompanies the slug flow. Additionally, different
type of visualization of experimental studies are plots of liquid phase flow along the
pipe (see for example Fig. 6).

Multiscale Three-Phase Flow Simulation Dedicated to Model Based Control

269

stable
annular flow

35

p ip e le n g th [m ]

30

25

20

15

10

5
5

10

15
tim e [s ]

20

25

30

Fig. 5. Time changes of normalized density for three-phase flow. Vacuum being controlled
along the pipe. The valve is opened at t=4s and t=18s. A stable annular flow is present, that
decreases the hydraulic resistance and enables flow of solid particles.

liquid velocity [m/s]

2
1.5
1
0.5
0
40
30
24

20

20

pipe length [m]

16
12

10

8

time [s]

4
0

Fig. 6. Linear velocity of liquid-phase flow in case of vacuum being controlled along the pipe

The process operator should make the appropriate decision based on the simulated control system with monitoring and visualisation. A real-time simulator of the
process improves the optimal operating control. The proposed software system is
dedicated as a simulation support for model based operating control and monitoring. In this case, the operator can check control decisions using the simulator and
find the most appropriate decision. In the mode of the reduced coarse grid resolution, the proposed system can also be helpful for direct digital control based on PCembedded controller.

270

D. Choiński, M. Metzger, and W. Nocoń

Acknowledgements. This work was supported by the Polish Ministry of Science and
Higher Education using funds for 2006-2008, under grant no. N514 006 31/1739.

References
1. Manual: Alternative Wastewater Collection Systems, United States Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Water, EPA/625/1-91/024 (1991)
2. Mao, F., Desir, F.K., Ebadian, M.A.: Pressure drop measurement and correlation for threephase flow of simulated nuclear waste in a horizontal pipe. Int. J. Multiphase Flow 23(2),
397–402 (1997)
3. Petruk, A., Cassar, A., Dettmar, J.: Advanced real time control of a combined sewer system. Wat. Sci. Technol. 37(1), 319–326 (1998)
4. Choinski, D.: Real-time simulation of two-phase flow in vacuum sewerage with pressure
control. In: Proceedings of the 11th IEEE MMAR Conference, Międzyzdroje, pp. 813–818
(2005)
5. Storkaas, E., Skogestad, S., Alstad, V.: Stabilization of Desired Flow Regimes in Pipelines. In: Proceedings of AIChE Annual Meeting in Reno USA, November 9 (2001)
6. Drengstig, T., Magndal, S.: Slug control of production pipeline. SIKT-rapport Nr:
SIKTPR-8-2, Hogskolen i Stavanger (2001)
7. Metzger, M.: A comparative evaluation of DRE integration algorithms for real-time simulation of biologically activated sludge process. Simul. Pract. Theory 7, 629–643 (2000)
8. Chopard, B., Droz, M.: Cellular Automata Modeling of Physical Systems. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge (1998)
9. Chopard, B., Dupuis, A.: Lattice Boltzmann models: an efficient and simple approach to
complex flow problems. Comp. Phys. Communications 147, 509–515 (2002)
10. Artoli, A.M., Hoekstra, A.G., Sloot, P.M.A.: Optimizing lattice Boltzmann simulations for
unsteady flows. Computers & Fluids 35, 227–240 (2006)
11. Jansen, F.E., Shoham, O., Taitel, Y.: The elimination of severe slugging-experiments and
modeling. Int. J. Multiphase Flow 22(6), 1055–1072 (1996)
12. Taitel, Y., Barnea, D., Brill, J.P.: Stratified three phase flow in pipes. Int. J. Multiphase
Flow 21(1), 53–60 (1995)
13. Taitel, Y., Barnea, D.: Simplified transient of two phase flow using quasi-equilibrium
momentum balances. Int. J. Multiphase Flow 23(3), 493–501 (1997)
14. Holland, F.A., Bragg, R.: Fluid Flow for Chemical Engineers, Arnold, London (1995)
15. Hager, W.H.: Abwasser-hydraulik Theorie und Praxis. Springer, Heidelberg (1994)
16. Gomez, L.E., Shoham, O., Taitel, Y.: Prediction of slug liquid holdup: horizontal to upward vertical flow. Int. J. Multiphase Flow 26, 517–521 (2000)

