A Model of Immune Suppression and Repertoire
Evolution
John Burns and Heather J. Ruskin
Dublin City University, Dublin 9,
Ireland
{jburns, hruskin}@computing.dcu.ie
http://www.dcu.ie/computing/msc/index.html

Abstract. We present a stochastic cellular automata model that allows us to study both localized and generalized aspects of the immune
system (IS). We show how critical values for T Cell Receptor (TCR)
aﬃnity and cross-reactivity (ρ) can determine the course of a viral infection. The model presented here oﬀers insight into the widely varying
pathology of infectious agents across individuals. Additionally, our model
points to ways in which auto-immune disease can occur. We show that
by integrating models of physical space and shape space we can analyze
immune repertoire evolution and distribution over various time periods
ranging from a few days up to three years.

1

Introduction

One of the questions that has long exercised immunological researchers is why
diﬀerent people (or, more precisely, their immune systems) respond diﬀerently to
the same viral or antigen challenge. This question is exempliﬁed by the pathology
of the Human Immune Virus (HIV). In particular, the progression of the HIV
infection from inital exposure to the onset of full blown AIDS (Acquired Immune
Deﬁciency Syndrome) is known to occur over time (t), with range 2 ≤ t ≤ 20
years [1]. Computer models that successfully reproduce the behaviour of the HIV
pathogen are extremely good at replicating the localized intra- and inter- cellular
behaviour over a certain period of time and space. In particular, the aﬀect of
viral mutation on the immune response has been demonstrated by [2] and [10]
while the work of [4] and [5] have shown, at least in outline, how bit-string models
can represent the state of the immune repertoire. However, to our knowledge,
there are no computer models that successfully address the issue of why it is
that diﬀerent immune systems respond diﬀerently to the same viral exposure. It
follows from this that in addition to modelling intra-cellular localized interaction,
there is a challenge to ﬁnd a way to express the generalized distinction that exists
between the immune systems of diﬀerent people. In this paper we postulate that
the course of an infection is crucially dependent on the density and distribution
of the immune repertoire, and furthermore, that T cell receptor cross-reactivity
is a crucial factor in determining the success or otherwise of the immune response
to pathogen challenge.
P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2657, pp. 75–84, 2003.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

76

2

J. Burns and H.J. Ruskin

Model

The synthesis of two distinct approaches is the key to our model. Firstly, we
model the physical space of the secondary immune organs (such as the lymph
nodes or spleen) by way of two-dimensional stochastic cellular automaton [6]
with periodic boundary conditions. This physical space model is the location in
which host invading intra-cellular pathogens, having been engulfed by antigen
presentation (APC) cells, are presented on the cell surface to naive recirculating
cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) cells. Upon recognition of a speciﬁc antigen,
naive lymphocytes stop recirculating and undergo cell division. The process of
cell division is limited to clones of the original lymphocyte that recognized the
viral pathogen (this original lymphocyte is known as a CTL-precursor ), and
all cloned daughters inherit the speciﬁc T cell receptor that was successful in
this recognition process. The daughters of the CTL-precursor cells will normally
divide at a rate of 2-4 every 24 hours and this process continues for some 3-5
days [9]. This process is known as clonal expansion, and forms the basis of our
physical space model. In our model, we assume that all antigen presentation
cells carry the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecule which
is required by CTL-precursors in order to produce armed eﬀector CTL cells at
the end of the clonal expansion process
The second component to our model is an implementation and extension of
the shape space formalism originally presented by [7]. We utilize shape space
to model the density and distribution of the T Cell Receptor (TCR) repertoire,
and to lend analytical insight into the critical nature of the measure of crossreactivity, which we denote as ρ. In our model, shape space is a dynamic and
evolving N -dimensional Euclidean space that contains one vector u for every
immune system CTL-p genotype, and one vector v for every pathogen genotype.
Around each v in shape space is a disc of inﬂuence of radius ρ. Any u falling
inside this disc of inﬂuence is subject to some pressure. That is to say, the
pathogen will be removed from the physical space system with some probability
P (X), inversely proportional to the distance between v and u in shape space. If
the distance d between the two points exceeds the critcal value ρ, then there is
no CTL pressure on the pathogen, and no aﬃnity or binding takes place. The
process is summarized in equation (1) and equation (2)
N

d= v−u =

(vi − ui )2

(1)

i=1


1
P (X) =

: d=0
: 0<d≤ρ

0 : d>ρ
1
d

(2)

It should be emphasized at this point that equation (1) and equation (2) will
be evaluated if and only if there is some contact between an APC and a CTLp within the physical space model. Contact in this case means that within the
physical space lattice the cells representing the CTL-p and the APC are adjacent

A Model of Immune Suppression and Repertoire Evolution

77

- or are nearest neighbours. If equation (2) does result in the removal of the
APC from the physical space, we use P (X) as the stimulation rate (S) for the
exponential growth during the clonal expansion phase (S ≡ P ). Therefore, the
total number of activated CTL daughter clones which the ith CTL-p gives rise
i
to, (TCT
L ) is given by:
i
0.036τ S
(3)
TCT
L =e
where the power of e depends on three parameters, τ , the duration of the expansion phase, S, the stimulation rate (dependent on the distance between the
APC and CTL-p in shape space), and a constant factor 0.036. At the end of
the clonal expansion phase, when τ ≈ 192 (representing some four days of actual time) and where S = 1, we see some 1000 clones have been produced. This
is what we would expect in a healthy immune system [9]. Clearly, the eﬀect on
i
TCT
L when S decline is noticeable, for example, for a case with weak stimulation,
i
S = 0.3, TCT
L ≈ 8.
Our physical space model is implemented as a discrete two-dimensional array
of C-language pointers to data structures. Each member of the array contains a
pointer to it’s own structure (even if the structure is logically empty). In turn,
each structure contains a set of information which is summarized in Table 1.
At each time step, we randomly select locations on the array to update. We
ensure full coverage of the array by using a member of the structure to indicate
that this array element has been updated. When 99% of the array has been
visited, we reset the visited ﬂag on each array member, and increment the clock
counter by one, thus indicating we have moved on to time τ +1. Our shape space
model is implemented as a one-dimensional array (of length 2). As both APC
and CTL-p cells have a representation in shape space, this value is again carried
by each of the structures in the physical space array. In Table 1, the location of
a given APC or CTL-p in shape space is referred to as sscoord. We implement
motion on the lattice merely by swapping pointer references (thus, no expensive
in-memory copy activities are required). For example, assume an infected APC
cell is located at position Li , and at position Li+1 there is an unoccupied cell.
We simply swap the pointers stored in Li and Li+1 with each other, and the
move is complete. For further treatment of physical space models see [3]. For
other models of shape space, see [12].
2.1

Model Parameters

Although the model presented here is capable of supporting most of the known
entities of the immune system, we restrict our inital study of the immune state to
antigen presentation cells (APC), cytotoxic lymphocyte precursor (CTL-p) cells,
and activated cytotoxic lymphocyte (CTL) cells. We justify the exclusion of other
entities (such as Th cells, B cells and cytokines) by the fact that it is through
activation and diﬀerentiation of CTL-p cells that the immune repertoire is known
to evolve when the immune system is faced with an intra-cellular pathogenic
challenge, such as the Human Immune Virus (HIV). Within our physical space
model, we deﬁne Lps as the length of one side of the square lattice, Dctl−p as

78

J. Burns and H.J. Ruskin
Table 1. Data structure maintained at each physical space array member
Data type
unsigned char
unsigned char
unsigned char
unsigned int
unsigned int
double
unsigned int
unsigned int
unsigned int

Parameter
act
state
sscoord[]
ticks
max-ticks
prolif-rate
last-updated
updated-count
id

Deﬁnition
Cell type
Cell state
Location of cell genotype in shape space
The age of this cell
The maximum age of this cell
The rate at which this cell proliferates (0..1)
Timestep when cell was last visited
cell visited ﬂag
Unique ID for this cell

the density of the CTL-p cells, Dapc as the density of the APC’s. During each of
the model simulation runs, we keep all parameters other than ρ constant. The
largest value of ρ is known as ρmax , the derivation of which is shown in equation
(4).
L2ps
(4)
ρmax =
π
We deﬁne ρmax as a measure of the maximum cross-reactivity of a given genotype
in shape space. Setting ρ = ρmax would be equivalent to having every CTL-p
cross-react with every APC. Although we do not explore this conﬁguration further, it is worth noting that this conﬁguration could represent a clinical condition
known as auto-immune disease (wherein the immune system attacks both itself
and invading pathogens without discretion). Auto-immune disease is a relatively
rare condition ([13]) and will be examined in further work. As we are initially
interested in observing the behaviour of the model as ρ → ρmax , we express the
ratio of ρ to ρmax as ρˆ, which takes values in the range A = {0.5, 0.29, 0.10}. A
represents one possible set of values for ρˆ in order of decreasing cross-reactivity.
We could have chosen any set of values for ρˆ that follow 0 ≤ ρˆ ≤ 1. From equation (4), the value for ρmax in our model is ≈ 28. The model parameter initial
values are summarized in Table 2.

3

Shape Space

The shape space idea, as an underpinning of theoretical immunology, was introduced by [7] in 1979, but has attracted some criticism, notably from [16]. It is
instructional at this point to review the basis of this important formalism and
to address the comments of [16] . We will also justify our utilization of shape
space while highlighting potential shortcomings.
In shape space, the antigenic determinant for a given antibody or antigen
is an N -dimensional vector consisting of values representing such parameters
as geometric conﬁguration (at the molecular level), electric charge and other

A Model of Immune Suppression and Repertoire Evolution

79

Table 2. Table of initial model parameters
Parameter Deﬁnition

Initial Value

Dctl−p
θ
Dapc
Lps
Lss
τ
ρmax
A

2000
2000
100
100
50
300
≈ 28
{0.5, 0.29, 0.1}

Density of CTL-precursors
Number of genotype CTL in shape space
Density of APC
Length of one side of physical space square lattice
Length of one side of shape space square lattice
Number of time steps per simulation run
Max. cross-reactivity of shape space genotype
Range of ρˆ

complex chemical characteristics that are not postulated in [7] . According to
this approach, not all elements of the N -dimensional vector play an equal role
in determining complementarity or match. Given an antibody vector Ab and
an antigen vector Ag, if Ab = Ag then the two entities will bind absolutely.
If we now assume that the N -dimensional vector represents a location in an
N -dimensional Euclidean space, then
Ab − Ag = 0

(5)

means that Ab and Ag are coincident in the space (that is, they share the exact same coordinates within the space), and this space is known as shape space.
Therefore, we can say that shape space is the space of all possible vectors each
one representing a unique set of antigenic determinants (or shapes). One of the
criticisms that [16] level at the above theory is that the function f (Ab, Ag),
which, according to [7], will determine the ‘distance’ (and hence, aﬃnity) between Ab and Ag, must be highly irregular and discontinuous. This assertion is
based on work by chemists which has shown that predicting aﬃnity and bonding
between two molecules is not simply a deterministic issue of understanding the
dynamics between the individual molecular constituents. However, [7] clearly
comment towards the end of their paper that shape space does not need to be
uniform (that is, there does not have to be a uniform distribution of Ab vectors
within Euclidean space). Therefore, f does not need to be either continuous or
regular. In fact, [7] oﬀer a model for representing the probability of detecting
antigens in a non-uniformly distributed shape space.
Further criticism of the shape space paradigm is the question of the value
for N . Although [16] insist the original value of 5 ≤ N ≤ 10 is too small (they
suggest a value closer to N = 20), they do not, in principle, question the theoretical foundation of representing antigenic determinants by a ﬁxed, N -sized
set of parameters. The actual value for N is clearly something that is system
speciﬁc and may vary. In fact, [17] have shown how the presence of cytokine
regulatory molecules crucially aﬀects the dynamics of helper T cell populations.
It is therefore plausible that the actual value and parameters of N are not only
dependent on the characteristics of Ab and Ag, but also of external and local-

80

J. Burns and H.J. Ruskin

ized state information such as the density of cytokines. It seems reasonable to
conclude that setting N to a ﬁxed and relatively small number is suﬃcient to
represent the parameters of antigenic determination.
Finally, to conclude this section, we address the speciﬁc utilization of the
shape space paradigm within the model presented in this paper. Firstly, we do
not require or assume a continuous Ab distribution across our shape space. The
probability that an APC will fall into a region for which equation (1) is not
deﬁned (and hence, not be under any CTL pressure) is given by
¯ =1−
P (X)

θ
2
i=1 πρ
2
Lss

(6)

In our model we assume that shape space is populated by a uniform distribution
of genotype CTL cells. It can be seen from equation (6) that ρ is a critical
parameter. Additionally, in a healthy immune system, equation (6) would always
result in a value close to zero. Secondly, we extend the original shape space
formalism by introducing a stimulation rate which is inversely proportional to the
distance as calculated using equation (1). This partially addresses the deﬁciencies
in other shape space -based models, most notably that of [12]. Thirdly, with
respect to the value for N , although we set N = 2, this is by no means a hard
parameter of our model. As N represents the dimensionality of the shape space,
we should, in principal, set N to a value such that LN
ss → ∞ (as the number
of antigenic determinants that might be presented to the immune system is,
essentially, inﬁnite). For practical computational purposes, such a space would
require resources beyond current computing boundaries available today. As the
research presented here studies the aﬀect of speciﬁc pathogen detection and
removal, our space needs only to accomodate antigenic variation for a speciﬁc
3
strain, and thus N = 2, LN
ss = 2.5 × 10 is suﬃcient for our initial purposes.

4

Results

Fig. 1 shows the state of three immune TCR shape spaces at time τ = 300
(where τ = 1 models 30 minutes of elapsed time), and Fig. 2 shows the denstity of APC in the lymph system over time 0 ≤ τ ≤ 300 for each of the three
immune system conﬁgurations. The only parameter altered across each of the
three conﬁgurations is the ratio of ρˆ , the values of which are drawn from A (and
are represented in the ﬁgures by the diamond, the circle and the square, respectively). We notice, in Fig. 1, that the shape space has evolved into three quite
diﬀerent states. The ﬁrst state can be classiﬁed as healthy in the sense that the
clearance rate of APC from the lymph system is broadly in keeping with what
is known to be the case clinically [9] (and represented here as the diamond in
Fig. 2). We can see that the healthy shape space state can be characterized as
a low aﬃnity, low density conﬁguration. This is in agreement with [8]. As the
immune cross-reactivity declines (represented by the circle, Fig. 1 and 2) we see
an apparently paradoxical condition in the shape space realization. That is, as

A Model of Immune Suppression and Repertoire Evolution

81

promiscuity diminishes, it takes greater speciﬁcity (and hence, greater stimulation) in order to clear APC. In fact, we can see from Fig. 2 that a 90% clearance
from the lymph system takes some τ = 300 time steps. We conclude that the immune system conﬁguration, with reduced cross-reactivity, is chronically unable
to clear all APC and is operating at a sub-optimal level. Finally, when we test
the immune conﬁguration at the lowest level of cross-reactivity (represented by
the square) - we see a very strong and highly speciﬁc four receptor response in
shape space. Having reduced promiscuity to its lowest level, the eﬀect on APC
clearance is conspicuous. From Fig. 2 we can see only a 10% APC removal from
the lymph system after some 6 days. It is clear that were this the immune system
of a real person, it would be at the point of collapse, and hence could represent
the onset of full-blown AIDS (wherein the patient dies by way of opportunistic
infection).

700

TCR Lymph node density

600

500

400

300

200

100

0
0

10
TCR type in Shape Space

Fig. 1. Immune repertoire density and distribution for 3 values of ρˆ drawn from A,
with τ = 192. Shown here are the density levels for the ten most dominant TCR types
in shape space. The healthy state of the system (diamond) is a low-aﬃnity, low average
density conﬁguration. As aﬃnity increases and promiscuity declines, a more speciﬁc
and active repertoire evolves. The state represented by the square is the least healthy,
and represents an immune system at the point of failure.

5

Discussion

Our starting point for the experiments presented here is to assume that the immune repertoire has not been exposed to any prior pathogen. Hence, we do not
model immunological memory or reinfection. Our objective has been to study
how insight (into diﬀerent IS evolutionary states) can be gained by integrating localized and generalized models of immune response. Informally, our theoretical

82

J. Burns and H.J. Ruskin
100

APC Lymph Density

80

60

40

20

0
0

50

100
200
150
Monte Carlo time step - 1/2 hr

250

300

Fig. 2. Clearance rate of APC’s from the lymph node system over about 6 days (τ =
300) for various values of ρˆ drawn from A. The three distinct states which have resulted:
healthy, chronic and fatal (diamond, circle and square, respectively). These states show
the aﬀect of decreasing ρˆ on APC clearance.

expectation is that by studying the evolution of shape space, we can demonstrate how speciﬁc conﬁgurations of the repertoire occur. Following from this,
we can also show one possible mechanism for the development of immunodominance 1 . With reference to Fig. 1, we see that immunodominance becomes more
pronounced as cross-reactivity declines. An immune system with high levels of
immunodominance gives rise to an ineﬃcient detection and clearance regime.
Therefore, when we examine the diﬀerence in infection outcome (Fig. 2) we
notice that a more strain-speciﬁc response results in poorer short-term disease
detection and clearance. Although we have not modelled pathogenic mutation
in this model, we can hypothesize that the repertoire conﬁgurations that have
evolved might play a role in determining the dynamics of a virus mutation and
immune clearance. We feel the model presented here is a sound basis for exploring such issues in the future.

6

Conclusion

A model of the immune system is presented which utilizes a new extension to
the shape space formalism, and addresses - at least in part - some of the former
criticisms. We argue for the value of a shape space formalism for modelling some
aspects of the immune repertoire. We have presented initial results from the
model that suggest that a low-aﬃnity T cell receptor (TCR) space provides the
1

Immunodominance is the process by which a small number of speciﬁc TCR’s are
reponsible for clearing an antigen or virus

A Model of Immune Suppression and Repertoire Evolution

83

most eﬃcient APC removal. Our ﬁndings are in agreement with recent work
presented by [8]. We have shown that, for all other model parameters being
unchanged, reducing TCR promiscuity causes signiﬁcantly diﬀerent evolution of
the shape space and correspondingly poorer APC removal. We hypothesize that
ρ (the cross-reactivity measure) is one of the most crucial general parameters
within the immune system. We have demonstrated, for one conﬁguration of
the model, results which are similar in signature to those which characterize
the onset of AIDS. A major factor underlying the evolution of an individual’s
immune system (and its overall health) appears to be the role played by crossreactivity, ρ. For ρˆ < ρˆcrit (where ρˆcrit is crudely estimated to be in the range
0.29 ≤ ρˆcrit ≤ 0.1), the immune system is essentially undermined and faces
almost immediate collapse. For more viable values of ρˆ (0.5 < ρˆcrit < 0.29) the
residual antigen cells are maintained at a limited levels in every case, with less
than 100% eﬀective clearance.

References
1. Nowak M., McMichael A. J.: How HIV defeats the Immune System. Scientiﬁc
American 273 (1995) 58–65
2. Mannion, R., Ruskin, H., Pandey, R.B.: Eﬀect of Mutation on Helper T-cells and
Viral Population: A Computer Simulation Model for HIV Theor. in Biosci. 119/2
(2000) 145–155
3. Seiden, P., Celada, F.: A model for simulating cognate recognition and response in
the immune system, J.Theor. Biol. 158 (1992) 329–357
4. Lagreca, M.C., de Almeida, Zorzenon dos Santos, R.M.C.: A dynamical model for
the immune repertoire. Physica A 289 (2001) 191–207
5. Castiglione, F., Motta, S., Nicosia G.: Pattern recognition by primary and secondary response of an Artiﬁcial Immune System. Theory Biosci. 120 (2001) 93–106
6. Wolfram, S.: Cellular Automata as Simple Self-Organizing Systems. Nature (1982)
7. Perelson, A. Oster, G.: Theoretical Studies of Clonal Selection: Minimal Antibody
Repertoire Size and Reliability of Self-Non-self Discrimination, J. Theor. Biol. 81
(1979) 645–667
8. van den Berg, H.A., Rand D.A., Burroughs, N.J.: A Reliable and Safe T Cell
Repertoire based on Low-aﬃnity T Cell Receptors. J. Theor. Biol 209 (2001) 465–
486
9. Janeway, C.A., Travers, P., Walport, M., Capra, J.D.: Immunobiology. The Immune System in Health and Disease. Churchill-Livingston 4th Edition (1999)
10. Zorzenon dos Santos, R.M., Coutinho, S.C.: Dynamics of HIV Infection: A Cellular
Automata Approach. Phys. Rev. Lett. 87 (2001) 168102
11. Nowak, M., May, R.: Mathematical Biology of HIV Infections: Antigenic Variation
and Diversity Threshold. Mathematical Biosci. 106 (1991) 1–21
12. Hershberg, U., Louzoun, Y., Atlan, H., Solomon, S.: HIV time: winning the war
while, loosing all the battles. Physica A 289 (2001) 178–190
13. Orosz, C.: An Introduction to Immuno-ecology and Immuno-informatics. Design
Principles for Immune System and Other Distributed Autonomous Systems. Oxford University Press (2001)
14. Monteiro, L.H.A., Goncalves, C.H.O., Piqueira, J.R.C.: A condition for Successful
Escape of a Mutant after Primary HIV Infection. J. Theor. Biol. 203 (2000) 399–
406

84

J. Burns and H.J. Ruskin

15. Nowak, M., May, R.: Virus Dynamics. Mathematical Principles of Immunology and
Virology. Oxford University Press (2000)
16. Carneiro, J. and Stewart, J.J.: Rethinking ”Shape Space”: Evidence from Simulated Docking Suggests that Steric Complementarity is not limiting for AntibodyAntigen Recognition and Idiotypic Interactions. J. Theor. Biol. 169 (1994) 391–402
17. Yates, A, Bergmann, C., Van Hemmen, J.L., Stark, J., Callard, R.: Cytokinemodulated Regualtion of Helper T Cell Populations J. Theor. Biol. 206 (2000)
539–560

