Reconstruction of Branching Surface and Its Smoothness
by Reversible Catmull-Clark Subdivision
Kailash Jha
Assistant Professor, Deptt. of Mechanical Engineering
& Mining Machinery Engineering,
Indian School of Mines University, Dhanbad-826004, Jharkhand, India
kailash_jha@hotmail.com

Abstract. In the current research a new algorithm has been developed to get surface from the contours having branches and a final smooth surface is obtained by
reversible Catmull-Clark Subdivision. In branching, a particular layer has more
than one contour, corresponds with the contour at the adjacent layer. The layer
having more than one contour is converted into a 3D composite curve by inserting
points between the layers. The points are inserted in such a way that the center of
contours should merged to the center of the contours at the adjacent layer. This
process is repeated for all layers having branching problems. In the next step, 3D
composite curves are converted into different polyhedrons by the help of the contours at adjacent layers. Number of control points at different layer for contours
and 3D curves may not be the same, in this case a special polyhedron construction
technique has been developed. The polyhedrons are subdivided using reversible
Catmull-Clark subdivision to give a smooth surface.
Keywords: Catmull-Clark subdivision, branching surface, incompatible curves,
reconstruction.

1

Introduction

In the present work, an algorithm has been developed to construct a three-dimensional
surface from contours at different layers which may have branching problem and the
required smooth surface is obtained with the help of the reversible Catmull-Clark
subdivision. In the reversible Catmull-Clark subdivision level of smoothness is given
by an integer value for required rendering. Construction of 3D surface from 2D contours is very important for CAD (Rapid prototyping, NC machining), Medical imaging and Geographical Information System. Technologies such as magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI), computed topography (CT), and ultrasound imaging allow measurements of internal properties of objects to be obtained in a nondestructive fashion.
The points on the 2D contours are measured slice-by-slice. A slice may have more
than one independent closed contour. These contours may correspond to one or more
contours at adjacent slice. This situation is termed as branching, which is described in
this work. The set of planes generating the slices are usually parallel to each other and
may not be equi-spaced along any axis through the object. Once these slices have
G. Allen et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2009, Part II, LNCS 5545, pp. 759–769, 2009.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

760

K. Jha

been obtained, the goal is to enable a human to easily visualize in 3D. Many algorithms have been developed for this purpose, but they can be classified into two categories, Volume Rendering Methods and Surface Reconstruction Methods. Volume
rendering is used to show the characteristics of interior of the solid. In surface
rendering, a geometrical representation is used to model the object or structure to
be visualized based on original data such as edge, mesh, polygon, triangle or pixel.
The present work focuses on surface reconstruction method. Generation of 3D surface
from 2D contours has four basic steps: (a) Correspondence, (b) Tiling, (c) Branching
and (d) Generation of surface.
(a) The correspondence problem involves finding the correct connections between the contours of adjacent slices. In the present formulation the correspondence problem is known which can be obtained from [1].
(b) Tiling means using slice chords to triangulate the strip lying between
contours of two adjacent slices into tiling triangles. A slice chord connects a
vertex of a given contour to a vertex of the contour in an adjacent slice. Each
tiling triangle consists of exactly two slice chords and one contour segment.
Details of tiling can be obtained from [1, 2]. In the current work focus is
given on branching problems. Our approach does not require tiling because it
is based on construction of polyhedrons.
(c) A branching problem occurs when a contour in a layer corresponds to more
than one contour in an adjacent layer.
(d) Solution of branching problem results polygonal surface which are smoothened by reversible Catmull-Clark subdivision.
There are three types of branching problems: (1) One-to-one, (2) One-to-many and (3)
Many-to-many. One-to-one problem has been solved by several researchers based on
minimizations of energy, twist and curvature and different tiling techniques which are
shown in Fig 1a. One-to-many problem is the one in which at least one layer must have
more than one contour and have correspondence with the contour at adjacent layers
which is shown in Fig 1b. Many-to-many problem is stated as m contours at i-th layer
and n contours at (i+1) th layer and they are corresponding to each other. This problem can be solved by combining many one-to-many branching problems. Fig. 1c
shows the Many-to-many branching problem. In the present technique, control
points of curves at layer having branching problem are taken at a time and converted
into 3D curve by linear merging of geometrical centers of the contours toward the
center of contours at adjacent layer. For example, two contours C1 and C2 are shown

i-th layer

i+1th layer
(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 1. Different type of branching: (a) One-to-one b; (b) Many-to-one; (c) Many-to-Many

Reconstruction of Branching Surface and Its Smoothness

761

in Fig. 2 at layer i having geometrical centers at g1 and g2 respectively, which are
merged linearly to the geometrical center (g3) of adjacent contour C3 at (i+1)th layer.
Lines parallel to g1g3 are drawn from all the control points of curves C1 and similarly
lines parallel to g2g3 are drawn from control points of curve C2. The intersection point
having highest value of y-coordinate is considered for construction of 3D curves
which is point d in Fig 2. ad and bd are parallel to g1g3 and g2g3 respectively and intersect at highest value of y-coordinate to give 3-D curve, which is comprised of db,
C2, bd, da, C1 and ad respectively. Once 3-D curve is obtained and the remaining
contours at other layers do not have any branches, then the polyhedrons are constructed according to present formulation given in section 4 and the final 3-D surface
is obtained by reversible Catmull-Clark subdivision, otherwise same process is repeated. Fig. 2 shows the contour points as well as other additional points. The current
branching problem has been solved for the known correspondence and starting points
for the contours at different layers. A complex 3D contour is generated for layer having branching problem, which converts many-to many branching problems into oneto-one branching problems.
Polyhedrons are constructed for all the pairs of adjacent layers once there is no
branching problem. If contours are given as the points and constraints then the
control polygons can be obtained by the references [3, 4] using energy based curve
approximation.

.
,.#
)
.
,.4
4


#
!


'
C4

.
,.0
0

Fig. 2. Illustrated example to convert contours to a 3-D composite contour for a layer having
two contours

A polygonal complex is a simple polygonal mesh whose structure depends on subdivision scheme used and whose limit of subdivision is a curve rather than a surface.
The polygonal complexes are constructed for each of the polygons and polyhedron is
constructed by connecting the polygon complexes side-by-side. Contours given are
restricted to uniform cubic B-Spline curves [5, 6] but it can be overcome by nonuniform technique given in [7]. The proposed technique is of order O (kn), where n is
the number of cross section curves and k is the average number of control points per
curve in the given sectional curves.

762

K. Jha

The reversible Catmull-Clark subdivision has been developed in the present work
to get smooth surface from a given polygons. It can be used for mesh generation. In
graphics, shading and rendering improves the representation of surfaces and solids.
The polygon construction technique in the current work is similar to [5, 6], which is
not limited to the uniform B-Spline input curves. In the present work other type surface subdivision [8] can be incorporated. Reversible Catmull-Clark subdivision has
been achieved in the present work, which is a unique feature of this work and is different from [6]. It also gives different stage of convergence of polygons toward the
interpolating curves as well as smoothness of the surface. A boundary curve of a
B-Spline patch is dependent only on the first three rows of the mesh defining the
patch. It is same for the curve case where one end depends on the three control vertices. Present technique will be useful in medical imaging like modeling liver vessel
tree, geological structure and stem of the tree.
Previous works are given in section 2. A brief overview of Catmull-Clark subdivision is given in section 3. Section 4 describes the current work. Results and discussions have been given in section 5. The research has been concluded in section 6.

2 Previous Works
The literature that is devoted to many-to-one branching problem can be classified into
four main families. The family of contour connection methods attempted to artificially
render one-to-many problem into a one-to-one by connecting the disjoint contour with
line [2] or triangulate facet bridge [9]. The first choice is applicable for simple cases,
while the second constrains unnaturally the saddle points of the branching surface to lie
on the plane containing the disjoint contours. The second family is based on introduction of intermediate contour, which splits the original problem into two problems
one-to-one and a new one-to-many. The second problem is further simplified into m
one-to-one problems. This idea has been proposed in [10, 11] and has been
implemented in [12]. The family of partial contour connection and hole filling has been
proposed in references [1,13,14]) is characterized by matching partially the disjoint
contours with the single contours of the neighboring plane, thus leaving a number of
holes which are finally filled in final step. Goodman et al., [15] has treated one-to-two
case in which a single hole is filled by an approximated chosen hyperboloid.
Finally, the family of implicit schemes relies on the assumption that possesses
implicit representation of contours composing the cross-sections. Then an implicit
interpolate can be obtained by taking a convex combination of contour representation [16], or implying the distance function [12, 16]). Wang et al., [17] used Catmull-Clark subdivision for biorthogonal wavelet construction based on lifting
scheme. Loop and Schafefer, [18] approximated Catmull-Clark subdivision surfaces
by minimal set of bicubic patch. A brief overview of branching problems has been
explained in reference [19], which involves skinning, trimming and hole filling. In
reference [20] an algorithm has been developed to obtain branching surfaces by
energy based skinning of compatible 2-D curves obtained by energy-based approximation.

Reconstruction of Branching Surface and Its Smoothness

763

3 Catmull-Clark Subdivision
A polygonal mesh from which inner mesh can be obtained through the application of
following rules basically defines a Catmull-Clark surface:
1.

Each old face f with n vertices (Vi)i<i<n, a new vertex Vf can be generated at
the centroid by:
n

Vf = 1 /n ∑ Vi

(1)

i =1

2.

For each of old edge e having two vertices V1 and V2 which is shared by two
faces f and g, a new vertex ve can be generated by:
Ve = (V1+V2+Vf+Vg)/4

3.

(2)

For each old vertex V incident to n edges (ei) and shared by n faces fi, a new
vertex Vv can be generated by:
n

n

i =1

i =1

Vv = α n ∑ Vei + β n ∑ V fi + γ n V

(3)

Where Vei (respectively Vfi) is the vertex generated from the edge ei (respectively
the face fi), and the weight αn, βn and γn are given by:

αn

=

βn =

1/n2,

γ n = (n-2) / n

The limiting curve of a Catmull-Clark polygonal complex can be determined in a
piecewise manner. Basic formulation for Catmull-Clark subdivision has been given
in [21]. Surface subdivision is based on rules and the given input polygons. Fig 3
shows the polygon and the subdivided polygons have been shown in Fig 4 along with
the modified vertices, edge points and face point.

Modified vertex
Face point
Edge point
Fig. 3. Constructed polyhedron

Fig. 4. Subdivided polyhedron with face points and
vertices

4 Current Work
The present technique is based on construction of polyhedron from the generated 3D
composite curves and polygons. Two or more set of control polygons are given at a
layer which correspond to the control polygons of curves at adjacent layer. If the control points of the contours are not given, energy based approximation [3, 4] can be

764

K. Jha

used to find their value. The first task is to calculate the center of each closed polygons and find slope of the line joining the centers of corresponding contours. In Fig 2,
g1, g2 and g3 are the CGs of the control polygons and g1g3 and g2g3 are the line joining
their centers. An algorithm has been developed to find out points (Pi, Pj) in given
curves for which the intersection of line parallel to g1g3 and passes through point pi
and line parallel to g2g3 and passes through qj having highest value of y-coordinate
intersection. Points Pi, Pj and the intersection point d have been shown in Fig 2. Once
the intersection point is obtained which is between the contours having correspondence, the closest point from this point at the adjacent layer is determined which, is
the point kc in Fig 2. With reference to these two points (d, kc), polyhedrons are constructed according to algorithm given in section 4.1. If the number of control points in
the 3D composite curves is not the same as the number of control points at adjacent
layer of contour then they are considered as the incompatible curves, which are solved
by the technique given in ref [5, 6]. After having the correct polyhedrons, the smooth
surfaces are obtained by reversible subdivision of the polyhedrons (Catmull-Clark
Subdivision), which is explained in Section 2. In the present work, reversible subdivision techniques have been adopted to go for the required smooth surface. Level of
smoothness can be given by an integer value. Once the level of smoothness is given
by the user, the corresponding surface will be displayed on the screen.
4.1 Construction of Polyhedrons for Branching Contours
The construction of surface polyhedron is done in such a way that a final control mesh will be
obtained by connecting the resulting complexes side-by-side. This construction is divided into
two phases:

(a) Reversible subdivision phase, (b) decomposition phase
These terminologies have been explained in references [5, 6]
4.1.1 Reversible Subdivision Phase
In this phase the given control polygons (Mi and Mj) (see Fig 5) of input curves are
subdivided recursively until one of the subdivided control polygon does not have one
edge. There are n and m vertices in control polygons Mi and Mj respectively. The
ends of the polygons are joined together to make closed polygon. This closed polygon
is again divided into two polygons by connecting at points where its Euclidian
distance is minimum. Fig 5 shows the connection. This phase is also called virtual
primitive phase. Fig 6 shows a primitive face, several such faces will be the output of
the reversible subdivision phase.
Recursive subdivision can be illustrated by the following points:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Vo, Vn Vm and Wm are the boundary vertices
If m and n are one stop
Associated vertices Vp and Wq are calculated by shortest distance criterion
Subdivision is continued recursively for divided polygons

This process terminates with a set of virtual primitives faces, where each such face f
is represented by the pairs (vf, wf) with vf and wf are the two set of vertices Vf =
(Vi)a ≤ i ≤ a+r and Wf = (Wi) a ≤ i ≤ a+s characterized by the following properties:

Reconstruction of Branching Surface and Its Smoothness

1.
2.

765

Either r and s is equal to 1
The vertices va and wb are the closest to va+r and wb+s respectively
among all possible pairs (Vi, Wi) of the set (Vf X Wf)

A primitive face F can be defined by sequence T from the vertices Mi and another
sequence B from the vertices Mj. One of the sequences must have two vertices. Let B
be the sequence having two vertices
B = {W1, W2}

(4)
Vk}

T = {V1, V2

;

;%;#;4
;4
;

G3
'

G% G4
G#

"()
Fig. 5. Illustration for recursive subdivision


+'!4

;4

;'


G4

G#

Fig. 6. Primitive face obtained by recursive subdivision for decomposition

766

K. Jha

4.1.2 Decomposition Phase
In this phase the primitive faces are decomposed into several actual faces. Number of
the faces is equal to number of vertices (k) in T. First the k-2 vertices are created on B
between W1 and W2 in same proportion distance as the vertices of Vk. K vertices
(Vk’) are created in between the two set of vertices B and T in 2: 1 ratio of distance
and similar two vertices (W1’ and W2’) are created on line V1W1 and VnWn in 1:2
ratio of distance. Constructed polyhedrons and surfaces are shown in Fig 7.
V1V2V2’V1’ is a typical constructed polyhedron in Fig 7. Constructed polyhedrons for
non-branching incompatible curves and has been shown in Fig 8.




;#

,
;'!4

;4

;'
;′#

;′4
G′4


G4


;′'!4

;′' ,%
G′#
G#

%


Fig. 7. Final faces after decomposition of a primitive face

Fig. 8. Polyhedrons for incompatible contours

Fig. 9. Polyhedrons for branching contours

5 Results and Discussions
A large number of results have been tested in this work for contours having branching
problems. The data structure implemented supports recursive Catmull-Clark subdivision. C++ and OpenGL have been used in current formulation. Figure 9 shows the
constructed polygons for a branching problem in which a layer has two contours and
they correspond to a contour an adjacent layer. Fig. 10 shows a wire frame surface
obtained by the present algorithms after smoothening by reversible Catmull-Clark
subdivision. In this test result, there are three contours at a layer and they are corresponding to a contour at an adjacent layer.

Reconstruction of Branching Surface and Its Smoothness

Fig. 10. Wire frame surface with constructed polyhedrons

767

Fig. 11. Shaded branching surface

Fig 11 shows the shaded surface for the same test result. Another test result is shown
in Fig 12 which has three contours at a layer and two contours an adjacent layer. Fig
13 shows the shaded surface for the test result shown in Fig 12. Fig 14 shows another
test result-having contours at seven layers, the first and the last layer having two contours and it is correspondence with contours at adjacent layers. Fig. 15 shows the
shaded surface for the test result shown in Fig 14. The technique given in [5, 6] can
not directly handle the branching surface. The results given in [19] for branching are
shifted towards the junction of the layer having single contour.

Fig. 12. Wire frame branching surfaces

Fig. 13. Shaded surface & constructed polyhedrons

Fig.14. Subdivided wire frame branching surface

Fig. 15. Shaded branching surface with
constructed polyhedrons

6 Conclusions
An algorithm has been developed to get a smooth surface from contours having
branching problem. Three-dimensional composite curves have been obtained for the
contours having branching problem on the basis of merging of the centre of the contours towards the center of adjacent contours. The polyhedrons have been constructed

768

K. Jha

between the 3D composite curves and other contours. Two adjacent contours which
are free from branching problem are selected for construction of polyhedrons. Reversible Catmull-Clark has been designed in the present formulation for the required
smooth surface for better rendering. Different results for branching problem have
been implemented.

References
1. Bajaj, C.L., Coyle, E.J., Lin, K.N.: Arbitrary topology shape reconstruction from planner
cross sections. Graphical Models & Image Proc. 58, 524–543 (1996)
2. Christiansen, H.N., Sederberg, T.W.: Conversion of complex contour line definitions into
polygonal element mosaics. In: Computer Graphics (SIGGRAPH 1978 Proceedings),
vol. 12, pp. 187–192 (1978)
3. Park, H., Kim, K., Lee, S.-C.: A Method for Approximate NURBS Curve Compatibility
Based on Multiple Curve refitting. Computer Aided Design 32(20), 237–252 (2000)
4. Jha, K.: Energy based multiple refitting for skinning. International Journal of
CAD/CAM 5(1), 11–18 (2005)
5. Jha, K.: Catmull-Clark Subdivision and Skinning of Incompatible Curves. In: International
Conference on Trends in Product Life Cycle Modelling, Simulation and Synthesis
(PLMSS 2006), pp. 83–90. IISc., Bangalore (2006)
6. Nasri, A., Abbas, A., Hasbini, I.: Skinning Catmull-Clark Subdivision Surfaces with Incompatible Curves. In: Proceeding of the 11th Pacific conference on Computer Graphics
and applications, PG 2003 (2003)
7. Sederberg, T., Zheng, J., Bakenov, A., Nasri, A.: T-spline and T-NURCUS. ACM Transactions on Graphics, SIGGRAPH 22(3), 477–484 (2003)
8. Doo, D., Sabin, M.: Behaviour of recursive division surfaces near extraordinary points.
Computer Aided design 10, 356–360 (1978)
9. Meyers, D., Skinner, S., Sloan, K.: Surfaces from contours. ACM Trans. On Graphics 11,
228–259 (1992)
10. Shinagawa, Y., Kunii, T.L.: The homotopy model: A generalized model for smooth surface generation from cross sectional data. Visual Computer 7, 72–86 (1991)
11. Ekole, A.B., Pyrin, F.C., Odet, C.L.: A triangulation algorithm from arbitrary shaped multiple planner contours. ACM trans. on Graphics 10, 182–199 (1991)
12. Jeong, J., Kim, K., Park, H., Cho, M., Jung, M.: B-Spline surface approximation to cross
section using distance maps. Adv. Manuf. Techn. 15, 876–885 (1999)
13. Barequet, G., Shapiro, D., Tal, A.: Multilevel sensitive reconstruction of polyhedral surfaces from parallel slices. Visual Computer 16, 116–133 (2000)
14. Barequet, G., Sharir, M.: Piecewise-linear interpolation between polygonal slices. Comp.
Vision & Image Underst. 63, 251–272 (1996)
15. Goodman, T.N.T., Ong, B.H., Unsworth, K.: Reconstruction of C1 closed surfaces with
branching. In: Farin, G., Hagen, H., Noltemeier, H. (eds.) Geometric Modelling, pp. 101–
115. Springer, London (1993)
16. Bedi, S.: Surface design using functional blending. CAD 24, 505–511 (1992)
17. Wang, H., Qin, K., Tang, K.: Efficient Wavelet Construction with Catmull-Clark Subdivision. Visual Computation 22, 874–884 (2006)
18. Loop, C., Schafer, S.: Approximating Catmull-Clark Subdivision Surfaces by Bicubic
Patch, Technical Report, MST-TR-2007-44 (2007)

Reconstruction of Branching Surface and Its Smoothness

769

19. Gabrielides, N.C., Ginnis, A.I., Kaklis, P.D., Karavelas, M.I.: G1-smooth branching surface contruction from cross sections. CAD 39(8), 639–651 (2007)
20. Jha, K.: Construction of branching surface from 2-D contours. International Journal of
CAD/CAD 8 (2008)
21. Catmull, E., Clark, J.: Recursive Generated B-Spline Surfaces on Arbitrary Topological
Meshes. The Journal of CAD and Application 1(1-4) (1978)

