Dynamic Data Driven Applications Systems: A New
Paradigm for Application Simulations and Measurements
Frederica Darema
National Science Foundation, Arlington VA 22230, USA
darema@nsf.gov

Abstract. Dynamic Data Driven Application Systems (DDDAS) entails the
ability to incorporate additional data into an executing application - these data
can be archival or collected on-line; and in reverse, the ability of applications to
dynamically steer the measurement process. The paradigm offers the promise of
improving modeling methods, and augmenting the analysis and prediction
capabilities of application simulations and the effectiveness of measurement
systems. This presents the potential to transform the way science and
engineering are done, and induce a major impact in the way many functions in
our society are conducted, such as manufacturing, commerce, hazard
management, medicine. Enabling this synergistic feedback and control-loop
between application simulations and measurements requires novel application
modeling approaches and frameworks, algorithms tolerant to perturbations from
dynamic data injection and steering, and systems software to support the
dynamic environments of concern here. Recent advances in complex
applications, the advent of grid computing and of sensor systems, are some of
the technologies that make it timely to embark in developing DDDAS
capabilities. Research and development of such technologies requires
synergistic multidisciplinary collaboration in the applications, algorithms,
software systems, and measurements systems areas, and involving researchers
in basic sciences, engineering, and computer sciences. The rest of the papers in
the proceedings of this workshop provide examples of ongoing research
developing DDDAS technologies within the context of specific and important
application areas.

1 Introduction
Accurate analysis and prediction of the behavior of a complicated system is difficult.
Today, applications and systems simulations are fairly complex, but still are still
lacking the ability to accurately describe such systems. Even elaborate complex
models of systems produce simulations that diverge from or fail to predict the real
behaviors of those systems. This situation is accentuated in cases where real-time
dynamic conditions exist. Application simulations that can dynamically incorporate
new data, archival or from on-line measurements of the actual systems, offer the
promise of more accurate analysis, more accurate predictions, more precise controls,
and more reliable outcomes. These capabilities are fostered with the Dynamic Data
Driven Applications Systems (DDDAS) paradigm. DDDAS can be viewed as a
methodology to counterbalance incompleteness in model and capability to enhance
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3038, pp. 662–669, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

Dynamic Data Driven Applications Systems

663

the application models by imparting additional information into the model as at
runtime additional data are used to selectively enhance or refine the original model.
In addition DDDAS paradigm fosters the ability of an application simulation to
control and guide the measurement processes, thus creating more effective
measurement processes. Such capabilities are highly desirable in cases where
measurements are difficult to perform, expensive or time-critical. The ability to guide
the measurement process and selectively focus on a subset of the measurement space
can result in more efficient and effective measurements, which can desirable in
reducing cost, collection time, or improving on the quality of data collected.
The author conceived the idea of this paradigm in the early 80’s while doing
radiation transport (Monte Carlo and Discrete Ordinates methods) computations for
simulations and measurements relating to oil exploration [1]. These computations
were quite expensive, executing in batch mode for many hours/days on state-of-theart supercomputers of that time. The original motivation for this idea was the desire to
speed the computations by using additional experimental data in selective places of
the computation, to improve the accuracy of statistical sampling and speedup
convergence in regions of interest, and reversely to control the measurement process,
which for oil exploration is time-critical and expensive. That immediately led to the
broader scope of such a paradigm, namely using the capability of injecting data as
more broadly for refining the modeling analysis and prediction capabilities of
applications. However at that time these computations were routinely run in batch
mode. Even technologies such as user interactivity were just emerging, and even user
interactivity is still a large step behind the kinds dynamic interfaces needed between
the measurement system and the executing application in DDDAS environments.
Similarly significant limiting factors were the then state of the art in complex
modeling of systems, technologies for dynamic composition of applications, dynamic
runtime support, and numeric and non-numeric algorithms. Some preliminary analysis
of the opportunities and challenges were discussed in [2], in the context of the
Gedanken Laboratory. While in the 80’s many of the relevant technologies to enable
this paradigm were at a stage of being non-existent or prohibitively inadequate, recent
advances in the late 80’s, the 90’s make DDDAS more feasible to pursue now than
ever before. In addition while the initial inspiration for this paradigm were
engineering/scientific kinds of applications, later experiences [3] with manufacturing
process and other management applications showed that there is significant relevance
of DDDAS to these classes of applications also. The term Dynamic Data Driven
Applications Systems (DDDAS) was coined around the time the author led the
organizing effort of the NSF Workshop [4] in March of 2000, which provided a forum
of discussion these ideas with broader research community, as well as addressing in
more detail the challenges and the opportunities.
Manufacturing process controls, resource management, weather and climate
prediction, and traffic management, systems engineering, geo-exploration, biosensoring are examples of areas that can benefit from the DDDAS paradigm. The
vision of DDDAS, goes beyond the current concepts of real-time control, in terms of
the concept of interaction of the application simulation with the measurement system,
the range of applications, the streamed input data and the scope of systemic approach
to addressing the ensuing challenges: assessment of data quality, incorporation of
uncertainty, ability to combine different kinds of data taken at different times,
application algorithms with stable response to the streamed data, distributed systems
(for sensing, for computation and for output, and for data storage), development of

664

F. Darema

effective interfaces of applications with measurement processes, supporting the
execution of such applications with dynamic resource requirements.

2 Research Challenges
This new paradigm creates a rich set of new challenges and new class of problems for
the applications, algorithms, and systems researchers to address. Such challenges
include: advances at the applications level for enabling this kind of dynamic feedback
and coupling with measurements; advances in complex, multi-modal models, and
ability to combine dynamically such models as is dictated by the injected data,
advances in the applications algorithms for the algorithms to be amenable to
perturbations by the dynamic data inputs and enhanced capabilities for handling
uncertainties in input data; new technology in the computer software systems areas to
support such environments where the applications requirements are dynamic,
depending on the injected data.
A number of these research and technology issues were addressed in a workshop
[3] organized by NSF to examine the technical challenges and research areas that
need to be fostered to enable such capabilities. Representative examples of
applications were addressed at this workshop to illustrate the potential impact that this
the DDDAS paradigm can have. To enable such capabilities multidisciplinary
research and technology development is needed in the four component areas:
applications, in mathematical algorithms, in systems software, and in measurements.
In terms of the applications challenges, DDDAS requires ability in the application
simulations to accept data at execution time and be dynamically steered by such data.
To handle dynamically injected data, requires application models that describe the
application system at different levels of detail, and the ability to dynamically invoke
such models as needed by the input data. New application modeling capabilities are
necessary, including: multi-modal methods of describing the system at hand;
modeling multiple levels of system detail; model enhancements for dynamic
resolution; dynamic data assimilation; ability to incorporate asynchronously collected
data. Methods and frameworks enabling dynamic composition of applications
depending on the streamed data, namely: dynamic selection of models, based on input
data; application model interfaces. Mathematical and computational models of
multiscale systems often involve a hierarchy of models; how to pass information
between the levels of the hierarchy is not yet well understood.
Enabling DDDAS requires advances in the existing mathematical algorithms, or
development new mathematical algorithms, that will be stable and have robust
convergence properties under dynamic data inputs. The of mathematical and
statistical aspects include: methods to assess the quality and propagation of
measurement errors and of uncertainty, in both stochastic and deterministic systems,
and methods to incorporate data of variable quality, such as for example in cases
where there is need to combine data (measured or computed) taken at different spatial
or temporal scales is a significant problem. Need to address the challenge of small
sample sizes, incomplete data, and extreme events. Differences between
computational results and external data can be viewed as a measure for controlling the
course of the simulation. Here all the issues of uncertainty, sensitivity, combination,
scatter, quality, propagation, and hierarchy arise again in attempting a systematic

Dynamic Data Driven Applications Systems

665

control of the simulation. In addition there is need to address issues of varying
discretization schemes, depending on the streamed data, and develop the underlying
algorithms with the ability to interpolate or extrapolate between grids of different
granularity.
In terms of systems software technology and infrastructure needed to support the
dynamic computational, communication and data requirements of DDDAS
applications, the interfaces with measurement systems, supporting fault-tolerance and
quality-of-service guarantees to ensure streamed data and resource availability.
Research advances in this area include systems software that will support the
execution of applications whose requirements are dynamic depending on the streamed
data. In addition new systems software approaches supporting interfaces of
applications software with measurement systems, including sensor systems, and
systems software to manage the underlying computational grid resources and
measurement systems. Such technologies include: complex application frameworks,
dynamic application execution support environments; support for dynamic selection
of application components. Multiresolution capabilities require the ability
dynamically select application components, embodying algorithms suitable for the
kinds of solution approaches depending on the streamed data, and depending on the
underlying resources. Dynamic computing requirements and matching dynamic
resource requirements: DDDAS will employ heterogeneous platform environments
such as embedded sensors for data-collection, distributed high-performance
simulations environments and special-purpose platforms for pre- and post processing
of data, and visualization.
In terms of data and measurements, there is need for developing interfaces to
physical devices (including sensor systems) and application/measurement interfaces
together with new capabilities for managing measurement systems, sensors and
actuators which are additional "resources" in the computational grid, and as such,
resource discovery and allocation of sensors and actuators becomes an important
issue. Combined application and measurement data would require new approaches for
data management systems supporting different naming schemas or ontologies,
information services, or information views.

3 Why Now
Why now is the time for developing such capabilities? DDDAS is a powerful and new
paradigm, requiring advances on several technologies. Over the recent years there has
been progress in a number of technology areas that makes the realization of DDDAS
possible. These include advances in hardware platforms’ computing speeds, the
advent of grid computing and sensor networks, applications and algorithms for
parallel and distributed platforms, computational steering and visualization,
computing, networking, sensors and data collection, and systems software
technologies. These are some of the recent advances that will be exploited to enable
the new paradigm of DDDAS. It is necessary however to further develop these
technologies with enhanced capabilities to advance the state of the art in DDDAS.
This background work make this a timely endeavor to pursue, as they provide the
basis to springboard and enable the new capabilities discussed here.

666

F. Darema

Dynamic Data Driven Application Systems (DDDAS) is an opportunity to
formulate application simulation models and methods that incorporate/integrate
dynamically measurement data, algorithms, system tools, and mathematical and
statistical advances to produce effective simulation systems for important applications
across the range of science and engineering disciplines.

4 Overview of Selected Research Efforts Presented in This
Workshop
The rest of the papers presented in this workshop represent ongoing research projects
each addressing a number of aspects of the technical challenges mentioned above.
With the exception of [18], all other projects [5-17, 19-25] are predominantly funded
by NSF ITR program [26]. Several papers address the aspect of application simulation
enhanced by additional data incorporated into the computation and simulation guided
and controlled measurements. While many of the papers are developing new
capabilities at the application and algorithm levels, several of the papers focus in the
underlying software technology to support the development of the complex DDDAS
applications, their dynamic runtime support requirements and interfaces to control
measurement systems. Several papers provide examples of simulation controlled
measurement processes. Most of the work on mathematical algorithms tolerant and
stable to dynamically streamed data is done in the context and together with the
development of the application models. In all cases the mathematical algorithms and
systems software development is done in the context of specific applications driving
and validating the developed technologies.
The projects discussed in [5, 11, 12, 24] include capabilities of application guided
control of measurements. In [5] the project employs dense networks of high resolution
radars to spatially resolve and improve location accuracy of tornadoes by overcoming
earth induced blockage and optimizing data resources in response to multiple and
sometimes conflicting needs. The paper [11] presents development of robust, efficient
and scalable forward and inverse 3D wave propagation solvers and integrated
steerable field measurements to improve techniques for forecasting of ground motion
during future earthquakes. The project in [12] discusses development of a prototype
hardware and software system to integrate dynamically empirical fire spread models
with turbulence models representing the fire generated winds, together with up-todate aerial survey and thermal sensor data and other information related to a wildfire
in progress, and to provide prediction of the course of the wildfire in visual form and
provide tools for predicting the outcome of firefighting strategies. The project in [24]
provides an example of the underlying hardware and software platform developed for
the case of neural modeling interacting with real-time data streams, by enabling realtime decoding of neural data streams and allowing neuronal models to interact with
living nervous systems, and enabling integrated interactive control in the analysis of
the neuronal function.
Projects such as those in [8 , 14, 15, 16] are dealing with appliying DDDAS for
exnhanced structural integrity and physical systems design capabilities. In [8] analysis
of structural integrity aspects of a vessel, using sensor data encoding strain-field
measurements and other loading conditions, induced for example from an explosion,

Dynamic Data Driven Applications Systems

667

and which are streamed into the structural analysis program, or input to an aeroelastic
model where embedded sensors provide datastreams of free-stream pressure, density
and Mach numbers in simulating airplane wing flutter. In addition to the capabilities
in the application level, the project is developing an environment for a multi-physics
computationally implementable framework in the form of a Multidisciplinary
Problem Solving Environment. In [14] development of state-of-the-art, efficient and
robust methods for producing data enhanced, reduced order models of large statespace systems, and applied to structural impact response simulations for events such
as for example the Pentagon plane crash on 9/11/2001. In [15 ] Data Driven Design
optimization methodology for multi-objective optimization of engineering design of a
submerged inlet is it will occur in fluid flow duct through which air is delivered to a
turbojet, turbofan or ramjet. In [ 16] MRI measurement enhanced computer
simulations to enable reliable and efficient determination of modeling functions for
patients with reconstructed ears.
Papers [ 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11] focus on environments and crisis management
applications, such as [5,6] for weather related phenomena such tornado studies and
track prediction. Like [5]. also [6] Weather Surveillance radar Systems w continuous
data streaming can lead to improved ability to discriminate tornadic from nontornadic events. In [7] physical and biogeochemical ocean dynamics can be highly
variable and involve interactions on multiple scales. For improved accuracy and
efficiency in forecasting the structures and parameter models must evolve and
respond dynamically to new data injected into the executing prediction system. In
[11] as mentioned above develops enhanced methods for seismic modeling and
detection. Papers [9, 10] deal with applications for subsurface and ambient
atmosphere pollutant modeling respectively. In [9] are described numerical
procedures for performing multi-scale interpolation of data to allow continuously
updating simulation computations with sensor data streamed into the computation and
shows that the methods significantly improve the prediction results for applications
such as contaminant tracking in subsurface environments. Paper [10] describes
continuous assimilation of data in the modeling of aerosol dynamics for more
accurate tracking of chemical pollutant in ambient environments.
Other crisis management applications like fire propagation in enclosed
environments, like buildings and submarimes, and in ambient environments are
discussed respectively in [13, 12]. In [13], agent-based and data-driven simulation of
fire propagation dynamics are modeled, and these enhanced modeling approaches can
provide more accurate information to firefighting personnel and effective response.
Paper [22] discusses the development of applications for oil recovery, and the
corresponding application development and runtime support framework. In addition
the project is also using this framework for the development of enhanced medical
applications, such as MRI (virtual microscope). These modeling methods and
underlying systems software framework that this project has developed enables
autonomic oil production management, by implementing dynamic data driven
modeling ideas and ability to support the execution of the ensuing complex dynamic
models and data in Grid environments.
Other application areas include [18] for transportation systems management ability
to effectively analyze and manage heavy road traffic by relating dynamically the
observed dynamics in speed and density of vehicles and driver behaviors and
reactions. In the area of human stress recognition [23] applies the DDDAS paradigm
to develop new techniques for image-based stress recognition using model-based

668

F. Darema

dynamic face tracking system, thus enhancing the capability to detect human stress an
application of which is in security.
Examples of mathematical algorithms aspects are addressed in papers [17, 25]. In
[17] this work is developing a generalized feature mining framework to deal with
analysis of evolutionary data (in the case study of CFD computations used in
designing vehicles), and improve on the methods of response surfaces used to
describe performance of the system (in this case vehicles) as functions of various
geometrical design parameters, or sensor data measuring for example air speed and
drag. In [25] are discussed efficient methods for calculating the effect on the fidelity
of the computed results (as represented by error bars in the computed entities) which
results from the uncertainty errors in the input data. In enabling DDDAS systems,
where data with their corresponding uncertainties have to be incorporated
dynamically into the computation, it is essential to have capabilities of efficiently
calculating the error propagation.
Underlying infrastructure technologies that are being developed are discussed in
the papers [19, 20, 13, 21, 22]. The SAMAS framework [19] allows multilevel agentbased simulations to incorporate dynamically data from different levels of abstraction
of the multilevel models, and in particular allow multitemporal abstractions, an
important aspect of enabling DDDAS capabilities requires the ability the integrate
multimodal, multispatial and multitemporal data and models, and the ability to ensure
the execution of such simulations with guaranteed quality of service, such as for
example in time-critical applications. In [20] are explored techniques to allow the
capability of dynamic composition of simulation components required to support
DDDAS environments. The systems software technologies developed include
abstractions of such components, syntactic definition of their interfaces, and their role
in the semantic definition of the entire system, including both measurement and
simulation modeling aspects. In [21] a new web services framework is discussed that
is better suited for the DDDAS application environments.

5 Summary
The DDDAS paradigm has the potential to transform the way science and engineering
are done, and induce a major beneficial impact in the way many functions in our
society are conducted, such as manufacturing, commerce, transportation, hazard
prediction/management, ecology and medicine, to name a few. To achieve such goals,
fundamental, multidisciplinary and collaborative research is needed and develop
technologies spanning applications, mathematical algorithms, and systems software,
aimed at creating DDDAS capabilities. The remainder of the papers in these
proceedings present efforts in these research and technology areas.

References
1.
2.

Schlumberger-Doll Research; www.slb.com
Parallel Applications and the Gedanken Laboratory, F. Darema; Conference of the Society
of Engineering Sciences, StFe, NM, Oct 22-24, 1990.

Dynamic Data Driven Applications Systems
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.

669

On the Parallel Characteristics of Engineering/Scientific and Commercial Applications:
differences, similarities and future outlook”, F. Darema, invited paper, in the book: Parallel
Commercial Processing, ed. J. A. Keane, UK, 1994 and 1996.
NSF Workshop, March 2000; www.cise.nsf.gov/dddas
Distributed Collaborative Adaptive Sensing for Hazardous Weather Detection, tracking
and Predicting; Brotzge, Chandresakar, Droegemeier, Kurose, McLaughlin, Philips,
Preston, Sekelsky; Proceedings ICCS’04
Rule-Based Support Vector Machine Classifiers Applied to Tornado Prediction; Trafalis,
Santosa, Richman; Proceedings ICCS’04
Adaptive Coupled Physical and Biogeochemical Ocean Predictions: A Conceptual Basis;
Lermusiaux, EvangelinosTian, Haley Jr., McCarthy, Patrikalakis, Robinson, Schmidt;
Proceedings ICCS’04
Dynamic-Data-Driven Real-Time Computational Mechanics Environment; Michopoulos,
Farhat, Houstis; Proceedings ICCS’04
A Note on Data-Driven Contaminant Simulation; Douglas, Shannon, Efendiev, Ewing,
Ginting, Lazarov, Cole, Jones, Johnson, Simpson; Proceedings ICCS’04
Computaional Aspects of Data Assimilation for Aerosol Dynamics; Sandu, Liao,
Carmichael, Henze, Seinfeld, Chai, Daescu; Proceedings ICCS’04
A Framework for Online Inversion-Based 3D Site Characterization; Akcelic, Bielak,
Biros, Epanomeritakis, Ghattas, Kallivokas, Kim; Proceedings ICCS’04
A Note on Dynamic Data driven Wildfire Modeling; Mandel, Chen, Franca, Johns,
Puhalskii, Coen, Douglas, Kremens, Vodacek, Zhao; Proceedings ICCS’04
Agent-based Simulation of Data-Driven Fire Propagation Dynamics; Michopoulos,
Tsompanopoulou, Houstis, Joshi; Proceedings ICCS’04
Model Ruduction of Large-Scale Dynamical Systems; Antoulas, Sorensen, Gallivan, Van
Dooren, Grama, Hoffman, Sameh; Proceedings ICCS’04
Data Driven Design Optimization Methodology Development and Application; Zhao,
Knight, Taskinoglu, Jovanovic; Proceedings ICCS’04
A Dynamic Data Driven Computational Infrastructure for Reliable Computer Simulations;
Oden, Browne, Babuska, Bajaj, Demkowicz, Gray, Bass, Feng, Prudhomme, Nobile,
Tempone; Proceedings ICCS’04
Improvements to Response-Surface Based Vehicle Design using a Feature-Centric
Approach; Thompson, Parthasarathy, Machiraju, Lawrence; Proceedings ICCS’04
An Application for the Virtual traffic laboratory: calibrating speed dependence on heavy
traffic (a demonstration of a study in a data driven traffic analysis); Visser, Zoetebier,
Yakali, Hertzberger; Proceedings ICCS’04
SAMAS: Scalable Architecture for Multi-resolution Agent-based Simulation; Chaturvedi,
Chi, Mehta, Dolk; Proceedings ICCS’04
Simulation Coercion Applied to Multiagent DDDAS; Loitiere, Brogan, Reynolds;
Proceedings ICCS’04
O’SOAP – A Web Services Framework for DDDAS Applications; Pingali, Stoghill;
Proceedings ICCS’04
Application of Grid-enabled Technologies for Solving Optimization Problems in DataDriven Reservoir Studies; Parashar, Klie, Catalyurek, Kurc, Matossian, Saltz, Wheeler;
Proceedings ICCS’04
Image-Based Stress Recognition Using a Model-Based Dynamic Face Tracking System;
Metaxas, Venkataraman, Vogler; Proceedings ICCS’04
Developing a Data Driven System for Computational Neuroscience; Snider, Zhu;
Proceedings ICCS’04
Karhunen-Loeve Representation of Periodic Second-Order Autoregressive Processes;
Lucor, Su, Karniadakis; Proceedings ICCS’04
NSF Information Technology Research (ITR) Program (1999-2004)

