Hybrid Approach to Reliability
and Functional Analysis
of Discrete Transport System
Tomasz Walkowiak and Jacek Mazurkiewicz
Institute of Engineering Cybernetics, Wroclaw University of Technology,
ul. Janiszewskiego 11/17, 50-372 Wroclaw, Poland
{twalkow, jmazur}@ict.pwr.wroc.pl

Abstract. This paper describes a novel approach of combining Monte Carlo
simulation and neural nets. This hybrid approach is applied to model discrete
transportation systems, with the accurate but computationally expensive Monte
Carlo simulation used to train a neural net. Once trained the neural net can efficiently, but less accurately provide functional analysis and reliability predictions. No restriction on the system structure and on a kind of distribution is the
main advantage of the proposed approach. The results of reliability and functional analysis can be used as a basis for economic aspects discussion related to
the discrete transport system. The presented decision problem is practically essential for defining an organization of vehicle maintenance.

1 Introduction
Modern transportation systems often have a complex network of connections. From
the reliability point of view [2] the systems are characterized by a very complex
structure. The main issue of reliability considerations is to model the influence of
these faults at a satisfactory level of detail. This analysis can only be done if there is a
formal model of the transport logistics, i.e. there are deterministic or probabilistic
rules on how the transport is redirected in every possible combination of connection
faults and congestion. The classical models used for reliability analysis are mainly
based on Markov or Semi-Markov processes [2] which are idealized and it is hard to
reconcile them with practice. The typical structures with reliability focused analysis
are not complicated and use very strict assumptions related to the life or repair time
and random variables distributions of the analysed system elements. The proposed
solution is to use a time event simulation with Monte Carlo analysis [1], [5] to train a
neural net. Once trained, the neural net can efficiently provide functional analysis and
reliability predictions. One advantage of this approach it supports the computation of
any point wise parameters. However, it also supports estimating the distributions of
times when the system assumes a particular state or set of states.

M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3037, pp. 236–243, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

Hybrid Approach to Reliability and Functional Analysis

237

2 Discrete Transport System Model
The basic entities of the system are as follows: store-houses of tradesperson, roads,
vehicles, trans-shipping points and store-houses of addressee and the commodities
transported. An example system is shown in Fig. 1. The commodities are taken from
store-houses of tradesperson and transported by vehicles to trans-shipping points.
Other vehicles transport commodities from trans-shipping points to next transshipping points or to final store-houses of addressees. Moreover, in time of transportation vehicles dedicated to commodities could fail and then they are repaired. In
general, a system does not need to be equipped with any trans-shipping points. However, all system configurations need at least: one store-house of tradesperson, one
road, single vehicle and one store-house of addressee [6], [7].
2.1 Commodities
The media transported in the system are called commodities. Different commodities
are characterized by common attributes which can be used for their mutual comparison. The presented analysis uses the capacity (volume) of commodities as such attribute. The following assumptions related to the commodities are taken: it is possible to
transport n different kinds of commodities in the system and each kind of commodity
is measured by its capacity.
2.2 Roads
A road is an ordered pair of system elements. The first element must be a store-house
of tradesperson or trans-shipping point, the second element must be a trans-shipping
point or store-house of addressee. Moreover, each road is described by following
parameters: length, the number of vehicle maintenance crews (at a given time only
one vehicle could be maintained by a single crew) and the number of vehicles moving
on the road. The number of maintain crews ought to be understand as the number of
vehicles which can be on a single road maintained simultaneously.
tradesperson

trans-shipping points
roads

SHT

addressee
vehicles

TSPA
TSPB
TSP...

Fig. 1. Exemplar model of discrete transport system

SHAjA
SHAjB
SHAj...

238

T. Walkowiak and J. Mazurkiewicz

2.3 Vehicles
A single vehicle transports commodities from the start to end point of a single road,
after which the empty vehicle returns and the whole cycle is repeated. Our vehicle
model makes the following assumptions. Each vehicle can transport only one kind of
commodity at a time. Vehicles are universal – are able to transport different kinds of
commodity. Moreover, the vehicle is described by following parameters: capacity,
mean speed of journey (both when hauling the commodity and when empty), journey
time (described by its distribution parameters), time to vehicle failure (also described
an distribution), time of vehicle maintenance (described by distribution). The choice
of distribution for the random variables is flexible provided that we know both a
method and the parameters needed to generate random numbers with that distribution.
2.4 Store-Houses of Tradesperson
The store-house of tradesperson is the source of commodities. It can be only a start
point of the road. Each store-house of tradesperson is an infinity source of single kind
of commodity.
2.5 Trans-shipping Points
The trans-shipping point can be used as a start or end point of a single road. This is a
transition part of the system which is able to store the commodity. The trans-shipping
point is described by following parameters: global capacity C, initial state described
by capacity vector of commodities stored when the system observation begins, delivery matrix D. This matrix defines which road is chosen when each kind of commodity
leaves the shipping point (1 means that a given commodity is delivered to a given
road). On contradictory to previously described systems ([6], [7], [8]) in this case a
commodity could be routed to more then one road (direction). The dimensions of the
delivery matrix are: number of commodities x number of output roads.
Input algorithm:
only one vehicle can be unloaded at a time, if the vehicle can be unloaded the
commodity is stored in trans-shipping point, if not – the vehicle is waiting in the
input queue, there is only one input queue serviced by FIFO algorithm.
Output algorithm:
only one vehicle can be loaded at a time, if the vehicle can be loaded, i.e. the
proper commodity is presented in trans-shipping point, (a commodity which
could be routed to a given road), the state of trans-shipping is reduced, if not –
the vehicle is waiting in the output queue; each output road has its own FIFO
queue.
2.6 Store-House of Addressee
The store-house of addressee can be used only as the end point of a single road. The
main task of this component of the system is to store the commodity as long as the

Hybrid Approach to Reliability and Functional Analysis

239

medium is spent by recipient. The store-house of addressee is described by following
parameters: global capacity C, initial state described as for the trans-shipping point,
function or rule which describes how each kind of commodity is spent by recipients.
Input algorithm is exactly the same as for trans-shipping point. Output algorithm can
be described as: stochastic process, continuous deterministic or discrete deterministic
one. The model assumes that the capacity of the commodity can not be less than zero,
“no commodity state” – is generated when there is a lack of required kind of commodity (marked as τ on Fig. 2).

3 System Structure
The simulation program generates a description of all changes in the system during
simulation (with all events). It is a base for calculation of any functional and reliability measures. The most valuable results of statistical analysis are: time percentage
when the vehicle is present in each state, time percentage when the store-house of
addressee is present in each state, mean time when the store-house of addressee is
empty - this way we can say if “no commodity state” is prolonged or only momentary
(Fig. 2.). We also propose a quantile calculation of time when the store-house of
addressee is empty. This is the answer if “no commodity state” situation sometimes
lasts significantly longer than the mean time of empty store-house. Moreover, it is
possible to observe the influence of changes related to single parameter or a set of
parameters – vehicle repair time for example – for other system characteristics – as
vehicle utilization level, or commodity accessible in store-houses. The calculated
reliability and functional measures could be a base of developing economic measures
[8]. Such layered approach allows a high level, economic analysis of the system. It is
necessary to check different variants of maintenance organization and to choose the
less expensive among them if the reliability criteria are satisfied. It could be done by
subsequent Monte-Carlo analysis and calculation of the required economic or functional measures for a set of analyzed parameters.
C

level of store-house of addressee filling

max

0

τi1
unloading

no commodity state

τi2

T
time

Fig. 2. Single store-house of addressee filling in time-period T

The system model described in previous sections is a subject of computer simulation.
A special software package for simulation of the discrete transport system has been
developed. The transport system is described in specially designed script language

240

T. Walkowiak and J. Mazurkiewicz

(with syntax similar to XML) [4]. It is an input for simulator programme (written in
C++) performing Monte-Carlo simulation [1], [5].
Monte Carlo simulation has an advantage in that it does not constrain the system
structure or kinds of distributions used [4]. However, it requires proper data preprocessing, enough time to realize the calculations and efficient calculation engine.

4 Hybrid Approach
The problem of speeding up functional and reliability analysis of discrete transport
system we propose to solve by hybrid system using simulation and neural nets. In
many tasks, i.e. in decision systems, there is a need to give an answer in a short time.
However Monte-Carlo simulation requires quite a lot of time to realize calculation for
a given set of system parameters. To solve this problem we have proposed a use of
artificial neural networks [9]. The use of neural network is motivated by its universal
approximation capability [3]. Knowing that most of output system parameters are
continues we can expect that neural network can approximate any unknown function
based on a set of examples. The time needed to get an output from learnt neural network is very short. Solution generated by net seems to be satisfactory [9], because we
do not need very precise results - time is the most important attribute of the solution.
The neural network ought to substitute the simulation process. As it is presented in
Fig. 3 the neural net module is added to developed simulation software. The aim of
this module is to generate an answer how to select the best system parameters (i.e. the
maintenance agreements - the average time of vehicle repair) based on the achieved
system functional parameters (i.e. the average time of “no commodity” in the storehouse of addressee).
The process of data analysis will be as follows:
1. set the input parameters for model of discrete transport system;
2. give a range of analyzed free parameter (parameters);
3. perform initial Monte-Carlo analysis for a few parameters from a given range calculate all required functional and reliability parameters;
4. build a neural network classification tool:
− use multilayer perceptron;
− the input to the network are analyzed free parameters;
− the outputs are functional and reliability measures;
5. build the answer about the maintenance agreement based on the output of the neural network and the proper economic measures;
6. communicate with a user:
− play with functional and reliability data, goto 4.
If more accurate analysis of economic parameter in a function of free parameter is
required goto 3 – perform more Monte-Carlo analysis.

Hybrid Approach to Reliability and Functional Analysis

Input file

241

Functional
Free
and
parameters
reliability
range
parameters

System functional
simulation
(Monte-Carlo)

Functional
Functional
and reliability
andforreliabilityFunctional
measures
and reliability
measuresset
for
a given free parameter
measures
a given free parameter
set for
a given free parameter set

Neural network
interpolation

Data for
learning

interpolated
data
Functional measure
calculation (i.e. time of „nocomodity” state)

User Interface
plotting, data manipulation

Fig. 3. Hybrid system overview

5 Case Study
To show possibilities of the proposed model and developed software we have analyzed an exemplar transport network presented on Fig. 4. The network consists of two
store-houses of tradesperson (each one producing its own commodity, marked as A
and B), one trans-shipping point (with one storehouse for both commodities) and two
store-houses of addressee (each one with one storehouse). The commodities are spent
by each recipient. The process is continuous deterministic as presented on Fig. 2, the
amount of consumption in time unit is marked by u with subscripts corresponding to
store-houses of addressee and commodity id. It’s exemplar values are presented in
Fig. 4. Having lengths of the roads (see Fig. 4), the amount of commodity consumption in time unit for each store-house of addressee, the capacity of each vehicle (15),
vehicle speed (50 and 75 in empty return journey) the number of vehicles for each
road could be easy calculated. We have take into account some redundancy [8] due to
the fact of car failure (we assumed that the time between failures is 2000 time units)
what results in following number of vehicles: road one n1=40, road two n2=12, road
three n3=18(A)+6(B)=24 and road four n4=16(A)+8(B)=24. The analysis time T was
equal to 20000.

242

T. Walkowiak and J. Mazurkiewicz

We have analyzed maintains and service level agreement (SLA) dependency. From
one side the transport network operator has to fulfill some service level agreement,
i.e. have to deliver commodity in such way that a "no commodity state" is lower then
a given stated level. Therefore the analyzed functional measure was a summary time
of "no commodity state" during the analyzed time period. It could be only done if a
proper maintenance agreement is signed. Therefore the argument of analyzed dependency was a average time of repair of vehicles. We assumed that we have four
separated maintenance agreement, one for each for each road (roads 1 and 2 with one
maintains crew, and 3 and 4 with two maintains crews). Also the exponential distribution of repair time was assumed. Therefore, we have four free parameters with
values spanning from 1 to 1200. The system was simulated in 1500 points. For each
repair time values set the simulation was repeated 25 times to allow to get some information of summary time of "no commodity" distribution. Two measures were
calculated: average time of summary of "no commodity state" and its 4% quantile
(i.e. the value of summary "no commodity" time that with probability 96% could be
not higher).
The achieved date from simulation was divided randomly into two sets: learning
and testing. We have used the multilayer perceptron architecture with 4 input neurons
which correspond to repair time for each road, 10 hidden layer neurons and 2 output
neurons.
The number of neurons in the hidden layer was chosen experimentally. Such network produced best results and higher numbers did not give any improvement. The
tan-sigmoid was used as a transfer function in hidden layer and log-sigmoid output
layer. Besides that, the output values have been weighted due to the fact the logsigmoid has values between 0 and 1. The network presented above was trained using
the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm [3].
The achieved results, the mean of absolute value of difference between network results (multiplied by time range: 20 000) and results from simulation, for testing data
set is 364 time units and 397 respectively for average time of summary of "no commodity state" and its 4% quantile. It is in range of 1-2% of analyzed transport system
time. We have also tested the simulation answer stability, i.e. the difference between
two different runs of simulation (25 of them each time) for both functional measures
(average time of summary of "no commodity state" and its 5% quantile) is 387 time
units in average.

r1(l1 ,n1)
SHTA
r2 (l2 ,n2)
SHTB

TSPAB

r3 (l3 ,n3)

r4 (l4 ,n4)

SHA1A

u1A

SHA1B

u1B

SHA2A

u2A

SHA2B

u2B

Fig. 4. Structure of case study discrete time system
(parameters: l1=120, l2=90, l3=90, l4=120, u1A=60, u1B=20, u2A=40, u2B=20)

Hybrid Approach to Reliability and Functional Analysis

243

6 Conclusion
Results of functional and reliability analysis of exemplar discrete transport system are very
promising. Time necessary for whole neural network training is less (in average 4 times) then
time necessary for a single training vector preparation (run of 25 simulations for a single set of
free parameters). An error related to the network answer - when the already trained network is
tested by the input data which are not used during training - is in the range of disperse related
to results of simulation. Of course there is an important aspect of avoiding over fitting or under
training by neural network. At this stage of work it was done manually by observing the global
error in function of training epochs and stopping training when the curve stops to decrease.

The other interesting aspect of presented approach is the scalability projections.
Increasing the number of modeled vehicles or system elements increases the Monte
Carlo simulation time significantly. In case of training time of neural network (classification time is negligible) increasing a number of simulated entities has not direct
influence. However, if one wants to analyze more sophisticated relation between input
parameters and output measures, i.e. increases the number of input parameters, it results in an increase of input neurons, therefore needs a larger number of training data
and results in a longer training time. Future work is planned on checking the extrapolation features of the neural network. We are going to analyze the answer of the network for input data with range outside the training set.
Acknowledgement. Work reported in this paper was sponsored by a grant No. 5
T12C 021 25, (years: 2003-2006) from the Polish Committee for Scientific Research
(KBN).

References
1. Banks, J., Carson, J.S., Nelson, B.N.: Discrete-Event System Simulation, 2nd Edition.
Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ (1996)
2. Barlow, R., Proschan, F.: Mathematical Theory of Reliability. Society for Industrial and
Applied Mathematics, Philadelphia (1996)
3. Bischop, Ch.: Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition. Clarendon Press Oxford (1996)
4. Caban, D., Walkowiak, T.: Computer simulation of discrete transport system (in Polish).
XXX Winter School of Reliability, Poland, Szczyrk (2002) 93-103
5. Fishman: Monte Carlo: Concepts, Algorithms, and Applications. Springer-Verlag, New
York (1996)
6. Jarnicki, J., Mazurkiewicz, J., Zamojski, W.: Model of discrete transport system (in Polish). XXX Winter School of Reliability, Poland, Szczyrk (2002) 149-157
7. Kaplon, K., Mazurkiewicz, J., Walkowiak, T.: Economic analysis of discrete transport
systems. Risk Decision and Policy, Vol. 8, No. 3. Taylor & Francis Inc. (2003) 179-190
8. Kaplon, K., Walkowiak, T.: Economic aspects of redundancy in discrete transport systems
(in Polish). XXXII Winter School of Reliability, Poland, Szczyrk (2004) 142-153
9. Mazurkiewicz, J., Walkowiak, T.: Neural Network for Reliability Parameters Analysis –
Case Study. V Conference Neural Networks and Soft Computing, Poland, Zakopane
(2000) 687-692

