Segment Self-Guide Reconstruction Algorithm Based
1
on Object-Oriented Quantization
Xuanqin Mou, Hengyong Yu, and Yuanlong Cai
Institute of Image Processing, School of Electronics and Information Engineering
Xi’an Jiaotong Univ., Xi’an, Shaanxi, P.R.C, 710049
{xqmou,ylcai}@xjtu.edu.cn, yuhengyong@hotmail.com

Abstract. Aiming at the problem of inaccurate imaging model of threedimensional (3D) reconstruction of rotational DSA (digital subtraction angiography) images, firstly a nonlinear model based on object-oriented quantization is
introduced. The model quantizes the projective pixel of 3D vessel slice as the
vessel number that the X-ray goes through. Then, under the constraint of limited
views and sparse projections, a slice reconstruction algorithm named segment
self-guide reconstruction (SSGR) is developed. It converts the slice reconstruction of N+1 level nonlinear quantized DSA image to the reconstruction of N
vessel cross-sections. The SSGR is especially suitable for solving the problem
of sparse projections and limited-views. Finally, the simulated results have
proved the feasibility of the model and the validity of the algorithm.

1 Introduction
The 3D reconstruction of the vessel has been widely studied all over the world in
recent years, since it is significant in the diagnosis and therapy of all kinds of vessel
diseases. The traditional reconstructive methods can be mainly divided into two parts:
axial and cross-sectional reconstruction. As to the vessel cross-sectional reconstruction, since the generation of digital X-Ray images is a complex process that includes
production, conversion and transfer of the X-Ray information, the gray level of X-Ray
images can’t show its exact physical meanings, and the imaging model doesn’t abide
by Lamber-Beer’s Law. Therefore the traditional methods are mainly to search the
optimal parameters of the prior elliptical model [1–2].
In the reconstruction of rotational DSA, there are many available projective data
of different angles, and the edges of vessels can be precisely detected, which is independent of imaging model. Thus a new vessel projective and reconstructive model is
presented, which does not need the reconstruction of axis. This model is a binary 3D
vessel whose voxel will be ‘1’ if it belongs to vessel volume otherwise it will be ‘0’. It
1

This research was supported by the foundation for university key teacher by the

ministry of education and national natural science foundation (no.30070225) of
china.
P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2657, pp. 457–465, 2003.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

458

X. Mou, H. Yu, and Y. Cai

also can be considered as a stack piled up by a series of slices, and each slice is a 2D
binary image. A DSA image is a projection of the 3D vessel model in certain angle
and the projection of a slice is a line in the DSA image.
To reconstruct 3D vessel, we have developed a nonlinear quantitative model [3],
where a pixel of DSA image can be quantized as the number of vessels that the X-Ray
has gone through. In reference [3], it is pointed out that binary slice image can be
reconstructed by optimal square-wave decomposition (OSWD) algorithm under the
condition of more fully views projections (at least 100). OSWD has exact physical
meaning, but it doesn’t suit to real computation because of its rigorous requirement.
As to sparse projections and limited views, the OSWD can’t get the approving reconstruction result. To overcome the shortcoming of OSWD, another reconstructive algorithm named segment self-guide reconstruction (SSGR) is developed. The core of
SSGR is the slice reconstruction can be converted to the reconstruction of N vessel
cross-sections.

2 Object-Oriented Quantization Model
Based on an assumption of parallel ray geometry, a binary projection model of the
slice is introduced [4–5], which can be described by Boolean Radon Transform
(BRT). Under Boolean OR Integral operator, a projective pixel of certain angle about
the binary image can be quantized as ‘0’ or ‘1’. If there is at least one pixel which
belongs to vessel cross-section on the direction of the projective pixel, it will be quantized as ‘1’, otherwise, it will be ‘0’. All projections of a point at different angles can
form a sinusoid in the projective image. Based on the BRT, a nonlinear quantitative
model of DSA image is presented. A pixel of DSA image can be quantized as
0,1, N , which represents the number of vessels that the X-Ray has gone through. It
is called object-oriented quantization in the paper.

L

2.1

Definition of Boolean OR Integral & Boolean AND Integral

As a subset of bounded closed regions D , S satisfies S ⊆ D , whose indicator function
can be defined as the following.
1 X ∈ S
f s ( X) = 
0 other

(1)

The operator ∪∫ on z ⊂ D is called Boolean OR Integral, if it satisfies equation (2).
Z

1 ∃X ∈ z , fs ( X) = 1
∪ ∫ f s ( X) = 
other
0
Z

(2)

The operator ∩∫ on z ⊂ D is called Boolean AND Integral, if it satisfies equation
z

(3).

Segment Self-Guide Reconstruction Algorithm

1 ∀X ∈ z , fs ( X) = 1
∩ ∫ f s ( X) = 
other
0
Z

459

(3)

In the later discussion, f s ( X) will be written as f ( X) if there are no confusing
factors.

(r,θ )

z

r
l

Fig. 1. Coordinate system of BRT

2.2 Definition of BRT & Inverse BRT

Shown as the coordinate system in figure 1, the Boolean OR Integral of a certain set’s
indicator function f ( x, y ) = fˆ (r ,θ ) along the line z is called Boolean Radon Transform.
p (φ , l ) = ∪∫

∞

−∞

f ( x, y )dz = ∪ ∫

∞

−∞

z
fˆ ( l 2 + z 2 ,φ + tg −1 ) dz
l

(4)

If one takes the acquisition process of the rotational DSA into account, the definition
domain of Boolean Radon Transform is assumed to be a closed domain as
D = {( x, y ) | x 2 + y 2 ≤ R 2 } . Since there are two directions of a straight line, the value
region of BRT can be defined as a rectangle B = {(φ , l ) | 0 ≤ φ < π , l ≤ R} . Thus, the
inverse BRT can be defined as:
π
f ( x, y ) = fˆ (r ,θ ) = ∩ ∫ p (φ , r cos(φ − θ ))dφ
0

(5)

460

X. Mou, H. Yu, and Y. Cai

2.3 Object-Oriented Quantization Model

L

Denoted pi (φ , l )(i = 1,2, N ) as a BRT of certain vessel cross-section, whose values
can be ‘0’ or ‘1’. The N+1 level vessel quantization model, which can distinguish N
vessels at best, can be descried as [3]:
N

P(φ , l ) = ∑ pi (φ , l )

L

(6)

i =1

Where the value of P(φ , l ) can be 0,1,2, N and

∑

represents the plain add opera-

tion. Fig.2 (a) is a slice image of simulated 3D vessel and (b) is the corresponding
nonlinear quantized result.

a 3D vessel slice image

b Nonlinear quantized result

Fig. 2. 3D vessel slice image and its quantized result

3 Segment Self-Guide Reconstruction Algorithm
We have developed OSWD algorithm to reconstruct the binary slice of 3D vessel [3].
However there are some noises in the reconstructed slice. The reason is that OSWD is
a model in continuous domain, but the processed data are discrete and the number of
projections is limited. The noises can be divided into 2 classes: one is caused by the
positional quantized error that are all located at the edge of projective region; the other
is caused by the small square wave width that is smaller than the unitary discrete
length. Simulated results show that the number of projections must be increased to
improve the reconstructive precision. In fact, one can at most get about 100 projections by rotational DSA system one time. To overcome this shortcoming, we design
another reconstructive method, that is SSGR (segment self-guide reconstruction) algorithm.
It is known that the BRT pi (φ , l ) of single vessel cross-section is a stripe-like subset
in set B [4]. The subset can be described by its upside bound and downside bound,

Segment Self-Guide Reconstruction Algorithm

461

that is, it can be determined by its bound support function (BSF). The quantized result
of a slice projection is the overlapped result of several stripe-like subsets, whose upside bound can be defined as {P(φ , li ) | P(φ , li ) > P(φ , li +1 )} and downside bound can be
defined as {P(φ , li ) | P(φ , li ) > P(φ , li −1 )} , where i represents the index of discrete image
pixel.
Under the constraint of limited views and sparse projections, the slice reconstruction of N + 1 level nonlinear quantized DSA image can be converted to the reconstruction of N vessel cross-sections. Therefore, SSGR algorithm can be described as
the following steps.
Step1: The number of vessel cross-sections N is counted using the method mentioned
in [3]. We reconstruct the CRSI (coarse reconstructed slice image) using inverse BRT
[4], where P(φ , l ) is regarded as ‘1’ if it unequals to ‘0’.
Step2: CRSI is segmented and marked as independent regions. N regions, that every
region’s area is larger than all the others, are selected as the candidate vessel crosssections.
Step3: Applied BRT to every candidate vessel cross-section, one can get the candidate
BRT image p% i (φ , l ) . Denoting the BRT image of the corresponding real vessel crosssection as pi (φ , l ) , there is pi (φ , l ) ⊆ p% i (φ , l ) . Thus pi (φ , l ) can be estimated from
p% i (φ , l ) , where p% i (φ , l ) acts as a guide model.
Step4: The candidate vessel cross-sections are sorted by area from large to small.
Beginning with the maximum area, find the nearest upside and downside bound in
p% i (φ , l ) , and one can get the estimation pˆ i (φ , l ) of pi (φ , l ) . Then one deletes pˆ i (φ , l )
from P(φ , l ) . Using the bound support function extracted from pˆ i (φ , l ) , one can reconstruct the single vessel cross-section [4~5]. Under the condition of sparse projections,
the estimation of pi (φ , l ) is very complex. Because many information are undeterminable, pˆ i (φ , l ) is not unique and the reconstructed image is not unique either. We estimated pˆ i (φ , l ) with the maximum prior probability (see appendix).
Step5: Reconstruct the final binary slice image by combining all the image of single
vessel cross-section.
It must be pointed out that there are two presuppositions for SSGR algorithm. 1)
For every vessel cross-section, there at least exists one projection in which the crosssection does not overlap with any other cross-sections. Thus all candidate vessel crosssections can be segmented from each other. 2) The segmented regions caused by noise
are smaller than all that caused by vessel cross-sections. Therefore the largest N regions are caused by real vessel cross-sections.

4 Simulated Results and Discussions
Aiming at validating the feasibility of SSGR under the constraint of sparse projections,
the simulated binary slice in Fig.2 is reconstructed with 4 and 8 uniformly distribution
projections. The percent errors are 11.97% and 7.07% respectively, where the percent
error is defined as the number of total error pixels dividing the number of total pixels.
Obviously, the larger the number of projections is, the higher the reconstruction preci-

462

X. Mou, H. Yu, and Y. Cai

sion is. Under the constraint of limited views, one can get the same conclusion and it
will not be discussed in detail. Fig.3 and Fig.4 are the reconstructed results of 4 and 8
projections respectively.

(a) CRSI

(c) Reconstructed result

(b) Candidate vessel cross-sections

(d) Reconstructed error

Fig. 3. SSGR reconstructed result of 4 projections

5 Conclusion
Based on the nonlinear quantization model, SSGR algorithm is developed to reconstruct binary slice. The algorithm is especially suitable for the problems of sparse
projections and limited views. SSGR can overcome the shortcomings of OSWD
though its implementation is more complex than OSWD’s. However, SSGR is suitable
for the slices in which vessel cross-sections are convex. Combining the gray level of
DSA image, we expect to solve the problem of concave cross-sections in the future
research.

Segment Self-Guide Reconstruction Algorithm

(a) CRSI

(c) Reconstructed result

463

(b) Candidate vessel cross-sections

(d) Reconstructed error

Fig. 4. SSGR reconstructed result of 8 projections

References
1. G P M Prause, D G W. Onnasch Binary Reconstruction of the Heart Chambers from Biplane Angiographic Image Sequences. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 1996,
15(4):532–546.
2. Pellot C, Herment A, Sigelle M, et al. A 3D Reconstruction of Vascular Structures from
Two X-Ray Angiograms Using an Adapted Simulated Annealing Algorithm. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 1994,13(1):48–60.
3. Yu Hengyong, Mou Xuanqin, Wang Yong, et al. 3D Reconstruction Model of Vessel Based
on Object-Oriented Quantization, in Medical Image Acquisition and Processing, Jayaram K.
Udupa, Aaron Fenster, Editors, Proceedings of SPIE Vol. 4549, 2001:75–79.
4. Yu hengyong, Mou Xuanqin, Wang Yong, and Cai Yuanlong, “Properties of Boolean Radon Transform”, Journal of Xi’an Jiaotong University, 2001, 35(10):1012–1016 .
5. Yu hengyong, Mou Xuanqin, Wang Yong, and Cai Yuanlong, “Further research on the
properties of Boolean Radon Transform and its application”, Journal of Xi’an Jiaotong
University, 2001,35(12):1236–1239.

464

X. Mou, H. Yu, and Y. Cai

Appendix: The Uncertainty of Reconstruction under Sparse
Projections
Shown as in Fig.5, assume φ0 is constant and all the values of p% i (φ0 , l ) are ‘1’, where
l ∈ [ld , lu ] . Then the upside bound and downside bound of pi (φ0 , l ) are in the interval
[ld , lu ] . One can use the nonlinear quantization of P (φ , l ) in [ld , lu ] to estimate the
bounds of pi (φ0 , l ) . The bounds of pi (φ0 , l ) may have many possible patterns because
of the complex of overlaps. Denote the upside bound as U and the downside bound as
D, the number of total bounds will be no less than 2. For 2,3 and 4 bounds, the candidate patterns of pi (φ 0 , l ) are listed in table 1. One candidate bound pattern is composed of an upside and a downside bound.
From table 1, one can get a conclusion that the number of patterns increases rapidly with the increase of total bounds. Noting that the pattern U1D1 have the maximum
possibility as the bounds of pi (φ0 , l ) , we select U1D1 as the estimated bounds of
pi (φ0 , l ) . Therefore, U1 and D1 are called nearest upside bound and nearest downside
bound respectively. The above is the principle of SSGR in step 4.

l

l

lu
U1
U2

M
D2

Um

ld

D1
~
pi (φ0 , l)

Fig. 5. The guided search process

P(φ0 , l )

Segment Self-Guide Reconstruction Algorithm
Table 1. Possible bounds of pi (φ0 , l )

Total
bounds
2
3

4

Distributions of bounds
D 1U 1
D 1D 2U 1
D 1U 1D 2
D 1U 2U 1
U 2D 1U 1
D 1U 3U 2U 1
U 3D 1U 2U 1
U 3U 2D 1U 1
D 1D 2U 2U 1
D 1U 2D 2U 1
U 2D 1D 2U 1
D 1U 2U 1D 2
U 2D 1U 1D 2
D 1D 2D 3U 1
D 1D 2U 1D 3
D 1U 1D 2D 3

Candidate bound patterns of pi (φ0 , l )
D 1U 1
D 1U 1, D 2U 1
D 1U 1
D 1U 1, D 1U 2
D 1U 1
D 1U 1, D 2U 2, D 3U 3
D 1U 1, D 1U 2
D 1U 1
D 1U 1, D 1U 2, D 2U 1, D 2U 2
D 1U 1, D 2U 1
D 1U 1, D 2U 1
D 1U 1, D 1U 2
D 1U 1
D 1U 1, D 2U 1, D 3U 1
D 1U 1, D 2U 1
D 1U 1

465

