A Vertical Handoff Decision Process and Algorithm
Based on Context Information in CDMA-WLAN
Interworking†
Jang-Sub Kim, Min-Young Chung, and Dong-Ryeol Shin
School of Information and Communication Engineering,
Sungkyunkwan University,

300 ChunChun-Dong, JangAn-Gu, Suwon, Korea
{jangsub, mychung, drshin}@ece.skku.ac.kr

Abstract. The integration of WLANs and CDMA networks has recently
evolved into a very hot issue. In order to support a vertical handoff, we propose
a context based vertical handoff decision process and the corresponding algorithms from WLAN to CDMA system, and vice versa, based on wireless channel assignment. We focuses on the handoff decision which uses context information such as dropping probability, blocking probability, GoS (Grade of Service), the number of handoff attempts and velocity. As a decision criterion, velocity threshold is determined to optimize the system performance. The optimal
velocity threshold is adjusted to assign available channels to the mobile stations
with various handoff strategies. The proposed scheme is validated using computer simulation. Also, the overflow traffic (a vertical handoff) is evaluated and
compared with non-overflow traffics in terms of GoS.

1 Introduction
There has been a huge development in wireless communication technologies: mobile
technology and WLAN technology. Mobile technologies such as GSM (Global System
for Mobile Communications), GPRS (General Packet Radio Service), UMTS (Universal Mobile Telecommunication System) and CDMA (IS-95 A/B and cdma2000) offer
high mobility but with low rates. In contrast, WLAN technologies offer high rates but
with low mobility. The integration of mobile technology and WLAN technology,
which compensates the coverage, bandwidth, and mobility to each other, achieves the
requirements of the increasing user demands. In order to provide a convenient access
of both technologies in different environments, interworking [1] and integration [2] of
the two networks are regarded as a very important work.
Recently, the 3rd generation partnership project (3GPP), a standard body that develops and maintains GSM, GPRS, and UMTS, initiates the specification of interworking architecture for WLANs and 3GPP system. In [3], six interworking scenarios
have been identified under different supporting services and operational capabilities.
†

This work was supported by Korea Science and Engineering Foundation. (KOSEF-R012004-000-10755-0).

V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3515, pp. 601 – 609, 2005.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

602

J.-S. Kim, M.-Y. Chung, and D.-R. Shin

The combination of WLAN and CDMA technology uses the best features of both
systems. The key goal of this integration is to develop heterogeneous mobile data network, capable to support ubiquitous data services with very high data rates in hotspots.
The effort to develop such heterogeneous networks, especially seamless roaming, is
linked with many technical challenges including seamless vertical handoff across
WLAN and CDMA technologies, security, common authentication, unified accounting
& billing, WLAN sharing, consistent QoS and service provisioning, etc [4].
A handoff mechanism in an overlay CDMA and underlay WLAN should perform
well so that the users attached to the CDMA just easily check the availability of the
underlay WLAN. The decision criteria for vertical handoff (or network selection) can
be based on the maximum link speed, reliability, power utilization, billing, cost, user
preference, mobile speed, and Quality of Service like bandwidth, delay, jitter, and loss
rate, etc [5]. For simplicity, we do only consider the mobile speed in this paper. A
good handoff algorithm is to be derived in order to minimize unnecessary handoff
attempts. An appropriate handoff control is also an important issue in system management for the sake of the benefits above with the overlaid cell structures. This paper
suggests three handoff strategies :
no-overflow,
Overflow – From WLAN to
CDMA system,
Overflow – From WLAN to CDMA system and vice versa.
In this paper, we deal with a vertical handoff decision process and algorithms
based on context information (GoS) and we first propose a context based vertical
handoff decision process and the corresponding mechanism between WLAN and
CDMA system, based on wireless channel assignment. Secondly, we present a handoff control scheme for a hierarchical structured network. As a decision criterion, velocity threshold is determined to optimize the system performance. The proposed
scheme is validated using computer simulation. Also, the overflow traffic (vertical
handoff) is evaluated and compared with non-overflow traffics in terms of GoS. The
simulation results show that overflows strategy performs as good as other handoff
strategy.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the proposed vertical
handoff algorithms are presented, problems are formulated, and core part of algorithmic decision procedure for the optimal velocity threshold for the WLAN and
CDMA selection schemes. Section 3 explains the architecture for integrated networks,
the mobility model, performance parameters (i.e. new call blocking probability and
handoff call dropping probability, and Grade of Service). Simulations are performed
in Section 4 to validate the proposed approach. Finally, the summary of the result and
the future related research topics are presented in the conclusion section.

③

①

②

2 A Vertical Handoff Decision Process and Algorithm
A vertical handoff decision process decides when to invoke a vertical handoff operation. The decision process evaluates user location changes (as users may leave or
enter a particular network coverage) and context information (QoS, GoS, mobile
speed, network preferences, and etc.) of the current and alternative networks. The
evaluation of user location changes is carried out based on the Received Signal
Strength (RSS). The vertical handoff process is rule based and the rules are decide
whether handoff is necessary and to which network. The latter is decided by the GoS

A Vertical Handoff Decision Process and Algorithm Based on Context Information

603

based network selection process invoked when the GoS of a integrated network is
below perceived acceptance quality, or GoS is minimized.
Decision rules are described as call initialization, moving out of networks, and
entering new networks. Our proposed vertical handoff algorithm between WLAN and
CDMA networks considered velocity threshold related to GoS performance and
handoff rates is shown in Fig. 1.

Fig. 1. A vertical handoff algorithm

We use the following variables to determine the vertical handoff:
- XT : predefined threshold value when the handoff
- VT : velocity threshold whether a fast mobile station (MS) or a slow MS
When the signal from the WLAN access point (AP) is strong, the MS is connected
to the WLAN when the MS is larger than velocity threshold (VT). As the MS moves
away from the coverage of the access point, the signal strength falls. The MS then
scans the air for other access points. If no other access point is available, or if the
signal strengths from available access points are not strong enough, the handoff algorithm uses this information along with other possible information to make a decision
on handing off to the CDMA network.
In a proposed vertical handoff algorithm, the estimation of the velocity threshold
procedure is shown in Fig. 2. For the estimation of the mobile speed, Global Positioning System (GPS) or Differential GPS can provide adequate location information.
Using GPS and Time-of-Arrival (TOA) information from the user signal, we can
estimate for user’s velocity. We develop the handoff algorithm based on an optimal
velocity threshold. The problem here is to find VT improving the GoS and decrease
the number of handoff attempts ( N h ) with the given traffic parameters and MS mo-

604

J.-S. Kim, M.-Y. Chung, and D.-R. Shin

bility; f Λ (λ ) and f V (v) . We have to find the velocity threshold satisfied the following equation.

min{GoS (V ), N h (V )}

(1)

VT

The procedure is now concerned with the GoS in which the system wide new call
blocking probability PB and the handoff call dropping probability PD are weighted
to be averaged as in Equation (11). The GoS can be written as a function of VT , and
hence finding the optimum value of VT minimizing the value of GoS and N h is a
typical minimization problem.

Fig. 2. The estimation of velocity threshold

3 Performance Measures and Analysis
3.1 System Description

We consider a large geographical area covered by contiguous WLANs. Figure 3
shows traffic flows between different wireless networks with related parameters. All
the WLANs are overlaid by a large CDMA system. The overlaying CDMA system
forms the upper cell layer. Each CDMA system is allocated c 0 traffic channels, and
the number of channels allocated to the WLAN cell- i is c i , i = 1,2, ! , N . All channels are shared among new calls and handoff calls. MSs are traversing randomly the
coverage area of WLAN and CDMA system.
In this paper, all WLANs of the lower layer are treated equally to simplify the overflow. We present analytical results for the proposed system. As stated, our objective is
to focus on simple and tractable mechanism for which analytical results can give an
insight into handoff between different networks. According to the velocity threshold,
all the mobile users are divided into two groups; slower moving users ( λS ) and fast
moving users ( λ F ). In order to determine the value, which is one of the main goals of
this study, a few assumptions related to mobility characteristics are made in system.
The assumptions we employ in the mobility models are taken from [6] as cells are
circular with radius R, mobiles are uniformly distributed in the system, mobiles making new calls in WLAN move in a straight line with a direction uniformly distributed
between [0,2π ) , and mobiles crossing cell boundary enter a neighbor cell with the
incident angle θ of distribution: f (θ ) = 1/ 2 × cos θ , − π / 2 < θ < π / 2 .

A Vertical Handoff Decision Process and Algorithm Based on Context Information

605

Fig. 3. Management of traffics in integrated system

WLAN cells compose of two types of new call traffics, represented by the call arrival rates λ Sn and λ Sh , respectively modeled by the Poisson process (To simplified
simulation, voice call considered). Let random variables X and Y denote the straight
mobile path for new calls and handoff calls, respectively. With the assumption of the
unique WLAN cell size and the same speed of the MS, WLAN cell boundary crossing
rate per call ( µ B ), provided that no handoff failure occurs [6]: µ B = 2 E[V ] / π R . New
calls assume to finish within the average call duration time, 1 / µ , or the call handoffs
to an adjacent cell. The proportion of the channel returned by the handoff is
Ph = µ B /( µ + µ B ) [7]. In other words, the rate of channel release and that of the call
completion due to handoff are µ B /( µ + µ B ) and µ /( µ + µ B ) , respectively.
3.1 The New Call Blocking Probability of WLAN and CDMA System

We denote the blocking probability of calls from CDMA system and WLAN by PB 0
and PB1 , respectively. And the handoff traffic from slow and fast mobiles is denoted
as follows. The λ Fh0 and λ Sh0 is the rate of fast and slow mobile handoff traffic in a
CDMA systems, respectively. The λ Fh1 and λSh1 is the rate of fast and slow mobile
handoff traffic in a WLAN, respectively. And we denote the take-back traffic rate to
CDMA system and WLAN by λT 0 and λT 1 , respectively. The PT 0 and PT 1 are the
take-back probability from CDMA system and WLAN, respectively.
The aggregate traffic rate into the WLAN due to a slow MS is computed as follows:

λ1S = λnS1 + λhS1

(2)

The aggregate traffic rate into the WLAN due to fast MS is expressed as

λ1F = 1/ N × (λnF0 + λhF0 ) PB 0 + λhF1

(3)

The generation rate of the handoff traffic of a slow mobile station in a WLAN is
given as follows:

λhS1 = PhS1 (λnS1 + λhS1 )(1 − PB1 )

(4)

The generation rate of the handoff traffic of a fast moving MS in a WLAN is characterized as follows:

606

J.-S. Kim, M.-Y. Chung, and D.-R. Shin

λhF1 = PhF1 {1/ N × (λnF0 + λhF0 ) PB 0 (1 − PB1 ) + λhF1 (1 − PB1 )}

(5)

The parameter ρ is the actual offered load to a WLAN from the new call arrival
and the handoff call arrival. Invoking this important property, we can use
ρ1 = λ1S / µ1S + λ1F / µ1F as the offered load to the WLAN, the Erlang-B formula

calculates the blocking probability with the traffic ρ1 and the number of channels c1
[8]
PB1 = B(c1 , ρ1 )

(6)

Like as the new call blocking probability of WLAN, we can use
ρ 0 = λ 0S / µ 0S + λ 0F / µ 0F as the offered load to CDMA system, and blocking probability can be written as
PB 0 = B (c 0 , ρ 0 )

(7)

3.2 The Handoff Call Dropping Probability of WLAN and CDMA System

Slow MSs are supposed to use WLAN channels. However, since handoff to CDMA
system is also allowed, the probability of handoff call drop in WLAN can be calculated as follows. Let P10 denote the probability that a slow MS fails to be handoffed
to a near WLAN. The probability of the calls, PB 0 , in a WLAN denotes the probability of failed hand-up to the overlaying CDMA system due to the channel shortage.
Then the handoff call dropping probability is
PDS ≈ P10 PB 0 + P10 (1 − PB 0 ) PFS0

(8)

Here PFS0 is the probability that a slow MS handoff to CDMA system fail. The P10
is defined in such a way that the i th handoff request is successful but the (i + 1) th
request is dropped:
P10 = f1 + s1 f1 + s12 f1 + ! = f1 /(1 − s1 )

(9)

where f 1 = Ph1 PB1 and s1 = Ph1 (1 − PB1 ) . f i describe the probability that handoff
fails due to channel shortage and the s i is the probability of successful handoff. The
overall probability of either dropping or handoff failure is
PD = R S PDS + R F PDF

(10)

where R S and R F is fraction of slow and fast MSs , respectively
3.3 Grade of Service (GoS)

Among many system performance measures, GoS is most widely used. In fact users
complain much more for call dropping than for call blocking. It is evaluated using the
prespecified weights, PB and PD ,

A Vertical Handoff Decision Process and Algorithm Based on Context Information

GoS = (1 − α ) PB + α PD

607

(11)

where PB and PD represent the blocking and dropping prob. of systems, respectively. The weight α emphasizes the dropping effect with the value of larger than one
half.

4 Numerical Examples
The proposed procedure is tested with a number of numerical examples for the overlaid structure. The test system consists of 10 WLANs in the CDMA system. The total
traffic Λ = λ 0 + nλ1 , where λ 0 and λ1 are the new call arrival rate for the CDMA
system and the WLAN, respectively. The radius of the WLAN and the CDMA system
are assumed 300m and 1000m, respectively. The average call duration is
1 / µ = 120 sec. The number of channels in each CDMA system and WLAN is
c 0 = 30 , c1 = 10 for the total Λ = 60 Erlang. Assume the traffic mobility distribution
is same as [6].

Fig. 4. Grade of Service vs. velocity threshold

In operation phase use can draw a histogram to estimate the fˆV (v) , and the expected value of the mobile speed can be calculated by averaging the mobile speeds
monitored by the system. Analytically we can obtain E[V ] for such a simple hypothetical velocity distribution [7]. And we consider four handoff strategies for comparison as follows.

①

No overflow : A reference system where the two layers are kept completely
independent.

608

J.-S. Kim, M.-Y. Chung, and D.-R. Shin

②
③

Overflow – From WLAN to CDMA system : A system where only overflow of new and handoff traffic for a slow MS to the CDMA system is allowed.
Overflow – From WLAN to CDMA system and vice versa : A system
where overflow of new and handoff traffic for both slow and fast MS is allowed.

We investigate the GoS, which is a function of both the traffic load and mobility
distribution. Fig. 4 shows the plot of (11) for the mobility distributions of the MS in
the system. The vertical arrows in the figure show the range of the possible velocity
thresholds at a certain load level. The lowest point in the range corresponds to the
maximum allowable and optimal velocity threshold. Optimal VT is 12m/sec,
14m/sec, 13m/sec for case , , , respectively. Here the GoS of case
and
have minimums of nearly equal values, but VT does different cases. Case
is favorable (See Fig. 4) since VT in the case
is smaller than that of case
and thus more
users are serviced in the CDMA system while the WLAN serves the fewer users. As a
result, the WLAN will give rise to a higher number of handoff requests for highmobility users, and the corresponding number of handoff requests of the calls in progress may cause an excessive processing load in the network. As the velocity threshold increases, the number of handoff attempts in the system also increases.
The overflow strategy, case , provides the value of GoS nearly equal to case
while it has the optimal velocity threshold smaller than that of case . With all the
observations in mind, the strategy we proposed has desirable characteristics, i.e.,
finding the optimal value of GoS and the number of handoff rate.

①②③

③

③

②

②
③

③

②

②

5 Conclusion
We have proposed a vertical handoff decision process with network selection deciding
the optimal velocity threshold in order to improve the GoS and minimize the number
of handoff attempts with the given traffic volume and three handoff strategies in
WLAN and CDMA system. The simulation results show the dependency of the system
performance upon the velocity threshold, VT . The velocity threshold has shown to be
an important system parameter that the system provider should determine to produce
better GoS and lower handoff rate. From the simulation results we were able to validate the procedures determining the optimal VT in which depends upon GoS as well as
the number of handoff attempts. Furthermore, the overflow strategy (case ) is more
favorable than other handoff strategies in this simulation environment.

③

References
1. K. Ahmavaara, H. Haverinen, and R. Pichna, “Interworking architecture between 3GPP and
WLAN systems,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol.41, no.11, pp.74-81, Nov. 2003.
2. “Requirements and architectures for interworking between HIPERLAN/3 and 3rd generation cellular system,” Tech. rep. ETSI TR191.957, Aug. 2001.

A Vertical Handoff Decision Process and Algorithm Based on Context Information

609

3. 3GPP TR 22.934, “Feasibility study on 3GPP system to wireless local are network
(WLAN) networking,” v.1.0.0.0, Release 6, Feb. 2002.
4. Milind M. Buddhikot, Girish Chandranmenon, etal , Design and Implementation of a
WLAN/CDMA2000 Interworking Architecture, IEEE Communications Magazine, November 2003.
5. Balasubramaniam, S., Indulska, J., Vertical Handover Supporting Pervasive Computing in
Future Wireless Networks, Computer Communication Journal, Special Issue on 4G/Future
Wireless networks. Vol 27/8, pp.708-719., 2003.
6. Kwan L. Yeung and Sanjiv Nanda. “Channel Management in Microcell/Macrocell Cellular
Radio Systems.” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technologies, 45(4):601–612, November
1996.
7. JangSub Kim, WooGon Chung, HyungJin Choi and JongMin Cheong, Soon Park, “Determining Velocity Threshold for Handoff Control in Hierachically Structured Networks,”
PIMRC 98, 1998.
8. W. Fischer and K. S. Meier-Hellstern. “The Markov Modulated Poisson Process (MMPP)
cookbook.” Performance Evaluations, 18:149–171, 1992.

