On the Motivation and Attractiveness Scope of the
Virtual Reality User Interface of an Educational Game
Maria Virvou, George Katsionis, and Konstantinos Manos
Department of Informatics, University of Piraeus,
80 Karaoli & Dimitriou Str., 18534 Piraeus, Greece
mvirvou@unipi.gr, {gkatsion,kman}@singular.gr

Abstract. Software games are very popular among children and adolescents
and thus they have often been used in educational software research projects to
increase motivation of students. However, before educational software games
are designed to be targeted to real classroom students there are many questions
to be answered concerning the scope of motivation and attractiveness of these
games. This paper investigates the extent to which learning can be combined
with pleasure and vice versa so that the end users of an educational virtual
reality game may gain an enjoyable learning experience. For this reason the
likeability of an educational virtual reality game interface has been evaluated
both in the school environment and in the home environment of student-users.

1 Introduction
There is a fast growing industry of software games that are targeted to children and
adolescents who are fascinated by these games. Such games are mainly created for
pleasure. However, the attractiveness of software games has often been considered as
a promising means for the creation of attractive educational software. Indeed, there
are many researchers and educators that advocate the use of software games for the
purposes of education. Papert [7] notes that software games teach children that some
forms of learning are fast-paced, immensely compelling and rewarding whereas by
comparison school strikes many young people as slow and boring. As a result, many
researchers have developed games for educational purposes (e.g. [5], [1], [3]).
However, there are criticisms about the quality of the existing educational games.
For example, Brody [2] points out that the marriage of education and game-like
entertainment has produced some not-very-educational games and some not veryentertaining learning activities. Indeed, educational software games aim at serving
two distinct aims, which are often conflicting each other: education and
entertainment. Both these aims have to be obtained to a satisfactory extent; otherwise
the existence of such software becomes pointless. If an educational game is not
entertaining then it is neither motivating nor attractive. On the contrary the game
environment may become distractive and educationally less effective than other kind
of educational software. Thus the likeability of these games has to be examined
before one may say that such software can be targeted to large masses of students and
be included in school classrooms.
On the other hand, the prevailing preoccupation of students with computers at
home is playing games. In contrast, games are not played at school. Mumtaz [6]
points out that this has created an enormous gap between home and school
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3038, pp. 962–969, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

On the Motivation and Attractiveness Scope of the Virtual Reality User Interface

963

perceptions and use of computers by students and that further research needs to
examine how to close this gap. Indeed, it would be useful if this gap was closed.
Students would have a more positive attitude towards computers at all times both in
the school environment and at home. Moreover, education would not look so hard or
boring to them. In this respect, educational games can provide a means for closing
this gap. However, in order to say that an educational software game serves this
purpose well, the likeability of the educational game has to be examined both in
school and leisure time conditions.
In view of the above, we have examined the scope of motivation and attractiveness
of a virtual reality educational game both in classroom and leisure time conditions.
The game is called VR-ENGAGE [8] and teaches students geography.

2 Description of the Educational Game and Its VR Interface
VR-ENGAGE is an educational virtual reality game. The environment of VRENGAGE is similar to that of the popular game called “DOOM” [4], which has many
virtual theme worlds with castles and dragons that the player has to navigate through
and achieve the goal of reaching the exit. Similarly with DOOM, VR-ENGAGE has
also many virtual worlds where the student has to navigate through. There are
mediaeval castles in foreign lands, castles under the water, corridors and passages
through the fire, temples hiding secrets, dungeons and dragons. The main similarity of
VR-ENGAGE with computer games like DOOM lies in their use of a 3D-engine.
The story of VR-ENGAGE incorporates a lot of elements from adventure games.
The ultimate goal of a player is to navigate through a virtual world and find the book
of wisdom, which is hidden. To achieve the ultimate goal, the player has to be able to
go through all the passages of the virtual world that are guarded by dragons and to
obtain a score of points, which is higher than a predefined threshold. The total score is
the sum of the points that the player has obtained by answering questions. In
particular, while the player is navigating through the virtual world, s/he finds closed
doors, which are guarded by dragons as illustrated in the example of Figure 1. A
guard dragon poses a question to the player from the domain of geography. If players
give a correct answer then they receive full points for this question and the dragon
allows them to continue their way through the door, which leads them closer to the
“book of wisdom”.
As part of the adventure of the game the player may come across certain objects or
animated agents. These objects or animated agents appear at random and give hints to
students or guide them to tutoring places respectively. In tutoring places, students are
encouraged to read a new part of the domain being taught.
The user interface of VR-ENGAGE involves the navigation of the player through
the virtual worlds using the mouse and the keyboard. In case players are lost in the
virtual world they may use a map, which is provided on line.

964

M. Virvou, G. Katsionis, and K. Manos

Fig. 1. Closed door in a virtual woods world

3 Aims, Settings, and Parts of the Empirical Study
For the purposes of finding out the extent to which students would like the
educational game, we conducted an empirical study which consisted of two parts and
involved students from schools. Both parts involved the same students. The first part
was conducted in the environment of school classrooms whereas in the second part
students had to use software in the environment of their own homes at leisure time.
More specifically, the empirical study involved in total 50 school children of 11-12
years old from 5 geography classes. The students that participated were selected from
each geography class on the basis of their game-playing expertise. For this purpose,
all the students of the five classes were interviewed concerning their experience in
game playing. For example, they were asked to estimate how long they spend weekly
on playing virtual reality computer games. Moreover, they were asked how long they
have been familiar with such games, and they were requested to navigate for 5
minutes in the virtual worlds of the commercial game we provided them. As a result,
the students were divided into three groups: experienced, intermediate and novice
players. Then, some students from each group were selected at random to participate
so that there was sufficient representation of all three categories. Indeed, among the
participants there were 15 novice, 20 intermediate and 15 expert game players. The
novice players were given a short training before they used the game on their own.
School children usually have a preconception of educational means as being totally
different from entertainment. In this respect, the first part of the empirical study aimed
at finding out how school children would react to an educational game in the settings
of a real classroom where an entertaining aspect of education is rather unexpected.
Therefore the first experiment took place in school-classrooms. The experiment aimed
at estimating the likeability of the VR-ENGAGE interface in comparison to the
likeability of educational software that had a simple user interface with no virtual
reality and no game at all. This program was a simple window application with forms,

On the Motivation and Attractiveness Scope of the Virtual Reality User Interface

965

menus, buttons, and edits which gave the student the opportunity to read questions
and answer them. Also it provided help about the theory examined. The comparison
was made in terms of the attractiveness of each of these applications for their endusers.
In particular, all students were asked to play the game at school for about 2 hours.
Then, after the 2 hours that all students had used VR-ENGAGE, they were asked to
use for another 2 hours an educational software application that had a simple user
interface with no virtual reality and no game at all. Then, all the students were given
the choice to use for 1 hour either of the two applications (VR-ENGAGE or the
simple UI application) to repeat the lessons. We measured the time that the students
had spent using each of the applications. Students who had spent more time with VRENGAGE were considered to have preferred it over the other kind of educational
application. At a first glance, one might consider it obvious that school children
would prefer VR-ENGAGE since it would be more amusing. However, in reality it
could not be foreseen whether the students who were novice game-players would find
playing the game amusing and whether the expert game-players would find VRENGAGE interesting enough to bother to play. Finally, students might find the game
distractive and thus might prefer the other kind of software for their learning
purposes.
The second part of the empirical study aimed at finding out the extent to which
VR-ENGAGE could be used by children and adolescents at their leisure time. The
underlying rationale of this part of the empirical study was to find out whether VRENGAGE could replace other computer games, which did not have any educational
value, in the children’s preferences for their entertainment. In this way, the children’s
game culture could be enriched with educationally beneficial games. Moreover, the
educational game could be used both at work time and leisure time and thus would
have a greater educational impact on children.
In view of the above aims, the likeability of the educational software game
interface was compared to the likeability of a popular commercial game that had no
educational content. Thus, after the 3 hours that students had spent with VRENGAGE in the classroom (2 hours of compulsory use and 1 hour where they had
free choice) the same students were given the opportunity to play VR-ENGAGE at
home during the weekend. They were also given a popular commercial game to play
with. Students were encouraged to play both of these games for as much as they liked
but it was also made clear that they did not have to play if they did not want to. After
the weekend they were interviewed about how they liked VR-ENGAGE and were
asked to state how many hours they had spent for each game.
For each phase of the empirical study we performed 4 t-tests to compare the time
spent on VR-ENGAGE and on the respective application that VR-ENGAGE was
compared to by: 1) Novice game-players (students), 2) Intermediate game-players
(students), 3) Expert game-players (students) and 4) All the students.

4 Results of the Comparative Study in Classrooms
In the first phase of the empirical study that was conducted in classrooms we
performed 4 t-tests to compare the time spent on VR-ENGAGE and on the application
with the simple user interface.

966

M. Virvou, G. Katsionis, and K. Manos

The null hypothesis, H0, was that there was no difference between the time spent for
each of the two applications. The research hypothesis, H1, was that there was a
difference between the time spent for each of the two applications. A summary of the
results of the 4 t-tests for correlated samples in classroom comparing the use of VRENGAGE and the application with the simple user interface is illustrated in Table 1
and Table 2. Table 1 illustrates the total minutes spent on each application by each
group. Table 2 illustrates the t-values found and the critical values for each t-test. The
t-value of each t-test is calculated by performing a t-test for correlated samples for the
time spent on each of the applications [9]. The critical value for each t-test is the value
taken from Table T for a one-tailed research hypothesis depending on the sample
number.
Table 1. Time spent by each group on VR-ENGAGE and on the educational application with
the simple UI

Novice
Intermediate
Expert
ALL

Minutes spent on
VR-ENGAGE
532
741
664
1937

Minutes spent on
SIMPLE UI
333
387
168
888

Sum of Differences
199
354
496
1049

Table 2. T-test results for each group
T Value
t-test for novice
t-test for intermediate
t-test for expert
t-test for all students

Critical Value
1.99
2.71
4.26
5.1

1.76
1.73
1.76
1.68

The results of the t-test for the novice game-players have shown that t, 1.99 is greater
than the critical value 1.76. Thus, we can reject H0 and accept H1. Therefore novice
students prefer to play VR-ENGAGE than to use the simple UI educational
application for leisure time at school or to repeat lessons. However, we can see that
the difference is not great. This is expected to some extent because novice users have
more operating difficulties with a virtual reality system than experienced users and
thus they may be put off from the use of the game for this reason. In the case of
intermediate game-players t is 2.71, which is much greater than the critical value 1.73.
Thus again we can reject H0 and accept H1. Therefore intermediate students strongly
prefer to play VR-ENGAGE than use the simple UI application. In the case of expert
game players t is 4.76 which is extremely greater than the critical value 1.76.
Therefore experienced students almost all the time use VR-ENGAGE. Indeed, the fact
that they are expert game players means that they are used to the culture of games and
they like it a lot. These users were very pleased to see the games introduced in the
classroom. The t-test for the total of game-players (students) showed that the t value is
5.10, which is extremely greater than the critical value 1.68. Therefore students prefer
to play VR-ENGAGE than use the simple UI educational application.

On the Motivation and Attractiveness Scope of the Virtual Reality User Interface

967

5 Results of the Comparative Study During Users’ Leisure Time
The second phase of the empirical study was based on students’ interviews after they
had used VR-ENGAGE and a commercial game at their homes. The students’
answers to the questionnaires for the interviews were used for t-tests that aimed at
showing what the comparison results were. However, the students’ answers were also
analysed to reveal how students had liked or disliked VR-ENGAGE irrespective of its
comparison with a commercial game.
Similarly with the first phase, in the second phase, which was based on the
students’ likeness of the software when it was played at home, we performed 4 t-tests
to compare the hours spent for each kind of software (VR-ENGAGE and a popular
commercial game).
The null hypothesis, H0, was that there was no difference between the time spent for
each of the two applications. The research hypothesis, H1, was that there was a
difference between the time spent for each of the two applications. A summary of the
results of the 4 t-tests for correlated samples between use of a Commercial Game or
VR-Engage in leisure time at home is illustrated in Table 3 and Table 4. The t-value
and the critical value of each t-test are calculated similarly to section 4 [9].
Table 3. Time spent by each group on VR-ENGAGE and the commercial game

Novice
Intermediate
Experienced
ALL

Hours spent on
Commercial
32
68
75
175

Hours spent on
VR-ENGAGE
28
41
27
96

Sum of Differences
4
27
48
79

Table 4. T-test results for each group
T Value
t-test for novice
t-test for intermediate
t-test for expert
t-test for all students

Critical Value
0.56
2.08
4.05
3.95

1.76
1.73
1.76
1.68

The results of the t-test for the novice game-players have shown that t, 0.56 is much
smaller than the critical value 1.76 we can accept H0. Therefore novice students do not
prefer to play a commercial game more than VR-Engage for leisure time at home.
This can be explained because novice users have operating difficulties with virtual
reality systems. Thus, they do not enjoy a commercial game more than VR-ENGAGE
because the commercial game has a more sophisticated virtual environment, which is
more difficult for them to handle. Also the time spent by novice users was the
smallest as compared to the other two groups of users as a consequence of these
difficulties. The t-test for the intermediate student “game players” has shown that t,
2.08 is greater than the critical value 1.73; thus H0 is rejected and H1 is accepted.
Therefore intermediate students prefer to play a commercial game more than VR-

968

M. Virvou, G. Katsionis, and K. Manos

Engage at home. The t-test for the experienced student “game players” has shown that
the t value of 4.05 is extremely greater than the critical value 1.76. Thus we can reject
H0 and accept H1. Therefore experienced students almost all the time played
commercial games for leisure time at home. We can understand this because
commercial games have a more sophisticated gaming environment than VRENGAGE and thus seem more amusing to experienced users who seek adventure and
amusement. The t-test for all students resulted in a t-value of 3.95, which is extremely
greater than the critical value 1.68. Thus, we can reject H0 and accept H1. Therefore
students prefer to play a commercial game more than VR-Engage for leisure time at
home.
The above t-tests’ results were expected to some extent. Indeed, it was almost
certain that the commercial game would be more appealing than VR-ENGAGE. This
is so because commercial games have very sophisticated virtual environments and can
be more challenging in terms of adventure since they do not have to care about
educational content. However, we wanted to find out whether our VR-ENGAGE
application was anywhere close to the commercial for each of the 4 categories. In this
respect VR-ENGAGE needs a lot of improvement so that it may be more competitive
to commercial games.
The results from this experiment were quite different from the first one. Since
children were not given the game to work with it as an assignment, they considered it
merely as a game similar to the commercial games they were familiar with. Therefore
their judgment on it focused on the game environment. The students’ interviews
revealed many interesting comments about what they expected and what they would
like. Most of the students (62%) pointed out that the game would be better if it had
more virtual objects, more background sounds and more adventure. These comments
came to a large extent from experienced game players rather than novice ones. This
was due to the fact that most of them were familiar with commercial virtual reality
games therefore they compared VR-ENGAGE with them and had higher expectations
in this aspect. Some of the students (8%) criticised it for being non-violent. Again,
this was probably due to the fact that the culture of commercial VR-games has
penetrated the world of adolescents and children in a way that they expect all games
to be similar even if this is not good for them. However, although most children had
given comments for the enhancement of the entertaining aspect of the game, a very
large percentage of them (84%) said that they would like to have this game at their
homes and play it at their leisure time together with other computer games they had.
This was a very encouraging result.

6 Conclusions
This paper has described and discussed the evaluation of an educational virtual reality
game for geography, VR-ENGAGE in terms of the attractiveness and motivation
scope that it may have on students. The results from the evaluation showed that
students in classrooms would be quite happy to work with a computer game, which
represents a more amusing teaching fashion than that of conventional educational
software. On the other hand, during their leisure time students would prefer to play a
popular commercial game instead of VR-ENGAGE. It was shown that the game
environment of the educational game has to be very competitive with commercial

On the Motivation and Attractiveness Scope of the Virtual Reality User Interface

969

games to make the most of its motivation and engagement effects on students. This is
so because children are quite familiar with commercial games and therefore they have
high expectations from the game environment.
The results from the evaluation have provided some important guidelines for the
improvement of educational games. First, the virtual reality environment of VRENGAGE has to be enhanced, so that the game is more competitive with other
commercial games. Moreover, there has to be more automatic help for the game, so
that novice players can play more easily and thus have a more enjoyable experience.

References
1.
2.
3.

4.
5.

6.
7.
8.

9.

Amory, A., Naicker, K., Vincent, J. & Claudia, A. (1998). “Computer Games as a
Learning Resource.” Proceedings of ED-MEDIA, ED-TELECOM 98, World Conference
on Education Multimedia and Educational Telecommunications, 1, pp. 50-55.
Brody, H. (1993) “Video Games that Teach?”. In Technology Review,
November/December 1993, pp. 51-57.
Conati, C. & Zhou, X. (2002) “ Modeling students’ emotions from cognitive appraisal in
educational games”. In S. A. Cerri, G. Gouarderes and F. Paraguacu (Eds.) : Intelligent
Tutoring Systems 2002, LNCS, 2363, pp. 944-954, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg
2002.
ID-software 1993.
Inkpen, K., Upitis, R., Klawe, M., Lawry, J., Anderson, A., Mutindi, N., Sedighian, K.,
Leroux, S. & Hsu, D. (1994). “We Have Never-Forgetful Flowers In Our Garden: Girl’s
Responses to Electronic Games”. Journal of Computers in Math and Science Teaching,
13(4), pp. 383-403.
Mumtaz, S. (2001) “ Children’s enjoyment and perception of computer use in the home
and the school” In Computers & Education, 36 (2001), pp. 347-362.
Papert, S. (1993). “The Children’s Machine: Rethinking School in the Age of the
Computers”. Basic Books, New York, 1993.
Virvou, M., Manos, C., Katsionis, G. & Tourtoglou, K.(2002): “VR-ENGAGE: A Virtual
Reality Educational Game that Incorporates Intelligence” In Proceedings of IEEE
International Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies (2002), Kazan, Russia,
September 16-19, 2002.
Voelker, D.: Statistics, Wiley Publishing, Inc. New York 2001.

