Prediction and Analysis of Weaning Results of
Ventilator-Dependent Patients with an Artificial
Neuromolecular System
Jong-Chen Chen1, Shou-Wei Chien1, and Jinchyr Hsu2
1

Department of Information Management, National Yunlin University of Science and
Technology, Touliu, Taiwan
2
Department of Internal Medicine, TaiChung Hospital, TaiChung, Taiwan
jcchen@mis.yuntech.edu.tw, {jans.alex,jinchyr.hsu}@msa.hinet.net

Abstract. We have developed a vertical information processing model, motivated
from physiological evidence, which integrates intra- and interneuronal information processing. Information processing at the intraneuronal levels is to create a
repertoire of pattern processing neurons. Information processing at the interneuronal levels is to group appropriate pattern processing neurons to constitute an
effective pattern processing system. The system was applied to a database of the
weaning results of ventilator-dependent patients. Ventilator has been used to
support the breathing need of patients, and weaning is the gradual process of
removing it from ventilator-dependent patients. Experiments with the model show
that the integrated system is able to learn to differentiate data in an autonomous
manner, separating those patients who have successful weaning results from those
who do not. Our parameter analysis shows that most of the parameters identified
as significant by the system are the same as those by physicians, but some are not.
Keywords: Weaning, Evolutionary Learning, Artificial Neural Networks.

1 Introduction
People are in great danger when they have difficulty in breathing, especially if they
have chronic pulmonary disease or neuromuscular problems. Ventilator has been
commonly used to support their breathing needs. Statistics show that most people in
intensive care unit (ICU) are in critical conditions and around 40% of them need
ventilator to support their breathing [1], [18]. When patients are no longer in critical
conditions, they will be transferred to respiratory care center (RCC) for further care.
Removing ventilator from patients too early could put them in dangerous situation.
However, for those patients who can breathe naturally, placing ventilator on them
may be of little help. When to remove a ventilator from a patient is sometimes a
tough question. Statistics show that the successful weaning rate is between 35% and
60% [16], [17]. The decision is usually based on the subjective assessments of
physicians. The parameters that the physician takes in accounts are physiological
factors, including maximal inspiratory pressure (Pimax)[10], [20], vital capacity
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2008, Part I, LNCS 5101, pp. 813–822, 2008.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

814

J.-C. Chen, S.-W. Chien, and J. Hsu

(VC)[20], rapid shallow breathing index (RSBI)[23], minute ventilation (VE)[10],
[21], pH and PCO[2], [16], APACHE II score, and blood urine nitrogen (BUN).
The above studies are related to what parameters to consider when the physician
tries to wean ventilator off patients in ICU. However, there are limited studies
regarding weaning in RCC, where one of the major tasks is to help patients to
progress from mechanical ventilation to spontaneous breathing as early as possible.
At present, there are 27 parameters used to determine whether weaning is successful
or not for ventilator-dependent patients in RCC. These parameters are divided into
four categories. The first category includes gender and age. The second category
comprises physiological parameters. These are APACHE II score and coma scale at
admission time, blood urine nitrogen (BUN), creatinin (Cr), albumin (Alb), hemoglobine (Hb), the ratio of respiratory frequency to tidal volume (RSBI) and coma
scale before removing ventilator. The third category of parameters is related to the
diseases carried by patients. These include chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
cardiovascular disease, cerebral vascular disease, other internal factors, septic syndrome with multiple organ failure, respiratory tract disease, trauma, acute respiratory
distress syndrome, brain surgery, and other surgeries. The fourth category of parameters is regarding the treatment and complication occurring during the patient’s
admission time. These include the length of time staying in ICU, the length of time
using ventilator, and tracheastomy, respiratory tract infection, blood stream infection,
urinary tract infection, and other infection.
Successfully weaning patients off ventilator requires careful assessments. It may
be helpful if we develop an intelligent system to assist physicians in making such a
decision. In this study, we apply an artificial neuromolecular system (ANM), a
biologically motivated model that integrates intra- and inter-neuronal information
processing, to differentiate a database of ventilator-dependent patients. The system
has two hypotheses. The first is that some neurons in the brain have significant intraneuronal information processing, which might directly or indirectly relate to their
firing behavior [14], [13], [15]. Neurons of this type will be called cytoskeletal
neurons or enzymatic neurons[4], [6]. They combine, or integrate, input signals in
space and time to yield temporally patterned output signals to control other neurons.
The second hypothesis is that some neurons in the brain serve as pointers to other
neurons in a way that allows for memory manipulation. Neuron of this type is called
reference neurons [6-7]. Reference neurons are used to select appropriate subsets of
cytoskeletal neurons, which then control the manner in which input patterns are
transduced to output patterns.

2 The Architecture
The ANM system as currently implemented comprises eight competing subnets, each
consisting of 30 cytoskeletal neurons. Cytoskeletal neurons are manipulated by two
levels of reference neurons. Low-level reference neurons select comparable cytoskeletal neurons in each subnet (i.e., neurons that have similar cytoskeletal structures).
High-level reference neurons select different combinations of the low-level reference
neurons. Fig. 1 provides a simplified picture (only two of the competing subnets were
shown, each consisting of only four cytoskeletal neurons). In Fig. 1, the intraneuronal

Prediction and Analysis of Weaning Results

Ra

high-level reference
neurons
low-level reference
neurons
cytoskeletal
neurons

E1

r1

815

Rb

r2

r3

E2 E3 E4
subnet 1

E1

r4

E2 E3 E4
subnet 2

Fig. 1. Connections between reference and cytoskeletal neuron layers. When Ra fires, it will
fire r1 and r4. Similarly, the firing of Rb will cause r3 and r4 to fire, which in turn fires E3 and
E4 in each subnet. (Ei stands for cytoskeletal neuron i.).

structures of E1, E2, E3, and E4 in subnet 1 are similar to those of E1, E2, E3, and E4
in subnet 2, respectively.

3 Pattern Processing Neurons
Cytoskeletal neurons are the major pattern processing neurons in the ANM system.
Information processing sketched in cytoskeletal neurons is motivated from some
physiological evidence that the internal dynamics of a neuron control its firing
behaviors [13], [14], [15]. Our hypothesis is that the cytoskeleton plays the role of
signal integration. That is, it is capable of integrating signals in space and time to
yield spatiotemporal output signals. The dynamics of cytoskeletal neurons are
simulated with 2-D cellular automata [22].
Our implementation (Fig. 2) in the cytoskeletal neuron is to capture the signal
integration capability (to be described below). When an external signal impinges on
the membrane of a cytoskeletal neuron, a readin enzyme sharing at the same site is
activated. The activated readin enzyme will then activate the cytoskeletal component
sharing at the same site, which in turn activates its neighboring component of the
same type, and so on. Thus, the activation of a readin enzyme will in turn activate a
chain of neighboring components of the same type (i.e., initiate a unidirectional signal
flow). As to a neighboring component of different type, an activated component will
affect its state when there is an MAP (microtubule associated protein) linking them
together. The interactions between two different types of neighboring components
are assumed to be asymmetric.
For example, in Fig. 3a, the activation of the readin enzyme at location (2,2) will
trigger a cytoskeletal signal flow along the C2 components of the second column,
starting from location (2,2) and running to location (8,2). When the signal arrives at
location (8,2), the C2 component sharing at the same site will be activated, which in
turn stimulates its neighboring C1 component at location (8,1) to a more exciting state
(but is not sufficient to activate it). A counter example (Fig. 3b) is that the activation
of the readin enzyme at location (4,1) will trigger a cytoskeletal signal flow along the
C1 components of the first column, starting from location (4,1) and running to

816

J.-C. Chen, S.-W. Chien, and J. Hsu

location (8,1). The activation of the C1 component at location (8,1) will activate its
neighboring C2 component at location (8,2). The activation of the latter will in turn
activate the C2 component at location (7,2), its next neighboring component at
location (6,2), and so on. Thus, it will trigger a signal flow on the second column,
starting from location (8,2) and running to location (2,2).
j
location (i,j)

5 6 7 8
c1
1
i
2
c2
c3 c1
3
c2
c3 c1
c1
4 c1 c2 c1 c3 c1 c2 c1 c3
5 c1 c2 c1 c3 c1 c2 c1 c3
c2 c1 c3
6 c1 c2 c1 c3
c1
c2
c3
7
c2
c1
8 c1 c2 c1 c3
1 2

' ' MAP

3 4

' ' readout
enzyme

' ' readin
enzyme

Fig. 2. Cytoskeletal neurons. Each grid location has at most one of three types of components:
C1, C2, or C3. Some sites may not have any component at all. Readin enzymes could reside at
the same site as any one of the above components. Readout enzymes are only allowed to reside
at the site of a C1 component. Each site has eight neighboring sites. The neighbors of an edge
site are determined in a wrap-around fashion. Two neighboring components of different types
may be linked by an MAP (microtubule associated protein).

We have described the feature that different types of components interact with each
other in an asymmetric manner. The other feature is that different types of
components transmit signals at different speeds. The summary of the above two
features is that C1 components transmit signals at the slowest speed, but with the
highest activating value, and that C3 components transmit signals at the fastest speed,
but with the lowest activating value. The activation value of C2 components and their
transmitting speed are intermediate between those of C1 and C3 components.
When the spatiotemporal combination of cytoskeletal signals arriving at a site of
readout enzyme is suitable, the readout will be activated and then the neuron will fire.
Fig. 4 shows that there are three possible cytoskeletal signal flows, initiated by
external signals, to activate the readout enzyme at location (8,3). One is a signal flow
on the second column, the other on the third column, and another on the fourth
column. Any two of the above three signal flows might activate the readout enzyme
at location (8,3), which in turn will cause the neuron to fire. Nevertheless, the neuron
might fire at different times in response to different combinations of signal flows
along these fibers. One is that different types of components transmit signals at

Prediction and Analysis of Weaning Results

817

different speeds. The other is that signals may be initiated by different readin
enzymes. For example, the signal flow on the second column may be initiated either
by the readin enzyme at location (2,2) or by the readin enzyme at location (3,2).
Similarly, the signal flow on the fourth column may be initiated either by the readin
enzyme at location (1,4) or by the enzyme at location (2,4). A signal initiated by
different enzymes will integrate with another signal at different times. All of these
will affect the temporal firing behaviors of a neuron.
(a)

external signal
1 2 3 4 5

(b)

6

7

1
c3
2
c2
c3 c1
3
c2
c3 c1
c1
4 c1 c2 c1 c3 c1 c2
c1 c3
5 c1 c2 c1 c3 c1 c2 c1 c3
6 c1 c2 c1 c3 c1 c2 c1 c3
7 c1 c2 c1 c3
c2
8 c1 c2 c1 c3

external signal

8

1 2
1
2

3

4

5

6

7

8

c3

c2
c3 c1
3
c2
c3 c1
c1
4 c1 c2 c1 c3 c1 c2 c1
c3
5 c1 c2 c1 c3 c1 c2 c1 c3
6 c1 c2 c1 c3 c1 c2 c1 c3
7 c1 c2 c1 c3
c2
8 c1 c2 c1 c3

Fig. 3. Interaction between different types of component via an MAP. (a) An external signal
will trigger a signal flow on the second column, starting from location (2,2) and running to
location (2,8). When this signal arrives at location (8,2), it will affect its neighboring C1
component at location (8,1) to a more exciting (i.e., a state that is much easier to be activated
later). (b) An external signal will trigger a signal flow on the first column, starting from
location (4,1) to running to location (8,1). The activation of the C1 component at location (8,1)
will in turn activate the C2 component at location (8,2) via the MAP, which in turn will trigger
a signal flow on the second column, starting from location (8,2) and running to location (2,2).

4 Evolutionary Learning
Six levels of evolutionary variation are possible in the system: at the level of readin
enzymes (initiating signal flows), at the level of readout enzymes (responding signal
flows), at the level of MAPs (modulating signal flows), at the level of cytoskeletal
components (transmitting signal flows), at the level of connections among receptor
neurons and cytoskeletal neurons, and at the level of reference neurons. In the current
implementation we allow variation-selection operators to act on only one level at a
time. One level, or aspect, is open to evolution for sixteen cycles. During this time
all the other levels are held constant. The levels of evolutionary changes are turned
on in the sequence of reference neuron, readin enzyme, reference neuron, connection
among receptor neurons and cytoskeletal neurons, reference neuron, cytoskeletal
component, reference neuron, readout enzyme, reference neuron, and MAP.

818

J.-C. Chen, S.-W. Chien, and J. Hsu

external signals
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

1

c3
c2
c3 c1
c2
c3 c1
c1
c2 c1 c3 c1 c2 c1 c3
5 c1 c2 c1 c3 c1 c2 c1 c3
6 c1 c2 c1 c3 c1 c2 c1 c3
7 c1 c2 c1 c3
c2
8 c1 c2 c1 c3
2
3
4 c1

Fig. 4. Different combinations of cytoskeletal signals to fire the neuron. The figure
demonstrates that the readout enzyme at location (8,3) might be activated by any two of signal
flows along C1, C2, and C3 components.

Evolutionary learning at cytoskeletal neuron level has three steps:
1. Each subnet is activated in turn for evaluating its performance.
2. The pattern of readout enzymes, readin enzymes, MAPs, connectivities, and other
components of best-performing subnets is copied to lesser-performing subnets,
depending on which level of evolution is operative.
3. The pattern of readout enzymes, readin enzymes, MAPs, connectivities, and other
components of lesser-performing subnets is slightly varied.
Evolutionary learning at reference neuron level has three steps:
1. Cytoskeletal neurons controlled by each reference neuron are activated for
evaluating their performance.
2. The pattern of neural activities controlled by best-performing reference neurons is
copied to lesser-performing reference neurons.
3. Lesser-performing reference neurons control a slight variation of the neural
grouping controlled by best-performing reference neurons.

5 Application Domains
In this study, the ANM system was employed to differentiate a clinical database of
ventilator-dependent patients. In total, there were 189 records, of which 84 patients had
successfully weaned from ventilators while the remaining 105 failed. The following
procedure described how to link the ANM system with the database. Note that in this
model the cytoskeletal neurons served as the major components responsible for
information processing. We first explained how to set up the connections between these
27 parameters and cytoskeletal neurons. Then we described how to map each parameter
value to an external signal for cytoskeletal neurons. At last, we explained how to
evaluate the system’s performances.

Prediction and Analysis of Weaning Results

819

We note that the connections between the parameter layer and cytokskeletal neuron
layer were only partial. That is, each of these neurons was responsible for processing
only a small subset of stimuli generated from these 27 parameters (through evolutionary learning). However, it should be noted that all cytoskeletal neurons that had
connections with a parameter would receive the same pattern of stimuli. The initial
connections between these 27 parameters and cytoskeletal neurons were randomly
decided, but subject to change as learning continued. Through evolutionary learning,
each cytoskeletal neuron would be trained to be a specific input-output pattern
transducer.
Each parameter was encoded with a 5-bit pattern. In total, there were 135 bits
required to encode all of these 27 parameters. For each parameter, the minimal and
maximal values of these 189 records were determined (to be denoted by MIN and
MAX, respectively). The difference between these two values was equally divided into
5 increments (denoted by INCRs). The transformation of each actual parameter value
(to be denoted by ACTUAL) into the corresponding 5-bit pattern was shown to be

=

⎧ 00001,
⎪ 00010,
⎪
⎨ 00100,
⎪ 01000,
⎪⎩ 10000,

if
if
if
if
if

(MIN
(MIN
(MIN
(MIN

MIN
+
+
+
+

≤
INCR)
≤
INCR × 2) ≤
INCR × 3) ≤
INCR × 4) ≤

ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ACTUAL

<
<
<
<
≤

(MIN +
(MIN +
(MIN +
(MIN +
MAX

INCR)
INCR × 2)
INCR × 3)
INCR × 4)

Each bit with value ‘1’ represented a specific set of stimuli to a cytoskeletal
neuron. When a readin enzyme received an external stimulus, a cytoskeletal signal
was initiated. As to which readin enzymes of a neuron would receive the stimuli from
a parameter, it was randomly decided in the beginning and subject to change during
the course of learning. For each record, all stimuli were sent to cytoskeletal neurons
simultaneously. This means that all cytoskeletal signals were initiated at the same
time. The cytoskeleton integrated these signals in space and time. For each input
record, the class of the first firing cytoskeletal neuron was assigned as its output (to be
described below).
Cytoskeletal neurons were equally divided into two classes, corresponding to two
different groups of records. One class of neurons represented the group of patients
who have successful weaning while the other unsuccessful weaning. For each record
(input pattern), we defined that the system made a correct response when the class of
the first firing neuron was in accordance with the group shown in the database. The
ANM system was tested with each of these 189 records in sequence. The greater the
number of correct responses made by the system, the higher its fitness was.

6 Experimental Results
Two experiments were performed. The first was to apply the system to the RCC
database. For comparison, we also tested the database with two other artificial neural
networks (the back-propagation neural network and support vector machine) and one
tree-based decision algorithm (Waikato Environment for Knowledge Analysis). In the
second experiment, we examined the effectiveness of each parameter in determining
weaning results.

820

J.-C. Chen, S.-W. Chien, and J. Hsu

6.1 Data Differentiation
These 189 records were divided into two sets: training and testing. The training set
consisted of 120 records, about two thirds of the database. The testing set consisted
of 69 records, about one third of the database. Ten runs were performed. For each
run, 120 out of these 189 records were selected at random as the training set whereas
the remaining 69 records were grouped as the test set.
The experimental result showed that the number of records recognized by the
ANM system increased continuously during the course of learning. The average
differentiation rate was 91%. Then, the system after substantial learning was tested.
The average differentiation rate on these ten test sets was 71.0%, implying that it
possessed a certain degree of differentiation capability.
For comparison, we first tested the database with the Weka tool, a collection of
data mining algorithms that employed tree-based classifications. The best result that
we obtained with this tool was collected. The average differentiation rate of 10 runs
on the testing set was 63.2%. We then tested it with the support vector machine. The
average differentiation rate on the testing set was 69.9%. Lastly, we employed
the back-propagation neural network to the database. Several combinations of the
numbers of hidden layers (including nodes) and transferring functions were tested.
The ten best results were collected. The average differentiation rate on the testing set
was 70.9%.
6.2 Parameter Analysis
In this experiment, we investigated the effectiveness of each parameter in determining
the weaning results of ventilator-dependent patients. We noted that the system learned
to treat a particular parameter as rather significant when it could always be used to
give a correct response to all training records. In other words, altering the values of
this parameter might lead to a completely different result. By contrast, the system
tended to ignore those parameters with insignificant values. In other words, for an
insignificant parameter, any alteration of its values had no effect on the response. To
generate a test set, we copied the training set and varied a specific parameter of each
of the training patterns. The variation was made by setting a parameter at a specific
value, starting from 0.1 to 1 (with an increment of 0.1). Thus, there were eleven
testing sets generated for each of these 27 parameters. In total, there were 297 testing
sets. For each testing set, we set a parameter at a specific value but kept the values of
other 26 parameters unchanged. For example, the first testing set was identical to the
training set except the value of the first parameter of each record was set to be 0.1.
The second testing set was generated in a similar manner, but the value of the first
parameter was set to be 0.2.
The system after substantial learning was employed. The experimental results
showed that there were almost no changes on the system’s outputs when the values of
these 7 parameters (Cr, respiratory tract disease, cardiovascular disease, and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease, septic syndrome with multiple organ failure, other
surgeries, and the length of time staying in ICU) were altered. That is, altering the
values of these parameters had no significant effect on the system’s outputs. This
implied that there was essentially no direct relationship between these parameters and

Prediction and Analysis of Weaning Results

821

patients’ weaning results. By contrast, the outputs were quite different when the
following 10 parameters (age, Alb, BUN, Hb, cerebral vascular disease, coma scale
before removing ventilator, RSBI, respiratory tract infection, urinary tract infection,
other infection) were set at different values, illustrating that they played a vital role in
affecting patients’ weaning results. Among these 10 parameters, age and coma scale
before removing ventilator are two most important parameters. For the remaining 10
parameters, the result showed that the changes of the system’s outputs fell within a
certain range, suggesting that to some extent they were important parameters.
We were particular interested in those parameters identified as very important by
one side but as insignificant by other side. Our experimental result showed that there
were four parameters identified by the physician as very significant but by the ANM
system as almost insignificant. These included respiratory tract disease, cardiovascular disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and septic syndrome with
multiple organ failure. All of these parameters were related to the disease carried by
the patients. Even though the result was not quite the same as that of the physicians;
however, in some senses it should provide another dimension of information to
physicians. It implied that some important parameters that the physician had in mind
might not be that critical.

7 Conclusions
The experimental result with the RCC database is consistent with our previous result
that the system demonstrates a high differentiation capability. Finally, we note that a
parameter is significant if it can be used to effectively differentiate data and to make it
redundant if it cannot. The significance of each parameter is dependent upon the
structure of a data set. Different sets possess different significant parameters. The
parameter analysis result has some implications for clinical studies. It provides
physicians with information about the effectiveness of each parameter in determining
weaning for patients. Our experimental result shows that some of these significant
parameters are the same as those recognized by physicians whereas some are not.
The finding of those significant parameters not previously recognized by physicians
may provide them another dimension of information, which in turn may open up a
possibility of exploring some unknown phenomena.

References
1. Adams, A.B., et al.: Survey of Long-Term Ventilators Support in Minnesota: From 1986
to 1992. Chest 103, 463–469 (1993)
2. Bouachour, G., et al.: Gastric Intramural Ph: An Indicator of Weaning from Mechanical
Ventilation in Patients. Eur. Respir. J. 9, 1868–1873 (1996)
3. Bremermann, H.J.: Optimization through Evolution and Recombination. In: Yovits,, Jacobi,,
Goldstein (eds.) Self-Organizing Systems, pp. 93–106. Spartan Books, Washington, D.C
(1962)
4. Conrad, M.: Molecular Information Processing in the Central Nervous System, Parts I and
II. In: Conrad, M., Güttinger, W., Dal Cin, M. (eds.) Physics and Mathematics of the
Nervous System, pp. 82–127. Springer, Heidelberg (1974a)

822

J.-C. Chen, S.-W. Chien, and J. Hsu

5. Conrad, M.: Evolutionary Learning Circuits. J. Theor., Biol. 46, 167–188 (1974b)
6. Conrad, M.: Molecular Information Structures in the Brain. J. Neurosci. Res. 2, 233–254
(1976a)
7. Conrad, M.: Complementary Molecular Models of Learning and Memory. BioSystems 8,
119–138 (1976b)
8. Conrad, M.: Principle of Superposition-Free Memory. J. Theor. Biol. 67, 213–219 (1977)
9. Conrad, M., Kampfner, R.R., Kirby, K.G., Rizki, E.N., Schleis, G., Smalz, R., Trenary, R.:
Towards an Artificial Brain. BioSystems 23, 175–218 (1989)
10. Feeley, T., Hedley-Whyte, J.: Weaning from Controlled Ventilation and Supplemental
Oxygen. N. Engl. J. Med. 292, 303–306 (1975)
11. Fogel, D.: Evolutionary Computation: Towards a New Philosophy of Machine Intelligence.
IEEE Press, Piscatawy (1995)
12. Fogel, L., Owens, A., Walsh, M.: Artificial Intelligence through Simulated Evolution.
Wiley, New York (1966)
13. Hameroff, S.R.: Ultimate Computing. North-Holland, Amsterdam (1987)
14. Liberman, E.A., Minina, S.V., Shklovsky-Kordy, N.E., Conrad, M.: Microinjection of
Cyclic Nucleotides Provides Evidence for a Diffusional Mechanism of Intraneuronal
Control. BioSystems 15, 127–132 (1982)
15. Matsumoto, G., Tsukita, S., Arai, T.: Organization of the Axonal Cytoskeleton:
Differentiation of the Microtubule and Actin Filament Arrays. In: Warner, F.D., McIntosh,
J.R. (eds.) Cell Movement: Kinesin, Dynein, and Microtubule Dynamics, pp. 335–356.
Alan R. Liss, New York (1989)
16. Modawal, A., et al.: Weaning Success among Ventilator-Dependent Patients in a
Rehabilitation Facility. Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 83, 154–157 (2002)
17. Nava, S., et al.: Survival and Prediction of Successful Ventilator Weaning in Copd Patients
Requiring Mechanical Ventilation for more than 21 Days. Eur Respir. J. 7, 1645–1652
(1994)
18. Robinson, R.: Ventilotor Dependency in the United Kingdom. Archives in Disease of
Child 65, 1235–1236 (1990)
19. Rosen, R.: Dynamical System Theory in Biology. Wiley, New York (1970)
20. Sahn, S.A., Lakshminarayan, S.: Besides Criteria for Discontinuation of Mechanical
Ventilation. Chest 63, 1002–1005 (1973)
21. Stetson, J.B.: Introductory Essay. Int Anethesiology Clinics 8(4), 767–779 (1970)
22. Wolfram, S.: Cellular Automata as Models of Complexity. Nature 311, 419–424 (1984)
23. Yang, K.L., Tobin, M.J.: A Prospective Study of Indexes Predicting the Outcome of Trials
of Weaning from Mechanical Ventilation. N. Engl. J. Med. 324(21), 1445–1450 (1991)

