Data-Parallel Method for Georeferencing of MODIS
Level 1B Data Using Grid Computing
Yincui Hu1, Yong Xue1,2,*, Jiakui Tang1, Shaobo Zhong1, and Guoyin Cai1
1
State Key Laboratory of Remote Sensing Science, Jointly Sponsored by the Institute of
Remote Sensing Applications of Chinese Academy of Sciences and Beijing Normal University,
Institute of Remote Sensing Applications, Chinese Academy of Sciences, P. O. Box 9718,
Beijing 100101, China
2
Department of Computing, London Metropolitan University, 166-220 Holloway Road,
London N7 8DB, UK
{huyincui@163.com, y.xue@londonmet.ac.uk}

Abstract. Georeference is a basic function of remote sensing data processing.
Geo-corrected remote sensing data is an important source data for Geographic
Information Systems (GIS) and other location services. Large quantity remote
sensing data were produced daily by satellites and other sensors.
Georeferenceing of these data is time consumable and computationally
intensive. To improve efficiency of processing, Grid technologies are applied.
This paper focuses on the parallelization of the remote sensing data on a grid
platform. According to the features of the algorithm, backwards-decomposition
technique is applied to partition MODIS level 1B data. Firstly, partition the
output array into evenly sized blocks using regular domain decomposition.
Secondly, compute the geographical range of every block. Thirdly, find the
GCPs triangulations contained in or intersect with the geographic range. Then
extract block from original data in accordance with these triangulations. The
extracted block is the data distributed to producer on Grid pool.

1 Introduction
Large quantity imagery data of remote sensing produced daily by variable satellites
and other sensors. The processing of remote sensing data is computationally intensive.
It requires parallel and high-performance computing techniques to achieve good
performance. G eo-corrected remote sensing data are source data for geographic
information systems and other location services. When the correction formulation is
complicate, the large image georeference will require a mass of time. Over the past
decade, Grid has become a powerful computing environment for data intensive and
computing intensive applications. Cannataro (2000) proposed to develop data mining
services within a Grid infrastructure as the deployment platform for high performance
distributed data mining and knowledge discovery.
Researchers have aimed to develop Grid platforms for remote sensing data
processing. Aloisio et al. (2004) proposed Grid architecture for remote sensing data
*

Corresponding author.

V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3516, pp. 883 – 886, 2005.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

884

Y. Hu et al.

processing and developed a Grid-enabled platform, SARA/Digital Puglia with his
research group. SARA/Digital Puglia (Aloisio et al. 2003) is a remote sensing
environment developed in a joint research project. Our research group has developed
a grid-based remote sensing environment, which is the High-Throughput Spatial
Information Processing Prototype System in Institute of Remote Sensing
Applications, Chinese Academy of Sciences (Cai et al. 2004, Hu et al. 2004, Wang
et al. 2003).
This paper focuses on the parallelization of the remote sensing data on a grid
platform. First, we discussed the algorithm of rectifying remote sensing image.
Second, data partition for georeference on grid is introduced. Finally, we analyzed the
result of georeference on Grid platform.

2 Georeference Implementation on the Grid
2.1 MODIS Level 1B Data
MODIS level 1B products are obtained from Moderate Resolution Imaging
Spectroradiometer (MODIS) carried on EOS satellite and have been calibrated.
MODIS includes 36 spectral bands extending from the visible to the thermal infrared
wavelengths (Running et al., 1994). The MODIS Level 1B products contain longitude
and latitude coordinates. These coordinates can be used as Ground Control Points
(GCP) to rectify the image.
2.2 Parallel Rectification on Grid
There are three important components to rectify an image, i.e. transformation model
selection, coordinate transformation and resample. In this paper, triangle warping
model is selected to transform the coordinates. Moreover, cubic resample method is
used. The triangular is build from the longitude and latitude coordinates.
The image rectification steps for interpolating, transforming and resampling can be
integrated into one routine. This rectify routine can be repeated to correct every part
of the large image. Now that the rectify routine can be data parallel processing in
Grid, how to partition the data and how to merge the results are the main questions
confront us.
2.3 Data Partition Strategy
The partition strategy influences the process efficiency and determines the merge
strategy. So to select an efficient partition method is very important. The value of the
output pixel is interpolated by value of pixels around its location in original image.
The original location is obtained by triangle transformation from GCPs triangulations.
According to the features of the algorithm, backwards-decomposition technique is
applied to partition MODIS level 1B data. It comprises four steps as follows:
Firstly, partition the output array into evenly sized blocks using regular domain
decomposition. Secondly, compute the geographical range of every block. Thirdly,
find the GCPs triangulations contained in or intersect with the geographical range.

Data-Parallel Method for Georeferencing of MODIS Level 1B Data

885

Then extract block from original data in accordance with these triangulations. The
extracted block is the data that will be distributed to producer on Grid pool.

3 Experiments and Analysis
Our experiments were performed on a Grid-computing environment, which is in the
High-Throughput Spatial Information Processing Prototype System (HIT-SIP) based
on Grid platform in Institute of Remote Sensing Applications, Chinese Academy of
Sciences. Test data are MODIS level 1B products. The data format is HDF. The data
is partitioned into many parts by backwards-decomposition techniques. The
experiment result is shown in table1.
Table 1. Experiment results

Test data size
768 MB

Sequential Time (sec)
Out of memory

83 MB

404

20 MB

282

No. of parts
10
80
8
80
4
8

Execution time (sec)
1208
856
358
281
130
110

The experiment shows that data-parallel georeference is efficient especially for
those large-size data. The computer shows errors “out of memory, unable to allocate
memory” when rectifying the large data (768 MB) in a computer with 512MB
memory. This situation could be solved with the help of the resources in Grid pool.
The large data is decomposed into small parts and distributed to the Grid.

4 Conclusions
As an important new field in the distributed computing arena, Grid computing focuses
on intensive resource sharing, innovative applications, and, in some cases, highperformance orientation. We implemented data-parallel georeference in HIT-SIP
platform. The experiments indicate that Grid is efficient for data-parallel
georeference. The efficiency could be improved especially for those large data. For
those processing that need large memory, Grid can also provide enough resources to
solve the problem. Ongoing work on HIT-SIP includes developing middleware of
remote sensing processing and providing remote sensing processing services for
Internet consumers.

Acknowledgement
This publication is an output from the research projects "CAS Hundred Talents
Program" and “Monitoring of Beijing Olympic Environment” (2002BA904B07-2)

886

Y. Hu et al.

and “Remote Sensing Information Processing and Service Node” funded by the
MOST, China and "Aerosol fast monitoring modeling using MODIS data and
middlewares development" (40471091) funded by NSFC, China.

References
1. Aloisio, G., Cafaro, M.: A Dynamic Earth Observation System. Parallel Computing. 29
(2003), 1357-1362
2. Aloisio, G., Cafaro, M., Epicoco, I., Quarta, G.: A Problem Solving Environment for
Remote Sensing Data Processing. Proceeding of ITCC 2004: International Conference on
Information Technology: Coding and Computing. Vol.2. IEEE Computer Society, 56-61.
3. Cai GY, Xue Y, Tang JK, Wang JQ, Wang YG, Luo Y, Hu YC, Zhong SB, Sun XS, 2004.
Experience of Remote Sensing Information Modelling with Grid Computing. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 3039. Springer-Verlag, 989-996.
4. Cannataro, M: Clusters and Grids for Distributed and Parallel Knowledge Discovery.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science. 1823(2000), 708-716
5. Hu YC, Xue Y, Wang JQ, Sun XS, Cai GY, Tang JK, Luo Y, Zhong SB, Wang YG,
Zhang AJ.: Feasibility Study of Geo-spatial Analysis Using Grid Computing. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 3039. Springer-Verlag (2004) 956-963.
6. Lanthier, M., and Nussbaurm, D: Parallel Implementation of Geometric Shortest Path
Algorithms. Parallel Computing. 29(2003), 1445-1479.
7. Pouchard, L; Cinquini, L; Drach, B; Middleton, D; Bernholdt, D; Chanchio, K; Foster, I;
Nefedova, V; Brown, D; Fox, P; Garcia, J; Strand, G; Williams, D; Chervenak, A;
Kesselman, C; Shoshani, A; Sim, A.: An Ontology for Scientific Information in a Grid
Environment: The Earth System grid. 3rd IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Cluster
Computing and the GRID. IEEE Computer Society (2003) 626-632.
8. Roros, D. -K. D., Armstrong, M. P: Using Linda to Compute Spatial Autocorrelation in
Parallel. Computers & Geosciences. 22(1996), 425-432
9. Roros, D. -K. D., Armstrong, M. P.: Experiments in the Identification of Terrain Features
Using a PC-Based Parallel Computer. Photogrammetric Engineering & Remote Sensing.
64(1998), 135-142
10. Wang, S. and Armstrong, M. P.: A Quadtree Approach to Domain Decomposition for
Spatial Interpolation in Grid Computing Environments. Parallel Computing. 29(2003)
1481-1504.
11. Jianqin Wang, Yong Xue, and Huadong Guo, 2003, A Spatial Information Grid Supported
Prototype Telegeoprocessing System. In Proceedings of 2003 IEEE International
Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium (IGARSS’2003) held in Toulouse, France on
21-25 July 2003, v 1, p 345-347.

