A Fuzzy Comprehensive Evaluation Method on Firms’
Credit Sale Risk*
Guoqiang Liu1, Zongfang Zhou1, Xinmin Song1, and Yong Shi2
1

School of Management, University of Electronic Science & Technology of China,
P.R. China, 610054
zhouzf@uestc.edu.cn
2
College of Information Science & Technology, University of Nebraska at Omaha, Omaha,
NE 68182, U.S.A
itdmeditor@yahoo.com.cn

Abstract. This paper utilizes the fuzzy comprehensive evaluation method
(FCEM) to evaluate firm’s credit sale risk, and provide the credit line and time
limit of a credit sale according to the grades of firm’s credit sale risk. Finally,
we also present an example to validate the feasibility of this method. The result
will greatly benefit in enhancing the firm’s credit sale risk management.
Keywords: Credit sale risk, FCEM, credit sale grades.

1 Introduction
Market economy, characterized with openness and competition, will no doubt lead to
the formation of buyers’ market, and then Chinese market will be a highly developed
credit market, which brings risks and costs to the firms as well as benefits. The credit
sale is adding the risk of bad debts, additional financing cost, managing cost, which
may lower the firms’ capacity of earning profits.
Firms in our country have little consciousness of credit. Lack of scientific risk
management system and perfect credit sale management measurements within the
business has made great bad debts losses to the firms. Some even said that credit sales
are going to die but no credit sales are waiting to die. So, enhance the credit
management system and establish the evaluation grade system of client credit has
been a burning question of all the firms.
Client’s credit risk is credit sale risk, that is, the client unable to or unwilling to
repay the credit sale on schedule. Because it should consider many aspects and
involves a great deal of quantitative and qualitative indicators to make an analysis of
customer’s credit risk, including three phases of a trade. The present research on
firms’ credit risk mostly concentrates on the whole assessment of firm’s credit [6][7][8],
and mainly adopts the accounting method. They seldom carry on a systemic study on
credit sale risk [7], not to say to combine client’s credit level with the credit line and
credit time limit.
*

National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 70671017).

Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part III, LNCS 4489, pp. 1062–1068, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

A Fuzzy Comprehensive Evaluation Method on Firms’ Credit Sale Risk

1063

This paper uses the fuzzy comprehensive evaluation method to give a quantitative
analysis of clients’ credit risk and to evaluate the clients’ risk degree, and the credit
line the firms may offer, and then determine the credit time limit. The result will be an
important reference for the firms’ credit sale policy-making.

2 Indictors of the Firms' Credit Sale Risk
The firms mostly gets the information of clients through the front line staff, however,
it’s hard for them to get clients’ financial information. According to the characteristics
of clients’ credit risk, this paper builds the indictor system of accessing firms’ client
credit risk on the basis of the credit grade indictor of the firms and the characteristic
of clients’ credit (Fig. 1). In my opinion, in order to avoid overly affecting the
formulation of fiems’ credit policy by a client’s past credit sales situation, only the
credit situation during some period T need to be evaluated by firms (Time T can be
confirmed by the industry environment of the firms).
Firm’s client credit sale risk U should include the following indictors: previous
transaction U1, business status U2, management and profit level U3, developing
potential U4, financial analysis U5.
(1) Previous transaction U1 includes: ordering quantity U11, repayment and
payment attitude U12, goodwill U13.
(2) Business status U2 includes: leader’s quality U21, employ’s quality U22,
technical level U23, product sales income U24, gross profit U25, capitalizationU26,
business environment U27.
(3) Management and profit level U3 includes: market share U31, major business and
funds status U32, total profit growth rate U33, products sale growth rate U34, capital
preserves value growth rate U35.
(4) Developing potential U4 includes: market prospect U41, major products
potential U42, industry position U43.
(5) Financial analysis U5 includes: liability and net assets ratio U51, short-term
liability and net asset ratio U52, quick ratio U53, working capital U54, receivable
accounts turnover U55.

3 The Application of FCEM
3.1 Evaluation of the indictor weights
This paper uses AHP method to determine the weight of firms’ client credit sale risk,
and the calculation procedure is as follows:
(1) Use scale 1-9 to construct Judgment Matrix A
Element a ij in matrix A refers to the relative importance of

U ij pairwise. An expert

panel generally constructs the judgment matrix. Certainly firms may also choose
experienced sellers, financial personnel.

1064

G. Liu et al.

previous
transaction

management and developing
profit level
potential

business status

financial
analysis

receivable accounts turnover
working capital
quick ratio
short-term liability and net
asset ratio
liability and net assets ratio

industry position

major products potential
market prospect

capital preserves value growth
rate
products sale growth rate
total profit growth rate
major business and funds status
market share

business environment
capitalization
gross profit
product sales income
technical level
employ's quality
leader's quality

goodwill
repayment and payment
attitude
ordering quantity

Fig. 1. Indicator system of client’s credit sale risk

－

Table 1. Scale 1 9
Scale
1
3
5

Meaning
Indicates two indicators are of equal importance;
Indicates the former indicator is weakly more important than the latter one;
Indicates the former indicator is strongly more important than the latter
one;
7
Indicates the former indicator is very strongly more important than the
latter one;
9
Indicates the former indicator is absolutely more important than the latter
one;
2 4 6 8
Intermediate values;

，，，

Reciprocal

If the importance ratio of indicator
indicator

j to i is a ji = 1 a ij

i

to

j

is

a ij

, then this ratio of

;

(2) Using maximum eigenvalue to calculate the weight:

Aω = λ max ω

(1)

A Fuzzy Comprehensive Evaluation Method on Firms’ Credit Sale Risk

Where

λmax

is the maximum eigenvalue in matrix A,

ω

1065

is corresponding

characteristic vector. It can be regarded as the weight vector behind the normalization
of ω .
(3) Consistency test
Consistency test is used to validate whether the judgment matrix has a consistency. If
not, we have to adjust the matrix by the steps follows:
I.

Consistency index:

C .I . =

λmax − n

(2)

n −1

II. Finding the corresponding average random consistency ： R.I .
III. Consistency ratio：

C.R. =

C .I .
R.I .

(3)

If C .R. < 0.1 , it is acceptable that the matrix is consistent; otherwise, the
judgment matrix would need some modification.
(4) Calculate combined weights
Relative weight of the indicator should be calculated from one level to another.
Supposing the weight of the second level indicator to the indicator of client’s credit
risk was ϖ = (ω1 , ω 2 ,......, ω k ) , and the weight of the third level indicator to the
T

second level was ϖ i = (ω1i , ω 2 i ,......, ω ni )
weight

of

the

third

level

be V = (v1 , v 2 ,......, v n ) , and
T

T

indicator

，i = 1,2,......, k . Then the combined
to

client’s

credit

risk

should

k

vi = ∑ ω j ωij，i = 1,2,......, n .
j =1

3.2 Clients’ Credit Sale Risk Grades
Client’s credit sale risk is related directly to the firms’ credit sale policy to this client.
This paper grouped client’s credit sale risk into six rates, each with corresponding
credit line.

(1) Membership degree of quantitative index
There are so many kinds of membership functions that the judgment of its
belongingness is very subjective.
Whereas in the practical situation, belonging to which membership function can
be decided, according to the specific situation of firms’ clients. We will apply
membership function:
instructions:

μvi (u ) = e − a ( u −c )

b

. In this formula, there are some

u stands for the actual value of the indicator; μvi (u ) means the

1066

G. Liu et al.
Table 2. Firms’ client credit sale risk and corresponding credit line

Rat
e
1
2
3
4
5
6

Definition

Annotation / note

For the client with very good credit, firms could provide the a > b > c > d
most affordable credit risk.
Firms could adjust
For the client with better credit, firms could provide credit rate
and
credit
provide under a%.
indicator
For the client with average credit, firms could provide credit accordingly,
plus
risk under b%.
with some measures
For the client with bad credit, firms could provide credit risk if necessary.
under c%.
For the client with worse credit, firms could provide credit risk
under d%.
For the client with most terrible credit, firms would provide no
credit risk. Only can be conducted the transaction by cash.

membership degree of u to vi , a
constants, and

> 0, b is plus even number, a and b are unallocated

c is the constant when it is applied to membership degree

of vi level μvi (u ) = 1 .

(2) Membership degree of qualitative indicator
When choosing senior marketing personnel, financial personnel and business
management personnel, we should classify all the evaluative elements into groups
according to the already designated evaluation standard. And then calculate the
frequency M ij of each evaluate elements divided by level vi . At last the membership
degree would become clear:

μ ij = M ij n

(4)

From above membership function we can make out the degree

rijt of U i ’s

indicator u ij devised by the evaluation number t, the U i ’s fuzzy comprehensive
evaluation matrix:

⎡ ri11
⎢r
Ri = ⎢ i 21
⎢ ...
⎢
⎣ rin1

ri12
ri 22
...
rin 2

... ri1m ⎤
... ri 2 m ⎥⎥
... ... ⎥
⎥
... rinm ⎦

(5)

i is the quota’s number of each categorical element, that
is, U 1 , U 2 ,......, U 5 ; where n :the number of each evaluation indicator in U i ; m : the
In this matrix,

evaluation number of vector’s evaluation set. By the formula U i
get

the

fuzzy

comprehensive

evaluation

set

of

= ω i • Ri , we can

all

indicators

in

A Fuzzy Comprehensive Evaluation Method on Firms’ Credit Sale Risk

level

1067

U and U i = (bi1 , bi 2 ,..., bim ) , ω i stands for proportion vector of

each U i evaluation indicator, bit is get from M (•,⊕) operator, that is,

bit = ω i1 • ri1t ⊕ ωi 2 • ri 2t ⊕ ... ⊕ ωin • rint

(6)

This operator has to take all the elements’ weight into consideration, which fulfill
firms’ need of taking the whole synthesized indicator of client’s credit risk into
consideration.
3.3 The Credit Sale Time Limit
Credit sale time limit usually means the period from the time when clients buy the
commodity to the time of payment. Too long a period will cause some indefinite
elements and the corresponding cost. Too short a period would cause clients lose
interest, thus lose its function. Therefore, firms should set an appropriate credit sale
time limit for each would-be client.
Supposing all the clients would pay credit loan on time, and according to CapitalTime-Value Principle and the fact that credit profit will always be larger than credit
cost, together with credit line, firms will get the credit sale time limit to its clients.
[credit loan /（ 1+R） CT－sales cost－credit sales cost] / total cost ≥ R

(7)

In this formula, credit sale cost includes bad debts cost (credit loan×bad debts rate),
opportunity cost ((profit rate + loan interest) ×CT) and management cost (the
additional fee of receivable account). R stands for standard financial rate of return; CT
shows the credit sale time limit.
If clients want to extend credit sale time limit, firms can use the same method to
test whether the cost is equal to or larger than firm’s interest rate. If the answer is
positive, then the request is acceptable; otherwise, it would be refused.

4 Illustration
Suppose there is a company, its credit management department is evaluating a client’s
credit risk. Consulting its senior marketing personnel and management personnel, the
company works out a comparative evaluation matrix. Each indicator’s weight would
be clear by power method:
Indicator weights of U: (0.4185， 0.0973， 0.1599， 0.0618， 0.2625)；
Indicator weights of U1: (0.1007， 0.6738， 0.2255)；
Indicator weights of U2: (0.0667， 0.0260， 0.1099， 0.3648， 0.1958， 0.0410)；
Indicator weights of U3: (0.1441， 0.4699， 0.0792， 0.2619， 0.0448)；
Indicator weights of U4: (0.1172， 0.6144， 0.2684)；
Indicator weights of U5: (0.0901， 0.3466， 0.1668， 0.3466， 0.0500).
According to the membership function with a normal distribution and suggestions
from senior marketing personnel, financial personnel and management personnel,
client’s membership degree to each level should be:
U=(0.0885， 0.1178， 0.2730， 0.2124， 0.2008， 0.1075)

1068

G. Liu et al.

The conclusion is that the credit sale risk of this firm’s clients belongs to the third
rate and the credit line is 15% at the most. Through the formula (7), we can get that
the time limit available to the client is no more than 23 days.

5 Conclusion
This paper illustrates a systematic research of an firms’ credit sale policy and
evaluation on its client’s credit risk. There are three parts of this process: evaluating
clients’ credit risk by the fuzzy comprehensive evaluation method, working out
clients’ credit line with the consideration of clients’ credit rate, and calculating the
time limit of credit sale. Besides, the evaluation system also includes recovering the
money, result evaluation of credit department, etc., we will devote ourselves to these
researches in the future.

References
1. Wang Lianfen, Xu Shubai, Theory of Analytic Hierarchy Process (in Chinese), RENMIN
University of China Press, 1990.
2. Yang Lunbiao, Gao Yingyi, Fuzzy Mathematics Theory and Application (in Chinese),
South China University of Technology Press, 2003.
3. Peng Zuzeng, Sun Wenyu, Fuzzy Mathematics and its Application (in Chinese), Wuhan
University Press, 2002.
4. Zhou Zongfang, Tang Xiaowo, The Research on Ordering Structure of Credit[J].Journal of
Systems Science and Information, 2004,3（ 2） :531-534
5. Zhou Zongfang, Tang Xiaowo. Research on Targets Evaluation for Customers
Credit[J].Journal of Systems Science and Information, 2003,4（ 1） :635-638
6. Zhou Wenxin, Wang Jiancheng, The Fuzzy Comprehensive Evaluation Method of the
Credit Level of Firms Rating (in Chinese) [J], Systems Engineering, vol19 no4, pp72-75,
July 2001.
7. Lin Hanchuan, Xia Minren, Firms Rating Theory and Practice (in Chinese), University of
International Business and Economics Press, pp133-160, 2003.
8. Pu Xiaolei, Han Jiaping, Firms Credit Management paragon, China International Business
and Economics Press (China Commerce and Trade Press), 2001.

