Geometry-Driven Nonlinear Equation with an
Accelerating Coupled Scheme for Image Enhancement*
Shujun Fu1,2,**, Qiuqi Ruan2, Chengpo Mu3, and Wenqia Wang1
1

School of Mathematics and System Sciences, Shandong University, Jinan, 250100, China
2
Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, 100044, China
3
School of Aerospace Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology,
Beijing, 100081, China
**
shujunfu@163.com
Abstract. In this paper, a geometry-driven nonlinear shock-diffusion equation is
presented for image denoising and edge sharpening. An image is divided into
three-type different regions according to image features: edges, textures and
details, and flat areas. For edges, a shock-type backward diffusion is performed
in the gradient direction to the isophote line (edge), incorporating a forward
diffusion in the isophote line direction; while for textures and details, a soft
backward diffusion is done to enhance image features preserving a natural transition. Moreover, an isotropic diffusion is used to smooth flat areas simultaneously. Finally, a shock capturing scheme with a special limiter function is
developed to speed the process with numerical stability. Experiments on real
images show that this method produces better visual results of the enhanced
images than some related equations.

1 Introduction
Main information of an image resides in such features as its edges, local details and
textures. Image features are not only very important to the visual quality of the image,
but also are significant to image post processing tasks, for example, image segmentation, image recognition and image comprehension, etc. Among image features, edges
are the most general and important, which partition different objectives in an image.
Because of some limitations of imaging process, however, edges may not be sharp in
images. In addition to noise, both small intensity difference across edge and big edge
width would result in a weak and blurry edge [1].
In the past decades there has been a growing amount of research concerning partial
differential equations (PDEs) in image enhancement, such as anisotropic diffusion filters
[2-5] for edge preserving noise removal, and shock filters [6-9] for edge sharpening. A
great deal of successful applications of nonlinear evolving PDEs in “low level” image
*

This work was supported by the natural science fund of Shandong province, P.R. China (No.
Y2006G08); the researcher fund for the special project of Beijing Jiaotong University, P.R.
China (No. 48109); the open project of the National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition at the
Institute of Automation of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, P.R. China; the general program
project of School of Mathematics and System Sciences of Shandong University, P.R. China
(No. 306002).

Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part I, LNCS 4487, pp. 490–496, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Geometry-Driven Nonlinear Equation with an Accelerating Coupled Scheme

491

processing can mainly be attributed to their two basic characteristics: “to be local” and “to
be iterative”. The word “differential” means that an algorithm is of local processing, while
the word “evolving” means that it is of iterative one when numerically implemented.
One of most influential work in using partial differential equations (PDEs) in image
processing is the anisotropic diffusion (AD) filter, which was proposed by P. Perona
and J. Malik [3] for image denoising, enhancement, sharpening, etc. The scalar diffusivity is chosen as a non-increasing function to govern the behaviour of the diffusion
process. Different from the nonlinear parabolic diffusion process, L. Alvarez and L.
Mazorra [7] proposed an anisotropic diﬀusion with shock filter (ADSF) equation by
adding a hyperbolic equation, called shock Filter which was introduced by S.J. Osher
and L.I. Rudin [6], for noise elimination and edge sharpening.
In image enhancement and sharpening, it is crucial to preserve and even enhance
image features when one removes image noise and sharpens edges at the same time.
Therefore, image enhancement is composed of two steps: features detection and the
processings by corresponding tactic according to different features.
In this paper, incorporating anisotropic diffusion with shock filter, we present a geometry-driven nonlinear shock-diffusion equation to remove image noise, and to
sharpen edges by reducing their width simultaneously.
An image comprises regions with different features. Utilizing the techniques of differential geometry, we partition local structures and features of image into flat areas,
edges, details such as corners, junctions and fine lines, and textures. These structures
should be treated differently to obtain a better result in an image processing task. In our
algorithm, for edges between different objects, a shock-type backward diffusion is
performed in the gradient direction to the isophote line (edge), incorporating a forward
diffusion in the isophote line direction. For textures and details, shock filters with the
sign function enhance image features in a binary decision process, which produce
unfortunately a false piecewise constant result. To overcome this drawback, we use a
hyperbolic tangent function to control softly changes of gray levels of the image. As a
result, a soft shock-type backward diffusion is introduced to enhance these features
while preserving a natural transition in these areas. Finally, an isotropic diffusion is
used to smooth flat areas simultaneously.
In order to solve effectively the nonlinear equation to obtain discontinuous solution
with numerical stability, after we have discussed the difficulty of the numerical implementation to this type equation, a shock capturing scheme is developed with a special limiter function to speed the process.
This paper is organized as follows. In section 2, some related equations are introduced for enhancing images: anisotropic diffusions and shock filters. Then, we propose
a geometry-driven shock-diffusion equation. In section 3, we implement the proposed
method and test it on real images. Conclusions are presented in section 4

2 Geometry-Driven Shock-Diffusion Equation
2.1 Differentials of a Typical Ramp Edge and Edge Sharpening
We first analyze differential properties of a typical ramp edge. In Fig.1 (a), a denotes
the profile of a ramp edge, whose center point is o, and, b and c denote its first and

492

S. Fu et al.

second differential curves respectively. It is evident that b increases in value from 0
gradually, reaches its maximum at o, and then decreases to 0; while c changes its sign at
o, from positive to negative in value. Here we control changes of gray level beside the
edge center o. More precisely, we reduce gray levels of pixels on the left of o (whose
second derivatives are positive), while increase those on the right of o (whose second
derivatives are negative), by which the edge can be sharpened by reducing its width
(see Fig.1 (b)). Shock-type diffusions later are just based on above analysis.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 1. Differentials of a typical ramp edge and edge Sharpening. (a) Differentials of 1D typical
ramp edge a, with center o, and the first and second differentials b, c respectively; (b) Edge
sharpening process (the solid line), compared with original edge (the broken line).

2.2 Local Differential Structure of Image
Consider image as a real function u ( x, y ) on a 2D rectangular domain Ω , and image
edge is isophote line (level set line), along which the image intensity is constant. Image
gradient is a vector, uN = ∇u = (u x , u y ) . If ∇u ≠ 0 , then a local coordinates system can
be defined at a point o:

K
K
N= ∇u ∇u , T= ∇u ⊥ ∇u ⊥

where ∇u ⊥ = ( −u y , u x ) . The Hessian matrix of image function u ( x, y ) is :

⎛ u xx u xy ⎞
Hu = ⎜
⎟
⎝ u xy u yy ⎠
Τ
For two vectors X and Y , we define HK u (X,Y
K ) = X H uY . Thus, we have the second
directional derivatives in the directions N and T :
K K
2
uNN =H u (N ,N ) = (u x2u xx + u y2u yy + 2u x u y u xy ) ∇u
K K

uTT =H u (T ,T ) = (u x2u yy + u 2y u xx − 2u x u y u xy ) ∇u
By calculating, the curvature of isophote line at a point o is :
K
3
k = div(N) = uTT ∇u = (u x2u yy + u y2u xx − 2u xu y u xy ) ∇u 2
where div is a divergence operator.
2

2.3 The Geometry-Driven Shock-Diffusion Equation
An image comprises regions with different features, such as edges, textures and details,
and flat areas, which should be treated differently to obtain a better result in an image

Geometry-Driven Nonlinear Equation with an Accelerating Coupled Scheme

493

processing task. We divide an image into three-type regions by its smoothed gradient
magnitude.
For edges between different objects, a shock-type backward diffusion is performed
in the gradient direction, incorporating a forward diffusion in the isophote line. For
textures and details, in equations (3) and (4), to enhance an image using the sign function sign(x) is a binary decision process, which is a hard partition without middle
transition. Unfortunately, the obtained result is a false piecewise constant image in
some areas producing bad visual quality. We notice that the change of texture and detail
is gradual in these areas. In order to approach this change, we use a hyperbolic tangent
membership function th(x) to guarantee a natural smooth transition in these areas, by
controlling softly changes of gray levels of the image. As a result, a soft shock-type
backward diffusion is introduced to enhance these features. Finally, an isotropic diffusion is used to smooth flat areas simultaneously.
Thus, incorporating shock filter with anisotropic diffusion, we develop a nonlinear
geometry-driven shock-diffusion equation (GSE) process to reduce noise, and to
sharpen edges while preserving image features simultaneously: Let ( x, y ) ∈ Ω ⊂ R 2 ,
and t ∈ [ 0, + ∞) , a multi-scale image u ( x, y, t ): Ω × [ 0, + ∞) → R ,

⎧ uG = Gσ ∗ u
⎪
(1)
⎨ ∂u
=
+
−
(
)sign((
)
)
c
u
c
u
w
u
u
u
N NN
T TT
NN
N
G NN
⎪⎩ ∂t
with Neumann boundary condition, where the parameters are chosen as follows according to different image regions:

w(uNN )

cN

cT

(uG ) N > T1
T2 < (uG ) N ≤ T1

0

1 (1 + l1 u )

1

0

1 (1 + l1 u )

th(l2 uNN )

else

1

1

0

2
TT
2
TT

where Gσ is defined in previous section, c N and cT are the normal and tangent flow
control coefficients respectively. The tangent flow control coefficient is used to prevent
excess smoothness to smaller details; l2 is a parameter to control the gradient of the
membership function th(x); T1 and T2 are two thresholds; l1 and l2 are constants. 3.
Numerical Implementation and Experimental Results

3 Numerical Implementation and Experimental Results
3.1 A Shock Capturing Scheme
Nonlinear convection-diffusion evolution equation is a very important model in the
fluid dynamics, which can be used to depict transmission processes of momentum,
energy and mass of fluid. Because of its hyperbolic characteristic, the solution to the
convection-diffusion equation often has discontinuity even if its initial condition is very
smooth. Mathematically only weak solution can be obtained here. If a weak solution

494

S. Fu et al.

satisfies the entropic increase principle for an adiabatic irreversible system, then it is
called a shock wave.
When one solves numerically a convection-diffusion equation using a difference
scheme, he may find some annoying problems in numerical simulation, such as instability, over smoothing, spurious oscillation or wave shift of a scheme. The reason for
above is that, despite the original equation are deduced according to some physical
conversation laws, its discrete equation may deviate from these laws, which can bring
about numerical dissipation, numerical dispersion and group velocity of wave packets
effects in numerical solutions specially for the hyperbolic term. Therefore, the hyperbolic term must be discretized carefully so that the flow of small scale and shock waves
can be captured accurately.
Besides of satisfying consistence and stability, a good numerical scheme also need
to capture shock waves. One method to capture shock waves is to add artificial viscosity term to the difference scheme for controlling and limiting numerical fluctuations
near shock waves. But by this method it is inconvenient to adjust free parameters for
different tasks, and the resolution of shocks can also be affected. Another method is to
try to stop from numerical fluctuations before them appear, which is based on the TVD
(Total Variation Diminishing) and nonlinear limiters. Their main idea is to use a limiter
function to control the change of the numerical solution by a nonlinear way, and the
corresponding schemes satisfy the TVD condition and eliminate above disadvantage
effects, which guarantee of capturing shock waves with a high resolution.
In a word, when solving numerically a nonlinear convection-diffusion equation like
(1) using a difference scheme, the hyperbolic term must be discretized carefully
because discontinuity solutions, numerical instability and spurious oscillation may
appear. Shock capturing methods with high resolution are effective tools. For more
details, we refer the reader to the book [10]. Here, we develop a speeding scheme by
using a proper limiter function.
An explicit Euler method with central difference scheme is used to approximate
equation (1) except the gradient term uN . Below we detail a numerical approach to it.
On the image grid, the approximate solution is to satisfy:

uijn ≈ u (ih, jh, nΔt ), i, j , n ∈ Z +

(2)

△

where h and t are the spatial and temporal step respectively. Let h = 1, δ +uijn and δ −uijn
are forward and backward difference schemes of uijn respectively. A limiter function MS
is used to approximate the gradient term:

uN = (MS (δ x+uijn , δ x−uijn ))2 + (MS (δ y+uijn , δ y−uijn ))2

(3)

where

⎧ x,
⎪
⎪ y,
MS ( x, y ) = ⎨
⎪ x,
⎪0,
⎩

x< y
x > y
x = y and xy > 0
x = y and xy ≤ 0

(4)

Geometry-Driven Nonlinear Equation with an Accelerating Coupled Scheme

495

The MS function bears fewer 0 in value than the minmod function does in the x-y plane,
which also make the scheme satisfy the numerical stability. Because the gradient term
represents the transport speed of the scheme, the MS function makes our scheme evolve
faster with a bigger transport speed than those with the minmod function.
In [8], other than above flux limitation technique, a fidelity term (u − u0 ) is used to
carry out the stabilization task, and they also displayed that the SNRs of results tend
towards 0 if af = 0 . However, this is not enough to eliminate overshoots, and this term
also affect its performance.
3.2 The Coupled Iteration
Based on preceding discussion, when implementing iteratively equation (1), we find
that the shock and diffusion forces will cancel mutually in a single formula. We split
equation (1) into two formulas and propose the following coupled scheme by iterating
with time steps:

⎧v 0 = u 0 , uG = Gσ ∗ u
⎪ n +1
n
n
n
⎨v = u + Δt ( − w(uNN )sign((uG ) NN ) uN )
⎪u n +1 = v n +1 + Δt (c v n +1 + c v n +1 )
N NN
T TT
⎩

(5)

where Δt is the time step, u 0 is an original image. By computing iteratively in the order
of u 0 → v 0 → v1 → u 1 → v 2 → u 2 → " , we obtain the enhanced image after some
steps.
3.3 Experiments
We present results obtained by using our scheme (5), and compare its performance with
those of above related methods, where the parameters are selected such that best results
are obtained for all methods.
We compare performances of related methods on the blurred Cameraman image
(Gaussian blur, σ =2.5) with added high level noise (SNR=14dB). In this case, weaker
features are smeared by big noise in the image, which are difficult to be restored
completely. As it can be seen, although the AD method denoises the image well specially in the smoother segments, it produces the blurry image with unsharp edges,
whose ability to sharpen edges is limited, because of its poor sharpening process with
the improper diffusion coefficient along the gradient direction. Moreover, with the
diffusion coefficient in inverse proportion to the image gradient magnitude along the
tangent direction, it does not diffuse fully in this direction and presents rough contours.
For the ADSF method, though it sharpens edges very well, in a binary decision
process they yield the false piecewise constant images, which look unnatural with a
discontinueous transition in the homogenous areas. Further, it cannot reduce noise well
only by a single directional diffusion in the smoother regions.
The best visual quality is obtained by enhancing the image using GSE, which enhances most features of the image with a natural transition in the homogenous areas,
and produces pleasing sharp edges and smooth contours while denoising the image
effectively.

496

S. Fu et al.

Finally, we discuss the performances of these methods in smoothing image contours
on bigger gradients in the tangent direction of edges. As we explain above, image
contours obtained by AD are not smooth with blurry edges in the gradient direction.
The results obtained using ADSF and GSE respectively all present smooth contours in
the tangent direction.

4 Conclusions
This paper deals with image enhancement for noisy blurry images. By reducing the
width of edges, a geometry-driven nonlinear shock-diffusion equation is proposed to
remove noise and to sharpen edges.
Our model performs a powerful process to noise blurry images, by which we not
only can remove noise and sharpen edges effectively, but also can smooth image contours even in the presence of high level noise. Enhancing image features such as edges,
textures and details with a natural transition in interior areas, this method produces
better visual quality than some relative equations.

References
1. Castleman, K.R.: Digital Image Processing, Prentice Hall (1995).
2. Aubert, G., Kornprobst, P.: Mathematical Problems in Image Processing: Partial Differential Equations and the Calculus of Variations, vol.147 of Applied Mathematical Sciences,
Springer-Verlag (2001).
3. Perona, P., Malik, J.: Scale-space and edge detection using anisotropic diffusion. IEEE
Trans. Pattern Anal. Machine Intell., 12(7)(1990) 629-639.
4. Nitzberg, M., Shiota, T.: Nonlinear image filtering with edge and corner enhancement. IEEE
Transactions on PAMI, 14(8)(1992) 826-833.
5. You, Y.L., Xu, W., Tannenbaum, A., Kaveh, M.: Behavioral analysis of anisotropic diffusion in image processing. IEEE Trans. on Image Processing, 5(11)(1996) 1539-1553.
6. Osher, S.J., Rudin, L.I.: Feature-oriented image enhancement using shock filters. SIAM J.
Numer. Anal., 27(1990) 919-940.
7. Alvarez, L., Mazorra, L.: Signal and image restoration using shock filters and anisotropic
diffusion. SIAM J. Numer. Anal., 31(2)(1994) 590-605.
8. Kornprobst, P., Deriche, R., Aubert, G.: Image coupling, restoration and enhancement via
PDE’s. IEEE ICIP, 2(1997) 458-461.
9. Gilboa, G., Sochen, N., Zeevi, Y.Y.: Image Enhancement and denoising by complex diffusion processes. IEEE Transactions on PAMI, 26(8)( 2004) 1020-1036.
10. Liu, R.X., Shu, Q.W.: Some new methods in Computing Fluid Dynamics, Science Press of
China, Beijing (2004).

