Implementing Virtual Buffer for Electric Power Grids
Rong Gao and Lefteri H. Tsoukalas
Applied Intelligent Systems Lab, School of Nuclear Enigineering, Purdue University,
400 Central Drive, West Lafaytte, IN, USA
{gao, tsoukala}@ecn.purdue.edu

Abstract. The electric power grid is a vital network for every aspect of our life.
The lack of buffer between generation and consumption makes the power grid
unstable and fragile. While large scale power storage is not technically and
economically feasible at present stage, we argue that a virtual buffer could be
effectively implemented through a demand side management strategy built
upon the concept of dynamic data driven paradigm. An intelligent scheduling
module implemented inside a smart meter enables customers to access
electricity safely and economically. The managed use of electricity acts
effectively as a buffer to provide the much needed stability for the power grid.
Pioneering efforts intending to implement these concepts have been conducted
by groups such as the Consortium for the Intelligent Management of Electric
Grid. Progresses have been made and reported in this paper.
Keywords: Electric Power Grid, Artificial Intelligence, Dynamic Data Driven.

1 Introduction
The electric power grid is a vital network for every aspect of our life. The grid is so
complex that it experiences the same instability problem as other complex systems do
[1]. The system can ran into an unstable point without notice until a large scale
collapse spreads, such as the major northeast blackout of 2003. The fragile nature of
the electric power grid, to a great extend, has to do with the fact that electricity can
not be stored in the grid. Electricity is consumed when it is generated. The lack of
cushion between generation and consumption constitutes a major unstable factor for
the power system.
On the other hands, it is helpful to study another example of complex system, the
Internet. The Internet connects billions of users in the world. The degrees of
connectivity and irregularity are enormous. Yet surprisingly high stability is achieved
considering the openness provide by the Internet. Users have the maximum freedom
to use the resources with little restriction, something that is hard to imagine for the
electric power grid. The key behind this impressive performance is the protocols, a set
of rules that very player agrees to. Protocols regulate the creation, transfer and use of
the resources. The Internet protocols roots on the assumption that very one has equal
access to the resources on the network. This principle of fairness is the guideline for
resolving conflict originated from the competition of resources. The protocols are the
reason why the Internet is able to maintain functional under malignant environment.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part I, LNCS 4487, pp. 1083 – 1089, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

1084

R. Gao and L.H. Tsoukalas

The protocols are feasible and enforceable because of one big assumption that the
resource (information) can be stored somewhere in the network. This assumption is
the cornerstone for many key concepts in the protocols, such as routing and conflict
resolving. In the Internet, resources are generated, stored, and consumed. The lag
between generation and consumption ranges from milliseconds to seconds or minutes
depending on the traffic in the network. The delay has proven an important stabling
factor for the network.
Having had a successful case at hand, it is natural to ask whether we can duplicate
the same kind of success in the electric power grid. As the initial attempts, we can try to
develop protocols similar to the ones used in the Internet to regulate the generation,
transportation, and consumption of the electricity. This is certainly unrealistic for the
current power grid. However, as the discussion and research on smart power meter have
been going for a while, we have the reason to believe that in the near future every
household will have one of these intelligent device installed. The intelligent meter is
connected to the network and is able to communicate with the outside world such as the
electricity supplier. The meter will have the computing capability, making possible the
implementation of a set of fairy complicated protocols. With these smart meters at our
disposal, there is only one thing between us and the Internet-type stable electric power
grid - we need the means to store electricity. There have been lots of efforts being spent
on electricity storage. Some successes have been reported [2]. But the solution for large
scale storage that can make a big impact to the power grid is still not technically and
economically feasible. In this paper, we argue that through the utilization of information
technologies, we can implement a virtual buffer between the generation and
consumption without the need to physically store the electricity in the grid.

2 Virtual Buffer for Electric Power Grid
As we know, the lack of buffer between generation and consumption is the source of
problem for many complex systems such as the electric power grid. Even though we
don't have a feasible way to physically store large amount of electricity in the network
so far, we are able to mimic the effect of storage through a virtual buffer.
A virtual buffer between generation and consumption can be created through
demand side management strategy which is build upon the practices of dynamic data
driven paradigms. With the emergence of intelligent meters, it is possible to
dynamically schedule the use of electricity of every customer. This dynamic
scheduling will create a sheet of virtual buffer for generation and consumption as we
argue here. Under the new paradigm, the consumption of electricity of every customer
is intelligently managed. Customers don’t power up their electricity-hungry machines
at will. Rather, they make smart decisions after balancing the costs and benefits. For
example, some non-urgent activities, such as laundry, can be scheduled to sometime
during the day when electricity is abundant and cheap. The costs of the electricity are
determined by the supply-to-demand ratio and the capacity of the network to transfer
the resources. This managed use of resources is analogous to the access control
widely used in the Internet. A buffer between generation and consumption is therefore
created, virtually. No physic laws are broke. The electricity is still actually consumed

Implementing Virtual Buffer for Electric Power Grids

1085

when generated. However, from the customer point of view, with dynamic
consumption scheduling the resources (electricity) are created and then stored
somewhere in the power grid before they are used. The analogy is shown in Fig. 1.
The virtual buffer can greatly increase the stability of the power grid.

Buffered Network
Internet

Unbuffered Network
Intelligent Power Grid

Virtual
buffer

Fig. 1. Internet and Power Grid with Virtual Buffer

Dynamic scheduling has to be carried out by software agents or intelligent agents.
The intelligent agents will act on behalf of their clients, making reasonable decision
based the analysis of the situation. One of the most important analysis powers an
agent has to possess is the anticipation capability. The intelligent agent needs to
predict its client's future consumption pattern to make scheduling possible. In other
words, load forecasting capability is the central piece for such a system. A pioneering
effort, conducted by CIMEG, has recognized this need and advanced many techniques
to make that possible.

1086

R. Gao and L.H. Tsoukalas

3 CIMEG and TELOS
In 1999, EPRI and DOD funded the Consortium for the Intelligent Management of the
Electric Power Grid (CIMEG) to develop intelligent approaches to defend power
systems against potential threats [3]. CIMEG was led by Purdue University and
included partners from The University of Tennessee, Fisk University, TVA and ComEd
(now Exelon). CIMEG advanced an anticipatory control paradigm with which power
systems can act proactively based on early perceptions of potential threats. It uses a
bottom-up approach to circumvent the technical difficulty of defining the global health
of power system at the top level, ash shown in Fig. 2. The concept of Local Area Grid
(LAG) is extremely important in CIMEG. A LAG is a demand-based autonomous
entity consisting of an appropriated mixture of different customers, charged with the
necessary authority to maintain its own health by regulating or curtailing the power
consumption of its members. Once all LAGs have achieved security, the whole grid,
which is constructed by a number of LAGs in a hierarchical manner, achieves security
as well. To pursue the health of a LAG, intelligent agents are used. Intelligent agents
monitor every load within the LAG, forecasting the power consumption of each
individual load and taking anticipatory actions to prevent potential cascade of faults. A
prototypical system called the Transmission Entities with Learning-capabilities and Online Self-healing (TELOS) has been developed and implemented in the service area of
Exelon-Chicago and Argonne National Laboratory [4].
Generators
To other LAGs

To other LAGs

Transmission
Generators

Sub-transmission

Customer-Side
Agent Space

Distribution

Residential Customers

Medium-Large
Customer

Large Customers
Very Large
Customers

Fig. 2. CIMEG’s picture of electric power grid

Implementing Virtual Buffer for Electric Power Grids

1087

CIMEG’s mission is to create a platform for managing the power grid intelligently. In
CIMEG’s vision, customers play more active role than in current power system
infrastructure. Lots of solicitation and negotiations are involved, as shown in Fig. 3. The
customer, who is represented by an intelligent meter in Fig. 3, predicts its need for the
electricity and place order in the market. The amount of the order is influenced by the
market price of the electricity, which is further determined by the difference of the demand
and supply and also the capacity of the network. Economic models with price elasticity are
used in the process [5]. The active interaction between customers and suppliers create a
virtual buffer between consumption and generation as discussed earlier.

Power
Pred.

Power
Flow

Ordering

Transmission/
Distribution
Agent

Intelligent Meter
Economi
c
Model

N

Y

Pricing Info
Economi
c
Model

Security
Check

Power
Flow

N

Backup

N

Capacity
Check

Y

Schedule

Y
Generation Agent

Fig. 3. Interactions between customers and suppliers

One of the key assumptions taken by CIMEG is that the demand of customers can
be predicted to a useful degree of accuracy. Among many existing prediction
algorithms, neural networks outperform others because of their superb capabilities in
handling non-linear behaviors [6].
TELOS achieves improved forecasting accuracy by performing load forecast
calculations at the customer site. The customer is capable of tracking local weather
conditions as well as the local load demand. TELOS forecasts are based on neurofuzzy algorithms, which are highly adaptive to changing conditions. Preliminary
results show that simple feed forward neural networks are well suited to predicting
load at the customer scale. Fig. 4 shows neural-network-based load prediction for a
large commercial customer.

1088

R. Gao and L.H. Tsoukalas

Fig. 4. Neural-network-based load forecasting for actual commercial customer

error is 0.087
0.8
prediction
original data

0.6
0.4
0.2
0
20

40

60

80

100

120

140

error is 0.03
0.8
final prediction
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
20

40

60

80

100

120

140

Fig. 5. The prediction results with (bottom) and without (upper) compensations

Implementing Virtual Buffer for Electric Power Grids

1089

Neural networks are well qualified for handling steady state cases, wherever
typical behaviors have been seen and generalized. Some unexpected events such as
favorite sport programs seriously cause enormous error in prediction. CIMEG has
developed a fuzzy logic module to process such situation. This module, called
PROTREND, quickly detects any deviation from the steady state and generates a
compensation for the final prediction. The results in Fig. 5 show a consumption
pattern over a winter break. PROTREND effectively compensates a large portion of
errors and makes the final prediction results more reliable.

4 Conclusions and Future Work
A regulation between generation and consumption is vital for the stability of a
complex system with limited resources. An effective way for regulation is to create
buffers where resources can stored when not needed and released when requested. We
have shown that an effective form of buffer can be simulated with the intelligent
management of the consumption when no means of storage is available. CIMEG has
made some promising results, demonstrating the feasibility of intelligent management
based on the anticipation of consumption. Accurate load forecasting is possible.
However, CIMEG's demo was implemented on a very small system. Large scale
demonstrations are necessary, both on simulation and theoretical analysis.

Acknowledgments
This project is partly supported by the National Science Foundation under contract no
0540342-CNS.

References
1. Amin, M.:Toward Self-Healing Energy Infrastructure Systems. In: IEEE Compouter
Applications in Power, Volume 14, Number 1, 220-28 (2001)
2. Ribeiro, P. F., et al: Energy Storage Systems for Advanced Power Application.In:
Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol 89, Issue 12, p1744-1756,(2001)
3. CIMEG, Intelligent Management of the Power Grid: An Anticipatory, Multi-Agent, High
Performance Computing Approach, EPRI, Palo Alto, CA, and Applied Intelligent Systems
Lab, School of Nuclear Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, 2004
4. Gao, R., Tsoukalas, L. H.:Anticipatory Paradigm for Modern Power System Protection.
In:ISAP, Lemnos, Greece (2003)
5. Gao, R., Tsoukalas, L. H.: Short-Term Elasticities via Intelligent Tools for Modern Power
Systems,.In: MedPower’02, Athens, Greece(2002)
6. Tsoukalas, L., Uhrig, R. : Fuzzy and Neural Approaches in Engineering. New York: Wiley,
(1997)

