A Nonlinear Model for Predicting ECG R-R
Interval Variation Based on the Evolutionary
Computation Approach
Bo Yeon Kim1 , Yun Seok Chang2 , and Kwang Suk Park3
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Kangwon National University
Chuncheon, Korea
2
Department of Computer Engineering, Daejin University, Pocheon, Korea
3
Department of Biomedical Engineering, College of Medicine, Seoul National
University, Seoul, Korea

Abstract. The study proposes a modeling method for nonlinear system,
which predicts characteristics of the ECG R-R interval variation. For
determining model equation, we adopted genetic programming method
that the chromosome represented the model equation consisting of timedelayed variables, constants, and four arithmetic operators. By the genetic programming the regressive nonlinear equations were produced and
evolved to ﬁnd the optimal model equation which could simulate the
spectral, statistical and nonlinear behavior of the given R-R interval
dynamics. Experimental results showed that the evolutionary approach
could ﬁnd the equation that simulates the spectral and chaotic dynamics of the given signal. Therefore the proposed evolutionary approach is
useful for the system identiﬁcation of the nonlinear biological system.

1

Introduction

Researchers have often considered that a biological system produces signals being
regular and periodic under the normal state. Recently, some clinical observations
have indicated that a biological signal seems to be irregular and non-periodic for
the normal states, but surprisingly becomes periodic and regular for the abnormal state, for instance, EEG of petitmal epilepsy, heart rate.[12,13,7] Therefore
the chaotic biological signals can be represented by an equation or a group of
equations. In our study, we have taken into consideration a deterministic approach for describing a nonlinear biological system and its intrinsic mechanisms.
We had attempted to ﬁnd a nonlinear equation with some control parameters
to describe the chaotic characteristics of a biological system.
Traditionally , AR model is the most common method to ﬁt a signal from
a linear system. In PAR, a current heart rate HR(k) is deﬁned by a quadratic
nonlinear function of sum of former heart rate products products
bij x(k − i)x(k − j)
i

j

P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2657, pp. 378–386, 2003.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

A Nonlinear Model for Predicting ECG R-R Interval Variation

379

plus the AR component. In bilinear, a current heart rate x(k) is deﬁned by a
quadratic nonlinear function of sum of former heart rate products
bij x(k − i)e(k − j)
i

j

plus the ARMA component, where e(k − j) = x(k − j) − x(k − j) , bij is the
coeﬃcients to be found and e(j) is the error that the diﬀerence of the measured
vaue of x from that estimated at the j-th time delay. PAR requires long computer running time (input signals normally less than 250 points) and require the
predetermined structure of the function for ﬁtting.
Unlike the previous PAR and Bilinear, in the study adopted Genetic programming (GP) approach that was not based on AR method. GP does not require the
predetermined structure of the function for ﬁtting and ﬁnds the structure of the
function as well as the values of the coeﬃcients which represent best given input signals. Genetic programming (GP) is known one of the searching methods,
which evolves solutions iteratively until, by natural selection, it ﬁnds the best
satisﬁed solution to given criteria. The study accounted for the R-R intervals of
ECG from a normal child which were shown to be irregular and non-periodic.
Aim of the study was to determine a nonlinear equation optimally ﬁtted to the
characteristics of the R-R intervals using the genetic programming.

2
2.1

Method
Proposed Genetic Programming Method for Modeling a
Chaotic Signal

The developed method in this study employs a genetic programming (GP) approach and ﬁnds a polynomial function consisting of the constants and variables
and optimally ﬁtting to a measured physiological signals. The polynomial function that the proposed method predicts is composed of arithmetic operators,
time-delayed variables and constants and has the form deﬁned by
Xn = f (a1 , a2 , ...., am : Xn−1 , ...., Xn−k )

(1)

where a1 , ...., am are constants and Xn−1 , ...., Xn−k are time-delayed variables.
If a chromosome is deﬁned as a polynomial expression, GP creates many
shapes of polynomials by the crossover and mutation operation. Since GP is
able to handle polynomials, it can be appropriate to ﬁnd a polynomial in the
shape of the equation (1) which characterizes or models a given signal.
To ﬁnd the best model equation for a given time series using GP, we took
the following steps.
1st step : design of chromosomes
2nd step : determine ﬁtness function
3rd step : set the genetic operators and execution control parameters
4th step : run the program for an optimal polynomial
Details of each step will be given below.

380

2.2

B.Y. Kim, Y.S. Chang, and K.S. Park

Design of Chromosomes

Table 1 shows the elements and the structure of the chromosomes for ﬁnding
the model equation of ECG R-R intervals. Since the number of variables was
not known for the measured signal that is ECG R-R intervals, we set it here as
large as the computing time and accuracy reasonably acceptable. In the present
study we took 9 variables for the ECG RR interval signals. The terminal of
a chromosome was a set of constants and time-delayed variables. The value
of the constants was ranged from 0.01 to 9.99. The primitive function was a
set of arithmetic operators which were used to construct a polynomial. The
operators were addition, subtraction, multiplication and division, and in this
study it was assumed that a nonlinear equation could be approximated using
those four operators.
Since each model equation has the same left-hand part as shown in table
1, the left-hand term and equal operator, ’Xn =’, was excluded to set a chromosome. Therefore, a chromosome represents only the right-hand part of the
model equation, and is constructed by time-delayed variables, constants, and
arithmetic operators.
Table 1. Structure of chromosomes for the nonlinear systems. Where Xn−1 , ...Xn−k
are time-delayed variables and a, b, c, ..., k are constants as control parameters
R-R interval variation
Time series of normal R-R interval
Xn = f (a, b, c, ..., k; Xn−1 , ..., Xn−9 )
f (a, b, c, ..., k; Xn−1 , ..., Xn−9 )
in preﬁx notation
Terminals
{a, b, c, ..., k; Xn−1 , ..., Xn−9 }
Number of time-delayed variable
9
Number of constants
no restriction
Primitive functions
{+,-,x,/}
Input data
Model equation
Chromosome

2.3

Determine Fitness Function

The measure of the ﬁtness was deﬁned by the inverse of the weighted sum of the
parametric diﬀerences between the original and the estimated time series. The
parametric diﬀerences are the diﬀerences on the 6 parameters (mean, variances,
regional histograms, range, fractal dimensions of projected dots, box-counting
dimension of signal, correlation integrals and square sum of diﬀerence of the two
signals.[1,2,4,5,15,9,14]
The regional histogram means the number of points in the equally segmented
regional bin from the minimum value to maximum value. Box-counting dimension of signal was computed as following function.

A Nonlinear Model for Predicting ECG R-R Interval Variation

D0 = lim

x→0

381

ln M ( )
ln(1/ )

where is the length of 2-dimensional box, M ( ) is the minimum number of
boxes to cover the signal.
2.4

Genetic Parameters for the Execution Control

The proper rates for three genetic operations were adjusted in experiments. For
each operation, 1 or 2 chromosomes were selected by the roulette wheel method
as parent chromosomes, with a probability based on the ﬁtness.
In the present study, we set the range of the values of the control parameters
related to the execution of GP as following :
–
–
–
–
–

the number of chromosomes in a generation: 100 to 500
the number of generations : 50 to 300
crossover rate : 0.3 to 0.7
mutation rate : 0.1 to 0.5
reproduction rate : 0.1 to 0.3

Note that the chromosomes produced by the GP are all the candidates for a ﬁnal
polynomial. The total number of the candidates are created under the condition
are 5000 to 150000.
If the iteration number of GP is reached to the maximum, the present GP
is terminated. The model function best-ﬁtted for the input signal can be constructed from the chromosome which has the maximum value of the ﬁtness
measure in all generations.
2.5

Simulation Procedure for an Optimal Polynomial

In the computer program for simulation, the chromosome is expressed by the
preﬁx notation where the operator precedes the operands and is manipulated by
a tree structure. The simulation program runs the following 3 steps :
1. Generate an initial population with random proportions of the functions and
terminals deﬁned in Table 1. The chromosomes produced by the present GP
are the right-hand part of the model equation.
2. Iteratively perform the following substeps until the terminal criterion has
been satisﬁed.
a) Evaluate each chromosome in the population and assign it a ﬁtness value.
From each chromosome, generate time series using the same initial value
of the given time series and calculate the statistical and nonlinear characteristics for generated time series. Measure the ﬁtness using calculated
values of the statistical and nonlinear characteristics.
b) Create population for the new generation by applying the three genetic
operations as follows. Those operations are applied to chromosomes in
the population with probabilities based on their ﬁtness. During genetic
operations, the reselection of chromosomes is allowed.

382

B.Y. Kim, Y.S. Chang, and K.S. Park

i. Reproduce an existing chromosome in a population of the current
generation by copying it into a population of the next generation.
ii. Create two new chromosomes from two parent chromosomes by
crossover using 2-point crossover, that is, the middle part of 3 partitions is switched.
iii. Create a new chromosome by mutating a randomly chosen part with
randomly produced polynomial.
3. Choose a chromosome that has the maximum ﬁtness. And then, to construct
a model equation, convert the best-ﬁtting chromosome from the preﬁx notation to the in-order notation and added ’Xn =’ in front of the converted
expression.

3

Experiments and Results

ECG was recorded from 5 normal child relaxed for 15 minutes and was sampled at
1000Hz and digitized via 12 bit A/D converter, and then stored on a PC at Seoul
National Children’s Hospital. Application of the R wave detection algorithm
suggested by Thomkins et al to the acquired signal resulted in the R-R interval
time series was obtained to be used as an input signal to the present genetic
program.
The genetic programming for modeling a nonlinear behavior of the biological
signals was written in C compiler and run on the SUN SPARC 20. The running
time varied by the values of the execution control parameters and the shapes of
the ﬁtness function. It was found that, as expected, the simulated results became
more accurate as the number of generations and chromosomes increased. The
optimum values of the execution control parameters which enabled the program
to give the most accurate results for minimum time were as follows;
–
–
–
–
–
–

the number of input data points: 512
the number of chromosomes in a generation: 500
the number of generations : 300
crossover rate : 0.3
mutation rate : 0.49
reproduction rate : 0.21

Figure 1 shows the measured R-R interval time series, where the label n
indicates the n − th heart beat and X[n] is the interval between beats in units of
millisecond. The phase-space diagram of the signal is displayed in ﬁgure 2 and
shows that the R-R intervals varies in the boundary so that it is chaotic. This
R-R interval signal was fed into the proposed GP with the values of the control
parameters and the computed results are given in ﬁgure 3. The best chromosome
with the maximum ﬁtness is
−Xn−9 × −Xn−8 Xn−1 − +Xn−9 × 0.07Xn−8 × 0.07Xn−9
and the responding equation of the chromosome is

A Nonlinear Model for Predicting ECG R-R Interval Variation

383

Fig. 1. Time series of R-R intervals of ECG; input time series

Fig. 2. Phase space diagram of time series in ﬁgure 1

Xn = Xn−9 − (9.93Xn−9 − 0.07Xn−8 )(Xn−8 − Xn−1 )
Note that, although we used nine time-delayed variables for a chromosome, only
3 time-delayed variables, Xn−1 , Xn−8 , Xn−9 appeared in the computed equation.
To show up the chaotic property of the predicted signal, its strange attractor is
depicted in ﬁgure 4. The statistical and chaotic characteristics for the original
and predicted times series of ECG R-R interval are summed up in table 2. It
shows that the chaotic properties are very accurately predicted, while there are
some insigniﬁcant diﬀerences in a statistical parameter such as mean.

384

B.Y. Kim, Y.S. Chang, and K.S. Park

Fig. 3. Modeling results for the time series of R-R interval; time series generated by
the estimates equation Xn = Xn−9 − (9.93Xn−9 − 0.07Xn−8 )(Xn−8 − Xn−1 ) with the
same initial values as ﬁgure 1

Fig. 4. Phase space diagram of time series in ﬁgure 3

Other model equations in table 3 showed similar nonlinear characteristics,
fractal dimension, even though estimated model functions vary.

4

Discussion

The evolutionary approach has been proposed for ﬁnding a nonlinear function
optimally ﬁtting for the given chaotic time series. In the case of modeling ECG R-

A Nonlinear Model for Predicting ECG R-R Interval Variation

385

Table 2. Statistical and nonlinear characteristics of the original and estimated times
series of normal ECG R-R intervals
Original Estimated
Mean
505.92
541.18
Variance
2.20
1.33
Range
366 ∼ 660 449 ∼ 660
Projected
0.752
0.772
fractal dimension
Fractal dimension 1.09954
1.09824

Table 3. Model functions and their fractal dimension
Model equation
Original
X2

(Xn−3 −Xn−2 )

n−5
Result 1
Xn = Xn−5 + 1.56X
n−3 Xn−5 Xn−6
Result2 Xn = Xn−9 + (0.93Xn−9 − 0.07Xn−8 )(Xn−1 − Xn−8 )
Results3
Xn = Xn−9 + (Xn−1 − Xn−8 )/(5.42Xn−1 )

Fractal Error
dimension
1.328
1.368
1.373
1.405

3.0%
3.4%
5.8%

R intervals, the signal generated by the equation represented by the chromosome
were seen to be not similar to the input signal in time domain, while its spectral,
statistical and chaotic characteristics were shown to be reasonably similar as
those of the input signal.
To ﬁnd the model function we optimize the control parameters. Unlike the
conventional use of Genetic Programming, the mutation rate for modeling ECG
R-R intervals was required to be larger than the crossover rate. The value of the
mutation rate is also required to be below 0.5, so that the model equations may
predict the nonlinear characteristics of input signals better. This may indicate
that the mutation rate plays an important role in searching the huge solution
space and in escaping the local minimum. It was found that the structure of
the ﬁtness function was closely associated with the degree of complexity or nonlinearity of the signals, that is, the number of the independent parameters to
construct the ﬁtness functions increased with the complexity of the signals.
In general, the strange attractors were shown to be quite similar between the
predicted and input signals. Figure 4 shows that the model equation appropriately represented the statistical and chaotic characteristics of the source signals,
even if the time history of the predicted signal was not ﬁtted well. The proposed
approach was able to yield a nonlinear equation which could not be well coincide
in time domain but precisely described its statistical and chaotic characteristics.
Therefore the proposed evolutionary approach is useful for the system identiﬁcation of the biological system. Further optimization technique in selecting more
appropriate ﬁtness function may be needed to obtain an improved time domain
ﬁtting and the authors leave it as a future study.

386

B.Y. Kim, Y.S. Chang, and K.S. Park

Acknowledgement. This work is the result of research activities of Advanced
Biometric Research Center (ABRC) supported by KOSEF.

References
1. Albano, A. M., Muench, J., Schwartz, C., Mees, A. I., Rapp, P. E.: Singular-value
decomposition and the Grassberger-Procaccia algorithm: Phys. Rev. A. 38 (1988)
3017–3116
2. Broomhead, D. S., King, G. P.: Extracting qualitative dynamics from experimental
data. Physica D 20 (1986) 217–236
3. Gleik, J.: Chaos : Making a New Science: New York: Viking Penguin Inc. (1987)
4. Grassberger, P., Procaccia, I.: Measuring the Strangeness of Strange Attractors.
Physica D 9 (1983) 198–208
5. Gulick, D.:Encounters with Chaos: McGraw-Hill Inc. (1992)
6. Hamilton, Patrick S., Tomkins, Willis J.: Quantitive investigation of QRS detection
rules using the MIT/BIH arrythmia database:IEEE Transactions on Biomedical
Engineering. BME-33 (1986) 413-422
7. Kaplan, D., Glass, L.: Direct test for determinism in a time series:Phys. Rev.
Lett. 68 (1992) 427–430
8. Koza, J. :Genetic Programming II: Automatic Discovery of Reusable Programs:
The MIT Press (1994)
9. Liebovitch, L. S., Toth, T.: A Fast Algorithm to Determine Fractal Dimensions by
Box Counting: Phys. Lett. A 141 (1989) 386–390
10. Mead, W. C., Jones, R. D., Lee, Y. C., Barnes, C. W., Flake, G. W., Lee, L. A.,
O’Rourke, M. K.: Prediction of Chaotic Time Series using CNLS-Net-Example:
The Mackey-Glass Equation: Proc. of the Workshop on Nonlinear Modeling and
Forecasting. 12 (1990) 39–71
11. Mees, A. I.: Tessellation’s and dynamical systems’: Proc. of the Workshop on Nonlinear Modeling and Forecasting. 12 (1990) 3–24
12. Pool, R.: Is It Healthy to Be Chaotic: Science. 243 (1989) 604–607
13. Rigney, D. R., West B. J.: Chaos and Fractal in Human Physiology: Scientiﬁc
American. (1990) 35–41
14. Sano, M., Sato, S., Sawada, Y.: Global Spectral Characterization of Chaotic Dynamics’: Prog. Theor. Phys. 76 (1986) 945–948
15. Kim, B. Y., Park, K. S.: Modeling of nonlinear sequence based on the Modiﬁed
Genetic Algorithm: Nonlinear Analysis. 36 (1999) 707–720
16. Davis, Lawrence: Handbook of Genetic Algorithms: Van Nostrand Reinhold. (1991)

