A New Hybrid Approach for Analysis of Factors
Affecting Crude Oil Price
Wei Xu1, Jue Wang2, Xun Zhang2, Wen Zhang1, and Shouyang Wang1,2
1

School of Management, Graduate University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100080, China
{xuw-06b1,zhangwen05}@mails.gucas.ac.cn
2
Institute of Systems Science, Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100080, China
{wjue,zhangxun,sywang}@amss.ac.cn

Abstract. In this paper, a new hybrid approach is presented to analyze factors
affecting crude oil price using rough set and wavelet neural network. Related
factors that affect crude oil price are found using text mining technique and
Brent oil price is chosen as the decision price because it plays an important role
in world crude oil markets. The relevant subsets of the factors are discovered by
rough set module and the main factors are got, and then the important degrees
of these are measured using wavelet neural network. Based on the novel hybrid
approach, the predictability of crude oil price is discussed.
Keywords: crude oil price, rough set, wavelet neural network, prediction.

1 Introduction
The high volatility and irregularity of crude oil market creates uncertainty, mainly
because of the interaction of many factors in crude oil markets. How to analyze and
use these factors to forecast the crude oil price has attracted increasing attention from
academics and practitioners in the past decade. The literature on factors affecting
crude oil price relates oil shocks either to the instability of the market structures or to
the effect of the price elasticity of demand [1-4]. Mork [1] and Huntington [2]
demonstrated the asymmetric relationship that a reduction in oil prices does not
necessarily lead to noticeable output growth, while an increase can have a negative
impact on output growth. The study of Ferderer points to the observation that
disruptions in oil market not only give rise to higher prices, but also increase oil price
volatility [3]. C.W.Yang [4] analyze factors affecting price volatility of the US oil
market by examining the market structure of OPEC, the stable and unstable demand
structure, and related elasticity of demand.
However, there are still several unsolved issues with the above methods. The first
problem is that only a few factors, such as demand and supply, are taken into account
in the researchers’ models. In fact, many other factors have a combined effect on
crude oil prices: economic, military, natural disasters and speculation, as well as
people’s expectations. These important factors can be hard to handle and they are not
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part III, LNCS 4489, pp. 964–971, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

A New Hybrid Approach for Analysis of Factors Affecting Crude Oil Price

965

included in the traditional models. The second problem is how to quantify the
qualitative factors. Some qualitative variables, such as political variables, are not easy
to quantify due to uncertainty. Furthermore, related data collection is very difficult.
Thus, the above proposed models are not easy to operate or impractical. Therefore, it
is important that new methods be developed for factors analysis.
Considering the discussed above, we present a new hybrid approach for factors
affecting oil price analysis based on rough set (RS) and wavelet neural network
(WNN). The related factors that affect oil price are found using text mining technique.
The relevant subsets of the factors are discovered by rough set module and the main
factors are got. The important degrees of these are measured using wavelet neural
network. Based on the novel hybrid approach, the predictability of crude oil price is
discussed. Finally, we draw the conclusions.

2 A Hybrid Approach Based on RS and WNN
2.1 Basic Concepts of Rough Set Theory
The theory of rough set (RS), proposed by Pawlak [5-6], has been proved to be a
powerful tool for handling various types of data. Several models based on original
rough set theory have been presented to solve different problems [7-8]. It has
important applications to artificial intelligence and economic and financial prediction
[9-10], as a tool for dealing with vagueness and uncertainty of facts, and in
classification.
The set about objects is represented in the form of an information system. The
rows of the information system are labeled by objects, whereas columns are labeled
by attributes and entries of the information system are attribute values.
Formally, an information system (IS) is an quadruple ϕ = (U, AT, V, f), where U is

∪

a finite nonempty set of objects and AT is a finite nonempty set of attributes, V= a ∈
AT Va and Va is a domain of attribute a, f: U×AT→V is a total function such that f (x, a)
∈ Va for every x ∈ U, a ∈ AT, called an information function. An IS can be seen as
decision system assuming attributes concluding two part (AT D), and AT ∩ D = φ ,
where AT is called condition attributes and D contains decision attributes.
Let RA= {(x, y) ∈ U × U: fa (x) = fa (y), ∀ a ∈ A}. The relation RA thus partitions
the universe of discourse U into disjoint subsets called equivalence classes, and the
result is denoted by U/A which forms a partition of U. The equivalence class
including x is denoted by [x] A, that is, [x] A = {y ∈ U: (x, y) ∈ RA}. The sets in the
partition U/A are referred to as A-elementary sets. Objects from [x] A are indiscernible
with regard to their descriptors in the system. Given an arbitrary set X ⊆ U, it may be
impossible to describe X precisely using the equivalence classes in U/A. In this case,
one may characterize X by a pair of lower and upper approximations:

{

A ( X ) = x ∈ U : [ x ]A ⊆ X

{

}

A ( X ) = x ∈ U : [ x ]A ∩ X ≠ φ

(1)

}

(2)

966

W. Xu et al.

The lower approximation A ( X ) is the set of objects that belong to X with certainty,
while the upper approximation A ( X ) is the set of objects that possibly belong to X.
In an IS, if RB =RAT, B ⊆ AT, then B is referred to as a consistent set of ϕ . If B ⊆ AT
is a consistent set of ϕ , and no proper subset of B is a consistent set of ϕ , then B is
referred to as a reduction of ϕ .Similarly, In decision system, ϕ = (U, AT, V, f, D),
satisfying RAT ⊆ RD, if RB ⊆ RD, B ⊆ AT, then B is referred to as a consistent set of ϕ .
If B ⊆ AT is a consistent set of ϕ , and no proper subset of B is a consistent set of ϕ ,
then B is referred to as a reduction of ϕ .
2.2 Basic Concepts of Wavelet Neural Network
Wavelet neural network (WNN) is a novel approach towards the learning function
[11]. Wavelet networks, which combine the wavelet theory and feed-forward neural
networks, utilize wavelets as the basis function to construct a network. Wavelet
function is a local function and influences the networks’ output only in some local
ranges. The wavelet neural network shows surprising effectiveness in solving the
conventional problems of poor convergence or even divergence encountered in other
kinds of neural networks [12]. The WNN consists of three layers: input layer, hidden
layer and output layer. The connections between input-hidden units and hidden-output
units are called weights uti and wt, respectively. A Morlet mother function is used as
node activation function for the hidden layer. The dilation and translation parameters,
at and bt, of the Morlet function for each node in the hidden layer are different and
they need to be optimized. In the WNN, the gradient descend algorithm is employed
and the error is minimized by adjusting uti, wt, at and bt parameters [13]. In the WNN,
the following steps are carried out:
Step1. Initializing the dilation parameter at, translation parameter bt and node
connection weights uti, wt to some random values. All those random values are limited
in the interval (0, 1).
Step2. Inputting data xn(i) and corresponding output values vnT, where the
superscript T represents the target output state.
Step3. Propagating the initial signal forward through the network:
⎛ s
⎜ ∑ uti xn ( i ) − bt
= ∑ wt h ⎜ i =1
at
⎜
t =1
⎜
⎝
T

vn

T

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

(3)

Where h is taken as a Morlet wavelet
⎛ t2 ⎞
h ( t ) = cos (1.75t ) exp ⎜ − ⎟
⎝ 2⎠

(4)

A New Hybrid Approach for Analysis of Factors Affecting Crude Oil Price

967

Step4. Calculation of the WNN parameters: Δwt = −η ∂E + αΔwt , Δuti = −η ∂E + αΔuti ,
∂wt

Δat = −η

∂E
+ αΔat
∂at

, Δbt = −η ∂E + αΔbt , the error function E is taken as E =
∂bt

vnT,

∂uti

1 N
∑ ( vnT − vn )
2 n=1

2

,

and
vn are the experimental and calculated values, respectively. N stands for the
data number of training set, and η and α being the learning rate and the momentum
term, respectively.
Step5. The WNN parameters were changed until the network output satisfies the
error criteria.

Internet

Text Mining Techniques
Related factors affecting the crude oil
i
Preprocess Data of Related Factors
Decision information system

Rough Set Refiner
The main factors
Wavelet Neural Network Method
The important degree of the factors

Forecasting/Prediction
Fig. 1. The Main Process of the Proposed Hybrid Approach

968

W. Xu et al.

2.3 A Hybrid Approach Based on RS and WNN
As revealed in previous two subsections, rough set theory is a powerful mathematical
tool that handles vagueness and uncertainty. It can reduce the attributes from the large
database and get the most important, but it can’t find the important degree from the
reduced attributes. However, wavelet neural network can did a good work on getting
the important degree of the input, but its input variables are limited because of the
algorithm’s speed and astringency. In view of this point, a new hybrid approach—
RSWNN approach— is proposed for factors affecting oil price analysis.
The proposed approach consists of three modules: the text mining module, the
rough set module and the wavelet neural module. In the first module, as the
preprocessing text mining techniques are used to mine the related factors affecting the
oil price. The text mining theory is a powerful technique which draws on information
retrieval, data mining, machine learning, statistics and computational linguistics [1415]. The text mining process consists of four major stages: collecting documents,
preprocessing documents, feature extraction, and metadata mining. The details have
been given in Ref. [16]. In the second module, rough set theory is used as a refiner for
the factors mining from the text mining technique. In the third module, WNN are used
to measure the important degree of the factors getting from the rough set refiner.
Based on the proposed approach, the predictability of crude oil price is discussed.
Generally, the process of the proposed hybrid approach is illustrated in Fig. 1.
As can be seen from Fig. 1, the novel hybrid approach is actually an intelligent
analysis system. Text mining techniques are used to mine the related factors affecting
the crude oil price automatically. Decision information system is got through
preprocessing the data of the related factors. And then as the main body the rough set
refiner is used to find the main factors from a large number of factors affecting the
crude oil price while the wavelet neural network are used to measure the important
degree of the factors getting from the rough set refiner. Finally, based on the proposed
approach, the predictability of crude oil price is discussed.

3 An Application of the Hybrid Approach
3.1 Presentation of the Text Mining Results and the Data
In Section 2.3, the text mining stages are described. In this section, the factors called
attributes or metadata are presented in conjunction with crude oil price. Then “crude
oil price, factor”, “crude oil market, factor” and “crude oil volatility, factor” are used
as keywords to search related data, including some numeric and textual data. We
obtain the following factors affecting crude oil price, as shown in Table 1.
We select annual data of these attributes because of analyzing the long-run factors
affecting oil price. The sources of these data are in the EIA, Reuters and IFS and the
period of the data begin from 1970, and end of 2005. We choose Brent oil price as the
decision attribute d because it plays an important role in world crude oil markets.

A New Hybrid Approach for Analysis of Factors Affecting Crude Oil Price

969

Table 1. The Factors Affecting Crude Oil Price

N
o

Factors

No

a17

OECD total stocks

a29

oil worker strike

a18

world total reserves

a30

hostage crisis

a31

terrorist attack

a13

a2

world total supply

a14

a7
a8

speculation

a4
a5
a6

a9
a10
a11
a12

OPEC market
share
forward price of
crude oil
OPEC production
Core OPEC
production

Factors

a16

world total demand

China/U.S. foreign
exchange rate
Japan / U.S. foreign
exchange rate
France / U.S. foreign
exchange rate
U.S. / U.K foreign
exchange rate
world economy
growth

No

Core OPEC
production capacity
Non-OPEC
production
Non-OPEC
production capacity
fuel switching
capacity

a1

a3

Factors

a15

a21

the distance
wells
the number of
drilling wells
the number of
oil wells

a22

a19

in

a25

OPEC oil embargo

a26

economic sanction to
oil nations

a27

large oil company merger

a28

rumors and false news

a33

political conflict in
oil nations
revolutions in
oil countries

gasoline tax rate

a34

wars in oil countries

a23

oil import fee

a35

a24

CO2 limit

a36

geopolitics
natural disasters
related to oil

a20

a32

3.2 Presentation of the Rough Set Results
The above forms an information table ϕ = (U, AT, V, f, D). The continuous attributes
are discredited by setting norms dividing the original domains of the attributes into
sub-intervals using equal frequency method.
The rough set analysis of the IS has been performed using an attribute
reductions algorithm with genetic algorithm. 85 reductions were obtained based on
the IS. They contain 5-8 attributes, which are considerably smaller than 36-the
total number of attributes. This result gives the idea of reduction a strong support
because each of the reductions contains fewer attributes, but, on the other hand,
ensures the same value of quality of approximation as the whole set of attributes
AT.
The proper reduction is selected among these reductions. The selection is based
on two criteria: the reduction should contain as small a number of attributes as
possible, and the reduction should not miss the attributes judged by the experts as
the most significant factors. As a result, the reduction selected, as the main factors
affecting the crude oil price, was the #31, which includes: a1 (world total demand), a2
(world total supply), a4 (Japan / U.S. foreign exchange rate), a6 (U.S. / U.K foreign
exchange rate), a7 (world economy growth) and a17 (OECD total stocks).

970

W. Xu et al.

3.3 Presentation of the Wavelet Neural Network Results
In this subsection the important degree of the main factors - a1 (world total demand),
a2 (world total supply), a4 (Japan / U.S. foreign exchange rate), a6 (U.S. / U.K foreign
exchange rate), a7 (world economy growth) and a17 (OECD total stocks) is got using
wavelet neural network. In this module, the input variables are the data of these main
factors and the output variable is the Brent oil price.
The wavelet neural network is constructed based on these selected variables. In
order to improve the algorithm stability and quicken the training, the input variables
and the output variables are normalized respectively before training the WNN so that
the data of learning samples are varied within small bound. The epoch is stopped
when MSE satisfied the given error criterion. As a result, the selected input variables
with their important degree in parentheses were world total demand (0.2021), world
total supply (0.1745), Japan / U.S. foreign exchange rate (0.1953), U.S. / U.K foreign
exchange rate (0.1011), world economy growth (0.1672) and OECD Total Stocks
(0.1607). The important degree of the input variables describes the influence of these
factors to the crude oil price.
As can be seen above, world total demand and supply are the most important
factors affecting crude oil price, and relatively demand is dominant. Crude oil stock
can reduce the volatility of crude oil price. World economy growth and exchange
rates also affect the crude oil price and increase the volatility of crude oil price.
3.4 The Predictability of the Proposed Approach
In this subsection, we discuss the predictability of the proposed approach. The annual
data of these main factors and Brent oil price in 1970-2002 are used as training data,
and the annual data in 2003-2005 are used as testing data. The result shows that MSE
of the testing data is 2.94%. The hybrid approach can be used as a tool for crude oil
price forecasting and improve the long-run prediction quality in view of empirical
results.

4 Conclusions
In this paper, a new hybrid approach is presented to analyze factors affecting crude oil
price using rough set and wavelet neural network. World total demand, world total
supply, Japan / U.S. foreign exchange rate, U.S. / Euro foreign exchange rate, world
economy growth and OECD total stocks are the main factors, and the important
degree are found. In future work we will construct an intelligent system based on the
proposed approach for forecasting crude oil price and compared with other models.

References
1. Mork K.A., Oil and the Macroeconomy When Prices Go Up and Down: an Extension of
Hamilton’s Results. Journal of Political Economy, 97 (1989) 740-744
2. Huntington H.G., Crude Oil Prices and US Economic Performance: Where Does The
Asymmetry Reside? The Energy Journal, 19(4) (1998) 107-132

A New Hybrid Approach for Analysis of Factors Affecting Crude Oil Price

971

3. Ferderer J.P., Oil Price Volatility and the Macroeconomy: a Solution to the Asymmetry
Puzzle. Journal of Macroeconomics, 18 (1996) 1-16
4. C.W. Yang, M.J. Hwang and B.N. Huang, An Analysis of Factors Affecting Price
Volatility of the US Oil Market. Energy Economics, 24 (2002) 107-119
5. Pawlak Z., Rough Set. International Journal of Computer and Information Sciences, 11(5)
(1982) 341-356
6. Pawlak Z., Rough Sets: Theoretical Aspects of Reasoning About Data. Kluwer Academic
Publishers, Dordrecht (1991)
7. Yao Y.Y., Generalized Rough Set Model, In Rough Sets in Knowledge Discovery1:
Methodology and Applications, L. Polkowski and A. Skowron (eds), Heidelberg: PhysicaVerlag (1998)
8. Wezhi Wu, Wenxiu Zhang, Huaizu Li, Knowledge Acquisition in Incomplete Fuzzy
Information Systems via the Rough Set Approach. Expert Systems, 20(5) (2003) 280-286
9. Slowinski R., Zopounidis C., Dimitras A., Prediction of Company Acquisition in Greece
by Means of the Rough Set Approach. European Journal of Operational Research, 100
(1997) 1-15
10. Tay F.E. and Lixiang Shen, Economic and Financial Prediction Using Rough Sets Model.
European Journal of Operational Research, 141 (2002) 641-659
11. Q. Zhang and A. Benveniste, Wavelet Networks. IEEE Trans. Neural Network, 3(6)
(1992) 889–898
12. Zhang X, Qi J, Zhang R, Liu M, Hu Z, Xue H, et al. Prediction of Programmedtemperature Retention Values of Naphtha by Wavelet Neural Network. Computers and
Chemistry, 25 (2) (2001) 125-133
13. Tabaraki R, Khayamian T, Ensafi A. A., Principle Component-wavelet Neural Networks
as a New Multivariate Calibration Method. Analytical Letters, 38 (2005) 1-13
14. R. Chau, C.H. Yeh, A Multilingual Text Mining Approach to Web Cross-lingual Text
Retrieval. Knowledge-Based Systems, 17, (5-6) (2004) 219-227
15. A. Gelbukh, Computational Linguistics and Intelligent Text Processing. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, Vol. 2004. Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg (2001)
16. Lean Yu, Shouyang Wang, K.K. Lai, A Rough-Set-Refined Text Mining Approach for
Crude Oil Market Tendency Forecasting. International Journal of Knowledge and Systems
Sciences, 2(1) (2005) 33-46

