Efficient Measurement of the Eye Blinking by Using
Decision Function for Intelligent Vehicles
Ilkwon Park1, Jung-Ho Ahn2, and Hyeran Byun1
1

2

Dept. Of Computer Science, Yonsei University, Seoul, 120-749, Korea
Dept. Of Computer & Media Engineering, Kangnam University, South Korea
{ikheart,jungho,hrbyun}@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract. In this paper, we propose an efficient measurement of the eye blinking
for drowsy driver detection system that is one of the driver safety systems for the
intelligent vehicle. However, during the real driving in the daytime, driver’s face
is exposed to various illuminations. It makes too difficult to monitor driver’s eye
blinking. Therefore, we propose efficient formation of the cascaded form of
Support Vector Machines (SVM) as eye verification to boost the accuracy of eye
detection. Furthermore, for an efficient measurement of eye blinking, we newly
define decision function that is based on the measure of eyelid movement and the
weight generated by the eye classifier. In the experiments, we can show the reliable performance for our own test data acquired during a real driving in the various illumination conditions. Furthermore, through our proposed method, we use
detected eye blinking for Drowsy Driver Detection System.
Keywords: Eye Blinking Detection, Eye Detection, Drowsy Detection, Cascaded SVM.

1 Introduction
In the safety driving application related with driver’s drowsiness, many computer
vision-based systems have been successfully applying to real application because it is
quite not only accurate but also nonintrusive method for a driver [4], [5], [8].
However, this type of approach is very sensitive to change in illumination [9]. To
solve these problems, some systems used the pupil reaction against infrared light pupil
reaction as the difference between pupil which appears bright and that which appears
dark [4], [5], [8], [9]. However, this kind of research has mainly been performed in the
indoor studio without the interruption of infrared illumination from sunlight.
In this paper, we extend our previous approach that tolerates various illuminations
changing not only in the daytime but also at night. In the proposed our system, we
propose the eye verification by using two-level cascaded SVM that is newly configured. Moreover, we newly define decision function based on eyelid-movement and
the weight generated by the eye classifier for detecting eye closed state. Open eye
state and closed eye states are distinguished by using the decision function. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe a robust eye
detection method. In Section 3, we configure the classifiers with the two level cascade
form of SVM (Two-Level Cascaded SVM) for the eye verification. In Section 4, we
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 546–549, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Efficient Measurement of the Eye Blinking by Using Decision Function

547

test the decision function for the measure of eye blinking. Experimental results and
the estimation of our system are provided in Section 5, and finally we make a conclusion in Section 6.

2 Extraction of Eye Candidates
The input frame includes both the driver’s face and the background which are parts of
the vehicle as well as scenery outside the car. In order to measure eye blinking, the
position of eyes should be detected. Eye corner filter is a fast and reliable preprocessing method for eye detection. In this paper, the eye corner filter is partially used to
detect suitable candidates of eye region as [3].
As input frame is convoluted with the filter, we can detect the positive areas over
the threshold. The threshold is determined to take 10% from high rank of the result by
a convolution with total eye area. Each positive area detected by eye corner filter is
cropped with 5 pixels margins from the boundary of positive area as eye candidates if
each positive area has a reasonable ratio of horizontal length to vertical length.
Cropped eye candidates are normalized the size of 41 by 21 for the eye verification.

3 Eye Detection Using Two-Level Cascaded SVM
In this section, we proposed a novel efficient verification scheme using SVM. In general, eye verification deals with the two-class problem of the eye vs. the non-eye.
However, the variation within eye class is large due to the inhomogeneity of open and
closed eye data. This fact drops down the verification performance.
Therefore, we considered three classes: open eye, closed eye and non-eye and if filtered eye candidates are classified as open or closed eye, we verified it as the eye. For
computational efficiency, we evaluated the SVM with the sequential evaluation algorithm [9] that we called the cascaded SVM. Considering the three classes, we designed the verification procedure with the two-level cascaded SVM. First classifier
represents a series of classifiers for open eyes and non-eyes and Second classifier
represents a series of classifiers for closed eyes and non-eyes.

4 Eyelid Movement Estimation
In this section, we propose the decision function for eyelid movement estimation. We
can determine open and closed eyes using a decision function based on the state of
eyelid as follows. Fig.1 illustrates the angles between eye corners and the top of upper
eyelid. we define the open degree θ of the eye that is calculate absolute summation of
θL(x) and θR(x) as and the marginal value of the open eye detector fO described in the
previous section.

Fig. 1. The measurement of eyelid movements

548

I. Park, J.-H. Ahn, and H. Byun

the open eye classifier fD is defined as
f D ( x ) = w1θ ( x ) + w2 f O ( x ) .

(1)

where weights w1 and w2 specify the relative importance of θ(x) and f (x). Here, the
value of fO(x) is defined by fmO (x) if the patch x has negative value at some layer
m(<Nz) during the sequential evaluation in first classifier, or fNzO (x) otherwise. The
threshold T for the decision function fD can be defined as
O

T = w1θ T + w2ε T .

(2)

In (2), θT is a person-specific threshold for the open degree of the eye. It is determined by a quarter of maximum degree of open eyes during first three seconds in the
beginning. The constant εT is a person-independent threshold that is usually accepted
as a small value, say 0.05. Using (1) and (2), we determine the patch x as the open eye
if decision function is over the threshold T.

5 Experiments
In this experiment, we assume that eye detection and the measurement of eye blinking
strongly depend on illumination change during real driving, regardless of nondrowsy
state or drowsy state. Proposed system consists of three parts; eye detection part,
verification part, and eyelid movement estimation part, we define novel decision function for eye blinking adapted for each driver.

Fig. 2. Results of the eye detection process under various illumination conditions

Fig. 2. represents the results of the eye detection process. In the Fig. 2., two eye corner
points and a top point of eyelid are also accurately detected in the various illuminations.

6 Conclusion
For robust eye detection, we newly designed two-level cascade form of SVM. We
also proposed the decision function for the measure of eye blinking. This function
could make more robust decision for the measure of eye blinking. Through our experiments, in the illumination circumstance as a daytime, our proposed method
showed the outperforming the conventional method that use a difference between
bright pupil and dark pupil by using pupil reaction against infrared light. In the future
work, we will integrate this proposed algorithm with our Drowsy Driver Detection
System (DDDS).

Efficient Measurement of the Eye Blinking by Using Decision Function

549

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the Ministry of Information and Communication,
Korea under the Information Technology Research Center support program supervised by the Institute of Information Technology Assessment, IITA-2005-(C10900501-0019).

References
1. Burges, C.J.C.: Simplified support vector decision rules. Intl. Conf. on Machine Learning,
Vol. 1, (1996)71-77
2. Dinges, D., Grace, R.: PERCLOS: A Valid Psycho-physiological Measure of Alertness as
Assessed by Psychomotor Vigilance, (1998), TechBrief FHWA-MCRT- 98-006
3. D'Orazio, T., Leo, M., Cicirelli, G., Distante, A.: An algorithm for real time eye detection in
face images, In Proc.17th Int. Conference on Pattern Recognition, Vol. 3, (2004)278 – 281
4. Hamada, T., Ito, T., Adachi, K., Nakano, T., Yamamoto, S.: Detecting method for drivers'
drowsiness applicable to individual features, In Proc. Intelligent Transportation Systems,
Vol. 2 (2003),1405 – 1410
5. Hayami, T., Matsunaga, K., Shidoji, K., Matsuki, Y.: Detecting drowsiness while driving by
measuring eye movement - a pilot study, In Proc. 5th Int. Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems, (2002) 156 – 161
6. Hayashi, K., Ishihara, K., Hashimoto, H., Oguri, K.: Individualized drowsiness detection
during driving by pulse wave analysis with neural network, IEEE, the Proceedings of Intelligent Transportation Systems, (2005) 901 – 906
7. Horne, J., Reyner, L.: Vehicle accidents related to sleep – a review, Occupational and Environmental Medicine, Vol. 56, (1999), 289-294
8. Ji, Q., Yang, X.J.: Real-time eye, gaze, and face pose tracking for monitoring driver vigilance, Real-Time Imaging, Vol. 8, Issue 5, (2002) 357 – 377
9. Park, I., Ahn, J.H., Byun, H.: Efficient Measurement of Eye Blinking under Various Illumination Conditions for Drowsiness Detection Systems, 18th International Conference on Pattern Recognition, Vol. 1, (2006) 383 – 386

