Developing Motivating Collaborative Learning Through
Participatory Simulations
Gustavo Zurita1, Nelson Baloian2, Felipe Baytelman1, and Antonio Farias1
1

Management Control and Information Systems Department - Business School,
Universidad de Chile
gnzurita@fen.uchile.cl, fbaytelmanp@fen.uchile.cl,
anfari@fen.uchile.cl
2
Computer Science Department – Engineering School. Universidad de Chile
nbaloian@dcc.uchile.cl

Abstract. Participatory simulations are collaborative group learning activities
whose goals are to improve teaching and learning, increasing motivation inside
the classroom by engaging the learner in games simulating a certain system
they have to learn about. It has been already applied to students of primary and
secondary educational levels, however there are still not experiences reported
with higher level students, although there are many learning subjects to which
this technique can be applied. This paper presents the implementation of a
framework-like tool for supporting learning activities in a business school with
undergraduate students using mobile devices over an ad-hoc network.
Keywords: Handhelds. Collaborative Learning. Participatory Simulation.
Gestures. Sketches. Freehand-input based. Learning and Motivation.

1 Introduction
Any experienced teacher knows that without the proper motivation for students to engage in
a learning experience, the otherwise best designed experiences will be unsuccessful. Dick
and Carey [8] state: “Many instructors consider the motivation level of learners the most
important factor in successful instruction”. “Motivation is not only important because it is a
necessary causal factor of learning, but because it mediates learning and is a consequence of
learning as well” [20]. In other words, students who are motivated to learn will have greater
success than those who are not. Participatory Simulation aims for students having “rich
conceptual resources for reasoning abut and thoughtfully acting in playful and motivational
spaces, and thus can more easily become highly engaged in the subject matter” [11]. It uses
the availability of mobile computing devices to give each student the capability of simple
data exchanges among neighboring devices [19], [4]. They enable students to act as agents in
simulations in which overall patterns emerge from local decisions and information
exchanges. Such simulations enable students to model and learn about several types of
phenomena, [4] including those related to economics [4], [9].
Some research groups have implemented collaborative learning participatory simulations
with handhelds and infrared beaming [16], and it has been found that this kind of activities
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part II, LNCS 4488, pp. 799–807, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

800

G. Zurita et al.

provide various advantages for teaching and learning: (a) they introduce an effective
instructional tool and have the potential to impact student learning positively across
curricular topics and instructional activities [18], (b) they increase the motivation [12], [4],
and (c) they generate positive effects in engagement, self-directed learning and problemsolving [12].
Although handheld’s most natural data-entry mode is the stylus, most currently available
handheld applications adopt the PC application approach that uses widgets instead of
freehand-input-based paradigms (via touch screens) and/or sketching, [6].
This paper presents a tool for implementing collaborative learning participatory
simulations, having two general research goals: (a) propose a conceptual framework for
specifying and developing participative simulation applications, and (b) to determine the
feasibility of using this in undergraduate curricular contexts of the simulation activities both
in terms of intended and actualized learning outcomes; particularly in the management area.
An instance of the framework is described. Its implementation is simple, lightweight and
fully based on wirelessly interconnected handhelds with an ad-hoc network.

2 Related Work
A learning participatory simulation is a role-playing activity that helps to explain the
coherence of complex and dynamic systems. The system maps a problem of the real
world to a model with a fixed number of roles and rules. Global knowledge and
patterns emerge in Participatory Simulations from local interactions among users and
making decisions to understand the impact by an analysis and observation while
doing and/or at the end of the activity.
Researchers are highly interested in collaborative learning participatory
simulations due to these simulations appear to make very difficult ideas around
‘distributed systems’ and ‘emergent behavior’ more accessible to students [19]
motivating its learning process in a playful social space [4].
Various systems using different hardware devices have been already implemented:
• A futures trading simulation described on [2] enhances the learning process of concepts
such as price discovery, the open outcry trading method, trading strategies of locals and
brokers, and the impact of interest rates on the treasury bond futures contract.
• Thinking Tags [1] uses small nametag sized computers that communicate with each
other. It was used to tech high-school students in a simulation of virus propagation and
asked them to determine the rules of the propagation [5].
• NetLogo [17] is an environment for developing of learning participatory simulations for
PCs. Simulations can be re-played, analyzed and compared with previous ones. An
extension called HubNet [19] supports PCs and mobile devices for input and output.
• Klopfer et al. [12] showed that the newer and more easily distributable version of
Participatory Simulations on handhelds was equally as capable as the original Tag-based
simulations in engaging students collaboratively in a complex problem-solving task.
They feel that handhelds technology holds great promise for promoting collaborative
learning as teachers struggle to find authentic ways to integrate technology into the
classroom in addition to engaging and motivating students to learn science.

Developing Motivating Collaborative Learning Through Participatory Simulations

801

• A collaborative learning participatory simulation in form of a stock exchange was
designed for master’s students in financial theory, using architectures based on a server
and clients running on desktop PCs or laptops as well as on PDAs, [13].
• The SimCafé experiments belong to the sociological approach, aiming at validating and
consolidating models [9], [4]. In this approach, participants are stakeholders and the
witnesses of the emergence are domain experts, usually social scientists.
Based on the literature above mentioned, we have identified that no system has yet
been proposed or implemented for handhelds in a wireless ad-hoc network using a
pen-based interface as main metaphor for user interaction.

3 Developing a Framework
In accordance to [7] and [20] some factors, based on empirical evidence, to enhance
motivation are:
•
•
•
•
•
•

•

Involve the learner. Learners must be involved in the ownership of the goals,
strategies and assessment of that with which they are to be engaged. The students
must to fell that they are in control of their own learning.
Respond positively to questions posed by students can enhance intrinsic
motivation. Furthermore, consideration should be given to what the learner brings
to the classroom: experiences, interests, and other resources.
Options and choices about the learning environment and the various
curriculum components (persons, time, content, methods, etc.) must be available.
Simulating the reality. Whatever the expected learning outcomes, there must be
a direct connection with the real world outside the classroom.
The shifting of responsibility for learning from the teacher to the student is
fundamental to both content fulfillment and learner motivation.
Feedback and reinforcement are essential to good teaching and effective
learning. When learners are given positive reinforcement, a source of motivation
is tapped. Evaluation should be based on the task, rather than comparison with
performance of other students.
Collaboration among learners is a very potent way in which an individual
learner forms an interpretation of the environment and develops understanding in
motivational spaces of social interactions.

Collaborative learning applications based on Participative Simulations are able to
meet the requirements listed above. In order to generate, design and implement them
the Teacher must define learning goals, artifacts to be exchanged, behavior variables
and parameters, and rules and roles for playing the simulation. In order to configure
the system for a collaborative learning participatory simulation, the Teacher may
setup transferable objects, their behavior parameters, rules and participant roles. Then,
the teacher explains the goal of the activity to the students, also describing objects,
rules and roles, and how these concepts are represented in their handhelds. Rules,
roles and goals should be designed to achieve a high social interaction between
students, negotiation instances, and competition to encourage an active and motivated
stance [13]. A startup process must ensure students will play an active and dynamic

802

G. Zurita et al.

role. This should be based on defining trading activities between students including
Negotiation and Exchange of Objects which is supported by handhelds. These
conditions depend on each particular application and may involve the following
aspects: (a) type of exchange objects, (b) exchange amounts, (c) trade conditions, (d)
parameters before and after the exchange, and (e) exchange objects. If students
require assistance, our framework allows the teacher to wirelessly give them
feedback and assessment. The teacher can (a) observe the simulation state of each
participant device and (b) modify such state in order to solve the student inquiry.

Fig. 1. Conceptual framework

Once the simulation is done, the teacher must guide students’ understanding about
the activity. In this way, the students will construct the learning objective together,
analyzing different stages of the activity.

4 Applications Implemented Using the Framework
We have implemented a lightweight platform for supporting the implementation of
participatory simulation applications based on the framework proposed in section 3. Using
this platform we have successfully implemented two applications for the scenarios proposed
on the previous section. The platform is a collection of java-classes which can be extended to
implement the desired scenario in a very fast and easy way. They allow the definition of new
roles, new products and the rules which will govern the simulation. It also offers
implementation of interfaces for assigning roles and exchange goods, which are should be
extended to implement the details of the desired application. The platform also implements
all the necessary actions to discover other applications of the same class running on
handhelds within the ad-hoc network and opens the necessary communication channels to
exchange data between them.
4.1 Trust Building Simulation
This application is aimed to support the learning of concepts like reputation and trust
by undergraduate students of business schools. In the simulated situation the roles of

Developing Motivating Collaborative Learning Through Participatory Simulations

803

vendors and customers are implemented. Customers are required to maintain a certain
basket with products they can acquire goods from vendors. Products have a certain
lifespan which is known at the purchase moment. Customers have to replace them
when they expire. The simulation assigns a random lifetime to the products around
the expected one. If the product fails before the lifetime offered by the vendor
customers may claim money refund or product replacement. Vendors can advertise
their products freely offering a longer lifetime to attract customers or a shorter to gain
customers’ trust. They may refuse to refund the money or replace the product in order
to make better profit. In the real world, the customers’ trust to the companies is built
by a repetitive interaction. A positive evaluation usually is generated when products
quality is satisfactory or, even, when the company reacts appropriately after a client’s
complain about bad products (or services). When the simulation finishes, students
must analyze these results and conclude about how clients’ trust impacts the
companies’ profit.

Fig. 2. a) Teacher drags a student icon into the “vendor” area to assign him a new role. b) Teacher can
create new goods using free-hand drawings.

Setup phase: To assign roles to the students (customer or vendor) the teacher uses the
"activity administration" mode. Students without roles are displayed in the middle of the
screen over a white area. The right area of handhelds (figure 2.a) has “vendors” and left
belongs to “consumers”. The teacher assigns roles by drag-and-dropping the icon of a
student into the desired area. Since in this application goods may be anything, they are
created by the teacher by drawing a sketch and surround it by a rectangle. This will produce
a "good icon", displaying an awareness of successful creation and displaying a reduced icon
of the original scratch in the bottom bound of the screen. Then, additional "goods icons" may
be created, as seen in Figure 2.b.
Double-clicking on a "goods icon" will open a window for defining default
variables for that type of good. In this application, instance variables are "original
price", "production time" and "product expected life". Once goods have been created
their icons will show up in "activity administration mode". The teacher assigns goods
to patricians by dragging the goods icons over the vendor icons to allow them to
produce this item, or over consumer icons to ask them to acquire this item.

804

G. Zurita et al.

Simulation phase: The simulation starts by vendors offering their products verbally and
customers looking for the most convenient offer in terms of price and lifetime. Once a
customer faces a vendor, they face their handhelds in order to activate the IrDA
communication. This will enable the customer to receive information about the vendor’s
reputation and allow customer and vendor make the transaction. Figure 3 shows the
three steps required to complete the transaction. When facing both handhelds the top
region of the screen is converted in the negotiation area. The vendor drags the product
to this area, which will appear on the buyer’s negotiation area, who accepts it by
dragging it to the area of products owned. The clients keep information of the
reputation of each vendor with a number ranking the vendors. At the beginning it has
no value. The client can set and alter this number after according to the interaction
they had with vendor and also by asking other customers about the opinion they have
from a vendor.

Fig. 3. Three steps in the trade process. The vendor offers a product by dragging the object, a
customer accepts it, the vendor’s stock and customer requirements/acquired lists get updated.

4.2 Stock Market Simulation
This application is about learning how offer and demand are impacted by expectations
and speculations. This is learnt by simulating a stock market situation. The only role
present in this simulation is the one of the investor who has to buy and sell shares
trying to make profit. The teacher takes part in the simulation introducing changes in
the scenario by varying the prices of the overall company. She can also participate by
offering and buying shares in order to create unexpected situations simulating
speculations. Students and teacher can after the simulation analyze the reactions of the
simulated marked.

Developing Motivating Collaborative Learning Through Participatory Simulations

805

Setup phase: In this scenario there is no role assignment action since all have the
same one. The goods are now the shares of different companies the investors can buy
and sell. The teacher creates the different shares in the same way like the previous
application. Every investor receives an initial amount of shares and money.
Simulation phase: The simulation starts by letting the investors offer and buy their
shares. Figure 4 a) shows the interface of the application. Students can see the amount
of shares and their value, value and amount, and a small graph with the history of the
values with a pull-down menu. Shares are traded using IrDA detection. Figure 4 b)
shows the three steps necessary to transfer shares among students when they agree on
the price and amount of the shares to be traded. When facing both handhelds, from the
buyer and seller, the region at the top of the screen is converted in the trade area. The
seller drags the object representing the share to this area, triggering at the buyer’s
handheld a dialog in order to enter the amount of shares and the money. Then the data
of both is updates accordingly.

Fig. 4. a) The student’s interface. b) The selling buying sequence.

5 Discussion and Future Work
First results of this ongoing work have shown us that mobile technology is a right approach
for implementing participatory simulations. In fact, one of the most motivating factors of this
kind of learning activities is the face-to-face interaction students can have among each other.
Technology plays a very subtle yet important role, letting the social interaction to be at the
center of the experience. On the other hand, we could experience that the platform is really a
helpful tool for supporting the development of applications implementing participatory
simulations and other games that are based on the exchange of artifact between the
participants. The development time required for the subsequent applications can be reduced
to less than 1/3 of the time. We believe that the most significant contribution of the work
reported here is to provide a conceptual framework for applications of collaborative learning

806

G. Zurita et al.

participatory simulations, which is easy to adapt to many subject-matter content knowledge
and undergraduate curricular integration and encouraging the adoption of learner-centered
strategies. The teachers, who pre-evaluate the application, suggest that the same technologies
and ideas could be used across many subject matter areas. The design of effective learning
environments of our conceptual framework have included (a) learner centered environment
(learners construct their own meanings), (b) knowledge-centered environment (learners
connect information into coherent wholes and embedding information in a context), (c)
assessment-centered environment (learner use formative and summative assessment
strategies and feedback), and (d) community-centered environments (learner work in
collaborative learning norms). The next phase of our investigations will develop and explore
more subject-specific applications and learning and motivational measures at the student
level. We are also working on developing an application which can let the teacher define a
participatory simulation application without having to program a single line, only defining
the roles, products and rules for exchanging products. In the current platform a language for
defining these rules which could be used to generate the application is missing.
Acknowledgments. This paper was funded by Fondecyt 1050601.

References
1. Andrews, G., MacKinnon, K.A. Yoon, S.: Using ”Thinking Tags” with Kindergarten Children: A
Dental Health Simulation, Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 19 (2), (2003), 209–219.
2. Alonzi, P., Lange, D., Betty, S.: An Innovative Approach in Teaching Futures: A Participatory
Futures Trading Simulation, Financial Practice and Education, 10(1), (2000), 228-238.
3. Castro, B., Weingarten, K.: Towards experimental economics, J. of Political Economy, 78, (1970),
598–607.
4. Colella, V.: Participatory simulations: Building collaborative understanding through immersive
dynamic modeling”. The Journal of the Learning Sciences 9, 2000, pp. 471–500.
5. Colella, V., Borovoy, R., Resnick, M.: Participatory simulations: Using computational objects to
learn about dynamic Systems, Conf. on Human Factors in Computing Systems, (1998), 9 – 10.
6. Dai, G., Wang, H.: Physical Object Icons Buttons Gesture (PIBG): A new Interaction Paradigm
with Pen, Proceedings of CSCWD 2004, LNCS 3168, (2005), 11-20.
7. Dev, P. (1997). Intrinsic motivation and academic achievement. Remedial & Especial Education.
18(1)
8. Dick, W., & Carey, L. (1996). The systematic design of instruction (4th ed.). New York:
Longman.
9. Guyot, P., Drogoul, A.: Designing multi-agent based participatory simulations, Proccedings of 5th
Workshop on Aget Based Simulations, (2004), 32-37.
10. Hinckley, K., Baudisch, P., Ramos, G., Guimbretiere, F.: Design and Analysis of Delimiters for
Selection-Action Pen Gesture Phrases in Scriboli, Proceeding of CHI 2005, ACM, (2005),
451-460.
11. Klopfer, E., Yoon, S., Perry, J: Using Palm Technology in Participatory Simulations of Complex
Systems: A New Take on Ubiquitous and Accessible Mobile Computing, Journal of Science
Education and Technology, 14(3), (2005), 285-297.
12. Klopfer, E., Yoon, S., Rivas, L.: Comparative analysis of Palm and wearable computers for
Participatory Simulations, Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 20, (2004), 347–359.

Developing Motivating Collaborative Learning Through Participatory Simulations

807

13. Kopf, S., Scheele, N. Winschel, L., Effelsberg, W.: Improving Activity and Motivation of Students
with Innovative Teaching and Learning Technologies, International Conference on Methods and
Technologies for Learning (ICMTL), WIT press, (2005), 551 – 556.
14. Landay, J., Myers, B.: Sketching interfaces: Toward more human interface design, IEEE
Computer, 34(3), (2001), 56-64
15. Long, A., Landay, J., Rowe, L.: PDA and gesture Use in Practice: Insights for Designers of Penbased User Interfaces, Retrieved on 2006, December, from http:// bmrc.berkeley.edu/
research/publications/1997/142/clong.html
16. Soloway, E., Norris, C., Blumenfeld, P., Fishman, R., Marx, R:: Devices are Ready-at-Hand,
Communications of the ACM, 44(6), (2001), 15–20
17. Tisue, S., Wilensky, U.: NetLogo: A simple environment for modeling complexity, International
Conference on Complex Systems, (2004).
18. Vahey, P., Crawford, V.: Palm Education Pioneers Program: Final Evaluation Report, SRI
International, Menlo Park, CA, (2002).
19. Wilensky, U., Stroup, W.: Learning through participatory simulations: Network-based design for
systems learning in Classrooms, Proceedings of CSCL’99, Mahwah, NJ, (1999), 667-676.
20. Wlodkowski, R. J. (1985). Enhancing adult motivation to learn. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

