Ab initio Modeling of Optical Properties of Organic
Molecules and Molecular Complexes
Vladimir I. Gavrilenko
Center for Materials Research, Norfolk State University, 700 Park Avenue, Norfolk VA
23504, USA
vgavrilenko@nsu.edu

Abstract. Electronic excitations are key points of most of the commonly
measured optical spectra. The first principle studies of excited states however
require much larger effort than computations of the ground state reliably
reproduced by the density functional theory (DFT). In present work
computation of optical functions of organic molecular complexes is studied.
The system of independent particles excited by external light field is considered
within perturbation theory (the random phase approximation, RPA). Optical
response functions are calculated using ab initio pseudopotentials theory.
Results of predicted optical absorption associated with organic semi-conducting
conjugated polymers, poly-phenylene-vinylenes (PPV), are presented. Effects
of different corrections to the DFT improving accuracy are considered. Results
are discussed in comparison with available experimental data.

1 Introduction
It has been demonstrated for decades that Kohn-Sham density functional theory
(DFT) realistically predicts electronic structure of different systems, such as atoms,
molecules, and solids [1 to 3]. Various generalized gradient approximation (GGA)
methods describing exchange and correlation (XC) interaction have been shown to
systematically improve the local density approximation (LDA) predictions of
equilibrium atomic geometries [3]. In atomic systems (like large single molecules,
inorganic solids etc.) the geometry optimization study primarily requires accurate
prediction of the ground state which is well reproduced within a standard DFT
approach. Electronic excitations are key points of most of the commonly measured
optical spectra of organic materials (see [4] and references therein). The first principle
studies of excited states however require much larger effort than computations of the
ground state. The DFT eigen energies underestimate gaps between bonding and antibonding states which requires quasi-particle (QP) correction [2,3]. It has been proved
that in inorganic solids [5] and organic polymers [2] the QP correction results in
substantial overestimates of the gaps. The situation is substantially improved by
additional inclusion of excitonic (many-body) interaction into Hamiltonian of the
system [2,3]. This state-of-the-art DFT+QP many-body theory predicts excitation
energies in organic polymers with a good accuracy [2]. Such approach however
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part III, LNCS 3993, pp. 89 – 96, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

90

V.I. Gavrilenko

requires large scale computations and it is very time consuming. On the other hand
the corrections for QP and exciton interaction in electron eigen energies could be
included through the scissors operator [3,5].
In this work a first principle method to predict optical functions of complex
organic molecules and molecular complexes based on ab initio pseudopotential (PP)
theory is described. Corrections for QP shift and excitonic effects are incorporated
through the scissor operator. This method could be used to study electronic structure
and optical functions of complex molecules and complexes which is demonstrated for
organic polymer calculations.

2 Method
Optical absorption spectra of organic conjugated poly-phenylene-vinylenes (PPV)
polymers with linear decacyl (C10H21) groups (donor RO-PPV block) are calculated
using ab initio pseudopotentials method. For this system an infinitely long PPV
polymer chain is considered. This approach is distinctly different from that
traditionally used in quantum-mechanical calculations [4]. Advantages of this
approach were demonstrated for trans-polyacetylene and simple PPV polymers [2].
Recently we applied this method for optical absorption study of Rhodamine 6G
(R6G) dye molecular aggregates [6].
Here both commercial [7] and research [8] computational packages based on ab
initio PP are used. In order to apply pseudopotentials in molecular system we use the
super-cell method [9]. The electron energy structure and eigen-functions are
calculated within DFT-GGA using fully separable ab initio PP generated according to
the Troullier-Martin scheme [10]. Energy cut-off up to 60 Ry is taken to generate
fully separable PP [8]. Convergence of the ground state has been proved by test
calculations with energy cutoff ( E cut ) up to 100 Ry for R6G single molecule.
Accuracy of better then 10% for eigen values is achieved with

E cut = 45 Ry. This

value is used in this work in order to avoid complexity. For atomic relaxation of
single molecule and molecular dimers the super cell method is used. The PerdewBurke-Ernzerhof (PBE) functional was used to model XC interaction [11].
Optical absorption spectra are calculated within RPA approach [5, 8, 9] according
to α (ω ) = 2ωk (ω ) [12].The extinction coefficient k is determined through real and

imaginary parts of the dielectric permittivity function ε (ω ) = ε 1 (ω ) + iε 2 (ω ) . The
evaluation of ε αβ (ω ), (α , β = x, y , z ) , in this work is based on the independent particle
approximation. We consider the effect of gauge invariance for computation of
ε αβ (ω ) (details are given in Appendix). The time dependent linear optical

susceptibility function follows from the equation of motion for the density matrix (the
RPA picture) [5,9]. The imaginary part of the function of ε αβ (ω ) in Coulomb (or
velocity) gauge and in length gauge is given by Eq (16) or Eq (17) respectively. The
real part is calculated using Kramers-Kronig formula [12].

Ab initio Modeling of Optical Properties of Organic Molecules

91

3 Results and Discussion
In order to study the effect of the gauge invariance on predicted optical spectra of
organic molecules the optical absorption spectra of R6G molecular dimmers [6] and
of RO-PPV polymer are calculated using both Coulomb (velocity) and length gauge
(Eqs (16) and (17)). We found [6] that length gauge for R6G calculations is
preferable. The level of 10% accuracy of the convergence of the optical functions
could be reached faster then with velocity gauge. This agrees with Rautian’s [4]
finding. He showed that length gauge is more convenient for confined system, where
if using Coulomb gauge, one still needs to sum over wide spectral range. On the other
hand we found that for delocalized system (RO-PPV polymer) velocity gauge is more
convenient. This approach allows easy corrections to the optical response function. In
particular, for several cases in materials optics one needs to incorporate nonnegligible contributions to optical response functions caused by intra-band electron
transitions (e.g. for molecular and/or atom surface adsorption, surface/interface
contributions etc. [9]) Straightforward use of length gauge in this case causes
divergences, which require special treatment [3,9], consequently the Coulomb gauge
is preferable.
The Coulomb gauge is very useful by evaluation of Hamiltonian matrix elements
in a plane wave basis by using ab initio pseudopotential method [8]. In this case
optical response functions (both linear and nonlinear) are evaluated in particularly
simple way, which is very important for complex systems [5,9]. However strictly
speaking in the optics of materials one can not use momentum operator for the free
particle (6). In many-particle system (like molecules or solids) electron experience not
only on-site (local) excitations, but also effect of the other particles, which is
essentially non-local. This results in the non-locality of momentum operator. Nature
of this effect could be understood from the following consideration.
Quite generally the many particles unperturbed Hamiltonian is given by:

H=

2
pˆ 0
r
r r
+ Vloc (r ) + ∑(r , r ′)
2m

(1)

r r
where operator ∑ (r , r ′) represents non-local part of the potential energy of the

Hamiltonian.
Momentum (or velocity) operator is given by:

[ ]

[( ) ( )]

r
r
r
d r
i
i
r = m Hˆ , r = m Hˆ r − r Hˆ
(2)
dt
h
h
r r
Taken into account that [Vloc (r ), r ] = 0 and using following relation for the
pˆ = m

kinetic part of the Hamiltonian:

(∇ r − r∇ )ψ = ∇(ψ + r∇ψ )− r∇ ψ = 2∇ψ
r2

r2

r

r

r2

r

(3)

92

V.I. Gavrilenko

The equation (2) results in:

r
r r r
i
pˆ = −ih∇ + m [∑(r , r ′), r ]
h

(4)

Last term in (4) represents correction to the momentum operator of the free particle
(6) for non-locality of the potential energy (for the particle in molecule or solid). This
contribution results in redistribution of the oscillator strengths which substantially
improves predicted shape of optical spectra by bringing them closer to experimental
data, as it has been demonstrated for inorganic group IV materials in [13]. This should
be borne in mind by analysis of the predicted spectral shape.
Equilibrium atomic configuration of organic semi-conducting conjugated polymer
RO-PPV (R=C10H21) is determined by geometry optimization through minimization
of the total energy and it is shown in Fig. 1.

Fig. 1. Equilibrium atomic geometry of RO-PPV conjugated polymer determined through total
energy minimization method. By the white line super cell units ordered in one dimensional
chain are shown.

Optical absorption spectra of RO-PPV conjugated polymers are calculated using
Coulomb gauge from Eq. (16). The self-consistently calculated eigen-functions and
eigen-energies for equilibrium geometries are used as inputs. Calculated optical
absorption spectrum of PPV single chain conjugated polymer is shown in Fig. 2.
Absolute values of the absorption coefficient are normalized according to the
molecular concentration followed from the dimension of the super rcell.
r
Optical absorption of the light polarized along polymer chain E || z (see Fig. 2) is
more then an order of magnitude stronger than that for perpendicular geometry.
Absorption peak around 440 nm arises from the excitations of delocalized π-electrons
from benzene rings. The basic PPV polymer chain does not show any optical
absorption for perpendicular geometry in a visible range [2]. The RO groups slightly
change symmetry
the delocalized π-electrons thus allowing non-zero optical
r of
r
absorption for E ⊥ z in a visible range. The quasi-particle correction is applied in the

Ab initio Modeling of Optical Properties of Organic Molecules

93

Fig. 2. Calculated optical absorption spectrum of RO-PPV conjugated polymer calculated for
r r
parallel ( E || z ) geometry. Symbols represent measured optical absorption spectra [14].

form of scissor operator: the predicted anti-bounding electronic states are increased in
energy by 0.79 eV to match the 440 nm measured absorption peak. With this ad hoc
QP correction the predicted optical absorption spectrum of RO-PPV correctly
represents all main features seen in the measured spectrum (see Fig. 2). Calculated
absorption spectrum is close to that observed in similar PPV polymers [4, 15].
However absolute intensities of the absorption peaks deviate strongly from
experimental data. Similar situation was reported on simple polymers by using first
principle many-body excitonic theory [2]. Better agreement we obtained for R6G
dye molecular dimers [6]. The reason for the discrepancy between the shapes of
predicted and measured absorption spectra could be the neglect of the momentum
operator nonlocality as discussed above. Inclusion of this effect into optical
calculation improves agreement with experimental spectral shape for inorganic
solids [13].
In [2] full ab initio computations of excitation energies of some simple polymers
demonstrated importance of excitonic effects in optics. Such large scale
computations within first principle theory (the DFT with QP and many-body
exciton corrections [2]) are still challenging for computational physics of complex
organic materials. Therefore the first principle pseudopotential method with the ad
hoc QP scissor correction for DFT-GGA excitation energies in organic polymers is
a reasonable compromise between accuracy and complexity of computations, as
demonstrated in this work. Results of the present work as well as that presented in
the literature show that overall agreement between predicted and experimental
optical spectra in polymers is worse than in solids. One important reason is the
reduction of the translational symmetry to only one dimension in polymers.
Consequently the increase of the unit cell requires more extensive computational
work to achieve the same accuracy level as in three dimensions. Further
development of computational methods combining that of physics and chemistry
may solve the problem.

94

V.I. Gavrilenko

4 Conclusions
Method of optical functions calculations of organic molecular complexes based on ab
initio pseudopotentials is described. Optical excitation energies are correctly predicted
using DFT-GGA method with scissor operator for quasi particle correction.
Numerical results obtained for RO-PPV conjugated polymer are in reasonable
agreement with experimental data. Effects of gauge invariance and non-locality of
optical momentum operator on predicted optical response functions are analyzed.

Acknowledgement
Author is thankful for discussions with M. Noginov and C. Bonner. This work is
supported by NSF grant CREST supplement No. 0520208.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.

Kohn W., Sham, L., J. Phys. Rev., 140 (1965) A1133-A1143
Rohlfing M., Luie S. G., Phys. Rev. Lett. 82 (1999) 1959-1962
Onida G., Reining L., Rubio A., Rev. Mod. Phys. 74 (2002) 601-633.
Barford W., Electronic and Optical Properties of Conjugated Polymers, Oxford University
Press, New York (2005)
Gavrilenko V. I., Bechstedt F., Phys. Rev. B 55 (1997) 4343-4352
Gavrilenko V. I., Noginov M. A., J. Chem. Phys. 124 (2006) 44301-44306
Material Studio Modeling 3.2, Accelrys Software Inc. 2004.
Fuchs M., Schefler M., Comput. Phys. Commun., 16 (1999) 1-18
Gavrilenko V. I., Phys. Status Solidi (a), 188, (2001) 1267-1280
Troullier N., Martins J. L., Phys. Rev. B, 43 (1991) 1993-1998
Perdew J. P., Burke K., Ernzerhof M., Phys. Re. Lett., 77 (1996) 3865-3875
Yu P., Cardona M., Fundamentals of Semiconductors, Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg
New York (2001)
Adolph B, Gavrilenko V. I., Tenelsen K., Bechstedt F., Del Sole R., Phys. Rev. B, 53
(1996) 9797-9808.
Bonner C. E., Jr., Charter S., Lorts A., Gavrilenko V.I. SPIE Int. Conf. on Optics and
Photonics, (San Diego 2006), (submitted).
Frolov S., Bao Z., Wohlgenannt M., Vardeny Z.V., Phys. Rev. B 65 (2002) 205209205218

Appendix: Effect of Gauge Invariance on Evaluation of Optical
Susceptibility Functions
Perturbed Hamiltonian of the particle in electro-magnetic field of light is given by:
2
r
1 ⎡
e r r ⎤
H=
pˆ + A(r , t )⎥ + V (r ),
⎢
2m ⎣
c
⎦

(5)

Ab initio Modeling of Optical Properties of Organic Molecules

95

The momentum operator of free particle is given by:

r
r
p0 = −ih∇

(6)

Using a trial function we have:

(Apˆ )− (pˆ A) = ih divA
r

r

0

r

0

(7)

r

Assuming Coulomb gauge ( divA = 0 ) and bearing in mind that in the light
wavelength range up to vacuum ultraviolet the quadratic term on vector-potential in
(5) is very small [12], we have:

( )

2
pˆ 0
r
e r
H=
+
Apˆ 0 + V (r ) = H 0 + H int
2m mc

(8)

with

H int =

( )

rr r
rr r
e
e
e r
E 0 e i (ωt + qr ) (τ pˆ 0 )
Ao e i (ωt + qr ) (τ pˆ 0 ) = −i
Apˆ 0 =
mω
mc
c

(9)

where τ is a unity vector, and for the light wave we have:

r
r
1 ∂A ω r
E=−
=i A
c ∂t
c

(10)

Let us consider now the full momentum matrix elements of p, determined on the
eigen functions of the Hamiltonian (5):

Hψ n = E nψ n

(11)

We have:

r
⎞
dr
i⎛
pln = m l |
| n = m ⎜⎜ ∑ H ln′ rn′l − ∑ rln′′ H n′′n ⎟⎟
dt
h ⎝ n′
n′′
⎠
=m

i
(El − En )rln = imωln rln
h

(12)

This expression is general. In the length gauge the interaction Hamiltonian is given
by [9]:
r r rr
rr
H int = er E = eE0 e i (ωt + qr ) (τ r )

(13)

Based on (9) and (12) the ratio between Coulomb and length gauge interaction
Hamiltonians is given by:

96

V.I. Gavrilenko

r
C
H int
1 (τ pˆ )
= −i
rr
mω (τ r )
H intL
C
l H int
n

lH

L
int

n

= −i

r
1 imω ln rln ωln
=
r
ω
mω rln

(14)

(15)

Last expression agrees with that given in [4]. It shows that in resonance (if ωln = ω)
both Coulomb and length invariance are equivalent, but out of resonance they are
different. Based on time dependent perturbation theory expressions for imaginary part
of dielectric permittivity in both gauges are given by [9, 12] for Coulomb and length
gauges, respectively:

⎛ 2πe ⎞
ε 2 (ω ) = ⎜
⎟
⎝ mω ⎠

2

∑p

2
ln

δ (El − E n − hω )

(16)

l ,n

ε 2 (ω ) = (2πe )2 ∑ rln δ (El − E n − hω )
2

l ,n

(17)

