Mesoscopic Simulation for Self-organization
in Surface Processes
David J. Horntrop
New Jersey Institute of Technology,
Department of Mathematical Sciences,
Newark, NJ 07102 USA

Abstract. The self-organization of particles in a system through a diffusive mechanism is known as Ostwald ripening. This phenomenon is an
example of a multiscale problem in that the microscopic level interaction
of the particles can greatly impact the macroscale or observable morphology of the system. The mesoscopic model of this physical situation
is a stochastic partial diﬀerential equation which can be derived from
the appropriate particle system. This model is studied through the use
of recently developed and benchmarked spectral schemes for the simulation of solutions to stochastic partial diﬀerential equations. The results
included here demonstrate the eﬀect of adjusting the interparticle interaction on the morphological evolution of the system at the macroscopic
level.

1

Introduction

The coarsening phenomenon by which mass is transported via diﬀusion in order
to reduce the overall interfacial area is known as Ostwald ripening. In general,
larger droplets grow at the expense of smaller droplets–the number of droplets
decreases while the average size of the remaining droplets increases because of the
conservation of mass in the system. This phenomena has received a great deal of
study in the literature from theoretical, experimental, and computational points
of view. ([1], [2], and [3] are just a few examples.) However, Ostwald ripening
is also a very diﬃcult problem to study due to the inherently multiscale nature
of the problem. In this note, a mesoscopic model which can be related to many
of the commonly studied models of phase separation is used in a computational
study of domain coarsening. To begin, the model under consideration here will
be described.

2

Description of Mesoscopic Model

Mesoscopic (or local mean ﬁeld) models are designed to bridge the gap between
microscopic (molecular) and macroscopic (observable) scales by incorporating
microscopic level behavior in the macroscopic level. Mesoscopic models can be
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3514, pp. 852–859, 2005.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

Mesoscopic Simulation for Self-organization in Surface Processes

853

derived through a coarse graining of the underlying microscopic system in a rigorous fashion without the introduction of artiﬁcial cutoﬀs. Details of the derivation
of mesoscopic models are given in [4], [5], and [6]. Here, this modeling approach
will be brieﬂy described and the mesoscopic model appropriate for studying
Ostwald ripening will be given.
In the mesoscopic framework, each micromechanism is incorporated through
an evolution equation of the average coverage which is derived from the speciﬁc micromechanism under consideration. These evolution equations contain
stochastic forcing terms as a result of a direct derivation rather than being
included in an ad hoc manner as a means of describing microscale behavior.
Thus, the mesoscopic model equations are stochastic partial integrodiﬀerential
equations which incorporate the molecular interactions explicitly through convolutions.
The mesoscopic model that would be an appropriate model of Ostwald ripening arises from the spin exchange (surface diﬀusion) mechanism and can be given
as follows:
ut − D∇ · [∇u − βu(1 − u)∇Jm ∗ u] + γ div

2Du(1 − u) dW (x, t) = 0 (1)

where u is the concentration of the particles on the surface, D is the diffusion constant, β is proportional to the inverse of the temperature of the
underlying Ising model, Jm is the migration potential, γ is proportional to
the interaction length of the particles, and dW represents a process that is
delta correlated (white noise) in both space and time dW (x, t) = 0 and
dW (x, t)dW (x , t ) = δ(x − x )δ(t − t ) where the angular brackets are used
to denote mean values. It is important to observe that the noise in (1) is multiplicative rather the additive noise that is commonly added to deterministic
models in an ad hoc manner.

3

Description of Simulation Method

The numerical scheme that is used to study the mesoscopic model in (1) is
based upon a generalization of spectral schemes for deterministic partial differential equations to the stochastic setting. Spectral schemes are a particularly
attractive way to study (1) due to the simplicity of calculating convolutions spectrally. Just as in the deterministic setting, spatial variables and derivatives are
treated spectrally while the time evolution is calculated using ﬁnite diﬀerences.
A detailed description of this scheme is given in [7] where some exactly solvable problems are used as computational benchmarks to validate this method.
The emphasis here will be on those aspects of the scheme which are unique
to the stochastic system, such as the spectral treatment of the multiplicative
noise term in (1) and the use of a suitable time discretization technique. For
the sake of simplicity in the description of the spectral method in this section,
it will be assumed that the stochastic partial diﬀerential equation has only one
spatial dimension. The method straightforwardly generalizes to higher spatial

854

D.J. Horntrop

dimension as evidenced by the two spatial dimension results presented in Section 4.
3.1

Treatment of Noise Term

One of the most important steps for developing a spectral scheme for a stochastic
partial diﬀerential equation such as the mesoscopic model in (1) is to determine
a spectral representation for the spatial component of the noise term. It is wellknown in the stochastic processes literature that a stationary, isotropic, Gaussian
random ﬁeld v(x) can be represented by the following stochastic integral in
Fourier space:
v(x) =

1

e2πix·ξ S 2 (ξ) dW (ξ)

(2)

where W is Brownian motion and S is the spectral density function of the random ﬁeld. Most consistent numerical schemes are based upon discretizations of
this stochastic integral ([8],[9]). The simplest such discretization uses equispaced
nodes and is known as the Fourier method and is essentially a Fourier series.
This approximation is
M

v(x) ≈

aj cos(2πξj x) + bj sin(2πξj x)

(3)

j=1

where aj and bj are independent Gaussians with mean zero and variance S(ξj )∆ξ.
Due to the periodicity of the approximation in (3), the Fourier method would
not be suitable in applications in which the desired random ﬁeld has long range
correlations [8]. However, since the random ﬁeld that is needed for the numerical study of (1) has delta correlation (lacks long range correlations), the Fourier
method should give a good approximation. The Fourier method is also computationally attractive since an FFT can be used directly to evaluate (3) at all
physical space lattice sites.
The next issue in the treatment of the noise term in (1) is determining how
to use (3) to obtain a spectral representation of the multiplicative noise term.
Because each realization of the noise at a given time is approximated by a Fourier
series representation (3), the noise term in (1) can be calculated by completing
all multiplications in physical space and all diﬀerentiations in Fourier space,
passing back and forth between physical space and Fourier space as necessary
using an FFT. Thus, the existence of the Fourier series representation of the
noise allows the treatment of the stochastic term in the same basic fashion as
for deterministic terms in partial diﬀerential equations.
3.2

Time Discretization

At this point, the solution of the stochastic partial diﬀerential equation in (1)
eﬀectively has been reduced to the solution of a stochastic ordinary diﬀerential
equation which can be written in the form
ut = a(u) dt + b(u) dW (t)

(4)

Mesoscopic Simulation for Self-organization in Surface Processes

855

where a is the drift coeﬃcient and b is the diﬀusion coeﬃcient. Note that it is
not appropriate to directly apply schemes that were derived for deterministic
ordinary diﬀerential equations to (4) since the additional stochastic corrections
from the Ito calculus must be included. For instance, it has been shown in [10]
that the Euler method applied to a stochastic ordinary diﬀerential equation
has a strong (pathwise) order of convergence of 12 rather than order 1 as in
the deterministic setting. Thus, it is essential to use schemes that are derived
directly from suitable truncations of Taylor-Ito series. However, such schemes
typically include derivatives of the drift and the diﬀusion coeﬃcients. Given the
highly nonlinear nature of these terms in (1), it is especially useful to consider
derivative-free Runge-Kutta type schemes [10]. One choice of a ﬁrst order strong
scheme is the following:
1
un ) − b(un )] (∆W )2 − ∆t
un+1 = un + a(un )∆t + b(un )∆W + √ [b(˜
2 ∆t

(5)

with supporting value u
˜n given by

√
u
˜n = un + b(un ) ∆t

(6)

and ∆W is a Gaussian with mean 0 and variance ∆t. In practice, the time
stepping is usually done in Fourier space so that terms, such as the standard
diﬀusion, which are linear in Fourier space may be treated exactly through the
use of an integrating factor. The integrating factor also allows the use of larger
times steps than are numerically stable if the linear terms were not calculated
exactly. Of course, since the solution of (1) is real, the ∆Wn ’s in the time stepping
scheme (when taking time steps in Fourier space) must be selected to respect the
symmetries in Fourier coeﬃcients that are present in spectral representations of
real ﬁelds.

4

Simulation Results

In this section, some simulation results for (1) in two space dimensions using the
numerical scheme described in the preceding section are given. The migration
potential is chosen to be
Jm (r) =

1
πr02

exp

−|r|2
r02

(7)

with r0 a parameter that describes the interaction length. The other parameters
in (1) are chosen to be D = 0.1, β = 6, and γ = r02 . Simulation parameters include 64 wave numbers in each direction and a step size of ∆t = 0.00001, which
insures numerical stability of the time evolver. The computational domain is a
unit square with periodic boundary conditions. The system is initialized with
two circular regions of high concentration surrounded by regions of low concentration. A rapidly decaying exponential is used to “connect” these two regions to

856

D.J. Horntrop

insure the continuity and diﬀerentiability of the initial concentration ﬁeld. The
centers of the circles are a distance 0.5 apart. The upper circle initially has a
radius of 0.1, while the lower circle has an initial radius of 0.09. This sort of initialization is commonly used in studies of Ostwald ripening as it is the simplest
physical case in which this phenomenon can be observed ([11], [12]). In this system, the larger (upper) circle is expected to grow while the smaller (lower) circle
shrinks since lower curvatures are preferred; as the smaller circle disappears, the
larger region should be distorted away from its circular shape in the locations
nearest the small circle but eventually become circular again. The deformation
in shape would be expected to occur at both ends of the upper circle in this case
due to the symmetries in the initial state and the periodic boundary conditions
used.
Figure 1 contains contour plots from simulations of (1) using the spectral
scheme described in Section 3 for the case r0 = 0.05 for times 5, 10, 13.5, and
15. The light areas represent regions of high concentration while the dark areas
represent regions of low concentration. At the earlier times presented in Figure 1,

t=5

t=10

60

60

50

50

40

40

30

30

20

20

10

10

00 10 20 30 40 50 60

00 10 20 30 40 50 60

t=13.5

t=15

60

60

50

50

40

40

30

30

20

20

10

10

00 10 20 30 40 50 60

00 10 20 30 40 50 60

Fig. 1. Contour plots showing the time evolution of the concentration ﬁeld obtained
from mesoscopic simulations. The lighter shades represent regions of higher concentration while the darker shades represent regions of lower concentration. The expected
Ostwald ripening is observed

Mesoscopic Simulation for Self-organization in Surface Processes

857

the shrinking of the lower circle and the growth of the upper circle are already
evident. As time continues, the rate of shrinking of the smaller circle increases
until at time 13.5, the region of highest concentration has almost completely
disappeared from the lower circle; the deformation of the upper region into an
elliptical shape is also becoming quite evident. By time 15, the lower region has
essentially diﬀused away with the majority of particles appearing in the upper
region which has become quite elliptical in shape. In later time results not shown
here, this upper region eventually evolves to a circular shape again. The total
concentration in the system was observed to be conserved for all times considered, including this ﬁnal state. All of these results are in qualitative agreement
with those expected; in addition, these results are also quite similar in nature
those obtained in prior studies of others using diﬀerent mathematical models
and numerical techniques, for example, boundary integral techniques are used
in [12].
The ease of changing the interparticle interaction potential in the mesoscopic
model in (1) straightforwardly allows for many computational studies. The eﬀect

r0=0.04

r0=0.05

60

60

50

50

40

40

30

30

20

20

10

10

00 10 20 30 40 50 60

00 10 20 30 40 50 60

r0=0.06
60
50
40
30
20
10
00 10 20 30 40 50 60
Fig. 2. Mesoscopic simulation results at time t = 10 which demonstrate the eﬀect of
adjusting the particle interaction length on the time evolution of the system. Longer
interaction lengths lead to faster evolution while shorter interaction lengths lead to
slower evolution

858

D.J. Horntrop

of adjusting the interaction length r0 in (7) can be observed in Figure 2 where
simulation results are given at time t = 10 for r0 = 0.04, 0.05, and 0.06. All
other simulation parameters are unchanged from those used for Figure 1; the
initial concentration ﬁeld is also unchanged. Recall that increasing the value of
r0 increases the interaction length of the underlying particles of the system. For
the smallest interaction length shown here (r0 = 0.04), the system has evolved
very little from the initial state; on the other hand, for the largest interaction
radius shown here (r0 = 0.06), not only has the smaller (lower) circle completely
diﬀused away but also the upper region has already evolved back to a nearly
circular shape. These results are in good agreement with physical intuition since
one would expect particles in systems with longer range interactions to more
readily “ﬁnd” each other. In fact, the smaller circle has essentially diﬀused away
by time 8 when r0 = 0.06 but remains until time 26 for the much smaller interaction radius of r0 = 0.04. Also, just as for the simulation results in Figure 1,
the total concentration was conserved throughout the entire simulation. Thus,
the time scale of the evolution is quite sensitive to the interaction length of
the particles but the overall qualitative behavior of the evolution remains the
same.

5

Conclusions

This brief note can only indicate the value and power of using the mesoscopic
modeling approach in conjunction with the spectral scheme for stochastic partial
diﬀerential equations (“mesoscopic simulation”). For instance, mesoscopic simulation can be applied to physical situations with underlying micromechanisms
other than diﬀusion. Mesoscopic simulation is more computationally tractable
than other approaches such as molecular dynamics, especially for results which
require long time simulations with large numbers of particles. (All results presented or discussed here were obtained in a few hours on a workstation.) One
particularly attractive feature of this approach is the ease by which diﬀerent
sorts of particle interactions can be used. While Figure 2 certainly indicates one
interesting class of adjustments to the interaction potential that can be considered, there are many others that should be considered including interactions
with repulsive interaction ranges as might be encountered with charged particles.
Anisotropic potentials would be useful in studies of coarsening systems in which
there is a preferred growth direction. It is also important that more quantitative
comparisons with theory and experiments be made. As a step in this direction,
results of this type are given in [13], including simulations starting from a disordered state which exhibit the Lifshitz-Slyozov growth law as self-organization
proceeds.

Acknowledgments
This research is partly supported by NSF-DMS-0219211, NSF-DMS-0406633,
and an NJIT SBR grant.

Mesoscopic Simulation for Self-organization in Surface Processes

859

References
1. Voorhees, P.: The theory of Ostwald ripening. J. Statis. Phys. 38 (1985) 231–252.
2. Yao, J., Elder, K., Guo, H., Grant, M.: Late stage droplet growth. Physica A 204
(1994) 770–788.
3. Niethammer, B., Pego, R.: The LSW model for domain coarsening: asymptotic
behavior for conserved total mass. J. Statis. Phys. 104 (2001) 1113–1144.
4. Hildebrand, B., Mikhailov, A.: Mesoscopic modeling in the kinetic theory of adsorbates. J. Phys. Chem. 100 (1996) 19089–19101.
5. Giacomin, G., Lebowitz, J.: Exact macroscopic description of phase segregation in
model alloys with long range interactions. Phys. Rev. Letters 76 (1996) 1094–1097.
6. Vlachos, D., Katsoulakis, M.: Derivation and validation of mesoscopic theories for
diﬀusion-reaction of interacting molecules. Phys. Rev. Letters 85 (2000) 3898–3901.
7. Horntrop, D.: Spectral schemes for stochastic partial diﬀerential equations. (submitted).
8. Elliott, F., Horntrop, D., Majda, A.: Monte Carlo methods for turbulent tracers
with long range and fractal random velocity ﬁelds. Chaos 7 (1997) 39–48.
9. Elliott, F., Horntrop, D., Majda, A.: A Fourier–wavelet Monte Carlo method for
fractal random ﬁelds. J. Comp. Phys. 132 (1997) 384–408.
10. Kloeden, P., Platen, E.: Numerical Solution of Stochastic Diﬀerential Equations.
Springer, Berlin (1992).
11. Imaeda, T., Kawasaki, K.: Theory of morphological evolution in Ostwald ripening.
Physica A 186 (1992) 359–387.
12. Voorhees, P., McFadden, G., Boisvert, R., Meiron, D.: Numerical simulation of
morphological development during Ostwald ripening. Acta Metall. 36 (1988) 207–
222.
13. Horntrop, D.: Mesoscopic simulation for domain coarsening. (in preparation).

