The Eﬀect of the Theorem Prover
in Cognitive Science
Tadashi Takahashi1 and Hidetsune Kobayashi2
1

2

Dept. of Mathematics and Informatics, Faculty of Human Development, Kobe
University, 3-11, Tsurukabuto, Nada-ku, Kobe 657-8501, Japan
Dept. of Mathematics, College of Science and Technology, Nihon University, 8-14,
Kanda-Surugadai 1-chome, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 101-8308, Japan

Abstract. Humans use strategies to solve problems. Strategies are used
as knowledge to plan solutions and decide procedures. A computer algebra system with a theorem prover is being developed. We must consider
the theorem prover from not only the perspective of its eﬀect on cognitive
science, but also from the perspective of mathematical studies.

1

Introduction

According to the three-level human behavior model of Rasmussen, automatic
human actions can be classiﬁed into the three levels of skill-, rule- and knowledgebased actions([6]). A skill-based action is a response that occurs in less than 1
second ([4]). A chain of skill-based actions is a rule-based action. Thinking about
how to solve a problem is a knowledge-based action.
Skill-based actions are performed smoothly without intentional control. Rulebased actions require a great deal of repetitive practice in order to be transferred
to the skill-based level. First, the external conditions must be recognized, then
the rules for composing the act are combined with the conditions required to
carry out the behavior. Knowledge-based actions require the recognition of external conditions, the interpretation of these conditions, the construction of a
psychological model for considering solutions, planning, and ﬁnally, the use of
the other two behavior levels to carry out the action. This is a process model in
which mastery of behavior requiring thought is internalized to the point where
it can be carried out unconsciously. Mistakes can be explained as omitted steps,
or for example, as pushing the wrong nearby button in smoothly carried out
skill-based actions. In the case of knowledge-based actions, illusion can lead to
error. In the present study, this process was analyzed using Rasmussen’s threelevel human behavior model in order to identify what functions are essential
to facilitating smooth action and learning. Behavior used to learn about problems and how to solve them is classiﬁed in detail according to the three-level
model. Humans act by classifying issues and their relationships by consciously
combining them. Humans control themselves by constantly observing, thinking
about, evaluating, and integrating their behavior in order to achieve accuracy,
continuity, consistency, and normality ([3]). Classiﬁed factors can be separated
into the same three levels as the general actions.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part I, LNCS 3991, pp. 924–927, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

The Eﬀect of the Theorem Prover in Cognitive Science

2

925

Strategy

Strategies are used as knowledge to plan solutions and decide procedures. When
these procedures, in general or for the most part, obtain the correct answer, the
procedure is called a heuristic; however, such heuristics do not always result in
a correct solution.
Strategies are used even when human beings solve mathematical problems.
Recognition knowledge and experience are used as ”doing it like this is eﬀective in this case”. The ability to rapidly reference knowledge is required for
strategies based on experience. Furthermore, the recognition of thoughts and
feelings controls. The famous book by the mathematician Polya, ”How to solve
it”([5]), showed the processes of mathematical problem solving; however, one
can not learn how to use heuristics in problem solving just by reading a book.
In researching problem solving, there are two contrasting concepts. The ﬁrst
emphasizes insight, ﬂash, and senses, while the second emphasizes experiential knowledge. The former concept employs a strong tendency to perceive that
strategies of thought are learned through the experience of problem solving. In
other words, it is assumed that an intuitive feelings and speciﬁc technical abilities
can be acquired. In the latter concept, it is assumed that problem solving ability
arises from the accumulation of rules inherent to the domain provided by an
individual problem. Such diﬀerences depend on the problem’s nature, domain,
and level, and the type of person involved in the learning process. In addition,
it is diﬃcult to establish clear boundary lines between these two concepts. In
problem solving, experiential knowledge plays a large role. Heuristics are general
ideas or algorithms (a procedure providing the correct solution), and are widely
used. Heuristics are equal to ”the logic of a thought”. Examples of extremely
general strategies are ”try to draw a ﬁgure if you come across a diﬃcult problem”, and ”search for similar problems that you have experience with”. There
are also concrete strategies we are familiar with, such as ”A problem requiring
the comparison of quantities requires two diﬀerences, and a transform formula”
and ”try to make clauses that diﬀer next to each other for number sum sequence
problems” ([1]).

3

Theorem Prover

As a representative of a theorem prover, the Isabelle/HOL system was used.
Research on formalizing abstract algebra in Isabele/HOL is based on work by
Hidetsune Kobayashi. This study focuses on researching mathematics, and in
particular, on training researchers in the technics of proving ([2]). In the area
of mechanical theorem proving, Kobayashi gave a decision procedure for what
he called abstract algebra, based on algebraic method. It is really surprise to
prove many abstract algebra theorems whose traditional proofs need enormous
amounts of human intelligence. One of the key observations of Kobayashi is that
theorems in abstract algebra can be relatively easily dealt with by a lot of lemmata, completely from former methods. The power of the method can be shown

926

T. Takahashi and H. Kobayashi

by experiments on computers in which many abstract algebra theorems were
proved. The success of Kobayashi’s method stimulated researchers to apply the
connection of lemmata images. This research on formalizing abstract algebra in
Isabelle/HOL is being conducted in order to develop a computer algebra system
that supports mathematical study focused on abstract algebra. The system combines methods of automated theorem proving and also integrates programming
in a natural way.
This method are of interest to researchers both in artiﬁcial intelligence (AI)
and in algebraic modeling because they have been used in the design of programs that, in eﬀect, can prove or disprove conjectured relationships between,
or theorems about, abstract algebraic objects.
It is interesting to note that theorems have been veriﬁed by this method.
In a limited sense, this ”theorem prover” is capable of ”reasoning” about algebraic conjectures, an area often considered to be solely the domain of human
intelligence.
This research aims at extending current computer systems using facilities
for supporting mathematical proving. The system consists of a general higherorder predicate logic prover and a collection of special provers. The individual
provers imitate the proof style of human mathematicians and produce humanreadable proofs in natural language presented in nested cells. The long-term goal
of this research is to produce a complete system, which supports mathematicians.
On the meta-level, we can write explicit programs for reasoning tactics using
Isabelle/HOL.

4

Knowledge Base in Cognitive Science

When researchers use the theorem prover for the acquisition of knowledge or
skills, we must consider a ”tool” to be a ”symbol device”. A symbol device exists between the researchers and the research subject. Operation activity occurs
between a symbol device and the researching subject. In cognitive science, two
diﬃculties exist, one in the interaction between the researcher and the symbol device, and one in the interaction between the symbol device and the research subject. Therefore, we must overcome these diﬃculties in order to eﬀectively utilize
the theorem prover in cognitive science. Moreover, we must assess the beneﬁts of
considering the integration of the theorem prover from the perspective of the relationship between mathematical knowledge and mathematical concepts. When
theorem provers are used in mathematical studies, researchers achieve a result
through their eﬀorts. Then, the researchers must investigate whether conceptual
problems exist or whether they simply do not appreciate how the theorem prover
works. By using a theorem prover eﬀectively, researchers become aware of numerous mathematical ideas. This is made possible by incorporating the results
of research in cognitive science. In carrying out a seven-phase model of human
action, ”the formation of a series of intentions or actions” must be performed
smoothly. The eﬀective use of a theorem prover in cognitive science is inﬂuenced
by the contents of mathematical thought, and research and understanding of

The Eﬀect of the Theorem Prover in Cognitive Science

927

mathematics can further inﬂuence general idea formation. The theorem prover
inﬂuences the ”perception - interpretation - evaluation” phases of evaluation.
The foundations of this model were studied by Rasmussen as the three-level
control model of individuals actions ([7]). We can use the theorem prover as a
material object that is available for the assessment of human activity. The use of
the theorem prover can establish automatic and routine procedures. Controlling
this automation is essential, especially in research on though processes. There
are three methods for creating a theorem proof (by hand, by mind, and with a
computer). A researcher’s point of view of cognitive science considers the relationship between the brain and mind as the relationship between hardware and
software in a computer. According to this point of view, the science of the mind
is a special science, the science of thought.

5

Conclusion

In the three-level model of human behavior, operations and strategies can be
identiﬁed and considered in relation to human thought processes in order to facilitate error-free problem solving. In consideration of surface features and conditions, similar problems can be recognized and suitable problem-solving methods
can be identiﬁed. In addition, it was found that contents of the subconscious can
be raised to the knowledge-based action level in order to support the expression
process and the achievement of eﬃcient functioning.
The technology of theorem prover automated reasoning. The ultimate goal of
mathematics is technology. To do mathematics is gaining knowledge and solving
problems by reasoning. Theorem prover is a powerful tool for researching mathematics. Researchers should appreciate the possibility of sharing cognitive level
with such technology.

References
1. Ichikawa S.: Psychology of Learning and Education, Iwanami Shoten, 91 (1995) (in
Japanese).
2. Kobayashi H, Suzuki H and Ono Y.: Formalization of Henzels Lemma, 18th International Conference, TPHOLs, Oxford, UK, Emerging Trends Proceedings Oxford
Research Report (2005).
3. Kozuya T. (ed.): Memory and Knowledge (Cognitive Psychology Lecture 2), University of Tokyo Press, 17 (1978) (in Japanese).
4. Polson P. G. and Kieras D. E.: A Quantitative Model of the Learning and Performance of Text Editing Knowledge, Proceedings of ACM CHI’85 Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems. (1985).
5. Polya G.: How to solve it. Doubleday (1957).
6. Rasmussen J.: Recognition engineering of interface, Keigakushuppan (1990) (in
Japanese).
7. Tamura H.: Human interface. Ohm-sha (1998) (in Japanese).

