An Interactive Virtual Reality Interface to an Object-Oriented Database
System for Construction Architectural Design
Farhi Marir, Karim Ouazzane, and Kamel Zerzour
Knowledge Management Group (KMG), School of Informatics and Multimedia Technology, University of North
London, Holloway Road, London N7 8DB, UK
{f.marir, k.ouazzane, k.zerzour}@unl.ac.uk

Abstract. The aim of this paper is to explore the potentials of using virtual reality as an interface for an
integrated project database using the World Wide Web. It describes the steps taken to link the OSCON
integrated database to a VRML environment.
Virtual Reality has often been looked at as a visualisation tool. This paper puts the argument that VR
should be used as the user interface. For instance, the user should interact with a 3D column in VR rather
than a column in traditional database environment. This will allow the construction practitioners better access
to information which will motivate them to use integrated databases. In addition, VR should be used as a
vehicle for classifying information. The user should be able to look at the design, costing, time planning,
facilities management views according to his/her requirements. This may prove helpful in projecting
information from a project integrated database.

1. Introduction
The need for remote accessing of information within an integrated environment has become a necessity in
this changing world. Information needs to be queried and interrogated in order to assist the various professions
in the construction sector. For instance, site engineers should be able to access and query the remote database
from their sites if they have access to a modem and the Internet. Technologies are now available which can be
used to this end. The Internet and its facilities should be exploited for the benefits of better management and
retrieval of construction information. The VRML (Virtual Reality Modelling Language) which is a web-based
standard will be explored as a means of remotely interrogating information stored within an integrated database.
The paper highlights the main findings of the OSCON integrated database project which has managed to link the
database to the VRML environment [3]. A VRML application which reads information about design produced
in AutoCAD has been developed within the OSCON project. The VRML over the Internet will allow
practitioners within the construction industry better access to the OSCON integrated database. The main benefits
associated with the use of VRML is the integration of project databases and VRML technologies which will
ultimately result in better productivity through the effective retrieval of information.
This paper aims to demonstrate the benefits of using the Internet to access construction information. The
VRML facility will be used to demonstrate how information can be remotely accessed from a database. In order
to achieve this, a VRML-based prototype has been developed. Common Gateway Interface programs can then
be embedded in web pages. When the page is accessed, the program is automatically executed on the server and
results are sent over the net to the user.
These facilities are freely available on the web. If exploited properly, the construction industry will benefit
tremendously in terms of information exchanges and management. It is expected that the user will be able to
query information about specifications, design information, cost estimating and time planning information. In
addition, he/she will be able to access information about suppliers and materials which are freely available on
the web.

2. OSCON Background
The OSCON project, which is funded by the Department of Environment-United Kingdom, builds on the recent
experience of the Salford team in developing a framework for integration of information in the ICON project
which was concluded in September 1994. The integrated database within OSCON supports the functions of
design, estimating and planning by allowing these phases to effectively share information dynamically and

intelligently. The system revolves around a central object-oriented information model. This model consists of
domain models which support integration of information within a specific domain, e.g. estimating. The
information model also contains a core model which captures knowledge about the means of transferring
information across domains. All the models in the system are fully independent of specific applications, and
each domain model provides support for general classes of a given application. In order to demonstrate how an
integrated approach can benefit construction projects, the OSCON team is developing a suite of software
applications, e.g. CAD application, cost estimating and planning, wrapper software for CA-Superproject®, a
VRML interface which will actively share construction information via a central object-oriented project
database. The CAD application allows a user to create and manipulate architectural components of a building.
The components are stored as instances of classes in the object oriented database. These instances are read by
the VRML interface in order to create a 3D view of the building which gives the user a better environment for
navigation and walkthrough. Time and cost estimates are also generated automatically based on the design
information stored in the database. The applications are being developed on PCs running under Microsoft
Windows NT and are implemented in Microsoft Visual C++. The database is implemented using ObjectStore®
OODBMS in conjunction with Object Engineering Workbench (OEW®) modelling software. OEW is useful
for generating OSCON models and the associated code in C++. The overall architecture of the OSCON system
is shown below.

Estimating Tool

CAD

Pla
nn
ing

ADS

el
od
nM
sig
De

Core Integration
Model

M
od
el

Estimating Model

Import/Export
Wrapper
Legacy
Application

VR Viewer

Fig. 1. The OSCON Overall Architecture

The integration approach developed by OSCON is generic and thus adaptable to any specific requirements of
the industry. The system can, for example, be easily tailored to solving problems within the civil engineering or
any other industry. This system can enhance the efficiency of the industry as a whole, improve productivity and
consequently speed up the process of design and construction through the rapid prototyping facilities provided
by the OSCON database.

3. Previous Work (VR-Based Work)
An awareness workshop on VR and rapid prototyping for engineering was organised in the UK by the
EPSRC (Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council) in January 1995. This workshop highlighted the
benefits of using VR as the technology for visualisation and interactions with 3D models [2, 10, 13]. The
proceedings of this workshop includes some of the most up to date literature within VR in the UK. Most of the
papers discuss how VR can be used as design tools [4]. Animation and simulation was another theme [14, 12].
Training was also mentioned where VR can play a major role. Alshawi & Faraj [1] was amongst the few
researchers who suggested that VR should be used as the interface for 3D models and databases. This paper
builds on the work done by the previous researchers in order to develop a VR tool which can be used as a

combination of visualisation, animation and simulation and as an interface for an object oriented integrated
database. The user should be able to interact with objects rather than using DXF files as suggested by Alshawi
and Faraj [1] and Griffin [4]. Some useful web sites are included in the references [5, 6, 7, 8, 9].

4. The Need for a VR Interface
One of the major problems associated with construction project integrated databases is the shear information
involved and the complexity of storing such information. Traditionally, the user interface provided within
databases is used to query information stored in these databases. This may prove difficult in browsing through
the many records of instances of entities developed within the scope of a certain construction application. One
way of browsing and querying is through the use of VR interfaces. It is a more natural way of interfacing with
information as the user can visually identify the objects of interests and retrieve information about them using
the VR interface. This approach was adopted by OSCON in order to respond to the user needs for a more user
friendly environment. Within OSCON, the user can navigate through the VR model and identify elements by
clicking on them. Information is then obtained about the specific objects depending on the view or requirements
of a particular participant of the construction process. For instance, the designer can retrieve information about
the specifications of a cavity wall, the QS can obtain cost information about the cavity wall, and the time
planner queries the model about duration of building the cavity wall. This process will be described in detail in
one of the forthcoming sections. To conclude, this paper suggests that VR technologies should be used as
means of providing better information interfaces, in addition to their visualisation capabilities.

5. Information Modelling (Abstract Type)
The information modelled in OSCON is generic and independent of any application. The information
describing design can be displayed in AutoCAD or VRML by using an abstracted display environment. All
classes in the design model inherit from the base class Component which defines a common interface. This
interface includes a draw() operation which is redefined in subclasses to allow instances of the design classes to
draw themselves in a display environment. The draw() function is passed a pointer to a Drawer object which
encapsulates a set of simple 3D drawing operations as virtual member functions. Subclasses of Drawer
implement drawing in specific environments. By implementing a CADDrawer class and VRMLDrawer,
AutoCAD and VRML become respectively a graphical front end for instances of the design model. This
arrangement is illustrated below.

Component

Drawer

draw()

Wall
draw()

Face3D()

Window

CADDrawer

VRMLDrawer

draw()

Face3D()

Face3D()

Fig. 2. Information Abstraction

6. The VRML Prototype
The Virtual Reality Modelling Language (VRML) is a developing standard for describing interactive threedimensional scenes developed across the internet. A VRML browser is needed to load VRML files which allow
users to navigate through VRML worlds. The VRML file is a textual description of the VRML World. It
contains nodes that describe shapes and their properties. VRML’s four primitive shapes include cube, sphere,
cone and cylinder.
Figure 3 illustrates the overall architecture of the link between a VRML viewer and an integrated database.

B ro w ser
V R M L V ie w e r
V ie w
C o st
T im e
etc

T h e 3 D V ie w

In tern et
U R L ’s

I n fo r m a t io n
fr o m d a t a b a s e
R em o te d a ta b ase

C G I

C G I

W eb S erver

Fig. 3. The VRML Prototype Architecture

The above figure shows diagrammatically how information is accessed from the database. The VRML
standard allows links between different worlds to be established on the web. This puts the entire Internet at the
fingertips of its users. Links are anchored to specific objects such as walls, beams, etc. By clicking on an
anchored object you request information from other worlds using a URL(Universal Resource Locator) that
specifies the address of a file on the web. World loaded from the Internet are delivered by the web server
running on the remote host at the remote Internet site. In our case, the URL specifies a CGI script which is a
c++ program to run on the remote host under the control of the web server. The CGI program returns
information about objects being queried in the VRML browser.
As previously mentioned, Virtual Reality has mostly been looked at as a visualisation tool. This paper puts
the argument that VR should be used as the user interface. For instance, the user should interact with a 3D
column in VR rather than a column in traditional database environment. This will allow the construction
practitioners better access to information which will motivate them to use integrated databases. In Figure 4
shown below, a screen shot of a house shown in VRML. The information is read from the OSCON object
oriented database and displayed in this VR environment. The user can navigate inside the building clicking on
design objects and retrieving information about their properties which include geometrical, cost and time data.

Fig. 4. A VRML House Model

The VRML environment to retrieve information is split into three windows using frames. The top window
displays the VR representation of the building. This where the user interacts with the VRML image. The bottom

windows displays the information about objects queried in the VRML environment. The left hand side windows
includes the views which are supported by the system. These are described as follows:
• The normal view displays the basic representation of the building without any textures. It is mainly used for
visualisation purposes.
• The textured view shows the textures associated with building elements such as walls, roofs, doors, etc..
• The cost view displays a coloured representation of the building according a colour criteria. For instance, an
uncosted item or an expensive unit will appear in yellow. This would help to chase mistakes in the
estimating model through the VRML environment.
• The planning view shows the various phases of the project plan in the 3D environment. For instance, in
schedule day 1 only the slab is shown whereas in schedule day 5 the slab and cavity walls are shown
according to information stored in the project plan.
It has to be said that there is not limit on the views which the system can support. For instance, facilities
management, structural design, or any other view can be added easily.
An example of a VRML file is shown below. This file was generated by OSCON based on the design
information stored in the object-oriented database. This is an ASCII file which includes nodes such as
wwwanchor (which allows links to web pages), material, rotation, and cube. This file is read by the VRML
browser in order to create a 3D environment which can have links to web pages containing information about
the design components.

Fig. 5. A VRML File

7. How The System Works
The user is provided with a suite of integrated applications which support the design and time and cost
planning of buildings. The AutoCAD design interface is used to generate the design layout of the building. The
user interacts with AutoCAD as the graphical display environment. In reality, the design information is
instantiated in the integrated object oriented database and displayed in AutoCAD. The design information is
then used in generating quantities which are used by the time and cost planning prototype software. The VRML
application is used to show the building in 3D and to retrieve information about specific objects in terms of cost,
time, etc. The textures of design objects could be changed in the object oriented database and the implications
on cost and time are displayed within the VRML environment. This is one example of how design can be
changed in the database by modifying its specifications and VR is used as the medium to show the such
implications. For a better description of the numerous functions supported by the OSCON database, the reader is
referred to Aouad et al [3].
This direct interaction with a VR environment has many advantages over the use of a CAD package. In
traditional CAD systems, the design is relatively static which makes changes costly and time consuming as new
images are re-generated from sequences of fixed frames [11]. In a VR environment, changes are handled
efficiently by the technology. The ultimate benefit is the ability to create walkthroughs which can facilitate
collaboration between clients, designers, contractors and suppliers. This is the main objective of the OSCON
database and it is strongly believed that VR is the medium for communication and convergence.

8. Industry Feedback on the Prototype
The VRML prototype has been demonstrated to major construction firms in the UK (ten companies). The
overall feedback from the demonstrations was promising and encouraging. The users have indicated their
favouritism for VR as an interface. However, these users have felt that navigating around a VRML model is not
an easy task. A better way would be to provide pre-recorded views which may allow for a better interaction with
the model. The next stage of this project will take this point on board and improvements will be made within
this area.

Conclusion
This paper discussed the development of a VRML prototype which will be used as an interface for a project
integrated database (OSCON). This prototype is a web-based application which can be run from any web site.
This will allow for construction information to be readily communicated between head offices and construction
sites and any other locations. This will ensure that information is communicated in a much better format with a
lot more visualisation capabilities. This paper has demonstrated that a VRML can be used as an interface to a
complex object oriented database. This interface has more navigation capabilities. The user will ultimately find
it simpler to navigate in a VR environment rather than browsing through thousands of records in a crude
database environment.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

Alshawi, M & Faraj, I. Integrating CAD and VR in construction. Proceedings of the Information Technology
Awareness Workshop. January 1995, University of Salford.
Ames, A et al. The VRML source book, John Wiley and sons, 1996.
Aouad G., Marir F., Child T., Brandon P. and Kawooya A. (1997). A Construction integrated databases- Linking
Design, Planning and Estimating. International Conference on Rehabilitation and Development of civil engineering
infrastructure systems, June 9-11, 1997, American University of Beirut, Lebanon.
Griffin, M. Applications of VR in architecture and design. Proceedings of the Information Technology Awareness
Workshop. January 1995, University of Salford.
http://www.construct.rdg.ac.uk/ITProjects/proje123.htm(Ashworth: linking Kappa, AutoCAd and WTK)
http://www.strath.ac.uk/Departments/CivEng/vcsrg.html (Retik visual scheduling)
http://www.construct.rdg.ac.uk/ITsearch/Projects/project12.html(James Powell: visualisation)
http://wquoll.maneng.nott.ac.uk/Research/virart/industry/maintran.html(Nottingham,
maintenance
training:
VIRART)
http://wquoll.maneng.nott.ac.uk/Research/virart/industry/rp.html(Nottingham,Rapid prototyping: VIRART)

10. Hubbold, R and Stone, R. Virtual reality as a design tool in Rolls Royce. Proceedings of the Information Technology
Awareness Workshop. January 1995, University of Salford.
11. Larijani, L.C. The virtual reality primer. McGraw-Hill, USA, 1994.
12. Lorch, R. Animation in communication. Proceedings of the Information Technology Awareness Workshop. January
1995, University of Salford.
13. Penn, A et al. Intelligent architecture: rapid prototyping for architecture and planning. Proceedings of the
Information Technology Awareness Workshop. January 1995, University of Salford.
14. Retik, A & Hay, R. Visual simulation using VR. Arcom 10th conference, Vol 12, 1994. pp 537-546.

