Overcoming Geoinformatic Knowledge Fence: An
Exploratory of Intelligent Geospatial Data Preparation
within Spatial Analysis
Jian Wang1, Chun-jiang Zhao1,*, Fang-qu Niu2, and Zhi-qiang Wang2
1

National Engineering Research Center for Information Technology in Agriculture
(NERCITA), Beijing 100097, China
Zhaocj@nercita.org.cn
2
Institute of Geography Sciences and Natural Resources Research,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100060 China
Wangj@nercita.org.cn

Abstract. The booming of earth observation provides decision-makers with
more available geospatial data as well as more puzzles about how to understand, evaluate, search, process, and utilize those overwhelming resources. The
paper distinguishes a concept termed geoinformatic knowledge fence (GeoKF)
to discuss the knowledge-aspect of such puzzles and the approach to overcoming them. Basing on analysis of the gap between common geography sense and
geoinformatic professional knowledge, the approach composes analysis space
modeling and spatial reasoning to match decision models to the online geospatial data sources they need. Such approach enables automatically and intelligently searching of suitable geospatial data resources and calculating their
suitability to given spatial decision and analysis. An experiment with geoservices, geo-ontology and rule-based reasoning (Jess) is developed to illustrate
the feasibility of the approach in scenario of data preparation within decisions
of bird flu control.
Keywords: spatial decision support, geo-ontology, spatial reasoning, geoservices, geography information metadata.

1 Introduction
With booming of earth observation and other earth-related activities, there is a dramatically increase of types and volume of available geospatial data in form of online data set
and services. Companying with such overwhelming data, users, esp. those without
enough geoinformatic knowledge (termed here as n-geo users), find it more difficult to
understand and utilize those dazzling resources [1-3]. Most difficulties can finally find
the root to insufficiency of geoinformatic knowledge (such as those relating to temporal-spatio scale or precision) and so are defined here as geoinformatic knowledge
fence (GeoKF). With continually increasing of available geospatial data, GeoKF will
*

Corresponding author.

G. Allen et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2009, Part II, LNCS 5545, pp. 385–394, 2009.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

386

J. Wang et al.

become an important obstacle to earth observation application, geospatial information
services and other geocomputing applications.
The experiment is an exploratory to overcome GeoKF by combining geoinformatic
knowledge with computing reasoning in scenario of geospatial data preparation
within spatial decision making. Five sections are laid out in the paper. Section 1 introduces and defines GeoKF, then section 2 explains the philosophy and conceptual
model of the approach to overcoming GeoKF. In section 3 the design of experiment
system is detailed following the conceptual model, the experiment result is analyzed
in the same section. Finally there are a discussion (section 4) and a conclusion
(section 5) at the end of the paper.

2 Philosophy and Conceptual Model of GeoKF Overcoming
2.1 Philosophy of GeoKF Overcoming
A questionnaire on 30 n-geo experts (mainly in agriculture engineering, information
system and management) of NERCITA shows two sorts of geographic knowledge
during their spatial analysis. One can be termed as common geographic sense (CGS)
mainly by which people model their analysis space through assigning i.e. spatiotemporal domain, scale and precision, etc.; the other can be termed as geoinformatic
professional knowledge (GPK) by which geoinformatic professionals can understand
various geospatial data and utilize them in a more effective and suitable way, for
example processing some ostensibly unsuitable data by generalization or scale transformation to meet spatial analysis. Most n-geo experts lack the later and so are prevented from efficiently geospatial data preparation within their spatial analysis.
The research philosophy comes from the knowledge-oriented analysis of GeoKF
and spatial decision process (Fig.1). GeoKF roots from knowledge heterogeneity between n-geo users and geoinformatic professionals, and can be represented as a fence
between CGS and GPK. CGS, together with domain knowledge, is generally employed
by domain professionals (most are n-geo users) to construct space model of analysis
(SMoA) within which the target objects or processes are modeled and analyzed [4].
Such models also determine the suitable geospatial data for analysis, namely, record
the data requirements (both data sources and their properties) in form of CGS. On the
other side, various geospatial data is traditionally described and represented by their
GPK-based metadata in terms of i.e. FGDC. So GeoKF-overcoming practically means
the mapping between SMoA and GPK-based metadata, which generally perform by
cooperation of geoinformatic professionals and n-geo SMoA makers.
The paper aims to find an intelligent and automatic approach to replacing the cooperation by spatial reasoning. Specifically, the paper aims to verify two hypothesizes
below.
• Hyp. #1. CGS can be regarded as dialect subsets of GPK, which means the data
requirements of CGS-based SMoA can be ‘translated’ into GPK-based description
of geospatial data. The translation gives the possibility of spatial reasoning to
match SMoA and the data it need.
• Hyp. #2. Current GPK-based metadata can be modified or extended to support
spatial reasoning relating to down or up-scaling, precision transform, etc.

Overcoming Geoinformatic Knowledge Fence

387

Fig. 1. GeoKF-overcoming philosophy

2.2 Conceptual Model
Space Model of Analysis. From the perspective of n-geo users, each spatial analysis
task has its space models, which contain all analyzed geography features within certain spatial and temporal domain. The model can be expressed by a triple of (features,
space, time). Features can be further expressed as (focal features, background
features). Focal features are those analyzed such as roads in transport analysis; background features are those that function as context of focal features such as land use in
transport analysis. Each dimension (space or time) is identified by domain, scale and
precision. Although some geoinformatic professionals suggest that scale covers precision [5-7], most n-geo users are apt to confuse them and so the research employs both
concepts contemporarily. Scale here means the size of analyzed or sampled unit. Precision here refers to minimum certain measure value of analysis. By this way, space
dimension is the triple of (spatial domain, spatial scale, spatial precision), while time
dimension is another triple of (temporal domain, temporal scale, temporal precision).
Table 1. Some main fundamental ontology
Fundamental ontology
Geospatial theme-feature
ontology
Geospatial scale and
precision ontology

Description
Extended ISO 19115[9], one example of extension are poultry
feature of agriculture theme.
Describing the knowledge of geospatial scale and precision,
including, metric scale (i.e. mapping scale, traditional airphoto
scale, etc.), named scale (Global scale, continent scale, region
scale etc.), and precision.
Geospatial domain
Describing the knowledge of geospatial domain, including
ontology
named domain (government precinct, geology zoning,
geography zoning, etc.)
Time scale and precision Describing the knowledge of time scale and precision, includontology
ing metric scale (second, day, year, etc.), named scale (Macro
scale, geography scale, etc.), and precision (second, minute, …,
year, etc.)
Temporal domain
Describing temporal domain, including named domain
ontology
(geology, geography, etc.)

388

J. Wang et al.

Knowledge Organization and Reasoning. All knowledge (CGS & GPK) should be
organized in computable formats such as ontology, knowledge base with facts and
rules[8], etc. The organization should consider both computing (i.e. spatial reasoning)
and human operating. Some main fundamental knowledge is listed in Tab. 1 in form
of ontology.
Spatial Reasoning. The spatial reasoning (Fig. 2) combines human intelligence and
computing reasoning by an iteration cycle consisting of 1) rendering data requirements of SMoA to GPK-based reasoner, 2) reasoning and suitability calculating basing on data requirements, GPK, and metadata, and 3) returning result to n-geo users,
who can re-render or accept result to end current cycle. Each cycle consists of three
sub-reasoning tasks (theme-ontology evaluation, space evaluation, and time evaluation). Each task reasons on a section of SMoA requirement, corresponding knowledge
base (represented as ontology in Fig.) and metadata of evaluated geospatial data
source. The performance of each task will return the section suitability of current
geospatial metadata. GPK-based resoner controls the running of sub-task and calculates the whole suitability of evaluated geospatial data sources by scanning metadata
list of them. Formula (1) is used to calculate the suitability index (SI), while some
GPK-based reasoning rules are listed in Tab.2.
SI=

∑((suitability-item) ×W )(i=1,…m)
i

i

(1)

SI: suitability index, the final suitability value of evaluated geospatial
data.
(Suitability-item)i: the result of evaluating of certain (i) items of SMoA.
Wi: the weight of each items of SMoA. The valued is appointed by decision
makers to assign the importance of items. The total of all weight is
100%.
m: the number of evaluated items of SMoA.
Table 2. Main rules for suitability reasoning and calculation
Items of SMoA
Feature

Suitability-item
M/N×100%

Space-Domain

(SMoA-D/DataD)×100% (0-100%)
0%, 100%

Space-Scale &
Time-scale

Space-Precision 0%, 100%
&
Time-Precision
Time-domain
0%, 100%

Description
N: the number of expected features in SMoA
M: the number of existence features of evaluated
geospatial data
SMoA-D: the domain of spatial analysis
Data-D: the domain of evaluated geospatial data
100%: the scale of evaluated geospatial data is
equal directly or by upscaling.
0%: other occasions
100%: the precision of evaluated geospatial data
directly or more precise to SMoA.
0%: other occasions
100%: the time period of evaluated data content
can cover time of SMoA completely
0%: other occasions

Overcoming Geoinformatic Knowledge Fence

389

Fig. 2. Spatial reasoning

Conceptual Model. The model have 5 key components including geospatial data
source agent, n-geo users and geoinformatic professionals, knowledge base (facts and
rules), GPK-based reasoner, and human-computer interface (Fig.3). Geospatial data
sources agent functions as a list of enrolled GPK-based metadata (Tab.3) of online

Fig. 3. Conceptual Model
Table 3. GPK-based FGDC metadata (limited to extended or modified items only)
FGDC metadata item

Extended or modified Description of extension or changes
metadata Items
Entity & Attributes and Theme-features
Bounding Entities to Theme-feature
Keyword-Theme
ontology
Identification-spatial
Spatial domain
Bounding to geospatial domain
domain
ontology
Null
Spatial Scale
Bounding to geospatial scale &
precision ontology
Null
Temporal scale
Bounding to temporal scale &
precision ontology

390

J. Wang et al.

geospatial data sources. CGS and GPK are organized in computable knowledge base
for GPKreasoning. Human-computer interface is a GUI web page that lets decision
makers (mainly n-geo users) render (and re-render) their SMoA as well as check the
suitability of reasoned results.

3 Experiment Design and Analysis
An experiment, with a software system as its core, is designed and implemented to
check the feasibility of philosophy. The comparison of reasoned results with evaluation of both n-geo users and geoinformatics professionals is employed as the basic
method for the verification.
3.1 Experiment Design
The experiment is a simplified spatial decision support of bird flu control in an agriintensive county of Beijing area. Three independent and geographically distributed
government agencies, which hold different geospatial and agricultural data sources,
will collaborate with their data sources. The spatial analysis aims to zone epidemic
impacted area and set block stations to control epidemic diffusion. Some main items
of SMoA of the decision are listed in Tab.4. The available online geospatial data can
be seen in Tab.5.
Table 4. SMoA items of bird flu control decision
SMoA items
Feature-focal
Feature-background
Feature-background
Feature-background
Space-domain

Space-Scale
Space-Precision
Time-domain
Time-scale
Time-precision

Value
Poultry – livestock
agriculture
Roads-Transportation

Description
- From geospatial theme-feature
ontology
From geospatial theme-feature
ontology
Resident area - land use - From geospatial theme-feature
plan
ontology
Government precinct – From Geospatial domain ontology
named domain
Daxing
District-Beijing From geospatial domain ontology
city-China-Government
precinct-Named domain
1:10000, Mapping scale- From geospatial scale & precision
metric scale
ontology
100M – precision
From geospatial scale & precision
ontology
after. 2004
Null
Year-metric scale
From Temporal scale & precision
ontology
Null
Null

Overcoming Geoinformatic Knowledge Fence

391

Software System Design. As an experiment prototype, the system adopts Jess and
Rete algorithm [8] because that Jess is a classic and fundamental technology for
knowledge organization and reasoning. Ontology, and other knowledge technologies,
is only used to organize knowledge to apart the proposed philosophy from implementation technologies as possible as it can. The logic structure of software system is
listed in Fig 4.

Fig. 4. The system is an implementation (with 7 web services and 13 endpoints) of conceptual
model (Fig.3). The service geocoding of cultivation garden, government precinct, roads, and
remote sense images are all online geospatial data services and enrolled into geospatial information category service. The service of bird flu control is an application service (with a GUI
page) that performs the spatial analysis trigged by a geo-referenced epidemic point reporting.
The endpoint of epidemic case will initialize the spatial analysis of bird flu control as well as
construct general SMoA basing on epidemic report. The endpoint of impacted area zoning,
blockade site locating, lose evaluation and reporting will undertake the spatial analysis within
which their detailed SMoA will be constructed basing on general SMoA and then its requirements will be transported o GPK-based reasoner for obtaining the suitable geospatial data
sources. The reasoner will return reasoned result to corresponding endpoint for refining if
needed.

3.2 Result and Analysis
Tab. 5 shows the comparison of reasoned results with human evaluation. Such
comparison displays a generally consistence between reasoned results and expert
evaluations, which can preliminarily give feasibility for further research. While as a
philosophy-proof experiment, there still exist many defects such as small sample of
online geospatial data, relatively simple reasoning rules (esp. on scale down- and upscaling and precision, etc.) and facts, etc. Additionally, a strong suggestion from experts for further research is to add quality of data services (QoS) into SMoA and
GPK-reasoning to get dynamic optimal data set.

392

J. Wang et al.
Table 5. Comparison of human evaluation with reasoned result

Available
geospatial
data
Cultivation
garden
(2004)
Fundamental
geography
information
(2000:
1:10M)
Beijing
fundamental
geography
information(1998
1:10000)
Beijing
Quickbird
image (200812:
R=0.61M)
Beijing DEM
(1:10000,
2001)
Beijing
MODIS
(2008-12,
30M)

Human
evaluation
of
suitability
High

Reasoned suitability index(%)
Feature%
Space
total
FF
BF SD SS
SP
30% 5% 30% 10% 5%
95
100 0
100 100 100

Time
TD
10%
100

TS
5%
100

TP
5%
100

Mid

85

50

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

High

75

50

100

100

100

100

0

100

100

High

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

Low

0

0

0

100

Null Null Null

Null Null

Mid

70

50

100

100

0

100

0

100

100

4 Discussion
According to the exploratory research, GeoKF-overcoming is a synthetic issue relating to some traditional geocomputing problems including intelligent geospatial data
generalization [10-11], scale and precision transformation [12], etc. In other words,
GeoKF research will depend on and contribute to those relating studies. Such relationships among them also discover some features of further researches.
• The combination of artificial and human intelligence. Because of the immature of
scale transform, automatically geospatial data generalization and other relative issues, the overcoming of GeoKF is still a combination of human and computing intelligence, namely, increasing the level of automation by adding more knowledge
and reasoning ability is a key research direction.
• The dependence of GeoKF-overcoming practice on fundamental GPK research and
practices. Although more and more discussions of geo-ontology or other geoknowledge relative researches appear recently, the practice works, such as construction

Overcoming Geoinformatic Knowledge Fence

393

of geo-ontology (including geospatial theme-feature ontology, geospatial scale &
precision ontology, etc.), have not yet functioned. Furthermore, the workings relating to
geo-knowledge components, such as adding more semantic to metadata to support
computing reasoning, are still in their way to practice. It is clear that the power of proposed approach of the paper will grow with increase of those workings.

5 Conclusion
With booming of available online geospatial data resources, the bottleneck of
net-centric geocomputing has moved gradually from network and computing capability to efficiently utilization of data resources by more users, esp. n-geo users. As a
consequence, geoinformatic knowledge and intelligent geo-computing (including geoontology, spatial reasoning, intelligent generalization of geospatial data, etc.) has been
attracting increasing attentions when facing overwhelming online resources.
The research suggests that GeoKF is an emerging issue within intelligent
geo-computing. It shares one aim of geo-cognition research, namely, how to provide
n-geo users with correct understanding and utilization of dazzling online geospatial
data sources, as well as to help geoinformatic professionals improve their efficiency
and capability. Featuring with knowledge-oriented analysis of geospatial data process
and spatial analysis, the conceptual model with SMoA, GPK-based reasoning and
extended GPK metadata, and the combination of human and computing intelligence,
the proposed approach shows its feasibility for further research of GeoKF.
Acknowledgments. The paper is supported by Beijing sci-tech Nova plan (2006B27)
and national key technology R&D program (2006BAJ05A09, 2006BAD10A05).

References
1. Rahimi, S., Cobb, M., Ali, D., Paprzycki, M., Petry, F.E.: A knowledge-based multi-agent
system for geospatial data conflation. Journal of Geographic Information and Decision
Analysis, 1480–8943 (2002)
2. Wei, Y., Yue, P., Dadi, U., Min, M., Hu, C., Di, L.: Effective Acquisition of Geospatial
Data Products in a Collaborative Grid Environment. In: IEEE International Conference on
Services Computing (SCC 2006), pp. 455–462. IEEE Press, New York (2006)
3. McMaster, R.B., Lynn, E.: A Research Agenda for Geographic Information Science. CRC
Press, Boca Raton (2004)
4. Longley, P., Batty, M.: Advanced Spatial Analysis. ESRI Press, Redlands (2003)
5. zhilin, L.: A theoretic discussion on the scale issues in geospatial data handling. J. Geomatics world, 1–5
6. Sun, q.-x., Li, m.-t., Lu, j.-x., Guo, d., Fang, t.: Scale issue and its research progress of
geospatial data. J. Geography and geo-information science 23, 5–56 (2007)
7. Meng, b., Wang, j.-f.: A review on the methodology of scaling with Geo-data. J. ACTA
geographic SINICA 60(2), 277–288 (2005)
8. Friedman-Hill, E.: Jess in Action: Java Rule-Based Systems. Manning Publications Co.
(2003)
9. ISO/TC211 19115: Geographic information – Metadata (2003)

394

J. Wang et al.

10. Lehto, L., Sarjakoski, L.T.: Real-time generalization of XML-encoded spatial data for the
Web and mobile devices. J. Geographical information science 19(8,9), 957–973 (2005)
11. Jones, C.B., Abdelmoty, A.I., Lonergan, M.E., van der Poorten, P., Zhou, S.: Multi-scale
spatial database design for online generalisation. In: Proceedings of the Spatial Data Handling Symposium, Beijing, pp. 7b.34–7b.44 (2000)
12. Li, S.-l., Cai, y.-l.: Some scaling issues of geography. J. Geographical research 1, 11–18
(2005)

