Unencapsulated Mobile Multicast Routing for
Next Generation Video Networks
Thomas C. Schmidt1,2 , Matthias W¨
ahlisch2 , Hans L. Cycon3 ,
3
Mark Palkow , and Henrik Regensburg3
1

HAW Hamburg, Department Informatik, Berliner Tor 7, 20099 Hamburg, Germany
FHTW Berlin, Hochschulrechenzentrum, Treskowallee 8, 10318 Berlin, Germany
3
FHTW Berlin, FB I, Allee der Kosmonauten 20–22, 10315 Berlin, Germany
{t.schmidt, waehlisch}@ieee.org,
{hcycon, mpalkow,h.r}@fhtw-berlin.de

2

Abstract. Mobile multimedia communication will particularly rely on
IP multicasting, as users commonly share frequency bands of limited capacities. This paper is dedicated to the problem of mobile Source Speciﬁc
Multicast (SSM) senders. We propose extensions to multicast routing for
transforming (morphing) previous delivery trees into optimal trees rooted
at a relocated source. This extension scheme only requires basic signaling mechanisms, explicit joins and prunes. First evaluations grounded on
real-world Internet topologies indicate network performance superior to
traditional distribution schemes. As corresponding application we further on introduce a videoconferencing and communication software of
distributed architecture. It is built as a simple, ready-to-use scheme for
distributed presenting, recording and streaming multimedia content over
next generation unicast or multicast networks.

1

Introduction

Mobile visual devices accepting synchronous or streaming media become more
and more ubiquitous. It is a challenge for the next generation Internet and its
recently released MIPv6 [1], to introduce voice and video conferencing over IP
(VoIP/VCoIP) to mobiles, so that IP will be pervasive and prevalent across
all digital communication devices. Conferencing parties will then soon request
seamless real–time performance of a mobility aware group communication service, thereby attaining the simultaneous roles of mobile multicast listener and
source. Intricate multicast routing procedures, though, are not easily extensible to comply with mobility requirements. Signiﬁcant eﬀort has been already
invested in protocol designs for mobile multicast receivers. Only limited work
has been dedicated to multicast source mobility, which poses the more delicate
problem [2, 3].
Source Speciﬁc Multicast (SSM) [4], still in its design process, is considered
a promising improvement of group distribution techniques. In contrast to Any
Source Multicast (ASM), optimal source trees are constructed immediately from
(S, G) subscriptions at the client side, without utilizing network ﬂooding or RendezVous Points. Source addresses are to be acquired by out of band channels,
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part II, LNCS 3992, pp. 1050–1057, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

Unencapsulated Mobile Multicast Routing

1051

which for conferencing is easily achieved by SIP. As a consequence, routing simpliﬁes signiﬁcantly, but invalidates with source addresses changing under mobility. SSM source mobility is known as an unsolved problem.
Addresses in Internet mobility carry the dual meaning of logical and topological identiﬁers. While MIPv6 operates dual addresses transparently at end
points, SSM routing needs to account for logical subscription and topological
forwarding. In the present paper we start from this observation and present an
approach to SSM routing, which adapts to source mobility. This scheme operates
fast, eﬃcient without encapsulation and does not cause additional packet loss.
This paper is organized as follows: In section 2 we review the basic problems of
SSM source mobility and related work. Section 3 introduces our new approach
and presents ﬁrst evaluations. The subsequent section 4 is dedicated to our
group conferencing application, discussing selected deployment scenarios. Finally
section 5 gives conclusions and an outlook.

2
2.1

The Mobile Multicast Source Problem
Problem Statement

Any next generation Internet support for multicast source mobility management
is required to operate transparently w.r.t. the socket layer. Speciﬁc protocol operations or extensions are thus bound to a multicast aware MIPv6 stack and the
Internet routing layer. Recalling the address duality problem, modiﬁed multicast routing protocols must be foreseen, as routing at the occurrence of source
movement is required to transform any (S, G) state into (S , G), while listeners
continue to receive multicast data streams. Hence any simple mobility solution
such as the remote subscription approach of MIPv6 [1] loses its receivers and
will no longer function in our context.
With SSM an additional address
problem needs consideration: A
multicast listener, willing to subscribe to an (S, G) state, needs to
account for the current location of
the mobile source. Concurrently a
general intricacy derives from the
principle decoupling of multicast
source and receivers: Any multicast
source submits data to a group of
unknown receivers and thus operFig. 1. Relative router coincidence in subseates without feedback channel. Adquent multicast trees
dress updates on handovers of an
SSM source have to proceed without means of the mobile source to inquire on
properties of the delivery tree or the receivers.
All of the above severely add complexity to a robust multicast mobility solution, which should converge to optimal routes and, for the sake of eﬃciency,
should avoid data encapsulation. Bearing in mind characteristic applications,

1052

T.C. Schmidt et al.

i.e. multimedia distribution, handover delays are to be considered critical. The
distance of subsequent points of attachment, the ’step size’ of the mobile, may
serve as an appropriate measure of complexity. Figure 1 visualises the relative
change of distribution trees as a function of receiver multiplicity for a medium
step size of 5. It is interesting to note that even in large networks 75 to 85 %
of multicast distributing routers remain unchanged under a mobility step. For
details of the simulation we refer to section 3.
2.2

Related Work

Two principal approaches to SSM source mobility are presently around.
Bi-directional Tunneling: The MIPv6 standard proposes bi-directional tunneling through the home agent as a minimal multicast support for mobile senders
and listeners. In this approach the mobile multicast source (MS) always uses its
Home Address (HoA) for multicast operations.
Inter–Tree Handovers: Several authors propose to construct a completely new
distribution tree after the movement of a mobile source. These schemes have to
rely on client notiﬁcation for initiating new trees. At the same time they need to
preserve address transparency to the client. To account for the latter, Thaler [5]
proposes to employ binding caches and to obtain source address transparency
analogous to MIPv6 unicast communication. Initial session announcements and
changes of source addresses are to be distributed periodically to clients via an
additional multicast tree based at the home agent. Source–tree handovers are
then activated on listener requests. Jelger and Noel [6] suggest handover improvements by employing anchor points within the source network, supporting
a continuous data reception during client–initiated handovers. Even though it
has not been applied to SSM, additional work is of relevance to this paper:
Tree Modiﬁcation Schemes: Very little attention has been given to procedures, which modify existing distribution trees to continuously serve for data
transmission of mobile sources. In the case of DVMRP routing, Chang and Yen
[7] propose an algorithm to extend the root of a given delivery tree to incorporate
a new source location in ASM. Focusing on interdomain mobile multicast routing
in PIM-SM, the authors in [8] propose a tunnel–based backbone distribution of
packets between newly introduced ”Mobility-aware Rendezvous Points” (MRPs).
Finally O’Neill [9] suggests a scheme to overcome reverse path forwarding (RPF)
check failures originating from multicast source address changes, by introducing an extended routing information, which accompanies data in a Hop-by-Hop
option header.

3
3.1

Tree Morphing: An Algorithm to Source Mobility
Introducing Routing Trees Adaptive to Mobility

In the present section we will brieﬂy introduce our new concept of multicast
routing, adaptive to source mobility. A mobile multicast source (MS) away from

Unencapsulated Mobile Multicast Routing

1053

home will transmit unencapsulated data to a group using its HoA on the application layer and its current CoA on the Internet layer, just as unicast packets are
transmitted by MIPv6. In extension to unicast routing, though, the entire Internet layer, i.e. routers included, will be aware of the permanent HoA. Maintaining
address pairs in router states like in binding caches will enable all nodes to simultaneously identify (HoA, G)–based group membership and (CoA, G)–based
tree topology.
When moving to a new point of attachD1
D2
ment, the MS will alter its address from preR
R
vious CoA (pCoA) to new CoA (nCoA) and
eventually change from its previous DesigR
R
R
nated multicast Router (pDR) to a next Designated Router (nDR). Subsequent to hanpDR
R
R
nDR
dover it will immediately continue to deliver
data along an extension of its previous source
MS
MS
tree. Delivery is done by elongating the root
of the previous tree from pDR to nDR (s. Fig. 2. Elongation of the Tree Root
ﬁg. 2). All routers along the path, located at
root elongation or previous delivery tree, thereby will learn MS’s new CoA and
implement appropriate forwarding states.
Routers on this extended tree will use RPF checks to discover potential short
cuts. Registering nCoA as source address, those routers, which receive the state
update via the topologically incorrect interface, will submit a join in the direction
of a new shortest path tree and prune the old tree membership, as soon as data
arrives. All other routers will re-use those parts of the previous delivery tree,
which coincide with the new shortest path tree. Only branches of the new shortest
path tree, which have not previously been established, need to be constructed.
In this way the previous shortest path tree will be morphed into a next shortest
path tree as shown in ﬁgure 3. Note that this algorithm does not require data
encapsulation at any stage.

D1

D2

D1

D2

R

R

R

R

R

pDR

R

R

R

R

R

nDR
MS

MS

pDR

R

R

(b)
Fig. 3. Morphing States

nDR
MS

MS

(a)

R

R

1054

3.2

T.C. Schmidt et al.

Performance Evaluation & Simulation

Mobility initiated handovers may in general lead to packet loss and delay. The
tree morphing multicast routing scheme will not produce any packet loss in
addition to mobile IP handovers, as can be easily concluded from primary packet
forwarding relying on unicast source routes. For a ﬁrst evaluation measure we
will subsequently concentrate on handover initiated packet delay as a result from
initially suboptimal delivery trees. Based on real-world Internet topologies we
simulate the packet distribution and compare our results to the bi-directional
tunneling approach [1], which currently is the only stable mobility solution for
SSM source mobility.
We analyze its delay eﬀects within realistic Internet topologies. We performed
a stochastic discrete event simulation based on the network simulator platform
OMNeT++ 3.1 [11] and several real–world topologies of diﬀerent dimensions.
The selection of network data in our simulation must be considered critical, as
key characteristics of multicast routing only make an impact in large networks,
and as topological setup ﬁxes a dominant part of the degrees of freedom in
routing simulations.
We chose the ATT core network [12] as a large (154 nodes), densely meshed
single provider example. For inter–provider data we extracted sub-samples of
varying sizes from the ”SCAN + Lucent” map [13]. Sample sizes, 154, 1.540
and 15.400 nodes, vary by two orders of magnitude. The delay excess relative to
optimal routes has been calculated as characteristic performance measure under
the assumption of homogeneous link delays. Extreme values, i.e. maximal delays
at initial elongation phase and minimal after convergence, were evaluated for tree
morphing (TM) as functions of the distance from pDR to nDR. Comparisons are
drawn with bi-directional tunneling (BT), which does not depend on designated
router distances, but on HA position. The delay excess in BT as function of
HA position does not converge to a characteristic value, but rather admits a
broad distribution derived from scattering HA positions uniformly. It should be
noted that these simulations concern delays for all three distribution trees in

(a) ATT Core Network

(b) Internet 15.400 Nodes

Fig. 4. Excess Delay of Optimal Routes: Comparison of BT and TM, Initial and Converged Phase, for Diﬀerent Network Topologies

Unencapsulated Mobile Multicast Routing

1055

presence and thus qualitatively cover the solutions discussed in section 2. Aside
from signaling overhead, BT reﬂects the delays of [5], TM those of [6].
The results of our simulations are displayed in ﬁgure 4. pDR to nDR distances
were chosen between 2 and 10, except for the ATT network, which exhibits a
maximal edge router separation of 5. Error bars indicate the standard deviation of initial TM delay excess, as calculated from events diﬀering in location
of the mobile source. Delay excess distributions for scattered HAs in BT are
laid underneath TM curves in grey dots. It can be observed that initially maximal delays of the tree morphing scheme tend to remain below the average of
permanent BT packet retardation. Convergence of the TM then will lead to (relatively) undelayed packet delivery, which is never met in BT. Little dependence
on network size becomes visible for TM — relative delays more strongly change
with topologic characteristics. In a densely meshed provider network such as
the ATT core, packet transitions are rapid and therefore initial delays from tree
elongation account more dominantly for our relative measure. In the contrary
it is interesting to note that delays from BT admit a systematic dependence on
network size. The tree morphing even in its initially weakest phase exhibits fairly
uniform performance, no matter how large the underlying network is (see [10]
for a more detailed analysis).

4
4.1

A Distributed Video Communication System
The Basic Software

In this section we introduce a digital audio-visual conferencing system, realised
as a server-less multipoint video conferencing software without MCU developed
by the authors[14]. It has been designed in a peer-to-peer model as a lightweight
Internet conferencing tool aimed at email-like friendliness of use. The system is
built upon a fast H.264/MPEG-4 AVC standard conformal video codec implementation [15]. It is a Baseline proﬁle implementation, optimized for real-time
decoding and encoding by several accelerating measures like diamond shape motion search, MMX enhanced SAD motion estimation, fast mode selection and a
fast subpel search strategy. There is also application-tailored fast wavelet-based
video codec [16] used for higher available data rate. By controlling the coding
parameters appropriately, the software permits scaling in bit rate from 24 to
1440 kbit/s on the ﬂy. All streams can be transmitted by unicast as well as
by multicast protocol. Audio streams are prioritized above video since audio
communication is more sensitive to distortions in erroneous networks.
An application-sharing facility is included for collaboration and teleteaching.
It enables participants to share or broadcast not only static documents, but also
any selected dynamic PC actions like animations including mouse pointer movements. All audio/video (A/V) - streams including dynamic application sharing
actions can be recorded on any site. This system is equally well suited to intranet
and wireless video conferencing on a best eﬀort basis, since the audio/video quality can be controlled to adapt the data stream to the available bandwidth.

1056

T.C. Schmidt et al.

The joined use of high bandwidth UDP traﬃc with TCP updates bound to
real-time demands is known to suﬀer from distortions due to TCP traﬃc suppression. Application sharing in conferencing applications thus is endangered
to encounter disruptions in the event of network congestion. For a service enhanced synchronous use of UDP media sessions and application sharing with
reliable data transport requirements, we implemented end-to-end load balancing employing proprietary extensions to UDP, reliable (RUDP), we work on its
packet identiﬁers to control application sharing data ﬂows. On the occasion of a
signiﬁcantly many (e.g., 5) unacknowledged packets, we slow down video packet
transmission to reserve required resources for real-time application updates. Audio communication remains undisturbed of load-balancing actions.
4.2

Application Scenarios

Based on the systems capabilities, various new scenarios for synchronous and
asynchronous distributed learning and communication evolve:
(i) Synchronous distributed learning scenario: Teacher and students are connected by LAN or WLAN, establishing mutual connections. The teacher can send
his PC presentations and applications to the students PCs. Students (outside or
inside the lecture room) can participate active and/or passive by real-time audio/video with latencies (in LANs) well below 50 ms. Since all participants can
send their presentations or applications via WLAN to a beamer in a conference
room, this can be used as a ”wireless” connected beamer which can present full
video formats. All participants can also initiate cooperations in small groups, so
that each student within the peer–to–peer network can share and work on any
PC applications for collaboration. There is also a live streaming option.
(ii) Asynchronous distributed learning scenario: Each station can record all
sessions. The recordings can be stored locally or made netwide accessible a by
converting it e.g. into a MS streaming format and uploaded to an e-learning
platform. Lecture room presentation or distributed group work are thus ready
to be played back anywhere at any time by streaming video.
(iii) A fast broadband conference version of the system is in operation to
connect two distant medical campuses in Berlin city by high resolution video.
The presentations are digitized by a high performance XGA frame grabber. This
video stream will be encoded with a very fast software wavelet-based codec.
(iv) The system has been used for tests with mobile video over UMTS transmissions within a convergence project carried out by Fraunhofer Research Institute Berlin and local companies. It aims to seamlessly interconnecting WLAN,
UMTS 3Gbeyond (4G) and DVB services. Results from the T–Mobile network
using a Multimedia Network Card show varying bandwidth results for the upstream direction. With TCP we observed in subsequent measurements of 30s
intervals 26 – 59 kbps and with UDP 48 kbps (with 4 % loss) to 54 kbps (2
% loss). The downstream direction is less critical for our scenario. We received
211 kbps over TCP and 338 kbps without loss over UDP, also measured in 30 s
intervals. Typical echo round trip delays were around 500 ms. These experiments
show that mobile video over UMTS works in principle with reasonable quality.

Unencapsulated Mobile Multicast Routing

5

1057

Conclusions and Outlook

In this paper we discussed the mobility problem in multicast routing and presented and analysed a novel scheme to solve it by morphing a previous distribution tree into a new shortest path tree. Correspondingly a video conferencing and
communication software was introduced ready for immediate use mobile Internet multicasting. In future work we will embed this application in SSM-capable
extensions of SIP dialogs. Further on we will quantify and compare further characteristic measures of the multicast routing scheme.

References
1. Johnson, D.B., Perkins, C., Arkko, J.: Mobility Support in IPv6. RFC 3775, (2004)
2. Romdhani, I., Kellil, M., Lach, H.Y., Bouabdallah, A., Bettahar, H.: IP Mobile
Multicast: Challenges and Solutions. IEEE Comm. Surv. & Tut. 6 (2004) 18–41
3. Schmidt, T.C., W¨
ahlisch, M.: Multicast Mobility in MIPv6: Problem Statement.
IRTF Internet Draft – work in progress 00, MobOpts (2005)
4. Holbrook, H., Cain, B.: Source-Speciﬁc Multicast for IP. Internet Draft – work in
progress 07, IETF (2005)
5. Thaler, D.: Supporting Mobile SSM Sources for IPv6. Proc. IETF meeting (2001)
6. Jelger, C., Noel, T.: Supporting Mobile SSM sources for IPv6 (MSSMSv6). Internet
Draft – work in progress (expired) 00, individual (2002)
7. Chang, R.S., Yen, Y.S.: A Multicast Routing Protocol with Dynamic Tree Adjustment for Mobile IPv6. Journ. Inform. Science and Engin. 20 (2004) 1109–1124
8. Romdhani, I., Kellil, M., Lach, H.Y., Bouabdallah, A., Bettahar, H.: Mobility–
Aware Rendezvous Point for Mobile Multicast Sources. In et. al., P.L., ed.: Proceedings of WWIC 2004. LNCS 2957, Berlin, Springer–Verlag (2004) 62–73
9. O’Neill, A.: Mobility Management and IP Multicast. Internet Draft – work in
progress (expired) 01, IETF (2002)
10. Schmidt, T.C., W¨
ahlisch, M.: A First Performance Analysis of the Tree Morphing Approach to Source Mobility in SSM Routing. In Lorenz, P., Dini, P., eds.:
Proceedings of the ICN’06, IEEE Press (2006) to appear.
11. Varga, A., et al.: The OMNeT++ simulation system. http://www.omnetpp.org
12. Heckmann, O., Piringer, M., Schmitt, J., Steinmetz, R.: On Realistic Network
Topologies for Simulation. In: MoMeTools ’03: Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM
workshop on Models, methods and tools for reproducible network research, New
York, NY, USA, ACM Press (2003) 28–32
13. Govindan, R., Tangmunarunkit, H.: Heuristics for internet map discovery. In:
Proceedings IEEE INFOCOM 2000. Volume 3., Tel Aviv, Israel, IEEE Computer
Society (2000) 1371–1380
14. : The daViKo homepage (2005) http://www.daviko.com
15. Ostermann, J., Bormans, J., List, P., Marpe, D., Narroschke, N., Pereira, F., Stockhammer, T., Wedi, T.: Video Coding with H.264/AVC: Tools, Performance and
Complexity. IEEE Circuits and Systems Magazine 4 (2004) 7–28
16. Cycon, H.L., Palkow, M., Schmidt, T.C., W¨
ahlisch, M., Marpe, D.: A fast waveletbased video codec and its application in an IP version 6-ready serverless videoconferencing system. Intern. J. of Wavelets, Multires. and Inf. Proc. 2 (2004) 165–171

