Mathematical Modelling the Ethnic System
Victor Korobitsin and Julia Frolova
Omsk State University, Computer Science Division,
55A, Mira pr., 644077 Omsk, Russia
{korobits, frolova}@univer.omsk.su
http://www.univer.omsk.su/socsys

Abstract. The main of presented research is a demonstration of creating the society model on ethnic solidarity level. This model describes
the behavior of ethnic system. The ethnic system includes a few ethnoses and provides their interactions. The interactions transmit by ethnic ﬁelds. The model is described by system of parabolic diﬀerential
equations. The software TERRI is used for the forecast of arising the
ethnic conﬂicts. Based on simulation result the researcher can compute
the direction of ethnic ﬁeld distribution and the most probable points of
skirmish between ethnoses.

1

Introduction

The modelling of biosphere (ecological) processes gave rise to the research of
society development. These models were destined for solving the problem of
global change the ecological situation. Now the problem of interethnic conﬂicts
is growing in society. It forces the international organizations to ﬁnd the way for
its adjustment. The modelling of global ethnic processes will allows to evaluate
the world ethnic situation.
The aim of this research is the construction of mathematical model of ethnic
ﬁeld. The model is described by the system of parabolic equations. It is the
tools for research the evolution of interactive ethnic systems under landscape
inﬂuence.

2

Ethnic Solidarity Level

On the ethnosphere level the traditions play the special role in the society. The
people get the behavior stereotypes from them. Thereby the general function of
this level is the sample maintenance. The individuals strive for conservation of
culture as a collection of history experience.
The ethnos is a people group, formed on basis of the original behavior stereotype. It exists as a energy system, opposing itself to other like groups. Thereby
people are divided on own and alien man. The main ethnos attribute is a behavior stereotype. It is a complex of behavior standards of ethnos members.
The collection of behavior stereotypes is deﬁned by ethnic tradition diﬀered the
ethnos from biological population.
P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2658, pp. 629–635, 2003.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

630

V. Korobitsin and J. Frolova

The passio energy is an excess of biochemical energy of living substance. It
suppresses the self-preservation instinct of man and deﬁnes the ability to goaldirected ultratension. The ethnic ﬁeld is formed by the passio energy. It provides
the interaction of ethnos members and regulates the joint goal-directed activity
of their. Each ethnos forms the unique ﬁeld and each ethnos member responds
to this ﬁeld. The behavior stereotypes, landscape, and culture values of ethnos
characterize the ﬁeld inﬂuence.
The primary motive for arising the ethnic conﬂicts is a skirmish of two not
solidary ethnoses. The skirmish is an eﬀect of distribution of some ethnic ﬁeld on
the territory of another ethnos. There are the territories occupied by the people
of diﬀerent ethnic systems. Such territory is a border or buﬀer zone placed between two ethnoses. The ethnic conﬂicts mostly arise on these zones. Therefore
the actual problem is to discover the buﬀer zones and to forecast the ethnic conﬂicts. For this problem decision, we propose to use the methods of mathematical
modelling. The model of level is created on the basis of Lev N. Gumilev’s theory
of ethnogenesis [1].

3

Mathematical Model of Ethnic Field

The ethnic system includes a few ethnoses and provides their interactions. The
interactions is transmited by ethnic ﬁelds. This ﬁeld is distributed on the landscape as hot gas in the space. We constructed the model of ethnic ﬁeld from this
analogy.
Consider the interaction of k ethnoses in the ﬁeld G ⊂ R2 with boundary Γ .
Let the passio energy of i ethnos (Ui ) satisﬁes the energy conservation law in
any given area. Deﬁne the passio energy density ui by
ui (x, y, t)dxdy.

Ui (t) =
G

The ethnos state is deﬁned by the passio tension. This characteristic is the ratio of passio energy volume to ethnos population quantity. The function E(x, y, t)
passio tension of ethnic ﬁeld is constructed on base of the measurement strategy
of history events frequency.
Interrelate the passio tension and density u(x, y, t) of ethnic ﬁeld energy by
u(x, y, t) = kS q(x, y, t)E(x, y, t),
where q(x, y, t) is the density of ﬁeld receptivity by ethnos members, kS is the
coeﬃcient. The function q(x, y, t) is deﬁned by the relation
q(x, y, t)dxdy,

Qj (t) =

Q(t) =
j

G

where the function Qj (t) describes the degree of receptivity and goal-directed
use of passio energy by j th ethnos member. The summation is made on all ethnos
members fallen in G area.

Mathematical Modelling the Ethnic System

631

Construct the integral balance equation describing change to density of ethnic
ﬁeld energy ui (x, y, t) of ith ethnos (i = 1, . . . , k), k is amount of ethnoses.
t2

Ri (t) + Pi (t) + Ti+ (t) + Ti− (t) + Ki (t) dt,

Ui (t2 ) − Ui (t1 ) =

(1)

t1

where Ui (t) =

G

ui (x, y, t)dxdy. The ﬂows of passio energy are described by

following expressions:
– Ri is the passio energy inﬂowing in G through boundary Γ ,
Ri (t) =

εi (x, y, t)
Γ

∂ui
(x, y, t)dγ,
∂n

the coeﬃcient εi (x, y, t) characterizes the velocity of passio energy distribution.
– Pi (t) is the passio energy inﬂowing in G under the inﬂuence of directional
moving energy through boundary Γ ,
Pi (t) =

−(ai , n)ui (x, y, t)dγ,
Γ

the vector ﬁeld ai gives the direction of energy moving, the vector n is
exterior normal to boundary section dγ. Let rot ai = 0 then the scalar
function ϕi exists and ai = −grad ϕi (x, y, t).
– Ti+ (t) is inﬂow of passio energy under the induction process in G,
Ti+ (t) =

βi+ (x, y, t)ui (x, y, t)dxdy,
G

the coeﬃcient βi+ (x, y, t) is the velocity of induction process.
– Ti− (t) is outﬂow of passio energy to life support of ethnos members and
landscape maintenance,
Ti− (t) =

−βi− (x, y, t)ui (x, y, t)dxdy,
G

βi− (x, y, t)

the coeﬃcient
is the velocity of passio energy losses.
– Ki (t) is outﬂow of passio energy under the skirmish of two ethoses,
k

−

Ki (t) =
G

γij (x, y, t)uj (x, y, t) ui (x, y, t)dxdy,
j=1

where uj is the density of passio energy of hostile ethnos, the coeﬃcient
γij (x, y, t) is the velocity of energy losses under the rivalry ith and j th ethnoses. The ratio γii u2i describes the internal conﬂicts in ethnos.

632

V. Korobitsin and J. Frolova

The system of integral equations (1) is equivalent to the system of parabolic
diﬀerential equations (add see [2])
∂ ∂ϕi
∂ui
∂ui
=
ui + εi
∂t
∂x ∂x
∂x

+

∂
∂y

∂ϕi
∂ui
ui + εi
∂y
∂y

+ βi+ − βi− −

k

γij uj ui ,
j=1

(2)
Deﬁne the initial and edge conditions for the system of parabolic equations by
ui (x, y, 0) = u0i (x, y), (x, y) ∈ G,
∂ui
(x, y) ∈ Γ.
∂n (x, y, t) = 0,

(3)

Deﬁne the functions as follows:
– moving the passio energy
ϕi (x, y) =

λi −µi ((x0i −x)2 +(yi0 −y)2 )
e
,
2µi

λi > 0, µi > 0, (x0i , yi0 ) ∈ G,

– the passio energy distribution
εi (x, y) = IG (ξεi ◦ lω )(x, y),

lω : ω → L,

ξεi : L → R+ ,

where ω is the discrete grid on G area, IG is the interpolation operator of
discrete functions on ω to continuous functions on G, L is a set of landscape
types,
– outﬂow of the passio energy
βi− (x, y) = IG (ξβi ◦ lω )(x, y),

ξβi : L → R+ ,

– inﬂow of the passio energy
βi+ (t) = max{0, βi0 − βi1 · (t − T0i )},

βi0 , βi1 ∈ R+ ,

T0i ≥ 0,

– the passio energy losses γij ∈ R+ .
The system of parabolic diﬀerential equations (2) with the initial and edge
conditions (3) is a mathematical model of ethnic ﬁeld interactions.
Given model is a way for formalization of Lev N. Gumilev’s theory. The
model accentuates the energy and geographical aspects of theory and gives the
clear formal description of internal processes.

4

Simulation Tools TERRI for Modeling the Ethnic
Fields

The simulation tools TERRI is created for modeling of ethnosphere level. The
tools realize the method for solving the system of parabolic diﬀerential equations
that described the model of ethnosphere. The modeling result is demonstrated
on the computer display as a dynamic map of ethnic ﬁelds.

Mathematical Modelling the Ethnic System

633

The initial data for modeling are the number of ethnoses k, map of landscapes, rates of changing the passio energy (functions εi , ϕi , βi , γij ), initial
distribution of passio energy density u0i .
Consider the simulation result of ethnosphere on real example. The aim of
simulation was to deﬁne the landscape dependence of division of territory between ethnoses. The dependence is discovered on real geographical features of
Europe, North Africa, and Middle East. Examine the interaction of three ethnic
systems: West European, East Slavonic, Asia Minor. Each ethnos was described
by the set of features (the function in the system (2)).
After run the modeling software TERRI, the map of landscapes is appeared
on the display. On this map the diﬀerent landscapes are marked by various
colors. The ethnos is born in some point on the map. So the ethnic ﬁeld is got
the initial pulse. According to dynamic rule (2) the ﬁeld is distributing on the
landscape. The ethnic ﬁeld is marked by color area on the display. Each ethnos
has own color: ﬁrst ethnos – blue, second – red, third – green. Given picture is
demonstrated the distribution of ethnoses on the landscape. The value of passio
energy density is shown by the brightness of color. The three stages of ethnos
dynamics is shown on ﬁgure 1.

Fig. 1. Distribution of ethnic ﬁelds

Initially the born ethnoses is developed on the isolation with each other.
In time they come into collision observed by the ethnic ﬁeld crossing. Under
conﬂicts the passio energy of hostile ethnoses is loss. Since there are not solidary
ethnoses then all they can not coexist on common territory. We can observe two
way of conﬂict adjustment. Either the most powered ethnos forces out the feeble
one or the equal-powered ethnoses separate the landscape. The buﬀer zone is
formed between them.
The software TERRI allows doing a lot of tests with model. We ﬁxed the part
of initial parameters but were changed other parameters in various tests. We were
getting the various pictures of ethnic dynamics. For analyzing the model behavior
we was collecting the data of ethnos ﬁeld distribution. The statistical analysis is
demonstrated the dependence of ethnic ﬁeld distribution on the landscapes.

634

V. Korobitsin and J. Frolova

The simulation result is the statistical distribution of super-ethnoses on the
landscape (ﬁgure 2).

Fig. 2. Statistics of Ethnos Distribution

The comparative analysis of experimental data with the facts was made for
the conﬁrmation of hypothesis on ethnos distribution. The facts are the percentage composition of population by church in the cityes of region. These data was
given from electronic library of Utrecht University, The Netherlands. The result
of comparative analysis is shown on table 1.
The cityes on table is sorted in ascending order of value ∆. It is a deviation
of experimental data from the facts, deﬁned by
∆=

1
2

4

|ai − bi |,
i=1

where ai is the facts, bi is the experimental data, i is super-ethnos number.
The analysis of computer simulation results allows doing the following conclusions:
– the distribution of territories between ethnoses really depends on landscape;
– the obtained statistical data demonstrates the correlation of settling the
ethnos on landscapes;
– the size of buﬀer zone is depended on the hostility of neighbor ethnoses.

Mathematical Modelling the Ethnic System

635

Table 1. Experimental Data vs the Facts. Church: I - Roman Catholic, II - Orthodox,
III - Islam, IV - other; Super-Ethnos: 1 - West-European, 2 - East-Slavonic, 3 - Asia
Minor, 4 - other.
City
Paris
Andorra
Zagreb
Rome
Buchares
Minsk
Vienna
Saraevo
Sophia
Prague
Berlin
Athens
Budapest
Tbilisi
Copenhagen
Jerusalem
Yerevan

5

I
II III IV
1
2
3
4
∆
89
4
3
4 87.2 8.0 0.0 4.8 4.8
86
0
0 14 76.8 5.8 0.0 17.4 9.2
77 11
0 12 68.8 29.8 1.4 0.0 20.2
83
0
0 17 78.4 14.0 7.4 0.2 21.4
6 80
0 14 22.8 71.6 5.6 0.0 22.4
8 60
0 32 15.6 82.2 1.0 1.2 30.8
85
0
0 15 64.8 35.2 0.0 0.0 35.2
15 31 40 14 49.2 32.2 18.6 0.0 35.4
1 87
8
4 35.0 49.8 15.2 0.0 41.2
50
2
0 48 66.2 33.8 0.0 0.0 48.0
37
0
2 61 66.6 33.4 0.0 0.0 63.0
0 97
1
2 33.2 33.0 31.6 2.2 64.0
68
0
0 32 35.6 64.0 0.4 0.0 64.4
0 75 11 14 0.0 10.4 75.6 14.0 64.6
1
0
0 99 60.0 11.8 0.0 28.2 70.8
0
3 15 82 0.4 0.0 86.4 13.2 71.8
0 100
0
0 0.0 6.8 71.0 22.2 93.2

Conclusion

We constructed the mathematical model of ethnic system. On results of presented research we can make up the following conclusions:
– this model is the tools for investigation in global development society area.
Based on simulation result the researcher will have got the numerical evaluation of historical hypothesis on ethnosphere evolution;
– the software TERRI is used for the forecast of arising the ethnic conﬂicts. In
that case, it is necessary to keep track of the passio energy pulse. Then we
can compute the direction of ethnic ﬁeld distribution and the most probable
points of skirmish between ethnoses;
– one of the ways for ethnic conﬂict prevention is to ﬁx the territory for certain
ethnos. The landscape features characterized for this ethnos deﬁne these
territories. So the separation of inﬂuence area of ethnos on territories is
realized.

References
1. Gumilev, L.N.: Ethnogenesis and Biosphere of Earth. Tanais DI-DIK, Moscow
(1994)
2. Guts, A.K., Korobitsin, V.V., Laptev, A.A., Pautova, L.A., Frolova, J.V.: Mathematical Models of Social Systems. Omsk State University Press, Omsk (2000)

