A Secure Peer-to-Peer Group Collaboration Scheme for
Healthcare System*
Byong-In Lim, Kee-Hyun Choi, and Dong-Ryeol Shin
School of Information and Communication Engineering,
Sungkyunkwan University,
440-746, Suwon, Korea, +82-31-290-7125
{lbi77, gyunee, drshin}@ece.skku.ac.kr

Abstract. P2P (Peer-to-Peer) applications allow flexible organization,
distribution of role to participating peers and the ability to share information
with the other peers for group collaborations. As a result, P2P systems are not
only gaining importance, but also becoming ubiquitous media for information
exchange. JXTA is a P2P application development infrastructure that enables
developers to easily create service-oriented software. This paper presents a lowcost, patient-friendly JXTA-based healthcare system, which is comprised of
medical sensor modules in conjunction with wireless communication
technology. Among the most important activities associated with the healthcare
system are the sharing of medical information and collaborative medical work.
The JXTA grouping service facilitates to share data in a secure manner under
P2P environments. Through JXTA grouping service, we implemented a
prototyped system, which improves the ability of the healthcare workers to cope
with dynamic situation, which in turn makes it possible to offer more efficient
medical services.

1 Introduction
Advancements in sensor, information and communication technology can play an
important role in achieving cost reduction and efficiency improvement in healthcare
delivery systems, to the extent that this offers high-quality medical service anytime
and anywhere. However, conventional healthcare systems, including the Mobihealth
[1] project, utilize a central server for the look up of information. Furthermore, the
possibility of offering seamless service is limited by the network connectivity of
wireless devices or resource-constraints. In addition, traditional systems only focus on
organic communication and service utilization between patients and hospital, whereas
they ignore the systematic communication and sharing of information between
healthcare workers in the hospital. For these reasons, these systems cannot cope with
acute situations dynamically and promptly. Also, privacy and security are potential
problems. Patient’s data should be available irrespective of their location, but only to
authorized healthcare workers.
* This research was partially supported by a grant from the CUCN, Korea and Korea Science
& Engineering Foundation (R01-2004-000-10755-0)
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3516, pp. 346 – 349, 2005.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

A Secure Peer-to-Peer Group Collaboration Scheme for Healthcare System

347

To resolve these problems, we propose a JXTA-based healthcare system, which
operates in a peer-to-peer (P2P) environment so as to offer seamless service by
distributing the healthcare services among the healthcare workers. This sharing of
information about the medical treatment that patients receive between the healthcare
workers in the JXTA environment improves their ability to cope with dynamic
situations, which in turn makes it possible to offer more efficient medical services.
Furthermore, the JXTA grouping service makes it possible to share data in a secure
manner under the P2P environment. So, our system protects patient’s data. In this
paper, we focus on the system architecture design in hospital region which is based on
JXTA grouping mechanisms.
This paper is structured as follows: Section 2 discusses system architecture for
healthcare services and the system implementation is presented in section 3. Finally,
this paper is concluded in section 4.

2 System Architecture for Healthcare Services
2.1 Architecture Overview
Our system consists of two regions, viz. the Healthcare region and the Hospital
region, as shown in Figure 1.

Fig. 1. System Architecture

The healthcare BAN consists of sensors, a Wireless Interface, PDA
communication, and various facilities. The Hospital region is composed of the JXTA
P2P network that supports the doctor’s mobility and dynamic service management
modules. A P2P network distributes the information among the member nodes,
instead of concentrating it at a single server. A JXTA relay peer is defined among the
two regions, in order to provide a systematic computing environment between the
Healthcare region and the Hospital region. JXTA relays act as proxies for the
individual patients’ PDAs, as well as taking care of all the heavier tasks on their
behalf. For more details, refer to [2]. In next section, we describe how healthcare
services with collaboration of JXTA secure group environment are formed and
managed in a hospital region.

348

B.-I. Lim, K.-H. Choi, and D.-R. Shin

2.2 Secure Group Collaboration Scheme in Hospital
Among the most time consuming activities associated with the public health sector
are documentation and data exchange. In a hospital, the healthcare workers form a
peer group within the institution. Together they can create a secure peer group with
various access rights, so as to allow the sharing of the patient’s data (e.g. his or her
patient UUID, patient sensor data, etc) and other kind of information (e.g. a first-aid,
drugs to prescribe, etc) under the secure environment. Figure 2 shows a sequence
diagram of group collaboration scheme in hospital domains.

Fig. 2. Sequence Diagram of Group Collaboration Scheme

JXTA combines the overlay network with a namespace abstraction referred to as a
peer group [3]. Any peer may create a new peer group at any time for any reason to
communicate with any set of peers. The only requirement is that all peers have agreed
upon a common set of services and protocols for implementing secure group
collaboration (authentication, authorization, message propagation, discovery service,
etc). Consequently, JXTA grouping service is an effective means to implement P2P
collaboration system under secure environment. This is the main reason for which the
healthcare system is based on the JXTA platform. In our system, the healthcare region
consists of several groups (e.g. groups corresponding to specific surgical wards, dental
treatment, etc). The collaboration scheme of secure peer group is as follows. Before
healthcare workers can interact with the group, they need to create a peer group. When
creating the peer group, the healthcare workers involved initialize the local secure
environment, and then publish a peer group advertisement, which includes the peer
group ID and peer group medical service. After the secure group is created, they can
perform collaborative service and functionality of the peer. Searching and sharing are
done on the peer group level, i.e., shared contents are only available to the peer group.
In order for service consumers to utilize medical service, they must firstly achieve their
guaranteed passwords as well as the information of secure peer groups which provide
medical service in the JXTA network. In JXTA, the membership service is used to
apply for peer group membership, join a peer group, and exit from a peer group. The
membership service allows a peer to establish an identity within a peer group. Once an
identity has been established, a credential is available, which allows the peer to prove
that they have obtained the identities rightfully. In our system, the security is ensured by
using JXTA grouping mechanism to implement group level security policies for

A Secure Peer-to-Peer Group Collaboration Scheme for Healthcare System

349

membership and service access. Also, the JXTA grouping mechanism supports the
sharing of medical information and collaborative medical work, which in turn makes it
possible to offer more efficient medical services.

3 Implementation
In this study, we utilize the JXTA Platform to develop a medical-service management
tool as well as secure group collaborations in a hospital domain. We also
implemented a software for monitoring the patient’s status, in the BAN as well as in

.
Fig. 3. Data Management JXTA Application

the JXTA application used for managing the patient’s information; medical status and
personal information, as shown in Figure 3. The use of the JXTA Platform with its
discovery and grouping mechanisms enables us to offer efficient and adaptive medical
services.

4 Conclusion
In this paper we have presented the design of a JXTA-based healthcare system which
enables healthcare workers to share data in a secure manner under the P2P
environment. This paradigm offers significant advantages in healthcare workers to
cope with dynamic situations, thus improving the quality of the medical service that
they can provide. Future work includes the detailed simulations and performance
evaluations for the developed systems.

References
1. Nikolay Dokovsky, Aart van Halteren, Ing Widya, “BANip: enabling remote healthcare
monitoring with Body Area Networks”, International Workshop on scientific engineering
of Distributed Java applications, November 27-28, 2003.
2. Byongin Lim, et al, “A JXTA-based Architecture for Efficient and Adaptive Healthcare
Services”, ICOIN 2005, LNCS 3391, pp. 776-785, January 31- February 2, 2005.
3. PKI Security for JXTA Overlay Network, Jeff Altman, February 2003.

