An Eﬃcient Bandwidth Reclaim Scheme for the
Integrated Transmission of Real-Time and
Non-Real-Time Messages on the WLAN
Junghoon Lee1 , In-Hye Shin1 , Gyung-Leen Park1, Wang-Cheol Song2 ,
Jinhwan Kim3 , Pankoo Kim4 , and Jiman Hong5,
1

Dept. of Computer Science and Statistics, Cheju National University
2
Dept. of Computer Engineering, Cheju National University
3
Dept. of Multimedia Engineering, Hansung University
4
Dept. of Computer Engineering, Chosun University
5
School of Computing, Soongsil University
jhlee@cheju.ac.kr, kimjh@hansung.ac.kr, pkkim@chosun.ac.kr,
gman@ssu.ac.kr

Abstract. This paper proposes and analyzes bandwidth reclaim scheme
for IEEE 802.11 WLAN, which may suﬀer from severe bandwidth waste
resulting from not only the variation of transmission rate and message
length but also the overallocation to the real-time traﬃc in compensating for the delay due to the intervention of non-real-time messages. Built
on top of the weighted round robin scheduling policy, we address that
the polling order rearrangement according to the degree of overallocation can enhance reclaimability of unused network time and that the
rearranegable slot has its message pending at the rearranging time. The
simulation results show that the proposed scheme is able to reclaim up
to 52.3 % of bandwidth waste when the number of streams is 2 and that
it also provides stable throughput for utilization of 0.5 through 0.8.

1

Introduction

1

According to the expansion of WLAN (Wireless Local Area Network), real-time
and non-real-time messages coexist in the wireless media. Real-time traﬃc such
as video and sensor data requires bounded delay, but is usually tolerant of some
packet losses. As contrast, non-real-time traﬃc requires loss-free transmission
without demanding bounded delay[1]. The IEEE 802.11 was developed as a MAC
(Medium Access Control) standard for WLAN and this standard consists of both
an essential DCF (Distributed Coordination Function) and an optional PCF
(Point Coordination Function)[2]. The DCF exploits collision-based CSMA/CA
(Carrier Sense Multiple Access with Collision Avoidance) protocol for non-realtime messages, aiming at enhancing their average delivery time as well as overall
1

Corresponding author.
This research was supported by the MIC, Korea, under the ITRC support program
supervised by the IITA (IITA-2006-C1090-0603-0040).

Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 925–932, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

926

J. Lee et al.

network throughput. On the other hand, the collision-free PCF can provide a
real-time guarantee by developing a deterministic access schedule[3].
Network management consists of two parts on real-time communications,
namely, static bandwidth allocation and dynamic adaptation parts, respectively
[4]. Based on the static informations that do not change for a long time, for example, period and maximum transmission time of each stream, the bandwidth
allocation procedure determines the network access schedule for the given set of
active streams. However, the dynamic change in network condition needs additional management that can cope with such situations as non-real-time traﬃc
load oscillation, channel status change, and so on. One of challenging problems in
WLAN is a bandwidth reclaim scheme that reassigns the network time reserved
but unused to another node[3]. In particular, the auto-selection mechanism can
create much of such unused bandwidth, as it chooses the rate to be used for each
packet that is submitted to the physical layer[5]. If a stream meets better rate
than expected for a time interval, it can complete its transmission early.
The reclaim scheme is very crucial to the network throughput, as hard realtime guarantee inevitably brings bandwidth overallocation resulted from a pessimistic assumption that the stream has the worst case available time at each
period. Moreover, a phenomenon called as a deferred beacon problem, which will
be discussed in Section 3.1, further deteriorates the worst case available time
for the real-time stream, increasing the amount of overbooking. It is desirable
that as much unused bandwidth as possible should be reclaimed and allocated to
another stream to minimize bandwidth waste. To this end, this paper is to propose and analyze a bandwidth reclaim scheme for WLAN that strictly obeys the
IEEE 802.11 standard, assuming that PCF operates according to the weighted
round robin schedule. We can improve the amount of reclaimed bandwidth by
adjusting the polling order.
This paper is organized as follows: After issuing the problem in Section 1,
Section 2 introduces the related works on both network scheduling and bandwidth reclaim schemes. With the description on network and message models
along with a bandwidth allocation scheme in Section 3, Section 4 proposes a reclaim procedure. Section 5 discusses the performance measurement results and
then Section 6 ﬁnally concludes this paper with a brief summarization and the
description of future works.

2

Related Works

Based on the attribute that most real-time traﬃc is periodic, several MAC protocols have been proposed to support the hard real-time communication over a
wireless channel[6]. However, they cannot be easily exploited to the IEEE 802.11
WLAN standard, as they ignored the CSMA/CA part deﬁned as mandatory in
the WLAN standard, or just aimed to enhance the ratio of timely delivery for
soft multimedia applications[4]. For example, Choi and Shin suggested a uniﬁed
protocol for real-time and non-real-time communications in wireless networks[1].
Based on frame-structured access mechanism, a BS (Base Station) polls every

An Eﬃcient Bandwidth Reclaim Scheme for the Integrated Transmission

927

station, be it a real-time or a non-real-time one, according to the corresponding policy. Though unpredictability due to message collision is eliminated, this
scheme is neither compatible with the standard CSMA/CA protocol, nor takes
into account any resource reclaim scheme.
Most works that conform to the IEEE standard are aiming at enhancing
the ratio of timely delivery for soft multimedia applications, rather than providing a hard real-time guarantee. DBASE (Distributed Bandwidth Allocation/Sharing/Extension) is a protocol that supports multimedia traﬃcs over
IEEE 802.11 ad hoc WLAN[4]. The basic concept is that each time real-time
station transmits its packet it will also declare and reserve the bandwidth needed
at the next CFP. Every station respectively collects this information and then
calculates its actual bandwidth at the next cycle. Though the per-packet reservation makes a resource reclaim scheme unnecessary, it does not only increase
the runtime burden on member stations, but also demands all stations receive
all the transmitted packets.
M. Caccamo and his colleagues have proposed a MAC capable of supporting deterministic real-time scheduling by implementing TDMA[3]. Referred as
implicit contention, their scheme makes every station respectively run the common real-time scheduling algorithm to determine which message can access the
medium. Accompanied with the implicit contention, FRASH (FRAame SHaring)
can reclaim the unused bandwidth. Whenever the transmission of the current
dispatched message is over and it does not use all the reserved frames, its identiﬁer is put in a ﬁeld in the header of the last data packet of the current message.
However, the identiﬁer should be correctly received by all stations in the network to reach a global agreement. FRASH can perform properly only for TDMA
protocols that operate on ﬁxed size slots. Moreover, this scheme cannot be implemented in the current 802.11 WLAN standard without the addition of new
management frames and thus causes additional overhead.

3
3.1

Backgrounds
Network and Message Models

In BSS (Basic Service Set), the time axis of WLAN is divided into a series of
superframes, each of which alternately operates CP (Collision Period) and CFP
(Collision Free Period) phases, which are mapped to PCF and DCF, respectively.
PC (Point Coordinator) node, typically AP (Access Point), sequentially polls
each station during CFP according to the polling schedule determined by a
speciﬁc policy such as EDF (Earliest Deadline First). All stations including the
ones even in the polling list contend in the CP to send a management frame or
a control frame. Even in the ad hoc mode, it is possible to designate a speciﬁc
node to play a role of PC in a target group.
The phase of network operation is managed by the exchange of control packets which have higher priority than other ordinary packets. The PC attempts to
initiate CFP by broadcasting a Beacon at regular intervals derived from a network parameter of CFPRate. Round robin is one of the commonly used polling

928

J. Lee et al.

policies for CFP, in which every node is polled once a polling round. A polling
round may be completed within one superframe, or spread over more than one
superframe. In case the CFP terminates before all stations have been completely
polled, the polling list is resumed at the next node in the ensuing CFP cycle.
The polled node transmits its message for up to a predeﬁned time interval, and
always responds to a poll immediately whether it has a pending message or not.
To prevent starvation of stations that are not allowed to send during the
CFP, a superframe is forced to include a CP of minimum length that allows at
least one data packet delivery under DCF[2]. Hence, a non-real-time packet may
occupy the network when the coordinator is to send the beacon frame. However,
only after the medium is idle the coordinator will get the higher priority due to
the shorter IFS (InterFrame Space). Thus, the delivery of a beacon frame can
get delayed, resulting in the deferred beacon problem, possibly invalidating the
network schedule determined for real-time messages. The maximum amount of
deferment coincides with the maximum length of a non-real-time packet.
The real-time traﬃc is typically isochronous (or synchronous), consisting of
message streams that are generated by their sources on a continuing basis and
delivered to their respective destinations also on a continuing basis[6]. For example, a sensor node periodically reports the collected sensor data to a remote
server. Accordingly, the general real-time message model consists of n streams,
namely, S1 , S2 , ..., Sn , and for each Si , a message sized to at most Ci arrives
at the beginning of its period, Pi , and it must be transmitted by Pi . Mi is the
transmission time of Ci , estimated with a reference transmission rate, Ri , which
can be set empirically or analytically. Small value of Ri increases the probability
that the actual transmission rate is above Ri , bringing more unused bandwidth.
Finally, the destination of message can be either within a cell or outside a cell,
and the outbound messages are ﬁrst sent to the AP and then forwarded to the
ﬁnal destination, or vice versa. In case of a change in the stream set, bandwidth
should be reallocated[1].
3.2

Bandwidth Allocation

This subsection brieﬂy describes the allocation scheme of Lee’s work on which
this paper is built. For detailed description of bandwidth allocation, refer to [7].
To begin with, by allocation, we mean the procedure of determining capacity
vector, {Hi }, for the given superframe time, F , and message stream set described
as {Si (Pi , Mi )}. As shown in Fig. 1, Hi denotes the time amount during which
Time
CFP (PCF)

H1
Start CFP

H2
Poll

CP (DCF)

....

Hn
End CFP

NRT

Start CFP

Fig. 1. Polling procedure and capacity vector

An Eﬃcient Bandwidth Reclaim Scheme for the Integrated Transmission

929

Si can send its message when it is polled. A stream can timely send Ci only if
its average transmission rate is over Ri during the Pi .
Let δ denote the total overhead of a superframe including polling latency, IFS,
exchange of beacon frame, and the like, while Dmax the maximum length of a
non-real-time data packet. In addition, Pmin denotes the smallest element of set
{Pi }. Then the requirement for the superframe time, F , can be summarized as
in Ineq. (1). Within this range, the scheme can select F and modify some of Pi ’s
such that they are harmonic[8].
Hi + δ + 2 · Dmax ≤ F ≤ Pmin

(1)

In addition, the least bound of Hi that can meet the time constraint of Si is
calculated as in Eq. (2).
Hi =
Hi =

(

if (Pi −

Mi
−1)

Pi
F
Mi
Pi
F

Pi
F

· F ) ≤ Dmax

(2)

Otherwise

The allocation vector calculated by Eq. (2) is a feasible schedule if the vector
meets Ineq. (1). Finally, we can determine the length of CFP (TCF P ) and that
of CP (TCP ) as follows:
TCF P =

4
4.1

Hi + δ,

TCP = F − TCF P ≥ Dmax

(3)

Bandwidth Reclaim Scheme
Reclaim Test

Hard real-time guarantee is given by the worst case available transmission time
which is calculated with a pessimistic assumption that the transmission rate of
Si is just Ri while the size of message is always Ci . So a stream can meet extra
slots in some periods if any of above conditions are not met. As a result, a node
Ps = 2 F + Δ
Ps
Message Arrival

Hs

CP

Unused slot time

Hs
1 access loss

Δ

2F

Extended CP

Hs

CP

Hs

CP

Hs

CP

(a) unused slot but not advance

Hs

CP

(b) simply advance on unused slot

Fig. 2. Bandwidth reclaiming

930

J. Lee et al.

may have no pending message when it receives a poll, in which case it responds
with a null frame containing no payload. How to cope with this unused slot is
critical to the network throughput. The ﬁrst step to reclaim the bandwidth is to
determine whether to advance the rest of the polling or leave the slot unused.
To begin with, let’s assume that if a slot is unused, AP simply moves ahead
every subsequent poll. Fig. 2 shows the example in which the predecessors of Ss
generate unused slots. Fig. 2(b) illustrates that the unused slots are reclaimed,
CFP terminates earlier than scheduled to extend the CP for non-real-time message transmission. However, this method may deprive Ss of one access and the
real-time guarantee can be broken. If we let Ps = k · F + Δ, where Δ is a value
from 0 to F , then the least bound of network access within Ps is k or k − 1, as
noted in Eq. (2). (The ﬁgure shows the case of k = 2). If AP simply advances
Hs , Ss loses one scheduled access as shown in Fig. 2(b) provided that the new
arrival of message falls in between new and original polling instants. As contrast,
that access can be preserved if the AP does not reclaim the unused bandwidth
as shown in Fig. 2(a).
The main idea of proposed scheme is that the rest of polling schedule can be
advanced if all the subsequent streams have their messages to send, that is, if
none of them are waiting for a new message arrival. As the PC can ﬁnish the
polling schedule of that round earlier than the original CFP duration, CP can
be extended to transmit more non-real-time messages. In addition, as the AP
receives all the informations on period and transmission time before bandwidth
allocation, it can estimate the status of each stream, namely, whether its transmission buﬀer is empty or not[3]. Finally, in case the slot cannot be reclaimed,
it can be used for error control of that stream.
4.2

Runtime Operation

Polling order is important not only in deciding whether a stream will be aﬀected
by a deferred beacon but also in improving the probability of reclaim. The more
a stream generates unused slots, it would be better to put the stream in the
latter place, as small number of successor increases the probability of being reclaimed. How much a stream generates unused slot depends on the amount of
overallocated bandwidth. This amount consists of static and dynamic factors.
The static factor does not change during the whole life time of a stream, cali
culated by subtracting the actual bandwidth requirement, C
Pi , from allocated
bandwidth, HFi . On the other hand, the dynamic factor keeps changing period
by period, as it is decided by the current transmission rate. As a result, the
overallocation, Oi , is calculated as in Eq. (4).
Oi = (

C¯i
Hi
Ai
−
) + max{0, (1 −
) · Mi }
F
Pi
Ri

(4)

where Ai is the actual transmission rate Si is now experiencing for this period. With
this information, the polling order should be decided such that the larger Oi , the
latter the stream is polled. The order is rearranged for each beginning of a superframe, taking into account the current transmission rates of respective streams.

An Eﬃcient Bandwidth Reclaim Scheme for the Integrated Transmission

931

Finally, the stream which has higher error rate brings more unused slots, so it
seems better to place such a stream to the latter part. However, the error dynamics, conforming to Guilbert model, are so unpredictable that the average behavior
cannot provide meaningful criteria[1]. If we are to consider the error characteristics, the channel probing mechanism should be reinforced to the reclaim scheme.

5

Performance Measurements

This section measures the performance of the proposed reclaim scheme via simulation using NS-2 event scheduler[9]. The experiments focus on measuring the
achievable throughput to demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of reclaiming scheme.
We deﬁne achievable throughput as the virtual throughput for a given stream
set without any collision even in CP. This can be estimated as the sum of both
utilization of real-time message streams and ratio of average length of CP to F .
1

1

0.95

Achievable throughput

Achievable throughput

0.95
"NoReclaim"
"Proposed"
"IdealThroughput"

0.9

0.85

0.8

0.9

0.85
"NoReclaim"
"Proposed"
"IdealThroughput"

0.8

0.75
2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Number of real-time streams

Fig. 3. Bandwidth reclaiming

10

0.75
0.5

0.55

0.6

0.65

0.7

0.75

0.8

Utilization

Fig. 4. Bandwidth reclaiming

Fig. 3 plots achievable bandwidth according to the average number of streams
on the superframe to evaluate the performance of reclaiming scheme. Without
overallocation caused by the hard real-time guarantee, the only waste is polling
overhead, but overallocation makes the throughput much less than ideal. However, the resource reclaiming scheme can narrow the gap between those two
curves, that is, considerably relieves the problem of poor utilization of PCF
operation, as shown in Fig. 4. The amount of overallocation does not depend
on the number of streams but how much F is harmonic with each Pi . For the
experiment, 200 stream sets are generated for each number of streams ranging
from 2 to 20 with utilization between 0.64 and 0.65. At last, it is certain that
the improvement increases when the number of streams is small, and the 52.3
% of waste was recovered. As shown in the ﬁgure, the improvement gets smaller
as the number of streams increases. This is due to the fact that the reclaimed
portion gets smaller and the probability of reclaim decreases.
Fig. 4 plots the reclaimed throughput measured by changing the utilization
of stream set from 0.5 to 0.8, while the number of streams randomly distributes

932

J. Lee et al.

from 2 to 10. If only a stream set has a feasible schedule, the throughput goes
high as utilization increases. On the contrary, reclaimed scheme provides stable
throughput throughout the given utilization range. When the utilization is from
0.5 to 0.65, about 31.3 % of bandwidth waste was reclaimed.

6

Conclusion and Future Work

In this paper, we have proposed and analyzed a bandwidth reclaim scheme that
can overcome poor utilization problem of PCF for real-time communication in
WLAN. When an unused slot occurs, AP tests whether it can be reclaimed by
checking all of its successors have messages to send. This test conﬁrms that the
other time-sensitive traﬃcs are not aﬀected by the early termination of polling
round. The reclaimed bandwidth is reassigned to CP to improve the response
time of connection management, error control, and other non-real-time messages.
The simulation results show that the proposed scheme is able to reclaim up to
52.3 % of bandwidth waste when the number of streams is 2 and that it also
provides stable throughput throughout the utilization from 0.5 to 0.8.
Finally, we are to apply the bandwidth reclaim scheme proposed in this paper
to the EDF style polling framework. In addition, we are also planning to develop
a bandwidth reclaim scheme combined with an error control mechanism.

References
1. Choi, S., Shin, K.: A uniﬁed wireless LAN architecture for real-time and non-realtime communication services. IEEE/ACM Trans. on Networking (2000) 44-59
2. IEEE 802.11-1999: Part 11 - Wireless LAN Medium Access Control
(MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Speciﬁcations (1999) also available at
http://standards.ieee.org/getieee802
3. Caccamo, M., Zhang, L., Sha, L., Buttazzo, G.: An implicit prioritized access protocol for wireless sensor networks. Proc. IEEE Real-Time Systems Symposium (2002)
4. Sheu, S., Sheu, T.: A bandwidth allocation/sharing/extension protocol for multimedia over IEEE 802.11 ad hoc wireless LANS. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communications, Vol. 19 (2001) 2065-2080
5. Khattab, A. and Elsayed, K.: Channel-quality dependent earliest deadline due fair
scheduling schemes for wireless multimedia networks. Proc. of MSWIM. (2004) 31-38
6. Adamou, M., Khanna, S., Lee, I., Shin, I., Zhou, S.: Fair real-time traﬃc scheduling
over a wireless LAN. Proc. IEEE Real-Time Systems Symposium (2001) 279-288
7. Lee, J., Kang, M., Jin, Y., Kim, H., Kim, J.: An eﬃcient bandwidth management
scheme for a hard real-time fuzzy control system based on the wireless LAN. Lecture
Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Vol. 3642. Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg New
York (2005) 644-659
8. Carley, T., Ba, M., Barua, R., Stewart, D.: Contention-free periodic message scheduler medium access control in wireless sensor/actuator networks. Proc. IEEE RealTime Systems Symposium (2003) 298-307
9. Fall, K., Varadhan, K.: Ns notes and documentation. Technical Report. VINT
project. UC-Berkeley and LBNL (1997)

