An Evolution Process Model for the Internet Topology*
Sangjoon Park1, Insook Cho2, and Byunggi Kim2
1

Information & Media Technology Institute, Soongsil University
2
School of Computing, Soongsil University
{lub, bgkim}@archi.ssu.ac.kr

Abstract. Instead of actual experiments to network protocols, network
simulators are useful to analyze these network protocols for lower analysis cost.
The Internet topology is dynamically evolving and growing, and then shows
changing characteristics based on time flow. Studies of Internet topology have
been motivated by the demands for analysis and simulation to the modeling of
real networks. Hence, to develop the Internet simulator, proper characteristics to
Internet topology should be studied. In this paper, we propose topology models to
the Internet topology showing node addition and deletion.

1 Introduction
Real experiments to large scale network are ideal to correctly analyze performance
evaluations to researched network protocols. However, it is very difficult since
researched protocols cannot be directly tested in real networks, and the evaluation cost
based on real experiments is very high. Hence, the modeling and the simulation to the
large scale network such like Internet are useful to assess researched protocol
performances. Advantages of the modeling and the simulation for such network
structure are as follows:
•Evaluation

cost: Generally, the experimental evaluation to the actual network is very
difficult and expensive. However, by using a simulator to the source network system,
it can spend much lower evaluation cost compared with actual experiments.
•Flexibility: The experimental implementation has the limitation of application flexibility caused by environment problems when an additional scheme is newly adapted to
the source network systems. In simulation environments, the addition of a new scheme
is much easier than it on the experimental environments.
•Applicability: Network simulators developed in the modeling can be used to analyze
variety network mechanisms.
The Internet was developed for military and research-oriented prototypes, but it has
grown into very large scale network that connects many computers around the world
without any centralized control or administration. Hence, to implement simulations
related to network protocols on the Internet, it is important to study the properties of
and policies of the Internet (e.g., network scale, connection types between different
* This work was supported by the Soongsil University research fund.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part III, LNCS 3993, pp. 1040 – 1047, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

An Evolution Process Model for the Internet Topology

1041

networks and network evolution model). Therefore, most researches to the Internet
focus topology models that try to represent the characteristics of the real Internet
topology accurately [1] [2] [7]. In this paper, we propose an Internet topology model
that has the functionalities of adding and deleting nodes and processing the isolated
nodes to accurately apply the changes in the real Internet. We consider a node change
model for showing characteristics of Internet evolution.

2 Internet Topology Property
2.1 Evolution Model
There are power-laws among the several properties that characterize the Internet
topologies [5], [6], [9]. At present, the well-known key power-laws are the following:
First, the power-law relationship between the degree of a node ( d v ) and the rank of a
node ( rv ) is presented by
d v ∝ rv

R

(1)

where v is a node in the Internet, and R is the power of a constant (rank exponent).
Secondly, a power-law appears between an degree ( d ) and the frequency ( f d ) as
follows:
(2)
fd ∝ d O
where O is the degree exponent..
Thirdly, a power-law is the relationship between a calculated eigen value ( λ i ) and a
rank ( i ) as follows:

λi ∝ iε

(3)

where ε is the eigen exponent.
The rank is arranged in ascending order by the eigen value using a close matrix. If all
nodes are connected, it is represented by 1, and if not connected, it is expressed by 0.
2.2 Topology Model
Waxman model is the distance-based connection that links of nodes are added to a
network considering the distance between nodes arranged in random positions on 2D
grid [10]. The rate of generating link between the two nodes u and v is different
depending on the distance of the node from the node, and it is determined using the
connection rate as follows. Waxman model is usually used to create a random network.
P (u , v ) = α e

−

d

βL

(5)

where d is euclidean distance from node u to v , L is the maximum distance
between two nodes in a graph, and 0 ≤ α , β ≤ 1 .
Barabasi-Albert model is the degree-based connection method that a characteristic of
the Internet evolution shows a power-law distribution by providing incremental growth
and preferential connectivity to the degree frequency [3][4].

1042

S. Park, I. Cho, and B. Kim

P ( j) =

d

∑

k ∈V

j

(6)

dk

where d j is the degree of the node ( j ) and V is the collection of all nodes connected
in the network.
d is the degree sum of all existing nodes.

∑

k ∈V

k

Fig. 1. Random topology (Arrangement of nodes without links)

3 Internet Topology Model
In this paper, we design an Internet topology model showing changeable network
configuration. In the time flow, network nodes can be deleted or added to the growing
Internet topology.
3.1 Method to Make a Topology in the Beginning
Firstly, to present the initial Internet topology, we use the node information (1999
year-network information) to the Korea Internet network. The node generation pattern
is that the initial node is generated and then will be arranged in the network.
Furthermore, after creating a node in small-sized topology, the arrangement to the node
uses a random method. A link connection between two nodes uses the node connection
rate [equation (5)] in Waxman model and the degree-based connection method
[equation (6)]. Fig. 1 shows the beginning topology created using a random method.
The AS number is 149 in 1999.
3.2 Node Addition
After initial topology generation, if a new node is created and is connected to another
node, the node addition method is same as above mentioned subsection 3.1: Firstly, the
node connectivity rate considering Euclidean distance between two nodes and secondly
degree-based connection method using the connectivity rate of the Barabasi-Albert
model. In Barabasi-Albert model, a higher degree node presents higher connectivity
rate in the existing network [3] [10].

An Evolution Process Model for the Internet Topology

1043

3.3 Node Deletion
Current Internet models only consider the network growing modeling. However, note
that a network node can be deleted from social or technical problems. Hence, though
the Internet is continuously growing, each network node has its life cycle so that it can
be died. In this paper, we derive two node deletion scenarios based on equation (5) and
(6). First scenario is based on the distance between two nodes as follows.
Pi =

li

∑l

(7)
k

where l i is the distance value of a node i , and

∑l

k

is the distance sum of all nodes.

In distance-based scheme, if a node ( i ) is far away from a core node and has the
maximum distance value l i , the rate Pi to i is the maximum value. Hence, the node i
having the maximum rate value will be deleted. For the second method, it is the case
that considers the degree and the distance simultaneously. Hence, even though a node
has the maximum distance value, if the degree of node is high, the node can alive. If
{I 0 , I 1 , I 2 ,⋅ ⋅ ⋅, I n } is the distance set of all nodes from a core node,

{d 0 , d 1 , d 2 ⋅ ⋅⋅, d n } is the degree set of all nodes, and the total number of node is m ,
the rate Pi is given by
Pi = ψ

∑

li
−δ
li m

i∈V

where ψ and δ are the shape parameters,

∑

di
di m

(8)

i ∈V

∑I
i∈V

i

m and

∑d
i∈V

i

m are the average

values, and V = {0 , 1, 2 , ⋅ ⋅ ⋅, n } is the set of all nodes.
Here, we use the average value for each node to make the same effects about the
degree and the distance.
3.4 Processing an Isolated Node
After deleting a core node or a node having high degree, the process to isolated
neighbor nodes (with zero degree) is required. Hence, it needs to create a new link and

Fig. 2. Processing an isolated node: (a) Before node deletion and (b) After node deletion

1044

S. Park, I. Cho, and B. Kim

connect to another node. As an example, Fig. 2 shows the node isolation process. In Fig.
2(a), the node ( C ) has 4 degrees. If the node ( C ) is deleted, node ( A ) and node
( B ) are isolated. Hence, node ( A ) and node ( B ) should be connected another node
[here, node ( G ) ]. To create new links, it uses a method similar to that of adding a link
when a new node is created: Waxman's node connectivity rate [equation (5)] and the
degree-based connection method [equation (6)].

4 Performance Evaluation
We evaluate the correlation between each topology model and the power-law by using
three power-law equations (in Section 2.1) [8]. To evaluate the proposed model, we
created the network topology in two ways. Table 1 show the current network models
without the node deletion function, and Table 2 presents the proposed models that
includes the node deletion function and the isolated node process. In the distance-based
method, Waxman parameter α and β are 0.6 and 0.4, respectively [see equation (5)].
Table 1. Topology model without a deletion function
Node addition

Model
name

Node creation

Link connection

A1

Incremental method

Distance-based method

A2

Incremental method

Degree-based method

Table 2. Topology model with a deletion function
Model
name
B1
B2
B3
B4
B5

Node addition
Node Creation
Link connection
Incremental
Distance-based
method
method
Incremental
Degree-based
method
method
Incremental
Degree-based
method
method
Incremental
Degree-based
method
method
Incremental
Degree-based
method
method

Node deletion

Processing to isolated nodes

Distance-based method

Distance-based method

Distance-based method

Distance-based method

Distance-based method

Degree-based method

Degree and distance-based
method
Degree and distance-based
method

Distance-based method
Degree-based method

In this paper, we used the status of the number of national AS announced by the
Korea Network Information Center (KRNIC) [11]. The yearly status of the number of
AS to Korea and the world is shown in Table 3. The actually used data in this
simulation is from January 1999 to May 2003.

An Evolution Process Model for the Internet Topology

1045

Table 3. AS number from 1999 to 2003
Year

Korea

World

AS

Growth rate

AS

Growth rate

1999

149

1.00

11,232

1.00

2000

300

2.01

15,710

1.39

2001

391

2.62

20,128

1.79

2002

433

2.90

23,822

2.12

2003

494

3.31

24,827

2.21

4.1 Evaluation Results
Unfortunately, we can show evaluation results to only the model A2 and the model B5
because of the limited paper space. Fig. 3 and Fig. 4 show graphs that the network
topology grows from 149 AS nodes to AS 494 nodes. Hence, to the network growth, the
power-law is examined by the growth characteristic of each topology, and results are
plotted on the Log-log scale. Fig. 3 is a result using the model (A2) without a node
deletion function.

Fig. 3. The network model (A2) : (a) Rank versus degree (b) Degree versus frequency and
(c) Rank versus eigenvalue

Fig. 4. The network model (B5) : (a) Rank versus degree (b) Degree versus frequency (c) Rank
versus eigenvalue

1046

S. Park, I. Cho, and B. Kim

Fig. 5. The predicted network model (B5) after 3 years: (a) Rank versus degree (b) Degree versus
frequency and (c) Rank versus eigenvalue

Fig. 6. A network topology example based on the model (B5): (a) core nodes (b) core nodes with
leaf nodes

In Fig. 3, three sub-graphs [(a), (b) and (c)] show that each result presents the
power-law property because A2 uses a node addition using a gradual increase method
and a link creation using the degree-based method. Each CC is -0.95, -0.95, -0.97. Here,
CC means the correlation coefficients between the network model and the power-law
property. Fig. 4 shows the result of using the model (B5) including a node deletion
function and the isolated node process. In Fig. 4, each CC is -0.96, -0.98 and -0.98. The
correlation coefficient for the model (B5) show better results of 0.01, 0.03, 0.01 than the
ones for the A2 model. Fig. 5 shows the prediction results to the model (B5) after 3
years. We determine the future node number by calculating the average value to all of
growth rates in Table 3. After 3 years, the correlation coefficient of B5 is -0.96, -0.98,
-0.98. The correlation coefficient of the model (B5) shows better results than that of the
model (A2) with 0.01, 0.03 and 0.02. Fig. 6 shows an example of the network topology
by the model (B5). The total number of AS node is 490. In Fig. 6(a), the core nodes are
firstly generated, and the leaf nodes having the low degree are secondly generated and
connected to the core nodes in Fig. 6(b). The proposed model in this paper deals not
only with the addition of nodes but it also applies to the node deletion. Hence, we can
show more elaborate network model for the Internet evolution.

An Evolution Process Model for the Internet Topology

1047

5 Conclusions
In this paper, we propose an Internet topology model reflects the status of changing
topologies caused by the creation and deletion of nodes. The model that we have
proposed with the function of node deletion reflects the real Internet topology modeling
better compared with current models that simply adds nodes. Furthermore, it shows that
the proposed model (B5) has better result values than the model (A2) for predicting the
Internet topology in the future. Therefore, the proposed model can better satisfy the
power-law that is the characteristic of the Internet compared with current models
without the deleting function. We hope the proposed network model that can apply to
the topology generator to implement the Internet protocol simulation.

References
1. Zegura, E.W., Calvert, K. L. and Donahoo, M. J., “A Quantitative Comparison of
Graph-based Model for Inter-networks,” IEEE/ACM Transactions, vol. 5, no. 6, pp.770-783,
December 1996.
2. Albert, K. L., Doar, M. B. and Zegura, E. W., "Modeling Internet Topology," IEEE
Communications Magazine, Vol. 35, No. 6, pp. 160-163, June 1997.
3. Barabasi, A. L. and Albert, R., "Emergence of Scaling in Random Network," Science, Vol.
286, pp. 509-512, October 1999.
4. Barabasi, A. L., Albert, R. and Jeong, Hawoong, "Scale-free Characteristics of Random
Networks: the Topology of the WWW," Physica A, Vol. 28, No. 1, pp. 69-77, 2000.
5. Chen, Q., Chang, H., Govindan, R., Jamin, S., Shenker, S. and Willinger, W., “The Origin of
Power Laws in Internet Topologies Revisited,” In Proceeedings of IEEE INFOCOM 2002,
Vol. 2, pp. 23-27, June 2002.
6. Faloutsos, M., Faloutsos, P. and Faloutso, C., "On Power-LawRelationships of the Internet
Topology," In Proceedings of ACM Computer Communication Review, pp. 251-261,
September 1999.
7. Jin, C., Chen, Q. and Jamin, S., "Inet: Internet Topology Generator," Technical Report
CSE-TR-433-00, University of Michigan at Ann Arbor, 2000.
8. Medina, A., Lakhina, A., Matta, I. and Byers, J., "BRITE: An Approach to Universal
Topology Generation," In Proceeding of MASCOTS 2001, pp. 346-353, August 2001.
9. Medina, A., Matta, I. and Byers, J., "On the Origin of Power Laws in Internet Topologies,"
Computer Communication Review, Vol. 30, No. 2, pp. 18-28, April 2000.
10. Waxman, B. M., "Routing of Multipoint Connections," IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communications, Vol. 6, No. 9, pp. 1617-1622, December 1998.
11. http://www.krnic.or.kr.

