Towards a Dynamic Data Driven System for
Structural and Material Health Monitoring
C. Farhat1 , J.G. Michopoulos2 , F.K. Chang1 , L.J. Guibas1 , and A.J. Lew1
1

Dpt. of Mechanical Engineering and Computer Science
Stanford University Stanford, CA 94305, U.S.A.
{cfarhat, fkchang, guibas, lewa}@stanford.edu
2
Special Projects Group, Code 6390.2
Center for Computational Material Science
Naval Research Laboratory, U.S.A.
john.michopoulos@nrl.navy.mil

Abstract. This paper outlines the initial motivations and implementation scope supporting a dynamic data driven application system for material and structural health monitoring as well as critical event prediction.
The dynamic data driven paradigm is exploited to promote application
advances, application measurement systems and methods, mathematical and statistical algorithms and ﬁnally systems software infrastructure
relevant to this eﬀort. These advances are intended to enable behavior
monitoring and prediction as well as critical event avoidance on multiple
time scales.

1

Introduction

During the last two decades, great strides have been achieved in many aspects
of computational sciences and engineering. Higher-ﬁdelity mathematical models, higher-order approximation methods, and faster solution algorithms have
been developed for many applications. Computing speed and networking communications barriers have also been shattered by hardware manufacturers. As a
result, the potential of modeling and simulation for reducing design-cycle time
and enhancing system performance is recognized today in almost every ﬁeld of
engineering. However, for many complex structural systems, even the most elaborate computational models remain bound to be imperfect for many reasons.
These include the limited means currently available for realistically modeling
a number of phenomena governing the behavior of the system of interest or
some of its components. They also include the fact that for most cases, stimulus conditions (initial, boundary, and loading) are typically acquired only after
the actual systems are placed in service. This hinders the potential of modeling and simulation, and forces designers to impose empirical safety factors for
allowable performance limits. This practice often leads to over-designed, ineﬃcient and expensive products that may be unsafe in the presence of unforeseen
critical conditions. The Dynamic Data Driven Application Systems (DDDAS)
paradigm is uniquely opportune for exploiting maturing computational and sensor networking technologies to compensate for model deﬁciencies and unforeseen
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part III, LNCS 3993, pp. 456–464, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

Towards a Dynamic Data Driven System

457

system evolution and stimulus conditions, mitigate the eﬀect of design imperfections on long-term as well as short-term system safety, and enable informed
decision for maintenance planning and crisis management.
Our overall goal is to enable and promote active health monitoring, failure
prediction, aging assessment, informed crisis management, and decision support
for complex and degrading structural engineering systems based on dynamicdata-driven approaches. The speciﬁc objectives are: (i) To investigate, design,
implement, illustrate and assess a DDDAS for health monitoring, failure prediction, and crisis management at various time-scales of degrading structural
systems. (2) To build a test-bed and exercise it to guide the development of the
desired DDDAS, and validate with experiments a representative set of its underlying approaches and methodologies. (iii) To exploit the above test-bed and
design a series of educational experiments that can serve as pillars for educational
exploitation of the DDDAS concept.
The research themes associated with these speciﬁc objectives are driven by the
following representative application scenarios: (S1) Apply the DDDAS concept
oﬀ-line to obtain material characterizations and construct an initial model of the
structural system of interest (S2) Exploit dynamic operational data to update
regularly, on-line, the current model. (S3) Apply the DDDAS concept to perform
on-line crisis management. (S4) Apply the DDDAS concept to assist oﬀ-line crisis
management and maintenance planning.
Our project will draw experiences and technologies from our previous eﬀorts
on a data-driven environment for multiphysics applications (DDEMA) [1].

2

Approach

Scenario S1 outlined above is representative of the problem of collecting and
exploiting data to develop a behavioral model for a system prior to its usage.
Scenarios S2 to S4 cover a time-scale that ranges from very short as in catastrophic failure induced (e.g. by ﬂutter manifesting in less than 2 seconds), to
very long as in a failure induced (e.g. by a slowly accumulating damage due to
cyclic load manifesting in months or years of platform operation).
Figure 1 captures the various application scenarios of the envisioned DDDAS
and displays a road map of the corresponding research activities as follows. Material characterization will provide behavior models to the damage detection
schemes (path 1); on-line processing and prognosis procedures will be updated
by sensor-originating dynamic data (path 2); in turn, these procedures will modify the damage detection schemes (path 3) which will either provide feedback
directly to the system if an imminent crisis is detected (path 4); otherwise,
they will update oﬀ-line high performance modeling and simulation procedures
and request long-term prognosis of slow evolving but accumulating damage
(path 5). This can then enable on-demand rather than routinely scheduled
maintenance.

458

C. Farhat et al.

Fig. 1. Data ﬂow within the main activities associated with our approach

2.1

Dynamic-Data-Driven Inverse Material State Characterization

An essential element of our approach is the data-driven computation of a constitutive theory/model that accounts for multiphysics loading conditions. This
approach consists of the following parts.
A. Mechatronicaly Automated Data Acquisition. Data-streams of experimentally controlled continuous system behavior in the form of stimulus-response
pairs of all observables will be generated. This will be done with the aid of an
extended multi-degree of freedom mechatronic loading systems [2, 3]. While the
system imposes preprogrammed displacement controlled loading paths to the
appropriated specimens, sensors measure both the controlled displacements and
rotations as well as the corresponding reaction forces and moments along with
the additional multi-ﬁeld state variables (i.e. temperature). These sensors generate the data-streams upon which all subsequent energy based evaluations are
made. Of particular interest to DDDAS in general, is the opportunity we have
to use our system in a manner which demonstrates that the modeled behavior
can be used to adjust an experimental procedure.
B. Inverse Modeling of Dissipative Behavior. Analytical representations will
be constructed such that they can accurately reproduce a subset of the acquired data via successive dynamic adaptation with the help of optimization
technology. This will be accomplished by the employment of an energy density
dissipation potential called dissipated energy density function (DEDF) that is
a function of the strain and temperature states of the material. Aerodynamically induced heat can further contribute to the damage behavior of aerospace
composite structures and therefore, the coupled inﬂuence of temperature with
mechanical deformations cannot be neglected any longer and will be integrated
in the formalism. The DEDF corresponds to the energy lost into the material

Towards a Dynamic Data Driven System

459

system for the creation of micro-cracking damage and therefore it represents
a scalar physical quantity associated with material health [2, 4, 5]. Its gradient
with respect to strains yields the corresponding constitutive relations that determine the stresses. An approximation of the DEDF for a material system will
be constructed as a sum of appropriately selected basis functions that depend
only on the local strain and temperature state of the material in the structure.
The coeﬃcients that are weighting these basis functions are the unknowns to be
determined with the aid of the experimental data. Minimizing the error between
the analytically computed dissipated energy and the experimentally measured
one by NRLs mechatronic systems reduces this problem to a data-driven inverse
global optimization problem with appropriate inequality constraints. Solving this
problem by any global optimization technique produces the sought-after coeﬃcients and ﬁxes the form of the DEDF.
C. Degrading Behavior Simulation. The derived constitutive models derived
will be utilized to simulate the response of any system that uses the characterized materials. To achieve this, the identiﬁed degrading behavior model will be
introduced into our AERO-S structural code [6, 7]. AERO-Ss separation of material and geometric encoding makes this eﬀort very feasible as we have already
demonstrated for single physics applications [2, 3, 4, 5].
D. On-line Extensions. The material characterization procedures described
above are essentially oﬀ-line activities. Online exploitation of damage accumulation models, damage tracking criteria and algorithms will also be developed
based on the amount and rate of dissipated energy in a fashion similar to the
one developed for metal fatigue.
2.2

Sensor Network Architectures and Protocols

Any prediction based on the approach outlined above depends, among others,
on the performance of the sensor network providing the data. In the context
of coupling the simulation of a structure to a sensor network monitoring the
structure, some problems take on a special signiﬁcance and need to be addressed.
On-line dynamic techniques that monitor the health of the routing infrastructure of the network, bypass failed areas, and always guarantee information delivery as long as the network remains connected will be investigated. We already
have developed distributed techniques for discovering failed areas, or “holes”, in
a sensor network and building routes around them [8].
Regarding the data integrity we intend to investigate how to tune sensor
misbehavior detection system, as too many false positives may remove valuable
sensor resources from the network, while too many false negatives may pollute
the data generated and veer the simulation oﬀ track. Unlike other sensor network
settings, the availability of a powerful simulator in our scenarios can greatly aid
the discovery and correction of node misbehavior.
Relative to the coupling between sensors and simulation technology, our goal
is to deﬁne a narrow interface between the sensor network and the simulator,
exploiting our knowledge of models of how the system should behave in order to
compress away predictable information and focus only on the deviations between

460

C. Farhat et al.

the simulation predictions and the actual readings. We are constrained by the
fact that the nodes have very limited computational power, so it is not possible
for them, individually or in groups, to run the full simulation model.
To achieve this goal, an approach where the simulation computes reducedorder models that are appropriate for making predictions over a certain time
period for small groups of collocated sensors (sensor clusters) will be followed.
These models are transmitted to the sensor clusters and then independently
checked by distributed regression within the cluster. No communication with the
base station is necessary as long as the local models ﬁt the data. The communication between the sensor network and the simulation is reduced to the periodic
transmission of reduced-order models from the simulation and of deviant sensor
readings from the nodes. Even if reduced-order models are diﬃcult to obtain for
some applications, general data aggregation and summarization techniques can
be exploited to the same eﬀect, though not with the same eﬃciency [9]. These
approaches can be used to deﬁne narrow interfaces between the simulation and
the sensor network and can form the basis of a software infrastructure that serves
well data-driven application systems.
2.3

Modeling Approaches and Solution Algorithms

The application problems targeted by this research eﬀort are not linear timeinvariant. Hence, constructing reduced order models (ROMs) can be challenging.
Some nonlinear model order reduction techniques have already been developed
and encountered some success. However, these techniques are in general either
applicable only to weakly nonlinear systems, or they are reliable only for input
signals close to the training input. Furthermore, they are not usually robust
with respect to large parameter changes, whether the parameter is geometrical,
material, or related to the surrounding of the structural system for example,
the Mach number of a cruising aerospace vehicle [10]. Reconstructing a ROM
each time a problem parameter is varied cannot be performed today anywhere
close to near real-time, and therefore defeats the purpose of using a ROM in
the ﬁrst place. Alternatively, a ROM can be rapidly adapted to a parameter
change. Previous approaches for adapting a proper orthogonal decomposition
(POD) basis to address a parameter variation include the global POD method
[11, 12] and the direct interpolation of the basis vectors [10] with poor results.
Two approaches for adapting a ROM will be investigated. The ﬁrst approach
aims at short time-response or on-line predictions where changes in the material
properties of the structure slightly before the onset of the short-term instability and a couple of seconds later can be neglected. The objective is to rapidly
adapt a ROM trained at a particular set of stimulus conditions to another set
of loading conditions. For such applications, a suitable combination of a sensitivity approach and the method of “subspace angle interpolation” [13] will be
investigated. We expect that the combination of this approach with sensitivity analysis and a precomputing strategy will lead to an eﬀective approach for
adapting in near-real-time a given ROM to changes in multiple parameters. The
second approach aims at oﬀ-line medium time-response problems where fast but

Towards a Dynamic Data Driven System

461

not necessarily near-real-time processing is required. It is based on the re-use of
Krylov subspaces for the solution of near-by problems [14].
We have recently developed a family of Parallel Implicit Time-integration Algorithms (PITAs) for accelerating the numerical processing of ROMs in order
to achieve near-real-time predictions [15, 16]. In [16], it was shown that for linear but otherwise complex structural dynamics problems, the latest PITAs can
converge in two to three iterations and speed-up the total processing of a ROM
by a factor equal to six using 25 processors. Hence, the objective of a PITA is
not to deliver a high parallel eﬃciency, but to reduce as much as possible the
CPU time of a problem that oﬀers little opportunities for parallelism. We are
attempting to extend the PITA methodology to nonlinear structural dynamics
problems. Furthermore, in order to get closer to near-real-time response, we are
also attempting to investigate two complementary approaches for improving the
CPU performance of the PITA methodology. The ﬁrst approach consists in investigating an alternative to propagating the jumps of the solution on the coarse
time-grid in order to reduce the computational overhead of this time-parallel
methodology. The second approach consists in exploiting the DDDAS context
and initializing the seed values of the solution by sensor-provided data.
2.4

Systems Software Technology

Figure 2 presents an abstract architecture that has both oﬀ-line and on-line
functionality and remains consistent with the tenets of our project. It consists
of the following main components: a sensor subsystem,a narrow interface between the sensor subsystem and the sensor data reduction and/or preparation
subsystem, a user interface, a full order model (FOM) solver with the ability to
construct ROMs, a ROM database, a ROM adaptor that composes appropriate
on-line models based on sensor inputs, and a behavior visualizer. This architecture is capable of addressing both the oﬀ-line and on-line modes of operations
as they were described earlier. In particular, the path deﬁned by the sequence

Fig. 2. Generic DDDAS architecture

462

C. Farhat et al.

[01,02,03,04]in Figure 2 can be executed oﬀ-line and can be used for computing and storing ROMs. Similarly, the path [05,06,07&09,08,04] can be used for
ROM-based and sensor-driven simulations for decision support. Finally, the path
[09,10,05] implements the model-based eﬀects on the sensor network. Some software components in this architecture will dynamically select and optimize their
distribution at run-time via mobile “middleware” as shown for DDEMA [1].
2.5

Test-Bed Article Integration and Demonstration

A general test-bed infrastructure of both wired and wireless sensor networks
will be selected for building the prototype in the study. For a wired network
system, the “SMART” layer approach [17] will be adopted. Passive sensors such
as strain and temp sensors will be embedded along with active piezoelectric
sensors/actuators into the layer. The layer will be customized ﬁt into the conﬁguration of the wing, which will be made of graphite epoxy prepreg commonly
used in aircraft structures. Sensor network strips will be embedded inside composites or mounted on the inner surface of the wing during curing process as
shown in Figure below so the composite and layer were integrated during the
fabrication.
For the study of short-term response, the composite wing will be subjected to
a foreign object impact by a hammer or a drop weight at the structures. Upon
impact, the same sensor networks will be activated automatically to characterize the impact event and determine if active sensing is needed to interrogate the
severity of the impact damage to create diagnostic images. The estimated damage image will be imported into a ﬁnite element simulation code to determine
the eﬀect of such damage on the residual strengths of the structure.
Finally, for the study of long-term time scale, the composite wing will be subjected to repetitive ﬂight conditions determined by repetitive combinations of
angle of attack and speed in order to induce and to assess the long-term degradation. Sensors will be reporting strains and temperature data for a multiple
missions over long period of time. Tracking of the strain-temperature condition
will be accomplished by appropriate database utilization along with corresponding dissipated energy density evaluations. After each emulated mission is completed, the ﬁnal distribution of dissipated energy density will be assessed and
used to derive the current softened distributions of the material properties (at
the areas where this is applicable), to be used as startup conditions for the next
emulated ﬂight. This process will be repeated for various emulated ﬂights and
the computed material softening distributions as a result of slowly accumulating
damage will be compared with the correlated values of damage index evaluated
from the short-term (or medium time) health monitoring technique that will be
employed.

3

Conclusions

In this paper, we have described an outline for the motivational drivers, some
technical issues and the approach for developing a DDDAS for material and

Towards a Dynamic Data Driven System

463

structural health monitoring along with critical event prediction across heterogeneous time-scales. Both the main research activities of the project and their
interrelationship as well as an abstract architecture of the system have been described. The general application area for such a system is the area of design and
maintenance of aerospace platforms.
Acknowledgement. The authors acknowledge the support by the National Science Foundation under grants EIA-0205663 and CNS-0540419. Partial support
from NRL’s 6.1 core-funding is also greatly acknowledged.

References
1. Michopoulos, J., Tsompanopoulou, P., Houstis, E., Farhat, C., Lesoinne, M., Rice,
J., Joshi, A., On a Data Driven Environment for Multiphysics Applications, Fut.
Generation Comp. Sys., 21(6), (2005), 953–968.
2. Mast, P. W., Michopoulos, J. G., Thomas, R. W., Badaliance, R., and Wolock I.,
Characterization of strain-induced damage in composites based on the dissipated
energy density: Part I - basic scheme and formulation. Int. Jnl. of Theor. and
Applied Fract. Mech., 22, (1995), 71-96.
3. Michopoulos, J., Mechatronically automated characterization of material constitutive respone. in: Proc. of the 6th World Congress on Computational Mechanics
(WCCM-VI), (2004), 486-491.
4. Michopoulos, J. G., Mast, P. W., Badaliance, R., and Wolock I., Health monitoring
of smart structures by the use of dissipated energy. in: Proc. 93 WAM on Adaptive
structures and material systems, G.P. Carman and E. Garcia, editors, ASME, vol.
ASME, AD-Vol 35, (1993), 457-462.
5. Factory, P. R., Health error prediction and sensor topology optimization on a smart
pressure vessel. In SPIE Proc. Smart Structures and Materials 1995, Industrial and
Commercial Applications of Smart Structures Technologies, volume SPIE 2447,
(1995), 155-166.
6. Geuzaine, P., Brown, G., and Farhat, C., Three-ﬁeld based nonlinear aeroelastic
simulation technology: Status and application to the ﬂutter analysis of an f-16
conﬁguration. in: Proc. of 40th Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, AIAA
Paper 2002-0870, (2002), 14-17.
7. Farhat, C., Geuzaine, P., and Brown G., Application of a three-ﬁeld nonlinear
ﬂuid-structure formulation to the prediction of the aeroelastic parameters of an
f-16 ﬁghter. Computer and Fluids, 32, (2003), 3-29.
8. Fang, Q., Gao, J., and Guibas, L., Locating and bypassing routing holes in sensor
networks. in 23rd Conference of the IEEE Communications Society, (2004).
9. Shrivastava, N., Buragohain, C., Agrawal, D.,and Suri, S., Medians and beyond:
new aggregation techniques for sensor networks. in Proc. ACM Conf. on Embedded
Networked Sensor Systems, (2004), 239-249.
10. Lieu, T., and Lesoinne, M., Parameter adaptation of reduced order models for
three-dimensional ﬂutter analysis. Number AIAA Paper 2004–0888, (2004).
11. Taylor J., and Glauser, M., Towards practical ﬂow sensing and control via pod and
lse based low-dimensional tools, in Proc. of ASME Fluids Engineering Division
Summer Meeting, FEDSM2002-31416, Canada, (2002).
12. R. Schmidt and M. Glauser. Improvements in low dimensional tools for ﬂowstructure interaction problems: using global pod. Number AIAA Paper 2004–0889,
(2004).

464

C. Farhat et al.

13. Lieu, T., Farhat, C., and Lesoinne, M., Pod-based aeroelastic analysis of
a complete f-16 conﬁguration: Rom adaptation and demonstration. In 46th
AIAA/ASME/ASCE/AHS/ASC Structures, Structural Dynamics & Materials
Conf., AIAA Paper No. 2005–2295.
14. C. Farhat, K. Pierson, and M. Lesoinne. The second generation of feti methods
and their application to the parallel solution of large-scale linear and geometrically
nonlinear structural analysis problems. Comp. Meth. in Appl. Mech. and Engng.,
184:333-374, (2000).
15. Farhat, C., and Chandesris, M., Time-decomposed parallel time-integrators: Theoryand feasibility studies for ﬂuid, structure, and ﬂuid-structure applications. Inernational Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 58, (2003), 13971434.
16. Cortial J., and Farhat, C. A time-parallel implicit methodology for the near-realtime solution of systems of linear oscillators. (in press).
17. Ihn, J. B.. and Chang, F.K., A smart patch for monitoring crack growth in metallic
structures underneath bonded composite repair patches, in: Proc. of the American
Society for Composites 17th Tech. Conf., Purdue University, (2002).

