An Approach for Enriching Information for Supporting
Collaborative e-Work
Obinna Anya, Atulya Nagar, and Hissam Tawfik
Intelligent and Distributed Systems Lab, Deanery of Business and Computer Sciences,
Liverpool Hope University, Liverpool, United Kingdom L16 9JD
{05008721,nagara,tawfikh}@hope.ac.uk

Abstract. As a result of the high level of knowledge required in collaborative eWork as well as its changing work contexts, e-Work support systems need to
provide not only information in the form of documents and articles, but also expert-level explanations in the form of supporting literature and references to
theories and related cases, to justify retrieved information and offer cognitive
support to e-Work. In this paper, we present a novel approach for enriching information for supporting collaborative e-Work, which combines latent semantic
analysis, domain task modelling and conceptual learning. We illustrate the potential of our approach using our e-Workbench system. e-Workbench is a prototype system for adaptive collaborative e-Work.
Keywords: Collaborative e-Work, information enrichment, concept-based
knowledge acquisition, cognitive support.

1 Introduction
Collaborative e-Work is highly knowledge-intensive, and involves experts, often,
with different knowledge backgrounds and from different work organisations who
share knowledge in order to arrive at an optimal decision or problem-solving strategy
[2], [9]. Such work activity requires both documented and experience-based knowledge. As a result, collaborative e-Work support systems need to provide not only information in the form of documents and articles, but also expert-level explanations in
the form of supporting literature and references to theories and related cases to justify
retrieved information and offer cognitive support to augment workers' ideas.
Different techniques have been proposed in advanced information processing, the
semantic Web and knowledge management, towards information enrichment. In machine learning, natural language processing and information retrieval, various techniques have been combined in efforts to identify features for indexing information
resources. A number of these methods employ shallow statistical inferences that do
not typically result in knowledge-rich representations. Techniques in natural language
processing have been explored but their huge reliance on grammar makes them less
attractive, especially in domains where problem-solving methodologies have not recorded using strict grammatical structure [3]. Within the Semantic Web community,
the use of metadata annotations, such as tagging [4] has proved immensely popular as
a technique for enriching information resources, but its employment of domain experts makes it less cost-effective.
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2008, Part III, LNCS 5103, pp. 419–428, 2008.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

420

O. Anya, A. Nagar, and H. Tawfik

This paper presents a novel approach for enriching information for supporting collaborative e-Work, which combines latent semantic analysis (LSA), domain task
modelling (DTM) and conceptual learning. The focus is to enable the work environment to acquire sufficient knowledge of a work domain in terms of key terms and
concepts within the domain and their relationships, (previous) cases, as well as possible tasks and task goals in order to provide expert-level explanations to justify retrieved information resources and offer cognitive support to augment workers' ideas.
We illustrate the potential of our approach using e-Workbench [5].

2 Related Work
A number of researches have been carried in areas, such as advanced information
processing, computer supported cooperative work and group decision making, knowledge management and the semantic Web, towards information enrichment for various
purposes. Feng et al. [1] proposed a model of an information space, consisting of
knowledge and document subspaces, to enable the acquisition of knowledge from
digital libraries. The authors noted that two shortcomings in the effort towards satisfying man’s information needs to support decision making are inadequate strategic level
cognition support and inadequate knowledge sharing facilities. Ackerman [8] presented the Answer Garden, which is aimed to achieve knowledge acquisition in two
intertwined ways – by making relevant information retrievable and by making people
with knowledge accessible. The issue of common understanding in collaborative decision making is addressed in [7] through argumentative discourse and collaboration.
Evangelou et al. [6] presented an approach for supporting knowledge-based collaborative decision making, which aims at developing knowledge management services for
the capturing of organisational knowledge in order to augment teamwork, and thus
enhance decision making quality.
An underlying goal of most of these efforts is to analyse information and/or integrate multiple knowledge resources so as to derive a semantic relationship among the
basic concepts. The novelty in our approach lies in the ability to employ an integrated
approach aimed to enable a work support system to acquire sufficient knowledge of a
work domain in order to cognitively provide expert-level explanations to justify the
use of an information resource.

3 e-Workbench Overview
We developed e-Workbench in [5], a prototype intelligent system aimed to equip future collaborative workspaces to adapt to work, and creatively support problem solving and decision making by leveraging on distributed knowledge resources in order to
proactively augment workers’ capabilities. The ultimate goal is to enable the work
environment to become not only a workspace, but also ‘a co-worker’ and ‘a collaborator’ as a result of its knowledge of work and creative participation in problem solving and decision making.
We use a semi-automated approach in enabling e-Workbench to acquire knowledge of work and appropriately understand the users’ domain of work. This involves:

An Approach for Enriching Information for Supporting Collaborative e-Work

421

(1) ‘Training’ e-Workbench to learn about key concepts and threads of ideal problem
solving strategies within the domain of work. (2) Generating knowledge element
models (KEMs) of the domain based on a DTM as well as cases and tasks that constitute best problem solving strategies. With the knowledge acquired during training and
the KEMs generated, e-Workbench is able to retrieve appropriate information to assist
in decision making and provide justifications for e-workers’ views. Fig. 1 depicts an
overview of the e-Workbench approach.
Other
e-workers

Information Agents &
Knowledge Aggregators

CoP

www
OrganisationSpecific Ontologies

e-worker

Organisation-Specific
Ontologies

1 Make
Input

Changing
Contexts
4, 7 Problem
Solving &
Decision Making

5 Pose, Route
and Retrieve
Question

e-Workbench
Engine

3 Learn
about work

6 Update
Knowledge
base

2 Build Model of Work

Database
Best Evidence
Literature

Case-base

Project-Specific Ontologies

Domain
Task
Model
(DTM) &
Ontology
Definitions
- consist of
Concepts,
Task goals,
Rules,
KEMs, etc.

Knowledge-base

Fig. 1. The e-Workbench Approach

4 Information Enrichment Approach
Our approach to information enrichment for supporting collaborative e-Work involves
the following processes:
− Posing a question to a knowledge expert or an information retrieval agent such as
a search engine, and obtaining retrieved results.
− Selecting the most appropriate result(s) based on domain expert knowledge.
− Using LSA to infer deeper meanings from the selected documents.
− Using DTM, conceptual learning and project-specific ontologies to construct concept structures, relevant cases and KEMs based on work context tree (WCT) in order to acquire contextual knowledge about work.

422

O. Anya, A. Nagar, and H. Tawfik

− Mapping the knowledge extracted to the meanings inferred from the selected
documents in order to conceptually enrich retrieved information.
During collaborative problem solving and decision making, information is usually
retrieved when a user poses a question to a knowledge expert or a search engine in
order to resolve an exception. Our experience in developing e-Workbench, however,
shows that this process of enriching the retrieved information cannot be completely
automated particularly with regard to e-Work because of its rapidly changing work
contexts and the likely use of loosely coupled teams from multiple domains of expertise. As a result, we use a semi-automatic approach, which is described as follows, to
achieve this.
4.1 Query Analysis
A search query is manually elaborated by a domain expert in order to accentuate relevant terms and domain concepts that relate to the query. The elaboration process
involves (1) extracting representative terms, which are likely to contain domain
knowledge and which actually contain the expected results from a given query, and
(2) incorporating relevant terms that may not appear in the query, but could be used to
capture key concepts and domain rules within the domain. The extracted and incorporated terms are used to build an accentuated matrix of key terms/concepts used during
the LSA-based indexing process (see sec. 4.4). During the elaboration process, terms
with different names across different sub-domains, e.g. civil engineering, building site
and estate development, which semantically refer to the same object, are identified.
We refer to such terms as synonyms. On the other hand, terms, which we refer to as
polysemys that have different shades of meaning across sub-domains, are equally
identified. Our elaboration approach enables us to solve the problem of the apparent
inability of Web users to formulate effective search queries that accurately reflect
their information needs [10], which thus poses the challenge of finding the optimum
search word size of a query that will give the most effective search result. Our technique is to identify the key terms within a search query, or that are related to a search
query, their synonyms and polysemys, accentuate those terms within the query, and
relate them to the concept and context of work for effective knowledge support. The
accentuated terms from the search query may also be used as subsequent queries.
Based on our conceptual query analysis, each term is related to a domain concept, and
relevant documents selected from the retrieved query results.
4.2 Conceptual Learning
Using a conceptual learning mechanism [11], e-Workbench is trained on the domain
of work. The goal of conceptual learning is to enable the system to build a “knowledge space” for understanding relevant concepts, principles and facts within the identified domain(s), and a “conceptual space” for inferring relationships among them.
This forms the semantic memory [12] of e-Workbench, which allows it to build the

An Approach for Enriching Information for Supporting Collaborative e-Work

423

cognitive capabilities required for accurate perception of concepts (and objects)
within the domain of work. In intelligent systems, perception is accomplished by the
ability of a system to recognise and analyse features of concepts (and objects), which
it encounters (and interacts with). For a given search query, we identify two levels of
concepts: the high level composite concept and the low level primitive concept. Using
simple mapping rules, we denote these generically, and using an example from the
domain of civil construction, as:
<composite concept>::=<composite concept> | <primitive concept>
<primitive concept>::=<feature> | … | <feature>
<civil engineering>::=<building site>|<road construction>
<building site>::=<engineer>|<hoarding>|<concrete>|<scaffolding>|< crane>
<hoarding> ::= <is-a-fence>|<is-temporary>|
<screens-off-a-building-site>|<serves-to-discourage-theft>
where ::= denotes a classification or mapping rule, and | denotes a semantic operator.
A feature is a psychological representation of properties of the world that can be
processed independently of other properties and that are relevant to a task, such as
categorisation, in collaborative e-Work. They are identified by their functional role in
cognitive processing, such as the act of including (or excluding) an entity as a member of a category [13]. We represent a feature as a 2-tuple:
feature (V, T)
where V is a set of properties of a feature and T, a set of types for corresponding
properties. V ≠ φ ; T ≠ φ .
The next stage of our conceptual learning technique consists of building the episodic memory [12] of e-Workbench. Episodic memory is used for storing events
(within collaborative e-Work) having features of a particular time and space, and for
storing episodes and traces of learning – about skills, problem solving strategies and
processes, decision making procedures, contextual use of information resources – that
occur within relevant cases through case-based reasoning. Episodic memory is associative in nature and content-addressable [12]. As a result, it could be used to appropriately hold episodic information about a case in collaborative e-work by storing
tasks based on concept as well as context, storing logical associations between tasks,
specifying appropriate action plans and storing dynamic references to information
resources. In e-Workbench, this memory is populated with cases, which are, in turn,
composed of conceptually categorised tasks. A case and a task are both represented as
a 3-tuple entity as follows:
case (P, A, S)
task (C, R, E)
where P is the problem (or case) description, which includes the initial problem state,
relevant concepts and their feature values, a description of problem execution context
and possible actors (people and virtual roles), one or more tasks and their (sub)goals
as well as associated action plans or behaviour streams required to achieve those
goals; A is an action plan or behaviour stream whose execution transforms the problem from the problem state to a goal state; and S is the expected result when A is

424

O. Anya, A. Nagar, and H. Tawfik

applied to P. C is the case under which the task is valid or, at least, applicable, R is the
set of resources required to perform the task, and E is the set of operations of corresponding resources.
4.3 Domain Task Modelling
The domain concepts related to the given search query are manually analysed using
WCT [5]. The goal is to filter out, from the DTM, possible motives of a worker’s actions and ideas, and correlate them conceptually based work goal. To achieve this, we
analyse the given e-Work project in terms of the domain(s), existing knowledge,
given terms of reference, previous cases and possible tasks and task goals. The work
context tree enables us to generate semantically rich service descriptions used to
meaningfully encapsulate ideas and knowledge resources within an e-Work task
structure. We refer to these semantic rich service descriptions as KEMs. We use a
KEM to refer to concept knowledge, which could be described by an information resource (i.e., an entity that has identity, for example, given by a URI) that is capable of
supplying coherent statements of facts, empirical results, reasoned decisions or ideas
(i.e., data, information, processes), which can be applied to justify the use of retrieved
information in collaborative problem solving and decision making, to corroborate or
refute a worker’s view or to build new knowledge.
Fig. 2 shows a WCT. The root, KW, of the top-down tree is the given e-Work project or problem of interest. The root node contains three items: the domain ontology,
D, which provides domain permissible procedures, rules and conceptual information
relevant to KW, existing knowledge, K and work goal, G. K comprises theories, stories, hypotheses, philosophies, assertions, rules, metaphors and initial work input, in
the form of terms of references, relevant to KW. G is the expected result of work. The
next level consists of a set of nodes that describes cases within the KW. Each case
node contains two items: the work, KW (as defined in the root node) and the case
context, CC. CC comprises goals, motives, conditions and information that pertain to
the case. The third level consists of nodes that describe tasks in the KW. Each task
node consists of three items: the next upper level case node, Cx (1 ≤ x ≤ n) , the task
context, CT and the task goal, O. The fourth level (the leaves) consists of the KEMs.
A KEM has four items: the next upper level task, Tx (1 ≤ x ≤ n) , a knowledge descriptor, S, the role, R, the effect, E and N, the referred cognitive node(s). The knowledge descriptor provides metadata descriptions about the KEM. R is the action performed or knowledge supplied by KEM, while E is the expected change brought
about by R in Tx. N refers to the node(s) in a knowledge network that possibly has (or
have) the resource (information, service or human expertise) required to perform Tx,
or augment the process of performing Tx or taking a decision towards performing Tx.
N could be Web resources, denoted by a URL, non-Web resources, e.g. a book, human agents, such as an expert in the given domain of work or non-human agents, such
as knowledge repositories, Web sites, content and referral databases, avatars, and
“webbots” [14] that have additional information with which to support retrieved information. The three nodes provide three cognitive planes, with which to analyse
work at the domain, conceptual and task levels.

An Approach for Enriching Information for Supporting Collaborative e-Work

425

Domain Model
KW
[D, K, G]

Conceptual
Decomposition

Concept Level
C2
[KW, CC]

C1
[KW, CC]

Task Level

T2 _ _ _
[C2, CT, O]

T1
[C2, CT, O]

KEM1
[T2, S, R, E, N]

___

___
KEM2
[T2, S, R, E, N]

Cn
[KW, CC]

Functional
Decomposition

Tn
[C2, CT, O]

Contextual
Decomposition

KEMn
[T2, S, R, E, N]

Fig. 2. Work Context Tree for Generating Knowledge Element Models

4.4 Latent Semantic Analysis
We use LSA [15] to infer deeper meanings and relations from the words, phrases and
sentences in an elaborated search query, and associate those meanings to the documents retrieved. Using LSA, we aim to enable the system to predict what terms “actually” are implied by a query or apply to a retrieved document. Table 1 shows four
documents D1, D2, D3 and D4, which are the selected results from the query: importance of hoarding materials. Key terms from the elaborated search query are shown
on the first row of the table. The key concept being considered is building construction, and is represented in the table by p. The context of work, q, is described by the
phrase “a building construction site”.
From the table, the user would have considered documents 2, 3 and 4 relevant (column R). Document 2 contains words within the context of work, while document 3
contains a key word, but relates to neither the underlying concept nor the context of
work. Document 1, though not considered relevant by the user, matches the query
because it relates to the underlying concept, while document 4 matches the query because it relates to both the concept and context of work.
Table 1. Sample Term by Document Matrix

D1
D2
D3
D4

hoarding
*
*
*

building
*

*

material

board

fence

*

*

*

*

p
*

*

q

R

*

*
*
*

*

M
*

*

426

O. Anya, A. Nagar, and H. Tawfik

LSA uses the technique of singular value decomposition in which a rectangular
matrix, A of terms by documents, m x n, is decomposed into a product of three other
matrices from which the original matrix can be approximated by linear combination,
as denoted by eqn. 1:
A(mxn) = TO(mxm) SO(mxn) DO(nxn)΄ .

(1)

such that TO represents the term matrix, DO΄ represents the document matrix, and SO,
a diagonal matrix containing singular values arranged in descending order. Our goal is
to capture the significance of every term in the query to the underlying concept of
work. As shown in fig. 3, the g highest singular values identify the g most importance
concepts in TO, which is represented by a T(mxg) matrix. The weights in S(gxg) reflect
the importance of concepts in T(mxg). Multiplying T(mxg) by S(gxg) results in the accentuation of the entries (concepts) in T(mxg).

g

g

Documents

g

g

Terms

=

A(mxn)

TO(mxm)

SO(mxn)

DO’(mxn)

Fig. 3. Singular Value Decomposition of a Term by Document Matrix

4.5 Enriching Retrieved Information
Fig. 4 shows our model for mapping extracted concepts to acquired knowledge in
order to enrich retrieved information for supporting collaborative e-Work. The model
consists of a knowledge space (KS), an information space (IS) and a cognition support area (CS). A retrieved information resource is analysed (see sec. 4.1) and input
into the knowledge space, and KEMs are generated from it based on fig. 2. KS contains the DTM for the given e-Work project, ontology definitions and work goal as
well as concept models, cases and possible tasks and task goals. In e-Workbench,
ontologies are defined based on the combined ontologies and knowledge structure of
all organisations participating in the given e-Work project as well as the DTM of the
e-Work project (see fig. 1). Within the IS, users and agents search for relevant documents using the generated KEMs and key terms as search guide. From the generated
KEMs, a KEM is selected. Work context information is applied to it; and best evidence literature information, used to enrich it to provide justifications for retrieved
resources. Concepts and deeper meanings are extracted from the retrieved documents
(see sec. 4.2 – sec. 4.4) to provide explanations and enhance their information base.
Finally cognition support (expert-level knowledge) is provided in the CS in the form
of rich information (i.e. enhanced retrieved document + supporting explanations and
justifications.

An Approach for Enriching Information for Supporting Collaborative e-Work
Knowledge
Space

Information
Space
Document Search

DTM, Ontology
& Work
Concept/Goal

Cognition
Support
Retrieved
Document

Concepts Models

Case-base (c1, c2, …, cn)

Has
Information
on M1

Tasks (T1, T2, …, Tn)

Get Knowledge from Retrieved
Documents as a KEI

Has
Information
on c3, T1

M2

M1
Information
Resource, X

427

Intelligent Answer
(Information +
Supporting
Explanation and
Justification =
Knowledge)

Extract
Document
Concept

KEMs

Relate to Concept
and Apply Work
Context
Information

Get Best Evidence
Literature (from
Knowledge
Networks)

Compare X with
Existing
Ideas/Suggestions and
address any
Discrepancies

Determine the Best
Suggestion/Problem
Solving Strategy based
on Contextual
Relevance Scaling

Information/Idea Enrichment Process

Fig. 4. Information Enrichment Framework

5 Conclusion and Future Work
This paper presents an approach for enriching information for supporting collaborative e-Work, which combines LSA, DTM and conceptual learning. The focus is to
enable the work environment to acquire knowledge of the domain of work in terms of
key terms and concepts within the domain and their relationships to previous cases, as
well as possible tasks and task goals in order to provide expert-level explanations to
justify retrieved information resources, and offer cognitive support to augment workers' ideas. Our future work will focus on developing mechanisms to keep track of the
changing work contexts in collaborative e-Work so as to ensure that enriched information resources are effectively used to cognitively support decision making and
problem solving.

References
1. Feng, L., Jeusfeld, M., Hoppenbrouwers, J.: Beyond Information Searching and Browsing:
Acquiring Knowledge from Digital Libraries. INFOLAB Technical Report ITRS-008, Tilburg University, The Netherands (February 2001)
2. Nof, S.: Design of Effective e-Work: Review of Models, Tools, and Emerging Challenges.
Production Planning and Control 14(8), 681–703 (2003)
3. Asiimwe, S., Craw, S., Wiratunga, Taylor, B.: Automatically Acquiring Structured Case
Representations: Smart Way. In: Ellis et al. (eds.) Applications & Innovations in Intelligent Systems XV, pp. 45–58. Springer, London (2007)

428

O. Anya, A. Nagar, and H. Tawfik

4. Tanasescu, V., Streibel, O.: Extreme Tagging: Emergent Semantics through the Tagging
of Tags. In: Proc. of the Int.l Workshop on Emergent Semantics & Ontology Evolution,
ISWC/ASWC 2007, Busan, S Korea (2007)
5. Anya, O., Nagar, A., Tawfik, H.: A Conceptual Design of an Adaptive and Collaborative
e-Work Environment. In: Proc. of the 1st Asian Modelling Symposium, Asia 2007, Thailand, March 27-30 (2007)
6. Evangelou, C., Karacapilidis, N., Tzagarakis, M.: On the Development of Knowledge
Management Services for Collaborative Decision Making. Journal of Computers 1(6), 19–
28 (2006)
7. Karacapilidis, N., Papadias, D.: Computer-Supported Argumentation and Collaborative
Decision Making: The Hermes System. Information Systems 26(4), 259-277(19) (2001)
8. Ackerman, M.: Augmenting the Organizational Memory: A Field Study of Answer Garden. In: Proc of the ACM Conf on Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW 1994),
October 22-26,1994, pp. 243–252. ACM, Chapel Hill, NC (1994)
9. Experts Group: New Collaborative Working Environments 2020, EUROPEAN COMMISSION Information Society Directorate-General, Report of the Experts Group on Collaboration @ Work, Brussels (February 2006)
10. Smyth, B.: Adventure in Personalised Web Search. In: proc of 27th SGAI Int’l Conf on
Innovative Techniques and Applications of AI, Cambridge, December 12-14 (2007)
11. Wiig, E., Wiig, K.: On Conceptual Learning, Knowledge Research Institute, Inc. Working
Paper 1999-1 (1999)
12. Ramamurthy, U., D’Mello, S., Franklin, S.: Modified Sparse Distributed Memory as Transient Episodic Memory for Cognitive Software Agents. In: IEEE Int’l Conf on Systems,
Man and Cybernetics, vol. 6, pp. 5858–5863 (October 2004)
13. Rogosky, B., Goldstone, R.: Adaptation of Perceptual and Semantic Features. In: Carlson,
L., van der Zee (eds.) Functional Features in Language and space: Insights from perception, categorisation and development, pp. 257–273. Oxford University Press, Oxford
(2005)
14. Carley, K.: Smart agents and organizations of the future. In: Lievrouw, L., Livingstone, S.
(eds.) Handbook of new media, pp. 206–220. Sage, London (2002)
15. Deerwester, S., Dumais, S., Furnas, G., Landauer, T., Harshman, R.: Indexing by latent
semantic analysis. Journal of the American Society for Information Science 41(6), 391–
407 (1990)

