Computational Modelling of Pulsating Biological
Flow
X.S. Yang, R.W. Lewis, and H. Zhang
Civil and Computational Engineering Centre, School of Engineering,
University of Wales Swansea, Swansea SA2 8PP, UK x.s.yang@swansea.ac.uk

Abstract. Computational modelling of biological ﬂow can have many
in medicine and biomechanical engineering. Stenosis of blood vessels is
the main cause of vascular disease. A mathematical model of pulsating
ﬂow through stenotic blood vessels has been formulated. The numerical
simulations using ﬁnite element analysis show that the axial velocity
proﬁle is controlled by the shape of the stenotic plagues and the pulsating pressure gradient. Instability due to the vessel narrowing is closely
related non-uniform stress distribution. In addition, the peak value of
the shear stress may directly aﬀect the degree and location of the rupture.
Keywords: Biological ﬂow, ﬁnite element analysis, stenosis.

1

Introduction

Vascular disease is mainly caused by the stenosis of fatty plaque deposition and
vessel narrowing. As the plaque slowly enlarges, it will cause a signiﬁcant pressure gradient across the aﬀected region, which may lead to the rupture of the
blood vessels. The common clinical observations suggest that the atheromatous
disease arise mainly at the bifurcation of arteries. The beneﬁt of modelling this
phenomena is obviously profound both in clinical treatment and biomedical research [1,2,5,6]. However, most models describing these phenomena only produce
some basic features which are far from reality.
This paper aims at using the ﬁnite element method to simulate the ﬂow
velocity proﬁles for diﬀerent shapes of stenotic plague and the possible rupture
and patterns under the conditions of pulsating blood ﬂow. The simulation of
axial velocity distribution for regular arterial structure show that the rupture
is controlled by the shape of the stenotic plaque, the pressure gradient and the
amplitude of the pulsating ﬂow. This can form the basis for further research.
The implication of the simulation results will also be discussed.

2

Governing Equations

The Navier-Stokes equations for incompressible ﬂow can be written as [3,6]:
∇ · u = 0,

ρ[

∂u
+ (u · ∇)u] = µ∇2 u − ∇p,
∂t

M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3037, pp. 622–625, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

(1)

Computational Modelling of Pulsating Biological Flow

623

where µ and ρ are the viscosity and density of the ﬂuid. u = (U, V, W ) and p
are ﬂow velocity and pressure of the ﬂuid, respectively. As the blood ﬂow is slow
and viscous, so the equations for viscous ﬂow become
∇ · u = 0,

ρ

∂u
= µ∇2 u − ∇p.
∂t

(2)

In terms of the cylindrical coordinates (r, θ, z), the axial velocity W (r, z, t) and
1) in
the radial velocity U (r, z, t), the nonlinear terms are negligible (W ∂W
∂z
the case of the slow ﬂow in a tube where the axial ﬂow is dominant (i.e., U
W ). The governing equation for the axial ﬂow can be written in the cylindrical
coordinates as
1 ∂ ∂W
∂p
∂W
=µ
(r
)−
ρ
.
(3)
∂t
r ∂r ∂r
∂z
This problem involves a moving or free boundary at r = R(z, t). To simplify
and convert the free boundary problem into a ﬁxed-domain problem, we deﬁne
a reduced radial coordinate ξ = r/R(z, t), now equation (3) becomes
ρ

1 ∂2W
∂p
ρξ ∂R ∂W
∂W
∂W
1
= µ[ 2
]−
+
.
+
∂t
R ∂ξ 2
ξR(z, t)2 ∂ξ
∂z
R(z, t) ∂t ∂ξ

(4)

The boundary conditions then become
∂W
= 0,
∂ξ

at ξ = 0,

W(ξ, z, t) = 0,

at ξ = 1.

(5)

It is clearly seen that this problem has been simpliﬁed as the one-dimensional
ﬂow problem if the pressure gradient is prescribed. Most earlier studies [1,2,6]
∂p
assume the following form ∂p
∂z = A cos(ωt) + γ,
∂r = 0, where γ is the
background pressure gradient. In fact, we can assume any known function form
for the pressure gradient in terms of a Fourier expansion.

3

Finite Element Formulation

From the implementation point of view, the continuity equation can be approximated by a penalty function as ∇ · u = −λ−1 p or p = −λ∇ · u where λ → ∞.
For numerical purpose, λ
1 is a large number [3,6]. We now have a general
form
Mu˙ = λGu + Ku + g,
(6)
where M = Ω ρNi Nj dΩ is the mass matrix, K = Ω ∇Ni µ∇Nj dΩ is the stiﬀness matrix, G is the penalty term, and g is the term due to body force and
natural boundary conditions. If λ → ∞, the requirement Gu → 0 leads to the
trivial solution u = 0 if G is nonsingular. To obtain the nontrivial solution,
this implies that G must be singular. The singularity of G can be fulﬁlled by
the reduced integration for the λ-term with a Gauss-Legendre rule of one-order
lower than normal rules [3,4,7].

624

X.S. Yang, R.W. Lewis, and H. Zhang

The nonlinear ﬁnite element equation can be solved using the time-stepping
and iteration technique. Once the ﬂow velocity u has been computed at a time
level, the pressure p = −λ∇ · u can be obtained using the smoothing technique
for the ﬂux calculation.

4

Simulations and Results

By using the ﬁnite element method in the previous section, the ﬂow proﬁles are
simulated for a given pulse. We will ﬁrst focus on the axial velocity distribution,
then calculate the mean shear stress at vessel walls and blood ﬂux variation.
4.1

Axial Velocity Distribution

The velocity proﬁles for diﬀerent stenotic shapes at the peak systole are shown
in Figure 1. The left ﬁgure is the ﬂow distribution through a tube where there
is essentially no stenosis, and thus the velocity is in fact paraboloid. The middle
proﬁle is irregular stenosis leading to the distorted velocity proﬁle. The velocity
proﬁle on the right is the regular stenosis on the hexagonal shape, and its velocity
distribution is correspondingly modulated by the stenosis.

Fig. 1. Velocity proﬁle for diﬀerent stenotic shapes at the peak systole. The ﬂow velocities are normalized so that W = 0 at ξ = 1 and W = 1 at ξ = 0.

From these velocity proﬁles, we can see that the velocity proﬁle is controlled
by the shape of the stenosis and thus the blood ﬂux is subsequently aﬀect the
degree of the stenosis.
4.2

Shear Stress and Rupture Prediction

For a given pulse, one can calculate the wall shear stress and ﬂux variation with
time after the peak R-wave of the given pulse. The mean shear stress variation
and blood ﬂux variation with time. The characteristics of the computed the
shear stress variation is consistent with the experimental results by Oyre et al
[6]. It is worth pointing out that there exists a peak for shear stress for a given

Computational Modelling of Pulsating Biological Flow

625

pulsating pressure gradient, and thus the peak shear stress could directly aﬀect
the rupture of the stenotic plagues.
Mechanism of rupture of the stenotic plagues is complicated. Generally speaking, the stenosis weakens the lumen of the blood vessel, and thus the rupture
could occur if the local shear stress reach to certain value or the yield stress.
For a given level of yield stress, the level of shear stress is directly related to
the possibility of the rupture. Since the wall shear stress varies with time after
the peak R-wave, the peak stress determine the rupture, thus may explain why
sudden increase of pulsating pressure could lead to the rupture of weak blood
vessels especially near the branch bifurcations.

5

Discussion

A mathematical model of pulsating ﬂow through stenotic blood vessels has been
formulated, and the ﬁnite element method has been implemented after transforming the free boundary problem into a ﬁxed domain problem. Numerical
simulations show that the axial velocity proﬁle is controlled by the shapes of the
stenotic plagues and pulsating pressure gradient. For a ﬁxed pressure gradient,
the velocity proﬁle is distorted by the stenosis.
For a pulsating pressure gradient, the wall shear stress varies with time. It
ﬁrst increases sharply to a peak short after the peak pressure is reached, then it
decreases nearly exponentially to a background value. The blood ﬂux also shows
the similar characteristics. Thus, the peak value of the shear stress may directly
aﬀect the possibility and location of the rupture.

References
1. Berbich L, Bensalah A, Flaud P and Benkirane, R., Nonlinear analysis of the arterial
pulsatile ﬂow: assessment of a model allowing a noninvasive ultrasonic functional
exploration, Medical Engineering, 23, 175-183 (2001).
2. Chakravarty, S and Mandal P K, Mathematical modelling of blood ﬂow through an
overlapping arterial stenosis, Math. Comput. Modelling,19, 59-70 (1994).
3. Langtangen, H P, Computational Partial Diﬀerential Equations: Numerical Methods
and Diﬀpack Programming, Springer, 1999.
4. Lewis R W and Schreﬂer B A,The ﬁnite element method in the static and dynamics
deformation and consolidation of porous media, 2nd Ed., John Wiley & Son, England
(1998).
5. Moore J A, Steinman D A, Ethier C R, Computational blood ﬂow modelling: Errors associated with reconstructing ﬁnite element models from magnetic resonance
images, J. Biomechanics, 31, 179-184 (1998).
6. Oyre S, Ringgaard S, Kozerke, S, Paaske, W, Erlandsen, M, Boesiger, P, and Pedersen, E., Accurate noninvasive quantitation of blood ﬂow, cross-sectional lumen vessel
area and wall shear stress by three-dimensional paraboloid modelling of magnetic
resonance imaging velocity dat, JACC, 32, 128-134 (1998).
7. Zienkiewicz O C and Taylor R L, The Finite Element Method, vol. I/II, McGrawHill, 4th Edition, 1991.

