Eﬃcient and Practical Algorithms for Deducing
the History of Recombination in Populations
(Keynote Talk Abstract)
Dan Gusﬁeld
University of California, Davis
gusfield@cs.ucdavis.edu

A phylogenetic network (or Ancestral Recombination Graph) is a generalization
of a tree, allowing structural properties that are not tree-like. With the growth
of genomic and population data, much of which does not ﬁt ideal tree models,
and the increasing appreciation of the genomic role of such phenomena as recombination (crossing-over and gene-conversion), recurrent and back mutation,
horizontal gene transfer, and mobile genetic elements, there is greater need to
understand the algorithmics and combinatorics of phylogenetic networks.
In this talk I will survey a range of our recent results on phylogenetic networks with recombination, and show applications of these results to association
mapping; ﬁnding recombination hotspots in genotype sequences; imputing the
values of missing haplotype data; determining the extent of recombination in the
evolution of LPL sequences; distinguishing the role of crossing-over from geneconversion in Arabidopsis; and characterizing some aspects of the haplotypes
produced by the program PHASE.
I will discuss the fundamental problem of constructing a phylogenetic network
for a given set of binary (SNP) sequences derived from a known or unknown ancestral sequence, when each site in the sequence can mutate at most once in
the network (the inﬁnite sites model in population genetics), but recombination
between sequences is allowed. The goal is to ﬁnd a phylogenetic network that generates the given set of sequences, minimizing the number of recombination events
used in the network. When all the “recombination cycles” are disjoint (which is
likely with low recombination rates), we have developed eﬃcient provably correct
algorithms that ﬁnd a network minimizing the number of recombinations, and
have proven that the optimal solution is “essentially unique”. I will also mention
a network decomposition theory that shows the extent that these results can
be generalized to arbitrary networks. For general phylogenetic networks (when
the cycles are not constrained) we have developed algorithms that are eﬃcient
in practice and that empirically obtain close upper and lower bounds on the
number of recombinations needed. In real data and simulations, these practical
(heuristic) computations often produce bounds that match, demonstrating that
a minimum recombination solution has been found. In small-size data we can
guarantee that an optimal solution will been found by running an exponentialtime algorithm to completion. For small-size data, we can also (provably) sample
uniformly from the set of optimal solutions, and can also determine the phase of
genotypic data so as to minimize the number of recombinations needed to derive
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part II, LNCS 3992, pp. 618–619, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

Eﬃcient and Practical Algorithms

619

the resulting haplotypes. More recently, we have extended the lower and upper
bound algorithms to incorporate gene-conversion as an allowed operation. Those
new algorithms allow us to investigate and distinguish the role of gene-conversion
from single-crossover recombination.
Various parts of this work are joint work with Satish Eddhu, Chuck Langley,
Dean Hickerson, Yun Song, Yufeng Wu, V. Bansal, and Zhihong Ding. Support for this work was provided by NSF grant IIS-0513910. All the papers and
associated software can be accesses at wwwcsif/cs.ucdavis.edu/˜ gusﬁeld.

References
1. Gusﬁeld, D., Eddhu, S., Langley, C.: Optimal, eﬃcient reconstruction of phylogenetic networks with constrained recombination. Journal of Bioinformatics and
Computational Biology 2(1) (2004) 173–213
2. Gusﬁeld, D., Eddhu, S., Langley, C.: The ﬁne structure of galls in phylogenetic
networks. INFORMS J. on Computing, Special issue on Computational Biology
16(4) (2004) 459–469
3. Gusﬁeld, D.: Optimal, eﬃcient reconstruction of root-unknown phylogenetic networks with constrained recombination. J. Computer and Systems Sciences, Special
issue on Computational Biology 70 (2005) 381–398
4. Gusﬁeld, D., Bansal, V.: A fundamental decomposition theory for phylogenetic networks and incompatible characters. In: Proc. 9th Annual International Conference
on Computational Biology. Volume 3500 of Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics. (2005)
217–232
5. Gusﬁeld, D., Hickerson, D., Eddhu, S.: A fundamental, eﬃciently computed lower
bound on the number of recombinations needed in a phylogenetic history. Discrete
Applied Math, Special issue on Computational Biology (to appear)
6. Song, Y., Wu, Y., Gusﬁeld, D.: Eﬃcient computation of close lower and upper
bounds on the minimum number of needed recombinations in the evolution of biological sequences. Bioinformatics 21(Supplement 1, Proceedings of the ISMB 2005
Conference) (2005) 413–422
7. Song, Y., Gusﬁeld, D., Ding, Z., Langley, C., Wu, Y.: Algorithms to distinguish
the role of gene-conversion from single-crossover recombination in the derivation of
snp sequences in populations. In: Proc. 10th Annual International Conference on
Computational Biology. Volume 3909 of Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics. (2006)
231–245 (to appear)

