Multi-scale Simulations of Gas Flows with Unified
Flow Solver
V.V. Aristov1, A.A. Frolova1, S.A. Zabelok1,
V.I. Kolobov2, and R.R. Arslanbekov2
1

Dorodnicyn Computing Center of the Russian Academy of Sciences
Vavilova str., 40, 119991, Moscow, Russia
{aristov,afrol,serge}@ccas.ru
2
CFD Research Corporation, 215 Wynn Drive,
Huntsville, AL , 35803, USA
{vik,rra}@cfdrc.com

Abstract. The Boltzmann kinetic equation links micro- and macroscale
descriptions of gases. This paper describes multi-scale simulations of gas flows
using a Unified Flow Solver (UFS) based on the Boltzmann equation. A direct
Boltzmann solver is used for microscopic simulations of the rarefied parts of
the flows, whereas kinetic CFD solvers are used for the continuum parts of the
flows. The UFS employs an adaptive mesh and algorithm refinement procedure
for automatic decomposition of computational domain into kinetic and
continuum parts. The paper presents examples of flow problems for different
Knudsen and Mach numbers and describes future directions for the
development of UFS technology.
Keywords: Boltzmann equation, Rarefied Gas Dynamics, direct Boltzmann
solver, kinetic CFD scheme, multiscale flows, adaptive mesh.

1 Introduction
The Boltzmann kinetic equation is a fundamental physical tool, which links two levels
of description of gases. The first one is the microscopic level at atomistic scale and
the second one is the macroscopic level at continuum scale. The kinetic equation
takes into account interactions among gas particles under the molecular chaos
assumption to describe phenomena on the scale of the mean free path. In principle,
the Boltzmann equation can also describe macroscopic phenomena, but its usage at
the macroscopic scale becomes prohibitory expensive and not necessary. The
continuum equations (Euler or Navier-Stokes) derived from the Boltzmann equations
can be used at this scale. The present paper describes mathematical methods, which
allow one to fully realize this property of the Boltzmann equation. The Unified Flow
Solver (UFS) is a variant of hybrid methods for simulation of complex gas (or maybe
liquid) flows in the presence of multiscale phenomena including nonequilibrium and
nonlinear processes. The UFS methodology combines direct numerical solution of the
Boltzmann equation with the kinetic schemes (asymptotic case of the direct methods
of solving the Boltzmann equation), which approximate the Euler or Navier-Stokes
(NS) equations.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part I, LNCS 4487, pp. 850 – 857, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Multi-scale Simulations of Gas Flows with Unified Flow Solver

851

The development of hybrid solvers combining kinetic and continuum models has been
an important area of research over the last decade (see Ref. [1] for review). Most
researchers applied traditional DSMC methods for rarefied domains and identified
statistical noise inherent to the particle methods as an obstacle for coupling kinetic and
continuum solvers [2]. The UFS combines direct Boltzmann solver [3,4] with kinetic
CFD schemes to facilitate coupling kinetic and continuum models based on continuity of
half-fluxes at the boundaries [5]. The UFS uses Cartesian grid in physical space, which is
generated automatically around objects embedded in computational domain. A
continuum solver is running first and the computational grid in physical space is
dynamically adapted to the solution. Kinetic domains are identified using continuum
breakdown criteria, and the Boltzmann solver replaces the continuum solver where
necessary. The Boltzmann solver uses Cartesian mesh in velocity space and employs
efficient conservative methods of calculating the collision integral developed by
Tcheremissine [6]. The parallel version of the UFS enforces dynamic load balance
among processors. Domain decomposition among processors is performed using spacefilling curves (SFC) with different weights assigned to kinetic and continuum cells
depending on CPU time required for performing computations in the cell [7].
This paper presents illustrative examples of UFS applications for supersonic and
subsonic problems and outlines directions for future development of UFS
methodology for simulating complex multi-scale flows.

2 Examples of Multi-scale Simulations with UFS
The UFS has already been demonstrated for a variety of steady-state laminar flows
with different Knudsen and Mach numbers [5]. In this Section, we present some
examples to illustrate important features of the UFS.
2.1 High Speed Flows
A comparison of UFS results with available experimental data for supersonic flows of
single component atomic gases was performed for a 1D shock wave structure and 2D
flow around a circular cylinder [5]. Here we show some new results for hypersonic
flows and extensions for gas mixtures. Figure 1 shows an example of 2D solutions by

Fig. 1. Axial velocity for OREX at M=27, Kn=0.1 (on the left). Gas pressure for a prism at
M=18, Kn=0.25 (on the right).

852

V.V. Aristov et al.

the kinetic Navier-Stokes solver for the Orbital Reentry Experiment [9] (left) and
flow around a prism (right). Kinetic scheme for the NS equation is derived from the
Boltzmann equation as described in [8, 5]
Figure 2 illustrates interaction of supersonic jets of two gases with different
masses. The kinetic Euler solver for gas mixtures is based on the model of Ref. [10].
Two free jets at Mach number M=3 are considered with the ratio of inlet pressure to
bulk pressure of 10, and the mass ratio of 2. The distributions of gas density and
longitudinal velocity are shown in Fig. 2 for a steady state. An asymmetry with
respect to y=0 can be explained by the different masses of molecules in the top and
below jets.
3.5

1.1
0.08

0.08
1

0.06

0.06

0.9

0.04

0.8

0.04

0.02

0.7

0.02

0

0.6

-0.02

0.5

3

r (cm)

r (cm)

2.5

2

0
-0.02

1.5

0.4

-0.04

-0.04
0.3

-0.06

1

-0.06
0.2

-0.08
0.1
0

0.05
x (cm)

0.1

0.15

-0.08
0.5
0

0.05
x (cm)

0.1

0.15

Fig. 2. Density (left) and longitudinal velocity (right) for a steady regime

The UFS is currently being enhanced with non-equilibrium chemistry (based on
the model kinetic equation by Spiga & Groppi [11]) coupled to radiation transport and
plasma capabilities. This will bring the fidelity of modeling high speed flows of
molecular gases to a next level and enable accurate prediction of aerothermal
environment around trans-atmospheric vehicles.
2.2 Low Speed Flows
There is a class of low-speed continuum flows, which are not described by the
traditional NS equations [12]. The Ghost and non-NS effects present themselves in
well-known classical fluid problems such as Benard and Taylor-Couette problems.
These effects can have important practical implications for low-pressure industrial
processing reactors [13]. The statistical DSMC methods are not well suited for
simulation of low speed problems, especially for studies of instabilities and transient
effects due to large statistical noise.
Figure 3 illustrates a low-speed flow induced by temperature gradients between
two non-uniformly heated plates. This flow is absent according to the traditional NS
equations with slip boundary conditions. Both the direct Boltzmann solver and the
kinetic NS solver produce correct physical picture of the flow shown in Fig. 3. The
temperature T of surfaces goes from 1.7 to 1 (hot bottom and cold top), bottom is
symmetry, top and left boundaries have T=1.

Multi-scale Simulations of Gas Flows with Unified Flow Solver

853

Fig. 3. Temperature driven vortex: temperature and velocity fields for three values of Knudsen
numbers (Kn=0.01, 0.07, 0.3 from left to right). Kinetic and continuum zones are shown in the
middle Figure corner: dark – continuum, grey – kinetic zones.

The UFS has been used for simulations of gas flows in micro-channels and
nozzles. We have recently confirmed the Knudsen minimum in the dependence of the
mass flow rate on Knudsen number for a 2D isothermal flow in a channel using the
Bolzmann solver with hard sphere molecules.

3 Future Directions
The Boltzmann kinetic equation provides an appropriate physical and mathematical
apparatus for description of gas flows in different regimes. The UFS approach can
serve the instrument for practical simulations of complex multi-scale flows including
unstable and turbulent regimes. For small Kn numbers (large Re numbers) the kinetic
Euler solver can be used for both laminar flows and unstable coherent large-scale
structures. For smaller scales, we can select NS solver or kinetic solver according to
specific criteria. In any case we assume that the kinetic solver can adequately describe
micro scales for unstable and turbulent flows (but can be very expensive
computationally).
From the kinetic point of view, the transition to unstable turbulent regimes can be
treated as appearance of virtual structures in phase space with different scales in
physical and velocity spaces. Strong deviations from equilibrium in velocity space
can explain rapid growth of dissipation in turbulent flows. The applicability of NS
equations in these regimes and the necessity to replace the reological linear model by
more complex nonlinear models remain discussion topics [14]. The kinetic
description is expected to describe correctly all flow properties at microscopic level
since the smallest vortices of turbulent flows remain of the order of 100 mean free
paths. The unstable flows already analyzed with the Boltzmann equation [15-17]
required sufficiently fine velocity grid, but the spatial and temporal scales remained
macroscopic, although smaller than for the laminar flows. For some parameters
(frequencies of chaotic pulsations and the density amplitude) there was agreement
with the experimental data for a free supersonic jet flows and computations from
[15-17, 3]. The capabilities of the kinetic approach have been confirmed in
independent investigations of different unstable and turbulent gas flows by the DSMC
schemes [18, 19] and by the BGK equation [20].

854

V.V. Aristov et al.

3.1 Instabilities
3D solutions of the Boltzmann equation for two Kn numbers for stable and unstable
regimes are shown in Fig. 4 for a free underexpanded supersonic jet flow. The gas
flows from left to right through a circular orifice, the Mach number at the orifice is
M=1. The pressure ratio of flowing gas (to the left from the orifice) to the gas at rest
(to the right from the orifice p0/p1=10. One can see in Fig. 4 that for the large
Reynolds number (small Knudsen number) the gas flow is unstable. The mechanism
of this instability is connected with the appearance of so-called Taylor-Gertler
vortices. The Boltzmann equation has been solved by the direct conservative method
with the spatial steps larger than the mean free path. The calculated system of vortices
has been observed in experiments [21], and the kinetic simulations reproduced the
experimentally observed macroscopic structures.
d

c oscoc s uc u es.

Fig. 4. Velocity fields in cross-sections for 5 values of x-coordinates. There is no vorticity in
the plot for the larger Knudsen number, - a). Pairs of the longitudinal vortices are shown - б). A
quarter for each cross section is depicted.

3.2 Multi-scale Simulation of Turbulent Flows
Modern approach to simulation of turbulent flows uses Euler, NS and Boltzmann
models for different parts of the flows [22]. The Euler models are used for large-scale
structures, whereas kinetic models are used for small-scale stochastic background.
The Boltzmann equation for the velocity distribution of gas particles is used for
compressive gas flows. For liquids, there is no universal kinetic equation for the
probability density of instant flow velocity. Often, kinetic equation for turbulent
background is used in the form resembling Boltzmann transport equation for gases.
The UFS can serve a useful tool for the first principle simulations of turbulent gas
flows. The macro-scale eddies can be described by the Euler or NS equations and the
Boltzmann solver used for micro-scale phenomena. For liquids, semi-empirical

Multi-scale Simulations of Gas Flows with Unified Flow Solver

855

kinetic equations of the Onufriev-Lundgren type could be used at the micro-scale.
Molecular dynamic simulations can help justify and improve these equations for
liquids. Additional research is needed to understand how to properly expand the UFS
methodology for complex turbulent flows. The macro-scale coherent structures of
turbulent flows can be well described by the Euler or NS equations. Fig. 5 shows an
example of 2D UFS simulations (here the kinetic NS solver is used) of unstable
phenomena appeared in the wake behind a prism at M=3, Kn=10-5 for the angle of
attack of 3 degrees.

Fig. 5. Instantaneous Mach number (left) in a range 9 10-3 <M <5 and temperature (right) in a
range 0.4 <T< 4.14 for a gas flow around a prism

3.3 Multiscale Flow Structures in Open Systems
The UFS can be extended for multi-scale analysis of chemical and biological
structures. An important kinetic model of such problems is the nonuniform relaxation
problem [23,3]. Very interesting physical effects have been observed in such systems,
e.g. the heat flux has the same sign as the temperature gradient. This model could
describe properties of complex natural objects [24]. Biological structures are open
flux systems, which often possess two key processes: convection and chemical
reactions. The scales of these processes are different: reactions are usually slower than
advection. The analysis of 1D nonuniform relaxation problem for monatomic onecomponent gas has shown that nonequilibrium in velocity space is “projected” onto
physical space and results in spatial structures. A generalization for mixtures showed
[25] that it is possible to change the character of the spatial structures by changing the
nonequilibrium distribution functions for gas components at the boundaries.

4 Conclusion
We have described a Unified Flow Solver for simulations of complex multi-scale gas
(and possibly liquid) flows in different regimes. We considered some examples of
supersonic and subsonic flows including unstable complex regimes for which the UFS
and its components show reliable results. Perspectives of future development of the
UFS methodology have been outlined. New approach to some important problems,
such as non-uniform nonequilibrium structures for complex flows in open systems has
been discussed.

856

V.V. Aristov et al.

Acknowledgments. This work is partially supported by the Program N15 of the
Presidium of the Russian Academy of Sciences and by the US Air Force SBIR Project
F33615-03-M-3326.

References
1. Kolobov, V.I, Bayyuk, S.A., Arslanbekov, R.R., Aristov, V.V., Frolova, A.A., Zabelok,
S.A.: Construction of a Unified Continuum/Kinetic Solver for Aerodynamic Problems.
AIAA Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets 42, (2005) 598-605
2. Carlson, H.A., Roveda, R., Boyd, I.D., Candler, G.A.: A Hybrid CFD-DSMC Method of
Modeling Continuum-Rarefied Flows. AIAA Paper 2004-1180 (2004)
3. Aristov, V.V.: Direct Methods for Solving the Boltzmann Equation and Study of NonEquilibrium Flows. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht (2001)
4. Tcheremissine, F.G.: Direct Numerical Solution of the Boltzmann Equation In:
M.Capitelli (ed.): Rarefied Gas Dynamics. AIP Conference Proceedings, Vol. 762.
Melville. New York (2005) 677-685
5. Kolobov, V.I., Arslanbekov, R.R., Aristov, V.V., Frolova, A.A., Zabelok, S.A.: Unified
Solver for Rarefied and Continuum Flows with Adaptive Mesh and Algorithm
Refinement, J. Comput. Phys. (2006), doi:10.1016/j.jcp.2006.09.021
6. Tcheremissine, F.G.: Solution of the Boltzmann Kinetic Equation for High-Speed Flows.
Comp. Math. Math. Phys. 46 (2006) 315-327
7. Zabelok, S.A. et al.: Parallel Implementation of the Unified Flow Solver, 25th Intern Symp.
on Rarefied Gas Dynamics. Book of Abstracts. St. Petersburg (2006) 62
8. Li, O., Fu, S., Xu, K.: A Compressible Navier-Stokes Flow Solver with Scalar Transport.
J. Comput.Phys. 204 (2005) 692-709
9. Moss, J.N., Gupta, R.N., Price, J.M.: DSMC Simulations of OREX Entry Conditions. In:
Shen, C. (ed.): Rarefied Gas Dynamics. Peking University Press, Peking (1997) 459-464
10. Andries, P., Aoki, K., Perthame, B.: J. Stat. Phys. 106 (2002) 993-1018.
11. Groppi, M., Spiga, G. A BGK Model for a Mixture of Chemically Reacting Gases. In:
M.Capitelli (ed.): Rarefied Gas Dynamics. AIP Conference Proceedings, Vol. 762.
Melville. New York (2005) 842-847
12. Sone, Y.: Molecular Gas Dynamics. Birkhauser, Boston (2007)
13. Arslanbekov, R.R., Kolobov, V.I.: Simulation of Low Pressure Plasma Processing
Reactors: Kinetics of Electrons and Neutrals, 25th Intern. Symp. Rarefied Gas Dynamics.
Book of Abstracts. St. Petersburg, (2006) 63
14. Astarita, J., Maruchhi, L.: Basis of Hydromechanics of Non-newtonian Fluids. Mir,
Moscow (1978)
15. Aristov, V.V.: Numerical Analysis of Free Jets at Small Knudsen Numbers.: In: Harvey,
J., Lord, G. (eds.): Rarefied Gas Dynamics. Oxford University Press, Oxford, Vol.2.
(1995) 1293-1299
16. Aristov, V.V.: Stability and Instability Analysis of Free Jets Based on the Boltzmann
Equation. Fluid. Dynam. 33 (1998) 280-283
17. Aristov, V.V.: Solving the Boltzmann Equation at Small Knudsen Numbers.: Comp. Math.
Math. Phys. 44 (2004) 1069-1081
18. Cercignani, C., Stefanov, S.: Vorticities and Turbulence in Hypersonic Rarefied Flows. In:
Harvey, J., Lord, G. (eds.): Rarefied Gas Dynamics. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
Vol.2. (1995) 1147-1153

Multi-scale Simulations of Gas Flows with Unified Flow Solver

857

19. Bird, G.A. The Initiation of Centrifugal Instabilities in an Axially Symmetric Flow. In:
Shen, C. (ed.): Rarefied Gas Dynamics. Peking University Press, Peking (1997) 149-154
20. Sakurai, A., Takayama, S.: Vorticity and Shock Wave in a Compressible Turbulent Flow
of Complanar Kinetic Gas Model. In: Shen, C. (ed.): Rarefied Gas Dynamics. Peking
University Press, Peking (1997) 291-296
21. Arnette, S.A., Samimy, M., Elliot, G.S.: On Streamwise Vortices in High Reynolds
Number Supersonic Axisymmetric Jets. Phys. Fluids. A 5 (1993) 187-202
22. Belotserkovskii, O.M., Oparin, A.M., Chechetkin, V.M.: Turbulence: New Approaches.
Cambridge International Science Publishing, Boston (2005)
23. Aristov, V.V.: A Steady State, Supersonic Flow Solution of the Boltzmann Equation.
Phys. Letters A. 250 (1998) 354-359
24. Aristov, V.V.: Dissipative Structures Describing by the Boltzmann Equation and
Relaxation Model Kinetic Equation. In: Topics in Biomathematics. World Scientific,
Singapore (1993) 109-112
25. Aristov, V.V.: Nonuniform Relaxation Problem for Mixtures and Effects of Anomalous
Heat Transfer. In: M.Capitelli (ed.): Rarefied Gas Dynamics. AIP Conference
Proceedings, Vol. 762. Melville. New York (2005) 288-293

