A Generic Multi-scale Modeling Framework for
Reactive Observing Systems: An Overview
Leana Golubchik, David Caron, Abhimanyu Das, Amit Dhariwal,
Ramesh Govindan, David Kempe, Carl Oberg, Abhishek Sharma,
Beth Stauﬀer, Gaurav Sukhatme, and Bin Zhang
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089
leana@cs.usc.edu
Abstract. Observing systems facilitate scientiﬁc studies by instrumenting the real world and collecting corresponding measurements, with the
aim of detecting and tracking phenomena of interest. A wide range of
critical environmental monitoring objectives in resource management,
environmental protection, and public health all require distributed observing systems. The goal of such systems is to help scientists verify
or falsify hypotheses with useful samples taken by the stationary and
mobile units, as well as to analyze data autonomously to discover interesting trends or alarming conditions. In our project, we focus on a class
of observing systems which are embedded into the environment, consist
of stationary and mobile sensors, and react to collected observations by
reconﬁguring the system and adapting which observations are collected
next. In this paper, we give an overview of our project in the context of
a marine biology application.

1

Introduction

Observing systems facilitate scientiﬁc studies by instrumenting the real world
and collecting corresponding measurements, with the aim of detecting and tracking phenomena of interest. In our project, we focus on a class of observing systems which are (1) embedded into the environment, (2) consist of stationary and
mobile sensors, and (3) react to collected observations by reconﬁguring the system and adapting which observations are collected next. We refer to these as
Reactive Observing Systems (ROS). The goal of ROS is to help scientists verify
or falsify hypotheses with useful samples taken by the stationary and mobile
units, as well as to analyze data autonomously to discover interesting trends or
alarming conditions.
We explore ROS in the context of a marine biology application, where the
system monitors, e.g., water temperature and light as well as concentrations
of micro-organisms and algae in a body of water. Using a hybrid network of
This research has been funded by the NSF DDDAS 0540420 grant. It has also been
funded in part by the NSF Center for Embedded Networked Sensing Cooperative
Agreement CCR-0120778, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Grant NA05NOS47812228, and the NSF EIA-0121141 grant.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part III, LNCS 3993, pp. 514–521, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

A Generic Multi-scale Modeling Framework for ROS: An Overview

515

stationary and mobile sensors, communicating both via wired and wireless links,
the system collects ﬁne-grained measurements of interesting information in near
real-time. An example use of such a system is the rapid identiﬁcation of microorganisms to predict the onset of algal blooms. Such blooms can have devastating
economic consequences, as recently seen in [4].
However, current technology (and any realistic prediction of technologies in the
near future) precludes sampling all possibly relevant data. For instance, bandwidth limitations between the stationary sensors make it impossible to collect all
of the sensed data. Similarly, time and storage capacity constraints for the mobile
entities severely curtail the number and locations of samples they can take.
To make good use of the limited resources, we need to develop a framework
for ROS capable of optimizing and controlling the set of samples to be taken at
any given time, taking into consideration the application’s objectives and system resource constraints. To support such an optimization and control process,
a signiﬁcant part of the framework must be dedicated to the development of
models of data, and their automatic validation1 or adaptation. As part of the
validation and adaptation process, the framework must also include a distributed
support mechanism for locating data of interest. We refer to this framework as
AMBROSia (Autonomous Model-Based Reactive Observing System).
We seek to develop AMBROSia as a multi-scale modeling framework for
ROS. AMBROSia allows applications to construct inter-related models of varying spatio-temporal scope based on collected data. Guided by the models, the
reactive elements of the system predict where interesting data and phenomena
are likely to be found. In the process of constructing models, the system actively
seeks most useful data to improve both, the models and phenomenon detection
and tracking. In a feedback cycle, this data acquisition is guided by previous,
perhaps less precise, models. Thus, AMBROSia enables optimal collection of
measurements in a manner that respects system resource constraints, yet improves the overall ﬁdelity of phenomenon detection and tracking.
The system we propose to develop is targeted at the marine application outlined above, and described in more detail below. However, we believe that many
of the components we develop, as well as the general AMBROSia framework,
may be quite useful in other settings.

2

Monitoring Marine Ecosystems

A wide range of critical environmental monitoring objectives in resource management, environmental protection, and public health all require distributed observing systems. Here we focus primarily on a marine biology application. Our
application’s primary long term scientiﬁc goal is to understand, and ultimately
predict, the conditions under which speciﬁc populations of marine microorganisms develop in nature. A fundamental requirement for attaining this objective is
the correlation of environmental conditions with microorganismal abundances at
1

By validation we mean a process of verifying the accuracy of models, based on
collected data, and subsequent discarding or updating/adaptation of those models.

516

L. Golubchik et al.

the small spatial and temporal scales that are relevant to the organisms. This is
not possible with current technology and methodological approaches. Sampling
the environment with high resolution and identifying microorganisms in situ in
near-real time will constitute a revolutionary advance in the study of the ecology of marine microbial species. In addition, the rapid identiﬁcation of aquatic
microorganisms will be extremely valuable for the early detection of harmful
organisms and the mitigation of their eﬀects on the environment and the human
population.
Marine microorganisms such as viruses, bacteria, microalgae, and protozoa
have a major impact on the ecology of the coastal ocean. For example, blooms
of harmful and/or toxic algae (e.g., red, brown and green tides) in aquatic ecosystems have increased dramatically on a global scale in recent years [1, 2]. These
events result in the loss of human life each year, and economic losses in the billions of dollars due to eﬀects on ﬁsheries and tourism. Likewise, the increasing
encroachment of humans along coasts has resulted in the recognition of potential
public health issues as a consequence of the introduction of pathogenic microorganisms into these waters from land runoﬀ, storm drains and sewage outﬂow.
Similar concerns exist regarding the potential for contamination of drinking water supplies with harmful, pathogenic or nuisance microbial species. Today, the
environmental factors that stimulate the growth of such microorganisms are still
poorly understood, and tests for their abundances are not suﬃciently rapid to
detect the onset of major outbreaks.
We now give a brief illustration of the types of hypotheses which are of interest,
i.e., this serves as an example of a potential AMBROSia application. Of course,
our goal is not to evaluate these speciﬁc hypotheses, but rather to design and
build a system capable of aiding scientists in the evaluation of hypotheses.
A popular hypothesis to explain accumulations of harmful microalgae near the
shore (resulting in ‘red’ tides) includes the release of cysts from the sediments,
growth in the water column, and then accumulation near shore as a result of
favorable weather conditions. Thus, [6] suggests that a combination of winds —
speciﬁcally wind speed, direction and duration that result in transport of the
population towards the coast — may lead to red tides along the coast. Alternate theories posit the importance of upwelling events (the movement of deep
water and nutrients contained in deep water into surface waters) or the breaking of internal waves that propagate along subsurface density discontinuities, as
contributors to these coastal phenomena.
The Need for a Hybrid Sensing Approach. In tracking the phenomena
described above, we encounter the challenge that the relevant locations can not
be predicted at deployment time, and indeed, the phenomena themselves migrate
over time. At the same time, the application requires prediction and sampling in
near real-time. Neither of the traditional approaches for studying spatiotemporal
phenomena can adequately deal with both these challenges. Statically deployed
sensor networks may not have sensors in the most relevant locations at a given
time (and an excessively high sensor density is likely to disturb the phenomenon).

A Generic Multi-scale Modeling Framework for ROS: An Overview

517

On the other hand, a system consisting purely of mobile sensor nodes tends to
be too slow in tracking the phenomenon, in particular over a large area.
We therefore propose a hybrid approach, combining a larger number of static
sensors with a few mobile sensing robots. The static sensors will be able to
monitor basic attributes in near-real time, and infer potentially interesting undersampled locations. These can then be sampled more densely by the mobile
sensors. In addition, the mobile entities will be able to collect samples for oﬄine
evaluation by human experts in a laboratory. This allows the system to track
attributes for which no autonomous sensing devices have been devised yet.

3

Reactive Observing System

We have constructed a suite of ten sensing/sampling nodes for deployment in
natural aquatic ecosystems. The system consists of ten stationary ‘nodes’ that
sense pertinent environmental characteristics, collate those measurements into
a 2/3-D picture of the ecosystem, and guide a small autonomous surface vehicle
to desired sampling locations to retrieve samples. Figure 1 shows (from left
to right) the sampling system, the robotic boat, one buoy, and the electronics
chassis that mounts inside the buoy. The sampling system is a six-port device
custom built for this project. A 36-port version has been designed and is being
tested. The prototype boat is a modiﬁed RC airboat, equipped with a Garmin
GPS and compass for navigation. All modules and sensors have been integrated
and connected to the main boat processor board. The main board on both the
buoys and the boat is an Intel Stargate. A peripheral basic stamp module is
used as the sensor interface. The current sensor suite on each buoy consists
of an array of thermistors for sampling temperature at diﬀerent depths and a
ﬂuorometer that can measure the concentration of chlorophyll-a (an indicator of
phytoplankton abundance). Communication is based on AODV over an 802.11b
wireless connection. Moreover, a land-based weather station will be constructed
and integrated into the network to provide pertinent meteorological information
for data interpretation.
A sample of the data collected by the experimental setup shown in Figure 1
is depicted in Figure 2. This ﬁgure plots the spatial patterns of chlorophyll and
temperature in Lake Fulmor at James Reserve, California.
While our current experimental system is on the scale of 10s of stationary
nodes, and only one boat, we envisage that as the technology becomes more

Fig. 1. Experimental Setup

518

L. Golubchik et al.

Fig. 2. Empirical Data from Lake Fulmor, James Reserve

commonplace and aﬀordable, the scale of the system will grow signiﬁcantly, and
may eventually monitor large coastal expanses with 100s or 1000s of nodes and
10s of boats. Hence, AMBROSia will be designed to scale gracefully to this size.
Similarly, at the moment, many attributes of interest require analysis of samples in a laboratory, conducted by an expert biologist. However, we anticipate
that as analysis technology improves, the system will increasingly be able to determine quantities of interest autonomously. Hence, our system design will allow
for the easy inclusion of additional attributes.

4

High-Level View of Our Approach

Figure 3 gives a schematic view of AMBROSia. At the core of AMBROSia is a
component for the construction, selection, and adaptation of models. Based on
the chosen models, a separate unit optimizes future samples and controls their
Sampled
Data

verifies
hypotheses
updates
model

chooses

influences
decisions
selects
Models

stores/queries
instances

Application
what to sample?

sampling decisions sensor control info
Sampling Optimization and Control
what models/correlations?
models/correlations
Model Construction, Selection, Adaptation
where are the right models?
model location info
Model Lookup Substrate

Fig. 3. System Overview

A Generic Multi-scale Modeling Framework for ROS: An Overview

519

acquisition. The results of these samples in turn aﬀect the decisions of the modeling unit, thus constituting a strong feedback loop in the system. Sampling and
control are of course also inﬂuenced directly by the requirements of the application, and samples are frequently collected for application-speciﬁc purposes, e.g.,
for scientists to act on. In order to make good decisions about model updates,
the model construction unit also requires access to data and ﬁne-grained models
stored at individual nodes. In order to ﬁnd the relevant data, it relies on a model
lookup substrate.
Models. At a basic level, a “measurement model” is a representation of a sequence of measurements taken by a sensor. These measurements are sampling
some phenomenon, such as temperature or chlorophyll, over a period of time.
(Notice that the notion of a model thus extends and subsumes the notion of
individual data items and measurements.) Due to resource constraints, the representation will frequently be approximate, and could take the form of a time
series, histogram, distribution functions, Hidden Markov Models, or decision
tree, for instance.
In principle, measurement models can be drawn from any desired class of
models, as the overall system architecture does not prescribe speciﬁc models
to use. We do note that good models would not only accurately represent the
observed data but would also have predictive value and/or be able to extract
interesting features from the observed data.
The measurement models are distributed over the physical nodes, which perform and store the measurements. The nodes maintain detailed models. Some
forms of these models are reported to other nodes in the system (for analysis).
Nodes can make requests for more or less detailed model forms (including full
data), based on need and resource availability.
The measurement models are complemented by “external models”. External
models are provided by human application experts, and capture prior knowledge about the physics underlying the phenomena. For example, an external
model could predict how wind aﬀects water movement between two stationary
observation nodes.
Naturally, more powerful inferences and predictions can be made based on
combinations of models from multiple sensors, as well as external models. We
call such combinations “composite models”. A simple composite model in our
example application would be a description of the evolution of the average temperature across a cluster of nodes over time.
Model Lookup. In order to form useful and meaningful composite model, nodes
must be able to eﬃciently locate relevant models at other nodes. Thus, an important component of our research will be the design of a ﬂexible framework
for model location, for the purpose of querying or updating them. This lookup
system will be akin to distributed naming systems and sensor databases, but
due to the higher complexity of our notion of models, will signiﬁcantly extend

520

L. Golubchik et al.

the approaches used in those settings. The design of this component will be integrated into the modeling framework; dynamically instantiated composite models
will help guide the lookup operations.
Sampling Optimization and Control. Sophisticated algorithms are needed
to control the mobile nodes with changing task assignments in an uncertain and
dynamic environment. Moreover, measurement, external, and composite models
together allow us to make predictions about future states of the system. These
predictions are needed to dynamically control the observation system, and determine the best set of measurements to perform next, subject to resource and
time constraints2 . Thus, another important aspect of the proposed research is
the design of algorithms for selecting samples that will likely be of high use to
the driving scientiﬁc application, or for improving the quality of models. As an
illustration, we now give one example formulation of such a problem.
The sampled data at each of the sensor nodes might have varying correlations with each other and with the result of a user query, and hence would
make varying degrees of contributions toward resolving the query. In order to
minimize processing and communication costs for sensor-network query resolutions, it is crucial to decide how to trade oﬀ accuracy in the query-result against
sampling a smaller subset of sensor nodes instead. In particular, if at most k
sensors can be queried for a given query, what would be the “best” k sensors to
choose that would still predict the given query with suﬃciently low error, given
a priori statistical knowledge about the correlation between the query result and
measurements at the sensor nodes?
In its simplest form, this problem can be mathematically formulated as a
subset-selection problem in linear regression [7]: Given a set of n random variables X1 , X2 , . . . , Xn (corresponding to measurements at individual sensor nodes)
and a predictor random variable Z (corresponding to the query), we are required
to select the best k out of the n random variables, such that Z can be predicted
by a linear combination of these k random variables with minimum least square
prediction error. The only information we are given are the statistical variances
and covariances between the Xi and Z variables, obtained from previous data.
While this problem has been well known in the statistics community, theoretical
progress so far has been limited to greedy and local-search heuristics, without a rigorous analysis of error bounds and time complexities involved [3, 7].
Other variants of this problem have been independently proposed in the mathematics community, such as the sparse approximation problem [8]; theoretical
results [5, 8] here have been limited to the special case of nearly orthogonal
dictionaries where greedy and convex relaxation methods have been shown to
provide (1 + ) approximation bounds to the optimal solution.
2

Newly obtained measurements, along with historic data, are also used to dynamically
adjust the models. This direct feedback loop requires that the model validation
process be automated and made part of the running system. Thus, an important
goal here is to develop a framework for autonomous adaptation of models based on
collected measurements.

A Generic Multi-scale Modeling Framework for ROS: An Overview

521

Summary. The novel aspect of our framework is the strong feedback between
the data acquisition process and the modeling process. Traditional sensing systems simply model all attributes of the environment, or a user-speciﬁed relevant
subset. In contrast, our system will make autonomous data acquisition decisions, which in turn inform the models that guide future decisions. We believe
that such a tightly coupled approach will lead to signiﬁcantly more useful data
being collected with the same limited resources.

5

Vision

AMBROSia will aid scientiﬁc research by facilitating the testing of scientiﬁc hypothesis. It will provide timely predictions of sampling needs. For instance, it
might predict that there is a need to increase (in time and/or space) chlorophyll
measurements in a particular region in preparation for a possible algae bloom.
This prediction might be made based on newly received temperature measurements and wind model predictions. It will also provide tracking information
for dynamic phenomena. For instance, it might detect red tide movement and
predict better sampling regions for mobile nodes. Overall, our vision for AMBROSia is that it will facilitate observation, detection, and tracking of scientiﬁc
phenomena that were previous only partially (or not at all) observable and/or
understood.

References
[1] D.M. Anderson. Turning back the harmful red tide. Nature, 388:513–514, 1997.
[2] D.M. Anderson and D.J. Garrison. The ecology and oceanography of harmful algal
blooms. Limnol. Oceanogr., 42(5:2):1009–1305, 1997.
[3] Kurt M. Anstreicher, Marcia Fampa, Jon Lee, and Joy Williams. Maximum-entropy
remote sampling. Discrete Applied Mathematics, 108:211–226, 2001.
[4] Pam Belluck. Red tide shuts shellﬁsh areas in new england. New York Times,
http://www.nytimes.com/2005/06/04/national/04tide.html, June 4, 2005.
[5] A. Gilbert, S. Muthukrishnan, and M. Strauss. Approximation of functions over
redundant dictionaries using coherence. In Proc. 14th ACM-SIAM Symposiun on
Discrete Algorithms, 2003.
[6] D. J. McGilliguddy, R.P. Signell, C. A Stock, B.A. Keafer, M.D. Keller, R.D. Hetland, and D.M. Anderson. A mechanism for oﬀshore initiation of harmful algal
blooms in the coast Gulf of Maine. Journal of Plankton Research, 25(9):1131–
1138, 2003.
[7] Alan Miller. Subset Selection in Regression. Second edition, 2002.
[8] Joel Tropp. Topics in Sparse Approximation. PhD thesis, The University of Texas
at Austin, 2004.

