PID Controller Tuning of a Boiler Control System Using
Immune Algorithm Typed Neural Network
Dong Hwa Kim
Dept. of Instrumentation and Control Eng., Hanbat National University,
16-1 San Duckmyong-Dong Yuseong-Gu, Daejon City, Korea, 305-719.
kimdh@hanbat.ac.kr, ial.hanbat.ac.kr
Tel: +82-42-821-1170, Fax: +82-821-1164

Abstract. Dead time processes exist widely in many types of systems such as
chemical processes, and the main steam temperature control system of the
thermal power plant. A PID Controllers have been used to operate these
systems. However, it is very difficult to achieve an optimal PID gain with no
experience since the gain of the PID controller has to be manually tuned by trial
and error. This paper suggests a tuning method of the PID Controller for a
process with long dead time using an immune algorithm typed neural network,
through computer simulation. Tuning results of immune algorithms based
neural network are compared with the results of genetic algorithm.

1 Introduction
When using a PID controller in these plants, the plant is generally controlled without
consideration of disturbance rejection. Therefore, an industrial experience is required
for tuning in these systems: [1]. Traditionally, PID controllers applied to these plants
are tuned with a reduction of gain so that overall stability can be obtained. This results
in poor performance of control. Failure to tune in control will cause an inevitable
plant shutdown, and a loss of production and considerable damage to the plant may
result. An effective tuning is required to maintain the system reliability and stability
following a system disturbance: [1], [2] In this paper auto-tuning scheme of the PID
controller using reference model and immune network is suggested and simulated for
an effective control of dead time process.

2 Problems of the PID Controller on the Dead Time Process
There are many well known PI and PID tuning formulas for stable processes.
However, PID tuning formulas for unstable processes, complex plants, and dead time
process are less common. Up to this time, many sophisticated tuning algorithms have
been tried an attempt to improve the PID controller performance under such difficult
conditions since the control performance of the system depends on the P, I, D
parameter gains. In the PID tuning methods, the method proposed by Ziegler Nichols
(1942) needs the ultimate gain and the period of the ultimate oscillation at stability
limit. But it is difficult to determine their exact values experimentally in real
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3037, pp. 695–698, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

696

D.H. Kim

processes, since the oscillatory operation must be avoided. Hence, a new idea for
automatic tuning of the PID control parameters, auto-tuning, is required. In utility
boiler of Fig. 1, the boiler-turbine model is given as [1], [2]

3 Multiobjective Controller Design of Boiler-Turbine System
Using Immune Algorithm Based Neural Structure
3.1

The Response of Immune System

Generally the concentration of i-th antibody, which is denoted by δ i , is calculated as
follows [7], [8]:

 N
N

dSi (t ) 
m jiδ j (t ) − α
mik δ k (t ) + βmi − γ i δ i (t ) ,
= α
dt

 j =1
k =1



∑

∑

dδ i (t )
=
dt

1
dS (t ) 

1 + exp 0.5 − i 
dt 


In Eq., m ji denotes affinities between antibody j and antibody i (i.e. the degree of
interaction), mi represents affinities between the detected antigens and antibody i,
respectively. The affinity mαβ between antibody α and antibody β is given as
mαβ = 1 {1 + Ω(αβ )} , Ω(αβ ) = f ( x) = [ f1 ( x) + f 2 ( x) + f 3 ( x)] ,

where

which obtained by antibody α and antibody β . Generally

Ωαβ
mαβ

is an information
is given by range of

0-1.
3.2 Controller Design by Immune Algorithm
In Fig. 1, r=1, 2,3 is reference input over 0, yi =1,2,3 is plant output. Immune algorithm
typed neural network has the following function in each layer;
Layer 1. As function comparing the reference input with the output of the given plant,
comparing result, r=1, 2,3 is selected for affinity in sub-function and it is defined by
the followings.
Layer 2. As layer for computing coupling degree between inputs of multivariable
system as Fig. 1, the sub-function defined as f a , f b , f c is used for coupling degree as;
(1)
f a = f1 ( x1 ) + f 2 ( x 2 ), f b = f1 ( x1 ) + f 3 ( x3 ), f c = f 2 ( x 2 ) + f 3 ( x3 ).
Layer 3. As layer for detecting error between reference input and plant output, the
following equation is defined as
n

f i ( xi ) =

∑ ( r − y )/ n , i = 1, 2, 3 , if
1

t =0

1

ri − y i ≥ ri then f i ( xi ) t = 1, else f i ( xi ) t = ri − y i , i = 1, 2, 3
t
t

Layer 4. They provide stimulation action by algorithms defined as
f ri : if f a < f b then stimulatio n f i ( xi ), else stimulatio n f i ( xi ), i = 1, 2, 3.

(2)

PID Controller Tuning of a Boiler Control System Using Immune Algorithm

697

Layer 5. Affinity is calculated with H s = f1 ( x1 ) + f 2 ( x2 ) + f 3 ( x3 ) . When the value of H s
is smaller, more satisfactory results is obtained.

Fig. 1. Flow diagram of controller

Fig. 2. Graph of sub-function f1 , K p

Fig. 4. Graph of sub-function f3 , Ki

Fig. 3. Graph of sub-function f1 , Ki

Fig. 5. Pressure response

698

D.H. Kim

Fig. 6. Water level deviation using
immune algorithm

Fig. 7. Water level deviation using
genetic algorithm

4 Simulation and Discussion
Figs. 4-7 represent the variation results of sub-function, f1 , f 2 , f3 and the PI

controller parameters, K p , K i is compared on immune algorithm and genetic
algorithm. Fig. 5 is pressure responses and Fig. 6 obtained by immune algorithm has
no oscillation against many oscillation based on genetic algorithm as shown in Fig. 7.
The range of initial value on parameter PI is P: 0-10, I: 0-5.

5 Conclusion
The immune system possesses a self organizing and distributed memory. Therefore, it
is thus adaptive to its external environment and allows a PDP (parallel distributed
processing) network to complete patterns against the environmental situation. This
paper suggests a tuning method of the PI Controller for a steam temperature process
with long dead time using an immune algorithm typed neural network, through
computer simulation. Tuning results by immune algorithms based neural network are
compared with the results of genetic algorithm.

References
1. Teng Fong-Chwee: Self-tuning PID controllers for dead time process. IEEE Trans., vol. 35,
no. 1. (1988) 119-125
2. J. D. Farmer, N. H. Packard and A. S. Perelson: The immune system, adaptation, and
machine learning, Physica. vol. D, no. 22. (1986) 187 - 204
3. Dong Hwa Kim: Intelligent tuning of a PID controller using a immune algorithm. Trans.
KIEE , vo. 51-D, no.1. (2002) 78-91

