Crack Analysis in Single Plate Stressing of Particle
Compounds
Manoj Khanal, Wolfgang Schubert, and Jürgen Tomas
Mechanical Process Engineering, Process Engineering Department,
Otto-von-Guericke-University of Magdeburg, D-39106 Magdeburg, Germany
{Manoj.Khanal, Wolfgang.Schubert, Jürgen.Tomas} @vst.unimagdeburg.de

Abstract. Particle compound material is the composition of different particles
with inhomogeneous and non-uniform properties. Particle compound material
is the most complicated engineering material whose properties vary according
to the applications, method of manufacturing and ratio of its ingredients. The
quasi-homogeneous materials like building materials and constituents of
tablets, pellets etc are some of the examples of particle compounds.
The 2 Dimensional Finite Element Analysis was done with single plate
compressive stressing on the particle compound material to have the idea of the
stress distributions during stressing. Then the method was followed by the
Discrete Element Method (DEM) for further analysis.
The study of crack propagating mechanism in particle compound was
represented by a model material which resembles the high strength materials,
pressed agglomerates and more. The paper analyses the cracking of the particle
compounds, here concrete ball, with respect to continuum and discrete
approach.

1 Introduction
Particle compound material [1] is the composition of different particles with
inhomogeneous and non-uniform properties. The research with the spherical shaped
particle compound, here concrete sphere, was to observe the cracking mechanisms
while subjected to single plate stressing along the diameter during diametrical
compression test. The aggregate material as the value component is fixedly embedded
in concrete so that cracking can only occur by forced crushing. During this process
the bonds between aggregate and binding material, which is the second but valueless
component, have to be burst. The compression stressing test, termed as indirect tensile
test, can be considered as one of the method to evaluate the fracture strength of
particle compounds.
There are number of references by Schubert [2], Kiss and Schönert [3], Arbiter et
al. [4], Tomas et al. [5], Potapov and Campbell [6], Mishra et al. [7], Salman et al. [8],
Moreno et al. [9] and Khanal et al. [10] which have shown the study of impact and
compression stressing for the fracturing of materials and cracking of material during
normal and oblique impact conditions. Khanal et al. [10] have studied the central and
oblique impact of particle compound materials with finite and discrete element
methods and compared with experiments of central impact condition. The discrete
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3037, pp. 364–371, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

Crack Analysis in Single Plate Stressing of Particle Compounds

365

element simulations of diametrical compression tests were carried out [11,12,13].
Thornton et al. [11] have studied the diametrical compression simulation on dense and
loosely packed agglomerates and showed that the loose agglomerates failed by
disintegration and dense agglomerate by fractured. For the low strength materials like
tablets, the simulations/measurements are generally performed with comparatively
low velocity for slow deformation, quasi-static, where the test specimen fails by
propagation of one or few cracks at a failure stress that is relatively insensitive to the
loading rate [13] (see[11]). The experiment and analysis of fragmentation of brittle
spheres under static and dynamic compressions were dealt by Chau et al. [14]. The
finite element method has also been adopted to study the crushing of spherical
materials [15,16].
The cracking method in spherical model is different than the regular structures
when subjected to impact or diametrical stressing loading. To study the cracking
mechanism in the concrete ball, the two-dimensional Finite Element compressive
analyses were carried out for single plate diametrical stressing condition to understand
the stress pattern distributions before cracking. In reality, the discrete element
approach is preferable for the analysis of the particle compound, particularly to
understand the fragmentation behaviour during fracturing, which treats the particle
compound as the constituents of different individual small balls as the particles. The
compression stressing on concrete sphere is done with relatively higher speed with
higher deformation rate as compared to the agglomerates.

Fig. 1. Cracks observed during single plate stressing of concrete sphere.

2 Results and Discussions
2.1 Experimental
2

Spherical shaped concrete spheres of 150 mm in diameter of B35 (35 N/mm
compressive strength) strength category as common material of civil engineering
were chosen for the single plate compression stressing. The compression stressing
experiments were done with universal testing machine. The concrete sphere was
clamped on the lower base plate and the upper plate was moving with the defined
velocity to generate the stress inside the sphere. The concrete sphere was coloured
with different colours before crushing. After crushing, the generated fragments were
collected, assembled according to the colour and analyzed to observe the crack

366

M. Khanal, W. Schubert, and J. Tomas

patterns. The fractured ball obtained from experiment is shown in Fig.1 with meridian
cracks and crushed cone.
2.2 Finite Element Simulation of Compression Test by Single Plate Stressing
To study the dynamic stress patterns generated inside the concrete ball during single
plate diametrical stressing, the finite element simulation was carried out with
commercially available software called ANSYS [17]. Though the continuum analysis
does not allow to visualize the high velocity multiple crack propagation and
fragmentation behaviour during simulation, but it provides the idea of stress
distributions inside the sphere during stressing. It is known that crack generation and
propagation are functions of stress [1]. Hence, the finite element analysis can be
considered as an essential investigation. The finite element model description with
input parameters is dealt in another paper [1]. An ANSYS model was considered for a
two-dimensional sphere of 150 mm in diameter, stressing at the velocity of 20 m/s.
Actually, different velocities were tried and it was noted that the change in velocities
causes the change in intensity of stresses. Hence, for the clarity here the simulation of
only one velocity is presented.

Fig. 2. Stress generated in stressing direction during compression test.

Fig 2. shows the stress generated during single plate diametrical stressing. The
upper plate is stressing the ball and lower plate is constraint from any movement.
When the plate stresses the ball, the stress wave is initiated and propagated from the
contact zone and moves towards the other low stressed zone (opposite side). These
different stressed zones show distinct region nearer to the contact zone and is similar
to the cone in three dimension or wedge (triangle) in two dimension. At the contact
area the compressive zones can be seen as a triangular shape. The tension waves are
generated from the boundary of the contact zone and can be seen in figure as two
dynamic tension spots nearer to the contact zone. The propagated tension waves can
also be seen on the fixed plate side as an arch shape. The boundary of the conical or
wedge shape has the maximum absolute change in values from compression to
tension. This transition from the compressive to tensile region takes place in the

Crack Analysis in Single Plate Stressing of Particle Compounds

367

periphery of the compressed zone. Hence, this region has a dominant effect on the
crack generation, and so, the boundary of this region initiates the crack with a similar
shape during stressing. In single plate stressing, though the stressing is done in one
direction, the other direction has also the similar disturbed region like the shape of the
wedge. This is because of the propagation and reflection of the waves in to and fro
direction. This implies even in single plate compression, there should be the
formation of the another wedge in opposite side (i.e. in the stationary plate side). The
dimension of this second wedge depends upon the stressing condition and velocity.
The generation of two wedges can be further verified by discrete element simulations.
The propagating tension waves from stressing to non-stressing sides should also
generate the cracks in the similar propagating manner from one side to another. These
types of cracks are called meridian cracks in experiments and diametrical cracks in 2
dimensional simulations.
2.3 Discrete Element Simulation of Compression Test by Single Plate Stressing
The concrete sphere is considered as the mixtures of different sized particles having
random properties with porosities. Though the material seems complicated, it can be
easily modelled with the principle of discrete element method. The discrete element
solution scheme assumes each of its constituents as the separate entity and applies the
Newton’s second law of motion and force displacement law at contacts. This
individual particles allow to delete the contact when they experiences the higher force
than their material strength. This process shows the fragmentation behaviour of the
material, like in reality. The two dimensional concrete ball was modelled with
randomly arranged 1000 particles as distinct elements with the PFC [18] which solves
with distinct element method. The detailed modelling of concrete ball and input
parameters are dealt in [1]. Left picture of Fig 3. shows the assembly of gravels
(aggregates) and hardened cement paste to represent the concrete ball. Thus modelled
concrete ball was diametrically compressed with single plate stressing. In single plate
stressing, the upper plate was allowed to move against the ball and the lower plate
was fixed.

Fig. 3. Left – modelled concrete ball with DEM (bigger balls – aggregates, smaller balls –
hardened cement paste), Right – Fractured ball during compression test by single plate
stressing.

Right picture of Fig. 3 shows the fractured ball during single plate compression at
the plate velocity of 1 m/s. The different gray tone pieces show the fragments

368

M. Khanal, W. Schubert, and J. Tomas

generated after crushing. Here, two disturbed regions are generated in two sides of the
ball – one on the stressing side and another on the fixed plate side. In the stressing
side, the crushed region has the similar wedge shape as predicted by continuum
analysis. The crushed wedge in the stationary plate side is small as compared to the
case of stressing side. The stress waves generated during stressing are somewhat
damped on the boundary of the particles and on the discontinuous region of the
material and only the less amount of the stress waves propagate and reach in the lower
side of the ball. Hence, this causes the less disturbances as compared to the stressing
side, as a result, the smaller wedge is produced in the opposite side of the stressing.
The figure shows the different types of cracks obtained during simulation. The
diametrical cracks are propagated from stressed side to the low stressed side. The
secondary cracks are linking the diametrical cracks. The bigger balls on the crushed
zone show the liberated aggregates during stressing.

Fig. 4. Different stages of fractured ball during single plate compression stressing, v=1m/s.

The different stages during compression test by single plate stressing of two
dimensional concrete sphere with calculation steps are shown in Fig. 4. The first peak
was observed when there was a starting of the crack. The fall in force curve after the
first crack shows that the energy was utilized to generate the crack. The generation of
crack means the generation of new surfaces and consumes energy. It is clear from the
figure that before the generation of cracks, the force curves are increasing and after
propagation of the cracks these force curves are decreasing. This shows that energy is
required to generate and propagate cracks. In other words, crack propagation is the
generation of new surfaces. It is seen from the figure that even after failure of the ball
the force curves attain the higher values. The reason for this is, when wall touches the
aggregates, the wall experiences the higher amount of resistance from the aggregates
(bigger balls). In other cases, the disturbances caused by the stressing of wall will be
adjusted by the discontinuous nature of the material. Which means, the stress waves

Crack Analysis in Single Plate Stressing of Particle Compounds

369

propagating inside the ball from the stressing condition will be damped by the
boundaries of the particles and the pores present in-between the constituents of the
concrete spheres.
2.4 Comparison of Experiments and Simulations
Fractured ball from experiment and simulations showed the crushed cone (wedge in
2D simulation) during stressing. In the experimentally fractured ball, the inelastic
contact deformation produces the cone of fines [5]. The contact area was noted very
smooth, all the micro irregularities were smoothened. There were no secondary cracks
generated during experiments. This is because it was not allowed to crush further after
the breaking of the ball. This provides the evidence that the secondary cracks are
generated only after forming the meridian cracks. The experiments were conducted
with the velocity of 1e-6 m/s, which is obviously very less stressing velocity to
generate the secondary cracks. This experiment was done with Universal Testing
Machine (UTM), where it was impossible to provide higher velocities. Even if the
stressing plate was allowed to stress further, the plate motion would not be sufficient
to hold the ball from falling down from the lower plate to crush it because
immediately after fracturing the ball, the ball crushed into pieces and fell out from the
experimental rig due to gravity. But in discrete element simulation it was possible to
farther the stressing wall against the ball. Hence, we can see the secondary cracks in
the fractured ball. This also adds to the proof that the secondary cracks are generated
only if there is sufficient energy remaining after forming the meridian cracks. Here, it
has to be noted that the experiments are 3 dimensional whereas the simulations are 2
dimensional, that is why it is not possible to relate point to point between them.
2.5 New Surface Generation
It is known that during stressing of the sphere, the fracturing process produces the
fragments and the quantity of fragments depends upon the stressing condition. Here,
the stressing condition imply the stressing velocity and the material strength of the
model. In discrete element method all the constituents are glued together with the
bonds existing between the particles. Therefore, when these bonds break the particles
are separated out. In other words, the breaking of bonds mean the generation of the
new surfaces. Fig.5 shows how the bonds are breaking with the increasing velocity.
From figure, it can be observed that with the increasing velocity the bond breakage
between the particles are also increasing. Actually, the broken bonds are nothing it is
similar to producing the cracks. When the material is not able to sustain the strength
generated by stressing, the material deletes the contact with each other and propagates
the crack. For the less stressing energy less bonds between the particles are broken
and with higher velocities more bonds are broken and after certain limit of the
stressing velocity no further more bonds are broken. Hence, higher than this limiting
velocity there is no production of broken bonds even with the increasing stressing
velocities. Here, in this case, the effective number of bonds are breaking at the range
of 5 - 10 m/s. After 10 m/s the process becomes inefficient because there will not be
any significant number of bonds breaking even with increasing input energy. The
application of the input energy after this limiting velocity is a wastage of the energy.

370

M. Khanal, W. Schubert, and J. Tomas

This can be validated by the new surface generation curve (dotted curve) as shown in
figure, which shows that the new surface generating process is efficient till 10 m/s.

Fig. 5. Broken bonds and new surface generation versus velocity.

3 Conclusions
The stress pattern distributions obtained from the finite element simulation during
stressing was the criterion to predict the crack initiation and propagation in the
spherical particle compound materials. The formation of the wedge predicted by finite
element method was further verified from the discrete element method. Discrete
element analysis showed the crack initiation and propagation in the similar way as
predicted by finite element simulation along with generation of different cracks and
thus forming different fragments. The secondary cracks were clearly seen and
analyzed with discrete element analysis.
The discrete element analysis was done with 2 dimensional software. It has
presented the basics of crushing and fragmentation phenomena with less time. But
there were some limitations in 2 D simulation, as the crushed cone could not be seen
as cone instead it can be seen as wedge (triangle). Hence, during simulation it was
realized that 3 dimensional software could provide realistic inside to the crushing
system to analyse the cracking mechanism.

Acknowledgement. The authors would like to acknowledge German Research
Foundation (DFG) for the financial support.

Crack Analysis in Single Plate Stressing of Particle Compounds

371

References
1.
2.
3.

4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.

M. Khanal, W. Schubert, J. Tomas, Ball Impact and Crack Propagation - Simulations of
Particle Compound Material, Granul. Matter, 5 (2004) 177-184.
H. Schubert, Zur Energieausnutzung bei Zerkleinerungsprozessen, Aufbereit. – Tech. 34
(10) (1993) 495-505
L. Kiss, K. Schönrt, Aufschlusszerkleinerung eines zweikomponentigen Modellstoffes
unter einzelkornbeanspruchjung durch druck-rund prallbeanspruchjung [Liberation of
two component materail by single particle compression and Impact crushing].
Aufbereit.-Tech.30(5)(1980)223-230
N. Arbiter, C. C. Harris, G. A. Stamboltzis, Single fracture of brittle spheres, Soc. Min.
Eng. AIME, Trans. 244 (1969) 118-133
J. Tomas, M. Schreier, T. Gröger, S. Ehlers, Impact crushing of concrete for liberation
and recycling, Powder Technol 105 (1999) 39-51
Alexander V Potapov, Charles S. Campbell, Computer simulation of impact-induced
particle breakage, Power Techno, 82 (1994) 207-216
B. K. Mishra, C. Thornton, Impact breakage of a particle agglomerates, Int. J. Miner.
Process. 61 (2001) 225-239
A. D. Salman, D. A. Gorham, A. Verba, A study of solid particle failure under normal
and oblique impact, Wear 186-187 (1995) 92-98
R. Moreno, M. Gadhiri, S. J. Antony, Effect of impact angle on the breakage of
agglomerates: a numerical study using DEM, Powder Techno, 130 (2003) 132-137
M. Khanal, W. Schubert, J. Tomas, Crack initiation and propagation – Central and
oblique impacts, Comp. Mater. Sci. (submitted)
Thornton, M. T. Ciomocos, M. J. Adams, Numerical simulations of diametrical
compression tests on agglomerates, (obtained per mail)
A. Lavrov, A. Vervoort, M. Wevers, J A L Napier, Experimental and numerical study of
the Kaiser effect in cyclic Brazilian tests with disk rotation, Int. J. Rock Mech. Min., 39
(2002) 287-302
Malcom Mellor, Ivor Hawkes, Measurement of tensile strength by diametrical
compression of discs and annuli, Eng. Geol., Vol, 5, Issue 3 (1971) 173-225
K. T. Chau, X. X. Wei, R. H. C. Wong, T. X. Yu, Fragmentation of brittle spheres under
static and dynamic compressions: experiments and analyses, Mech. Mater., 32(2000)
543-554
S. Lee, G. Ravichandran, Crack initiation in brittle solids under multiaxial compression,
Eng. Eng. Fract. Mech., 10 (2003) 1645-1658
Oliver Tsoungui, Denis Vallet, Jean Claude Charmet, Numerical model of crushing of
grains inside two dimensional granular materials, Powder technology, 105 (1999) 1901998
FEM Manual ANSYS 6.1, ANSYS Inc., Southpointe, 275 Technology Drive,
Canonsburg, PA 15317.
Particle Flow Code in 2 Dimensions Manual, Vers. 3.0, Itasca Consulting Group Inc.,
Minneapolis, Minnesota, US (2002).

