General Conception of the Virtual Laboratory
Marcin Lawenda1 , Norbert Meyer1 , Tomasz Rajtar1 , Marcin Oko´
n1 ,
2
1
1
Dominik Stoklosa , Maciej Stroi´
nski , Lukasz Popenda ,
Zoﬁa Gdaniec2 , and Ryszard W. Adamiak2
1

2

Pozna´
n Supercomputing and Networking Center,
ul. Z.Noskowskiego 10, 61-704 Pozna´
n, Poland,
lawenda@man.poznan.pl,
http://vlab.psnc.pl/
Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry Polish Academy of Sciences,
ul. Z.Noskowskiego 12/14, 61-704 Pozna´
n, Poland

Abstract. In the paper some theoretical considerations about virtual
laboratory (VL) aspects are discussed. Possibilities of the VL system
creation to control many laboratory apparatus in a remote way are considered by the authors. The main research goals on which the authors
want to focus their attention are: laboratory framework and dynamic
measurement scenarios.

1

Introduction

Virtual Laboratory (VL) is a heterogeneous, distributed environment, which
allows scientists all over the world to work on a common group of projects [1].
This environment should allow conducting experiments with the usage of physical devices, doing simulation using the computational application, and communication between users working on the same topic. Similarly to typical laboratory
tools and research techniques depending on the speciﬁc ﬁeld of science, virtual
laboratories can beneﬁt from some collaboration techniques as tele-immersion,
but they are not mandatory.
Research work of the authors is focused on virtual laboratory aspects [2]
which have signiﬁcant inﬂuence on creating a general system which will allow
taking control on many diﬀerent devices. In the virtual laboratory system there
are many factors which are signiﬁcant in our work. The most important of them
are: laboratory framework and dynamic measurement scenarios.
The Virtual Laboratory system is developed in Pozna´
n Supercomputing and
Networking System in collaboration with the Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry
and Radioastronomy Department of Nicolaus Copernicus University.

2

Virtual Laboratory Framework

In the virtual laboratory architecture we can distinguish four layers (see Fig. 1).
The ﬁrst of them is the Access layer. Originally it consists of tools which enable
access to the laboratory resources and for presentation stored data. The most
important modules are:
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3038, pp. 1013–1016, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

1014

M. Lawenda et al.

Laboratories and users management

Teamwork environment

Access
layer
Dynamic Measurement Scenarios

Authorization centre

Data presentation

Global scheduling
Data transport

Grid layer
(General services)
Grid Gateway

Supervision layer
(specific services)

Resource
layer

Local scheduling

Laboratory devices

Digital library

Users accounting
Resource monitoring

Computational servers

Visualization servers

Fig. 1. The framework of virtual laboratory architecture

– Dynamic measurement scenarios - assure control and execution of the operations (experiments) chain, which is submitted by the user,
– Users and laboratories management - tools for creating new laboratories
proﬁles, new users accounts, management of the access rights to devices,
digital library and communication media,
– Data presentation tool - presentation experiment results collected in the data
management system, on-line visualization tool and accounting data looking
through,
– Users communication tools - allow users to communicate with one another
The second is the Grid layer where services which we can call general were
accumulated. They are required in most laboratories instances. There are also
connections with the outside grid services e.g. with Globus services [3]. The most
important are:
– Authorization centre - granting (or not) access to many virtual laboratory
resources, certiﬁcates management,
– Global scheduling - responsible for choosing the appropriate laboratory device and load balancing when possible,
– Digital library - storing experiments results and electronic publications,
– Data transport - responsible for download and upload data from/to destination machine,

General Conception of the Virtual Laboratory

1015

– Grid Gateway - communication with the grid broker (e.g. GRMS [4]), sending
computational tasks to the grid and receiving experiment tasks from the grid
systems
On the supervision layer speciﬁc services are gathered. These services have to
be implemented taking into consideration a given device and their speciﬁcation.
Usually it consists of:
– Local scheduling - tasks scheduling on a given device taking into consideration parameters and priority
– Resource monitoring - resources using control, tasks actual state control
– Users accounting - information about the used resources
Finally we can deﬁne the Resources layer which consists of devices to experiment execution and also the necessary software:
– Laboratory devices - laboratory apparatus and software for experiment execution
– Computational servers - also software for pre- and post-processing computation
– Visualization servers - also visualization software

3

Dynamic Measurement Scenarios

The experiment process execution in many types of laboratories consists of very
similar stages. The given experimental process is often recurrent and must be
executed many times by some parameters modiﬁcation. In this situation the
measurement scenarios conception seems to be very useful.
The conception of the dynamic measurement scenarios allows deﬁning the
process of an experiment in any way, from pre-processing, through executing the
experiment, to the post-processing and visualization tasks. Users are also allowed
to add their own module as a part of the scenario. Deﬁning the measurement
scenario allows to spare a lot of time during computation. The user does not
have to wait for the end of a given process stage to submit another one. It is
made automatically.
Initially, we divide the experiment execution process into four steps: preprocessing (data preparation to use as an input source), experiment (executed on
real device), postprocessing (output data processing) and visualization.
This simple task’s execution chain we call a static measurement scenario
(SMS). It allows connecting particular stages only between themselves. Here,
the execution path is speciﬁc and the user can not manipulate it.
To increase the possibility of the jobs scenario the dynamic measurement scenario (DMS) was deﬁned. In the DMS model, besides the deﬁnition of the tasks
execution sequence, we can also deﬁne some extra connections (e.g. loops, parallel
connections), conditions on the connections and diﬀerent lengths of the execution
paths. In fact, DMS allows to deﬁne many SMS models in one scenario. Thanks

1016

M. Lawenda et al.

to the possibility of the conditions deﬁning on the connections paths the real
path is determined during execution and can depend on computational results.
To properly deﬁne the dynamic measurement scenario the system has to have
knowledge about connections which are enabled. In case of the laboratory type
where the processing software is well known, it seems to be easy. The case will
be more complex when we want to deﬁne the DMS model for a wider range of
virtual laboratories.
To solve this problem we deﬁned a special language which determines the
following conditions: names of the connected applications, a condition (or conditions) connected with a given path, an additional condition which has to be met
to pass a given path, e.g. when special conversion between application is needed
and in the end a list of input or output ﬁles for applications.
An expertise from a particular discipline is necessary to deﬁne rules for DMS.
It can be done by a laboratory administrator together with a domain expert.

4

Conclusions

The universal virtual laboratory framework allows to spare a lot of human
energy and money during the development stage. It is possible to build many
diﬀerent types of laboratory systems which provide and adapt functionality to
speciﬁed needs. Designers of a new laboratory have to focus their attention only
on a few aspects connected with adaptation to a new data set, and a speciﬁc
scheduling algorithm.
To proof our assumptions and as an exemplary implementation it is planned
to make the NMR Spectrometer (Bruker Avance 600) and radiotelescope (diameter 32m) available to the Grid users [5].

References
1. Lawenda, M.: Laboratorium Wirtualne i Teleimersja. Pozna´
n Supercomputing and
Networking Center, RW nr 34/01, (2001), (in polish)
2. Lawenda, M., Meyer, N., Rajtar, T.: General framework for Virtual Laboratory.
The 2nd Cracow Grid Workshop, Cracow, Poland, December 11 - 14, 2002
3. Adamiak, R. W., Gdaniec, Z., Lawenda, M., Meyer, N., Popenda, L ., Stroi´
nski,
´
M., Zieli´
nski, K.: Laboratorium Wirtualne w Srodowisku
Gridowym. Polish Optical
Internet - PIONIER 2003, 9-11 April 2003, (in polish)
4. GridLab: A Grid Application Toolkit and Testbed http://www.gridlab.org/
5. Virtual Laboratory project http://vlab.psnc.pl/

