Simulating Weed Propagation Via Hierarchical,
Patch-Based Cellular Automata
Adam G. Dunn and Jonathan D. Majer
Alcoa Research Centre for Stronger Communities and
Department of Environmental Biology, Curtin University of Technology,
Western Australia
{A.Dunn, J.Majer}@curtin.edu.au

Abstract. Ecological systems are complex systems that feature heterogeneity at a number of spatial scales. Modelling weed propagation is
diﬃcult because local interactions are unpredictable, yet responsible for
global patterns. A patch-based and hierarchical cellular automaton using
probabilistic connections suits the nature of environmental weed dispersal mechanisms. In the presented model, weed dispersal mechanisms,
including human disturbance and dispersal by fauna, are approximated
by pathways through a network of cells. The results of simulations provide evidence that the method is suitable for modelling weed dispersal
mechanisms using multiple scales of observation.
Keywords: Environmental weeds, hierarchical patch dynamics, cellular
automata, multiscale heterogeneity

1

Introduction and Context

Weed establishment and spread is a signiﬁcant issue in Western Australia (WA),
especially in the region that is known as an international biodiversity hotspot [1].
Biodiversity describes the state of an ecosystem in terms of the natural complexity through which it evolves over time. Environmental weeds are plants that
degrade an ecosystem via simpliﬁcation; these weeds compete more eﬀectively
than their native counterparts in an environment that is foreign to them [2].
Along the south coast of WA, local and state governments, the Gondwana Link
initiative [3] and other community groups beneﬁt from a predictive analysis of
the landscape-scale eﬀects of their decisions on the propagation of weeds.
An ecological system is a complex system [4] and the intricate web of interactions between species of ﬂora and fauna form a resilient system. A system’s
degradation by weeds makes it more susceptible to further degradation.
Weeds propagate by dispersal and are constrained by competition with other
plants and by predation [5]. Signiﬁcant dispersal vectors include seed-eating birds
and grazing animals, human transport networks, watercourses, wind and agricultural disturbances. Each of these dispersal vectors acts in a diﬀerent manner
and often at diﬀerent spatial and temporal scales.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part I, LNCS 4487, pp. 762–769, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Simulating Weed Propagation

763

The approach to modelling the landscape described here is novel because
it extends the cellular automata formalism to create a cellular space that is
hierarchical and irregular. As a result, the structure captures the patchy nature
of the landscape realistically, as well as being capable of representing GIS data
with a variety of levels granularity in a single structure.

2

Background

Ecosystems are complex systems in which the spatial dynamics may be described by a hierarchy of patches. Existing models of spatial ecosystem dynamics vary considerably in structure; two-dimensional raster grids that discretise
mechanisms of competition or propagation are typical. Hierarchical patch dynamics is a modelling hypothesis for ecosystems that matches the physical spatial structure of ecosystems and other landscape patterns, such as land use and
urbanisation.
Ecological systems are heterogeneous, complex systems that are neither completely regular nor completely random [6]. They exhibit a natural patchiness [7]
that is deﬁned by the processes of dispersal and competition, and are inﬂuenced
by soil structure and natural resources, ﬁre and forestry regimes, other human
disturbances and climate. Distinct and abrupt changes between vegetation type
are typical (from woodland to grassland, for example) and a mosaic of vegetation
types over a landscape is a natural feature of an ecological system, besides being
a feature of human-modiﬁed landscapes.
Ecological systems display multiscale heterogeneity — when viewing a system
at a single level of spatial granularity, the landscape may be segmented into a set
of internally homogeneous patches. To be internally homogeneous, a patch need
only have an aggregable set of properties that are considered to be consistent
throughout the patch at that level. For example, a coarse granularity view of
a landscape may be segmented into regions of forest, woodland and grassland,
whereas an individual patch of forest may be segmented by the distribution of
species or even by individual plants.
In the case of weed propagation, the data quality issue is one of uncertainty
at the microscale. In broad terms, weed propagation is the combination of the
processes of germination, competition for resources and seed dispersal, as well
as the uncertain long distance dispersal (LDD) events [8]. The typical approach
for modelling the dispersal of any plant is to use empirical information to build
a function that aggregates the several modes of seed dispersal by likelihood for a
homogeneous landscape. The ‘observational reality’ of weed dispersal phenomena
is one of uncertainty and multiple scales. At the scale of individual plants, the
eﬀects of individual birds, other animals, water ﬂow, or human disturbances are
essentially ‘random events’ in the colloquial sense of the phrasing. At a slightly
coarser scale, the dispersal mechanisms for weeds become more stable in the
sense that a model recovers some notional sense of predictability; mechanisms
are described using a radius of spread or a likely direction of spread, and this is
the operational scale of weed propagation [9].

764

A.G. Dunn and J.D. Majer

Given the need to capture multiscale heterogeneity and the patchiness of
ecological systems, the hierarchical patch dynamics formalism [10,11] may be
used to model weed propagation. Hierarchical patch dynamics is a modelling
method that captures the patchiness and multiscale heterogeneity of ecological
systems as a hierarchy of interacting, heterogeneous (and internally homogeneous) patches.
The hierarchical patch dynamics method may be implemented as a cellular
automaton [12], modiﬁed to be irregular, probabilistic and hierarchical. Coarse
patches comprise several ﬁner patches in a hierarchy. Regular-grid cellular automata introduce a bias in propagation [13], in the absence of any other method
to avoid it, such as stochastic mechanisms in timing or update. Introducing stochasticity implicitly via irregularity or asynchronicity, or explicitly via a probabilistic update can restore isotropy in a cellular automata model of propagation [14]. The model described in the following section includes stochasticity to
match the spatial nature of an ecological landscape by following the hierarchical
patch dynamics concept.

3

Method

The model is constructed as a network of both interlevel connections forming
a hierarchy and intralevel connections forming a graph. The structure of the
model captures multiple scales of observation from GIS data, relating the levels
to each other via the process of abstraction. Simulations are run by traversing
the structure to determine the updated state of the network, which involves
discovering the likelihood of dispersal through the heterogeneous and multiscale
landscapes. The approach is analogous to existing models that use dispersal
curves [15] but they additionally capture the dispersal modes explicitly rather
than aggregating them into a single function, and they eﬀectively manage the
multiscale heterogeneity.
A cell is deﬁned by its state, a set of connections to its neighbourhood and
its Cartesian coordinates i, j ∈ R. The state of a cell s ∈ S, is deﬁned by the
static physical properties taken from GIS data of a speciﬁc level of abstraction
associated with its level of abstraction; S represents the union of the set of
possible states from each level (for example, |S| = 13 in Fig. 2). The extent of a
cell is deﬁned by the Voronoi decomposition [16] of the landscape at the level to
which the cell belongs and is therefore dependent on the locations of the nodes
in the cell’s neighbourhood. The intralevel neighbourhood of a cell is deﬁned by
the Delaunay triangulation of the subset of nodes in the graph and the interlevel
neighbourhood is deﬁned by the process of abstraction in which the hierarchy is
created by physical state information.
An abstraction necessarily involves three homogeneous cells belonging to a
single triangle in the Delaunay triangulation. Using this deﬁnition, the cells composed to create a new cell are guaranteed to be neighbours, they will represent
an internally homogeneous environment (for the given level of abstraction) and
will create a new level of abstraction in which fewer cells are used to represent

Simulating Weed Propagation

765

the landscape and the average size of a cell increases. A single abstraction is
illustrated in Fig. 1. The extents of the cells are given by the Voronoi decomposition and the connectivity is given by the Delaunay triangulation. In the ﬁgure,
the cell d is now related to cells a, b and c with a ‘composed of’ relationship
and three interlevel connections are formed, contributing to the structure of the
hierarchy. Note that the choice of ternary trees over other forms is the simplest
choice given the triangulation method; other forms produce the same shapes
using a centroid method for deﬁning the new cell’s node location.

node
boundary
between
a and b

c

intralevel
connection

b

b

c

d

a

new
cell
boundary
new
node

a

interlevel
connection
Fig. 1. A single abstraction is shown on a detail view of one landscape. The top two
illustrations are the Voronoi decomposition of a set of nodes. The bottom two illustrations are a subset of the Delaunay triangulation for a set of nodes. The cells a, b and c
in the left illustrations are abstracted to form cell d as given on both of the illustrations
on the right. Cell d has a larger size than cells a, b and c (taken individually) and the
distance to the nearest cells increases.

The result of multiple abstractions creates a hierarchy that builds a set of
complete ternary trees. A set of points is initially distributed as a set of Halton
points and each abstraction is made for a group of three internally homogeneous
cells using the GIS data as a guide. The abstraction process continues until there
are no more groups of homogeneous cells that may be abstracted such that the
newly created distances between nodes are above a critical distance (representative of the operational scale). The above abstraction process is repeated for
the several levels of GIS data until the coarsest GIS data is captured within the
hierarchical structure. In Fig. 2 an example landscape is presented for for three
levels of ﬁctitious GIS data captured as raster information (see Fig. 3 for two
intermediate levels of abstraction within the hierarchical structure that is built
for this data).

766

A.G. Dunn and J.D. Majer
vegetation survey

satellite imagery

b
d

c

e
a

land tenure data

g

h

f

l

k
m

i
j

Fig. 2. Fictitious satellite imagery, vegetation survey data and land tenure data of
the same landscape. Three levels of an example landscape are illustrated with the
following categorisations: a pasture and crops, b natural vegetation, c bare or disturbed,
d impermeable or built up, e type 1 vegetation, f crop or pasture, g road, h type 2
vegetation i urban, j peri-urban, k nature reserve, l private agricultural, m private
residential.

The structure of the landscape model provides a useful multiscale description
of the environment for multiple scales of observation (based on GIS data) but it
does not, alone, provide a method for simulating weed propagation for the variety
of dispersal modes, each with their own operational scale. The simulation method
chosen for the implementation described here is to associate a probability with
each of the connections in the network — the interlevel hierarchy and intralevel
graphs combined. At each time step (a typical synchronous timing mechanism
is adopted) and for each cell, a breadth-ﬁrst search through the network is used
to discover the avenues of possible dispersal and the likelihood value. This path
mimics the seed dispersal curves and oﬀers a unique approach to modelling LDD
via its inherent uncertainty.
Probabilities for each of the connections are determined by the state information of the connected cells and the distance between their nodes. For example,
given the higher density of seed rain (dispersal by seed-eating birds perching
on trees) near the periphery of remnant vegetation [17] the likelihood of dispersal between remnant vegetation and most other types of landscape is given a
higher value than between two remnant vegetation cells at the vegetation survey
scale. The operational scale here has a ﬁner granularity than human dispersal
modes, which occur over both longer distances and with higher uncertainty. This
is analogous to dispersal curve models of short and LDD.
There are three signiﬁcant assumptions made about the landscape and the
process of dispersal for the implementation described here. Firstly, it is assumed
that several processes including dispersal, seed predation, germination, seasonal
variance and seed bank dynamics may be aggregated into a single dispersal mechanism. Secondly, it is assumed that the operational scale of the variety of dispersal modes exist within a reasonable expanse of orders of magnitude. Computer
simulation would be too computation-intensive if the operational scales included
millimetres and hundreds of kilometres (and their associated time scales). Lastly,

Simulating Weed Propagation

767

it is assumed for these experiments that the landscape is static except for the
weed propagation — ceteris paribus has been invoked in a heavy fashion for this
experiment.

4

Results and Discussion

In testing this implementation of hierarchical patch dynamics, the results of
simulations demonstrate that the method is sensitive to the choice of granularity, but that the methodology is capable of representing the multiple dispersal
mechanisms and the dynamics of a weed population. Importantly, the simulations demonstrate that there is advantage in the rigorous mapping between the
operational scales of the dispersal phenomena and the observational scales captured by the GIS data. The approach is useful speciﬁcally because it captures
dispersal modes and multiple scales explicitly, combining them in a framework
that provides the aforementioned rigorous mapping.
The results of one simulation are presented in Fig. 3 — the simulation uses
the ﬁctitious GIS data depicted in Fig. 2. In this example, an environmental
weed is given properties that are typical of a fruit-bearing weed whose dispersal is dependent on birds, small mammals and human disturbance routines. A
weed of this type is likely to spread along the periphery of remnant vegetation
because of the desirability of the perching trees for birds in these regions, and be
found more commonly in and near regions with higher populations and greater
frequencies of disturbance. The probabilities associated with remnant vegetation ↔ crop/pasture are relatively high, crop/pasture ↔ crop/pasture are zero
and any connections within or between frequently disturbed patches are associated with relatively high probabilities. Since the weed and the landscape are
both ﬁctitious, the results of the experiment are not easily veriﬁed; instead this
experiment represents a proof of concept for the modelling formalism and represents a typical set of operational scales that a model may be expected to
represent.
Experiments in both homogeneous and heterogeneous landscapes suggest two
speciﬁc issues with the speciﬁc implementation of aggregation/abstraction. The
method does not exhibit the same bias caused by a regular lattice [13] but there
is an apparent degradation in the approximation to isotropy in homogeneous
experiments where the highest density of points is too coarse. In simpler terms,
a minimum density of points is required to maintain isotropic propagation. An
issue apparent in the heterogeneous experiments is that thin corridors through
which weeds may spread are sensitive to maximum densities; a model structure
must represent the thinnest corridor through which a weed may propagate. It
is therefore important to accurately capture the grain and extent of the operational scale — for example, some fauna involved in the dispersal may ignore
thin corridors, whilst other fauna may actively use thin corridors.
By combining diﬀerent forms of data (such as vegetation surveys and land
tenure information), the model captures the eﬀects of a range of dispersal mechanisms in the same simulation, predicting the combined eﬀects of human and

768

A.G. Dunn and J.D. Majer

Fig. 3. The extent of cells depicted for three intermediate time steps and two levels
of abstraction in the hierarchy. Elapsed time increases from left to right, the three
sub-ﬁgures above are for the satellite imagery level of abstraction and the bottom
three sub-ﬁgures are for the land tenure data level of abstraction. The increased rate
of spread along the periphery is apparent in the top sub-ﬁgures and the dispersal over
a disconnection is apparent in the bottom sub-ﬁgures.

natural dispersal mechanisms. A ﬁnal assessment suggests that a more rigorous
method for mapping from the dispersal mechanisms to the likelihood values is
required. Speciﬁcally, the behaviour of the system is sensitive to the choice of
both aggregation values between levels of abstraction and intralevel connection
probabilities.
By creating a spatial model of the ecosystem in the south-west of WA using this implementation of hierarchical patch dynamics, predictive analysis of
risk may be undertaken using spatial information about government policy and
community group choices. Hierarchical patch dynamics is used as a model of multiscale ecological heterogeneity and the simulation presented here demonstrates
a rigorous implementation of hierarchical patch dynamics. The fundamental approach to combining a variety of levels of abstraction (for human observation as
well as organism perception) is the key advantage of using this approach over
existing approaches.
The results of simulations suggest that the methodology is useful in creating
a physically realistic (and therefore useful) model of the uncertain phenomena of
weed propagation, but it is also suggestive of the need for introducing stronger
links to a priori information about individual dispersal mechanisms in practical

Simulating Weed Propagation

769

solutions to the issue of environmental weeds, rather than adopting a purely
empirical approach.
Acknowledgments. The authors acknowledge the Alcoa Foundation’s Sustainability & Conservation Fellowship Program for funding the postdoctoral fellowship of the senior author (http://strongercommunities.curtin.edu.au) and two
anonymous reviewers for helpful comments.

References
1. Myers, N., Mittermeier, R.A., Mittermeier, C.G., Fonseca, G.A.B.d., Kent, J.: Biodiversity hotspots for conservation priorities. Nature 403 (2000) 853–858
2. Ellis, A., Sutton, D., Knight, J., eds.: State of the Environment Report Western
Australia draft 2006. Environmental Protection Authority (2006)
3. Anon.: Gondwana Link Website (2006) [online] http://www.gondwanalink.org, last
accessed 05/10/2006.
4. Bradbury, R.H., Green, D.G., Snoad, N.: Are ecosystems complex systems? In
Bossomaier, T.R.G., Green, D.G., eds.: Complex Systems. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge (2000) 339–365
5. van Groenendael, J.M.: Patchy distribution of weeds and some implications for
modelling population dynamics: a short literature review. Weed Research 28 (1988)
437–441
6. Green, D., Klomp, N., Rimmington, G., Sadedin, S.: Complexity in Landscape
Ecology, Landscape Series. Volume 4. Springer (2006)
7. Greig-Smith, P.: Pattern in vegetation. Journal of Ecology 67 (1979) 755–779
8. Nathan, R., Perry, G., Cronin, J.T., Strand, A.E., Cain, M.L.: Methods for estimating long-distance dispersal. Oikos 103 (2003) 261–273
9. Wu, J.: Eﬀects of changing scale on landscape pattern analysis: scaling relations.
Landscape Ecology 19 (2004) 125 – 138
10. Wu, J.: From balance-of-nature to hierarchical patch dynamics: a paradigm shift
in ecology. Q. Rev. Biol. 70 (1995) 439–466
11. Wu, J., David, J.L.: A spatially explicit hierarchical approach to modeling complex
ecological systems: theory and applications. Ecological Modelling 153 (2002) 7–26
12. Chopard, B., Droz, M.: Cellular Automata Modeling of Physical Systems. Monographs and Texts in Statistical Physics. Cambridge University Press (1998)
13. O’Regan, W., Kourtz, P., Nozaki, S.: Bias in the contagion analog to ﬁre spread.
Forest Science 22 (1976) 61–68
14. Sch¨
onﬁsch, B.: Anisotropy in cellular automata. BioSystems 41 (1997) 29–41
15. Higgins, S.I., Richardson, D.M.: Predicting plant migration rates in a changing
world: The role of long-distance dispersal. The American Naturalist 153(5) (1999)
464–475
16. Okabe, A., Boots, B., Sugihara, K.: Spatial Tessellations — Concepts and Applications of Voronoi Diagrams. John Wiley & Sons (1992)
17. Buckley, Y.M., Anderson, S., Catterall, C.P., Corlett, R.T., Engel, T., Gosper,
C.R., Nathan, R., Richardson, D.M., Setter, M., Spiegel, O., Vivian-Smith, G.,
Voigt, F.A., Weir, J.E.S., Westcott, D.A.: Management of plant invasions mediated
by frugivore interactions. Journal of Applied Ecology 43 (2006) 848–857

