Exploration of TCM Masters Knowledge Mining
Xijin Tang, Nan Zhang, and Zheng Wang
Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Beijing 100080 P.R.China
{xjtang,zhangnan,wzheng}@amss.ac.cn

Abstract. With a very long history, traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) has a
rich knowledge about human health and disease by its special way. To avoid
losing lots of precious knowledge of TCM masters, endeavors have been
engaged to keep down those knowledge of TCM masters, such as their growth
experiences, effective practical cases toward sickness and typical treating methods and principles. In this paper, some computerized methods are applied toward those collected materials about some alive TCM masters in China
mainland to show a different way of exposing essential ideas of those TCM
masters which aims to help people understand the correspondence of TCM
views toward disease and body, and facilitate tacit knowledge transfer. This
work is one kind of qualitative meta-synthesis of TCM masters’ knowledge.
Keywords: Traditional Chinese medicine, knowledge mining, idea map, metasynthesis approach.

1 Introduction
Analysis is one of salient features of all modern science. The analytical approach is the
very foundation of modern medicine. Allied to the notion of analysis are the techniques
of quantification and the idea of causality. Analysis is far less important to traditional
Chinese medicine (TCM), which views human health and disease in terms of functional entities and disease-causing influence that are observed with the naked senses.
“Its sophistication lies in its observation of correspondence between gross phenomena,
and its organization of these observations through holistic systems of yin-yang and five
phases”[1]. Qualitativity and holistic correspondence are two principal features in
TCM whose basic concepts seem very simple while on the other hand create difficulties in applying them to practical situation. TCM diagnosis requires the identification
of subtle variations of the working body and assessment of their significance in relation
of each other. This is usually done by synthesis, rather than analytical reasoning. Ability to synthesize a host of subtle clues into a clear image and thus actually visualize a
patient’s condition is the mark of an experienced TCM physician. Due to complicated
reasons, TCM is confronting difficulties in its own development in comparison to that
of modern medicine. The knowledge transmission of TCM meets problems, even lots
of precious knowledge of TCM masters are losing. Endeavors have been taken to save
those masters’ tacit experiences by systematic organizing to keep down the knowledge
of those alive TCM masters, such as their growth experiences, effective practical cases
toward disease, typical treating methods, principles and prescriptions. On the other
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 35–42, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

36

X. Tang, N. Zhang, and Z. Wang

hand, a variety of information technologies have been applied to different facets of
TCM research to find some patterns or laws. Among those, data mining, text mining
and ontology are widely studied [2-9]. Those kind of research requires lots of datasets
or prerequisites for mining. In this paper, instead of concerning IT applications to TCM
research, the delivery of TCM masters’ knowledge is firstly addressed as a knowledge
conversion process where new insights may be acquired by TCM followers. To facilitate knowledge conversion, a computerized tool, TCM Master Miner, is designed to
help find basic concepts or constructs of TCM masters’ thoughts and applied to the
meta-synthetic engineering of TCM masters’ knowledge conversion. Next TCM
knowledge conversion is addressed.

2 TCM Knowledge Transfer and Computerized Support
Due to the holistic correspondence feature, new TCM college graduates still require
apprentice training after several year of institutionalized learning. Usually junior physicians write down prescriptions (explicit knowledge) for their mentors during daily
practice for rather a period of time to gain the ability of holistic observation. That is
one of biggest differences in education between TCM and modern medicine. Through
learning and practice under guidance of the experienced TCM physicians, less experienced physicians may gradually sense the insights of their mentors’ know-how by
careful observation and practice, an indication of masters’ tacit knowledge transfer to
students’ own knowledge, which could be regarded as a normal SECI (socialization,
externalization, combination and internalization) process of knowledge conversion
proposed by Nonaka and his colleague [10]. While the process of TCM knowledge
conversion lasts longer. Mass production of modern medical doctors is impractical to
train genuine TCM physicians.
To enable effective knowledge conversion, ideas of computerized support are naturally adopted to TCM knowledge conversion process to help less experienced physicians or even nonprofessionals to understand those TCM masters’ thoughts easier, i.e.
to acquire the essential framework or structure of their thoughts, especially the
mechanism of qualitative correspondence in diagnosis and treatment. Such kind of
supporting tools is expected to bring new threads for association and expand human’s
thinking space. If the disease recognition is an unstructured problem, the particular
diagnosing way of TCM is a problem structuring process. Those computerized aids
are expected to visualize the perspectives or structures of those TCM masters’ diagnosis. It is actually one kind of qualitative meta-synthesis, i.e. to find assumptions or
hypotheses about problems (syndromes) for further actions (treatment).
Among various developed supporting tools, group argumentation environment
(GAE) is specifically designed to support divergent group thinking and qualitative
meta-synthesis by versatile ways, such as visualization of expert opinion structure,
clustering of contributed opinions, various analysis about participation, etc. [11, 12].
GAE has been applied to various conference mining, on-line group discussions of
social issues, etc. However, few group activities such as conference exist in TCM practice. It is inappropriate to apply GAE directly to exploring TCM masters’ thoughts. A
TCM Master Miner is designed with improvements of analytical technologies in GAE.

Exploration of TCM Masters Knowledge Mining

37

3 TCM Master Miner for Thoughts Structuring
Current explorations by TCM Master Miner are mainly based on those materials contributed by TCM masters. One piece of thought can be expressed by a structure as
<master’s name, text of thoughts, keywords set>, which indicates that a master expresses his thoughts by a text (one sentence) with a set of keywords. The keywords set
is manually selected by domain people according the related text. Based on simple
representation of thoughts, a variety of explorations toward those masters are provided in TCM Master Miner, such as
– Visualization of correspondence between masters and their academic thoughts by
exploratory analysis
– Clustering of masters’ academic thoughts and concept extraction
– Visualization of idea structure by keyword network
– Comparisons between TCM masters, such as dominance, agreement and discrepancy, etc.
Next mechanisms of two feature functions are explained briefly.
3.1 Visualization of Correspondence Between Masters and Their Academic
Thoughts by Exploratory Analysis
This is achieved by correspondence analysis using frequency matrix F = (aij ) , aij

denotes the frequency of keyword j referred by the master i , i = 1,2,K, m ;
j = 1,2,K, n . The keywords are articulated as attributes of the masters.
Given frequency matrix, the mechanism of correspondence analysis is employed to
explore the correspondence relations between masters and keywords; the principal
components for given relations between keywords and masters could be acquired,
then both masters and keywords can be mapped into 2-dimensional space. As a result,
a pair of masters with more shared keywords may locate closer in the 2D space.
In TCM Master Miner, “exploratory analysis” fulfills above computing and displays the global structure of masters’ collective thoughts. Such kind of analysis can be
applied to any combination of available TCM masters, and may help to “drill down”
into those masters’ thoughts to detect some possible or emerging academic schools
among those masters even they have never realized before.
As a matter of fact, the visualized map may be more useful in understanding masters’ thought quickly, stimulating further thinking, such as finding interesting or
strange ideas which are worth in-depth investigation, etc.
Moreover, a variety of clustering method such as k-means clustering can then be
applied to ideas clustering and concept extraction for qualitative meta-synthesis based
on the spatial relations.
3.2 Idea Viewer by Keyword Network

The clustering of the thoughts of the concerned masters by spatial correspondence
provides perspectives of those masters, which is easier for novices to understand the
major ideas of those masters. While above mentioned clustering is not the only way to
detect structures of academic thoughts. Here is another way. Each text record of the

38

X. Tang, N. Zhang, and Z. Wang

masters’ thought has a group of keywords, which actually explain the basic constructs
or ideas applied to the specific problem solving by the masters. Then a keyword graph
Gl = ( K l , El ) of the lth record of the thoughts can be constructed where the vertex

refers to a keyword ki ∈ K l ( K l is the keyword set of the lth record), and if both
keyword ki and keyword k j occur simultaneously in one record, then an edge exists
between two vertexes eij = (ki , k j ), i ≠ j , eij ∈ El ( El is the edge set). Each vertex is
connected with all others at one keyword graph for one piece of text. Then the aggregation of all complete keyword graphs of one master or a group of selected masters
brings forward a topological keyword network, G = ( K , E ) , K = ∪ K l =
{ k1l , k 2l ,L, k nl }, E = ∪ El = ∪{eij } , i, j = 1,2,K, m; i ≠ j . This map is a weighted
undirected network where the weight of edge refers to the frequency of co-occurrence
of both keywords among all contributed texts of the master(s) and is referred as an
idea map of the concerned master(s). Various network analyses can then be undertaken to detect different perspectives of the master’s knowledge scope. The basic
mechanism had already been discussed in Ref. [13].
Next some trials are given.

4 Practical Analysis of Some Masters’ Thoughts Using TCM
Master Miner
Before applying TCM Master Miner, data preprocessing is undertaken.
1) Select representative texts from each TCM master’s contributing file;
2) Convert each selected text into the structure: <master’s name, text of thoughts,
keywords set> where each keyword denotes only one idea, syndrome, disease,
diagnosis or treatment.
3) Put all structured records of the concerned master(s) together into a data base file;
4) Converge keywords by their synonyms based on a corpus of TCM masters’
thoughts. The corpus is not a comprehensive one but growing with increasing
TCM masters’ materials. For example, TCM masters prefer to cite an ancient
book; while sometimes they refer its author. For keyword convergence, if the
keyword is the book name, then it is replaced by its author name.
With 8 TCM masters materials, some testing is undertaken here to show basic features of TCM Master Miner in exposing different perspectives about those masters’
thoughts, and help to experience the holistic view in TCM thinking.
Fig.1 shows a global correspondence structure of the 8 TCM masters. It is easily to
find that at the center of the map lies the keyword
(actually denotes the famous
TCM book Yellow Emperor’s Inner Canon) which is surrounded by names of some
famous ancient TCM masters (keywords). This reveals the basic fact that those alive
TCM masters mainly got basic ideas set forth in the Inner Canon written in the beginning of the first millennium and from other ancient masters. Moreover, the specialty
of some masters could also be speculated, such as both
and
are experts on
stomach and spleen disease according to their surrounding keywords. Here 4 experts,

Exploration of TCM Masters Knowledge Mining

39

Fig. 1. Visualization of the 8 TCM masters’ thought structure

Fig. 2. Visualization of the selected 4 TCM masters’ thought structure

(in the center),
(below the center),
(close to the bottom) and
(close to
left border), are selected and their group structure is as shown in Fig.2.
The absolute location of each expert is changed in Fig.2 while the relative location of
each expert still maintains, which may infer a somewhat stable joint knowledge structure of those 4 experts. Further observation indicates those 4 experts all treat stomach
and spleen disease. Moreover, it could be noticed that those keywords at the center of
Fig. 2 are
, and , all related with (qi, the dynamic product of the orchestration of muscle action, or the invisible but observable force that carries food downward
or upward in the digestive tract), which also exposes the treatment principles applied by

40

X. Tang, N. Zhang, and Z. Wang

1

0

6

4

2

5

3

Fig. 3. Clustering of keywords of the 8 TCM masters’ thought

Fig. 4. Four TCM masters’ thought map via keyword network (cutpoint: non circle node)

those TCM masters to stomach disease. With simple materials, basic principles of those
TCM experts’ thoughts are easily acquired.
With the spatial relations as shown in Fig.1, a centroid-based k-means clustering of
keywords is undertaken. Here as k = 7, seven clusters are acquired as shown in Fig. 3.

Exploration of TCM Masters Knowledge Mining

41

The keyword (whose label is of bigger size of fonts) which is closest to the centroid
of the affiliated cluster could be regarded as label of the cluster. For example, Cluster
No.5 includes 12 keywords and the keyword “
” is denoted as the representative of that cluster, which actually reflects one kind of concept extraction. Observers
can check details of that cluster and define a more appropriate label.
Fig. 4 is the keyword network of those 4 selected TCM masters whose knowledge
correspondence is as shown in Fig.2. Given such a network, more senses may be
acquired by a variety of network analysis in detecting some features of the idea map,
such as cutpoints, keyword structure of the network, etc. For example,
and are
two cutpoints, which may reflect their principal roles among those 4 masters. Together with Fig.2, more senses could be acquired about the major treating principles
applied by those 4 experts.

5 Concluding Remarks
With long history, traditional Chinese medicine still confronts a lot of difficulties,
such as the dissemination of its thoughts. This paper initially focus on modeling the
TCM knowledge conversion and then proposes a computerized tool, TCM Master
Miner, which aims to facilitate TCM knowledge conversion and qualitative metasynthesis during structuring process of masters’ thought.
By adopting various methods, such as correspondence analysis, graph theory and
complex networks analysis, TCM Master Miner provides
–
–
–
–

perspective analysis of TCM masters’ thoughts, which help people to acquire
TCM basic scenario about the working body of human beings easier;
exploratory detection of possible academic schools of current TCM masters;
extraction of essential TCM masters’ ideas;
awareness of unknown correspondence between different masters, between syndromes, diagnosis and treatment, etc.

TCM masters belong to TCM expert system and a variety of IT supports is regarded as machine system for quantitative computing and analysis. Both systems
contribute TCM knowledge to the increasing and validating TCM knowledge system.
Then those three systems construct a meta-synthetic system of TCM masters for TCM
knowledge production. TCM Master Miner belongs to machine system and undertakes somewhat knowledge mining by exposing hidden structure of those TCM masters’ thought and characteristics of basic TCM thinking, which may even reflect basic
situations of current TCM diagnosis and treatment, and then help understand the
situation of TCM in a right way.
Our current work is still at a very initial stage at both research and practice. Here
shows very basic analysis provided by TCM Master Miner in exploring alive TCM
famous experts’ thoughts due to space limits. Lots of further work will be under exploration, such as expert group detection by considering the working location of TCM
masters, consideration of more semantic meanings of keywords, such as origins or
background of the thoughts, concerned patterns or syndromes, treating methods and
principles or prescriptions, in correspondence analysis, etc. Besides, with more TCM
masters’ materials provided, more analysis will be undertaken for verification and
validation of TCM Master Miner in practice.

42

X. Tang, N. Zhang, and Z. Wang

Acknowledgments. The authors are grateful to Professor Weiliang WENG and
Mr. Fei WU who provide the basic datasets and help in this study, which is supported
by Natural Sciences Foundation of China under Grant No. 70571078 and the National
Key Technologies R&D Program (No. 2004BA721A01H05-02).

References
1. Wiseman, N., Boss, K.: Introduction to Glossary of Chinese Medical Terms and Acupuncture Points. Library of Congress number 89-2982, Paradigm, Brookline (1995)
2. Xiang, Z.-G.: A 3-Stage Voting Algorithm for Mining Optimal Ingredient Pattern of Traditional Chinese Medicine. Journal of Software. 14(11) (2003)1882-1890
3. Sun, Y.N., et al. OLAP and Data Mining Technology in Decision Supporting System for
Chinese Traditional Medical Diagnosis. Computer Engineering. 32(9) (2006) 251-252,
255 (in Chinese)
4. Liu, H.Y., Cao, Y.F., Qin, L.N.: Knowledge Acquisition Method of Traditional Chinese
Medical Expert by Case Base on Ontology. Computers System and Applications. 3 (2005)
80-83 (in Chinese)
5. Yan, J.-F, Zhu, W.-F.: Apply Rough Sets Theory in TCM Syndrome Factor Diagnosis Research. Chinese Journal of Basic Medicine In Traditional Chinese Medicine.12(2) (2006)
90-93 (in Chinese)
6. Zhu, Y.-H., Zhu, W.-F.: Syndrome Differentiation System of Traditional Chinese Medicine Based on Bayesian Network. Journal of Hunan University (Natural Sciences). 33(4)
(2006) 123-125 (in Chinese)
7. Cao, C.-G.: Extracting and Sharing Medical Knowledge. Journal of Computer Science and
Technology. 17(3) (2002) 295-303
8. Li, C., et al.: TCMiner: A High Performance Data Mining System for Multi-dimensional
Data Analysis of Traditional Chinese Medicine Prescriptions. In: Wang, S., et al. eds.: ER
Workshops 2004, LNCS 3289. Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg (2004) 246-257
9. Wu, Z. H., et al.: Text Mining for Finding Functional Community of Related Genes Using
TCM Knowledge. In: Boulicaut, J.-F., et al. (eds.): PKDD 2004, LNAI 3202. SpringerVerlag, Berlin Heidelberg (2004) 459-470
10. Nonaka, I., Takeuchi, Y.: Knowledge Creating Company. Oxford University Press, New
York (1995)
11. Tang, X. J., Liu, Y. J.: Computerized Support for Idea Generation during Knowledge Creating Process. In: Cao, C.G., Sui, Y.F. (eds.): Knowledge Economy Meets Science and
Technology (KEST’2004). Tsinghua University Press, Beijing, (2004) 81-88
12. Tang, X. J., Liu, Y. J.: Exploring computerized support for group argumentation for idea
generation. In: Nakamori, Y. et al. (eds.): Proceedings of the 5th International Symposium
on Knowledge and Systems Sciences (KSS’2004), Japan (2004) 296-302
13. Tang, X. J., Liu, Y. J.: Computerized Support for Qualitative Meta-synthesis as Perspective Development for Complex Problem Solving. In: Adam, F. et al. (eds.): Creativity and
Innovation in Decision Making and Decision Support (proceedings of IFIP WG 8.3 International Conference, CIDMDS’2006), Vol.1. Decision Support Press, London (2006) 432448

