Immersive Co-operative Psychological Virtual
Environments (ICPVE)
Ronan Jamieson, Adrian Haﬀegee, and Vassil Alexandrov
Advanced Computing and Emerging Technologies Centre,
The School of Systems Engineering, University of Reading,
Reading, RG6 6AY, United Kingdom
r.jamieson@reading.ac.uk

Abstract. Virtual Reality (VR) has been used in a variety of forms
to assist in the treatment of a wide range of psychological illness. VR
can also fulﬁl the need that psychologists have for safe environments in
which to conduct experiments. Currently the main barrier against using
this technology is the complexity in developing applications. This paper
presents two diﬀerent co-operative psychological applications which have
been developed using a single framework. These applications require different levels of co-operation between the users and clients, ranging from
full psychologist involvement to their minimal intervention. This paper
will also discuss our approach to developing these diﬀerent environments
and our experiences to date in utilising these environments.

1

Introduction

Psychologists are constantly seeking new methods and technologies for treating a range of psychological illness. They also have a need to created realistic
controllable environments in which to conduct research into the diﬀerent psychological aspects of human behaviour. One such technology that can fulﬁl both
these requirements is VR, which provides users with the means to create 3D
computer generated virtual environments (VE’s). These virtual environments
can be viewed in a variety of ways using diﬀerent display technology from nonimmersive systems (e.g. PC desktops) to semi-immersive (e.g. head mounted
displays, HMD’s[1]) right to fully-immersive systems (e.g. CAVE[2]). A fully immersive system allows us to be bodily immersed within the virtual environment,
this assists in creating a feeling of presence. As mentioned by Slater “presence
means that the user constructs a mental spatial model out of virtual stimuli
and the perception of the self in the virtual environment”[3]. The advantage
that a fully-immersive system gives the therapist/psychologist is, providing the
client/user with a increased feeling of presence. This will help lead to a more
successful treatment outcome for the client, as the environment will be more involving. Our applications will be focusing on utilising a fully immersive system
for these reasons.
There are many diﬀerent options on what constitutes a co-operative virtual
environment, and some of these will be discussed in more detail in the next section. In terms of what is considered a co-operative virtual environment for this
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2008, Part III, LNCS 5103, pp. 438–445, 2008.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

Immersive Co-operative Psychological Virtual Environments (ICPVE)

439

paper the following approach has been taken which has had to also consider the
terms from a physiological point of view as well. From a psychological viewpoint
diﬀerent types of environments require varying levels of co-operation between
client/user and therapist/psychologist. Therefore we have used the term in the
following context. A full co-operative environments requires continual feedback
from the client to enable the therapist to modify the environment. This modiﬁcation is required to enable the client to overcome their phobias/fears and
bring about a positive treatment outcome. Where as an automatic co-operative
environment reduces the needs on the physiologist to continually control the
environment as once the user completes a set task then the system can automatically move onto the next deﬁned task, this allows the physiologist to focus on
analysing the actions of the user. Also all actions of the user (e.g. head movement, length of time in a particular position/area) is recorded by the system
for further oﬀ-line analysis. It should be noted that co-operation should not
be confused with collaboration, in terms of VE these are two distinct diﬀerent
approaches.
The following section examines the related work concerning using VR for
treating physiological illness and as an experiential tool. It also outlines current
research into what is considered a co-operative virtual environments. Section
three provides an overview of how we have used our framework to create our
diﬀerent environments and discuss some of the speciﬁc requirements that each
environment has. This is then followed by an examination of our two application
areas that were chosen. Finally our conclusions are presented and future work if
required is outlined.

2

Related Work

When investigating previous work carried out in this area it becomes apparent
that there are two main topics that needed to be considered. The ﬁrst being the
use of VR in the treatment of psychological illness. The second being, what is
considered co-operation when using VEs.
The main focus for using VR with treating clients psychological problems has
focused on using HMD’s to created the virtual environment in which clients are
treated. Using this techology the most successfully treated illness have been situational based phobias. This is due to the fact the VR is a powerful medium
which allows for the creation of realistic environments. Situational phobias are
related to a persistent fear of a particular stimulus and therefore leads to an
avoidance of that stimulus. Acrophobia is an example of this type of phobia, it
is concerned with the fear of heights. Traditional therapy uses in-vivo techniques
to treat this, where as VR has been found to be as if not more successful than this
technique[4]. With the added beneﬁts of the being able conduct the treatment
in the privacy and safety of the therapists oﬃce. Also complex and potentially
costly situations are possible to recreate virtually. Another area that VR is currently being investigated as a potential therapeutic tool is Post Traumatic Stress
Disorder (PTSD)[5].

440

R. Jamieson, A. Haﬀegee, and V. Alexandrov

When implementing a co-operative psychological VE it is important to understand what interactions will be required and approaches others have taken.
In an traditional VE when dealing with users, who share the same VE and are
manipulating the same objects, there are some clear distinctions to be made in
the way that they work together. In terms of VE there is a diﬀerence between cooperation and collaboration. According to Broll, co-operative implies joint editing of shared objects, while collaborative additionally allows truly concurrent
editing[6] . Where as Margery deﬁnes co-operation as a situation where two or
more people interact on the same object in a concurrent but co-operative way[7].
As our interactions involve both the client/user and therapist/psychologist our
version of co-operation is very similar but diﬀerent, depending on what outcome
is required. In our case both parties are jointly engaged in the environment and
through their actions (conscious and sub-conscious) act on objects with in the
scenario which eﬀects the overall outcome of the session.

3

System Overview

Our two diﬀerent environments have been developed using a single framework,
VieGen[8], which is used for the creation and control of Virtual Interactive Environments. It aims to provide users with limited technical ability the power to
create their own virtual environments without the need of learning a complex
programming language. It also has a API for more advanced users.
A system overview of our approach can be seen in ﬁgure 1. This approach
allows us to take advantage of the modular nature of VieGen.

Immersive Co-operative Psychological Virtual Environments (ICPVE)

441

The following features of the framework are used in our applications:
3.1

Scene Conﬁguration

The Scene Conﬁguration module is responsible for loading the scene ﬁle. The
scene ﬁle is a text ﬁle written either in plain text or XML. It contains a description of the objects we require to create the environment, also the position and
scale of these objects. We can also assign attributes to objects if we require (e.g.
a car object can be dynamic and thus will be able to move around the scene
either on a random or pre-set path).
3.2

Logging

The Logging Module allows the psychologist to automatically capture data from
the experimental sessions. This data can be of various diﬀerent parameters and
date/time stamped. An example of these parameters could be the position the
users head was in at a particular location within the environment and for how
long they remained in a particular pose. It is a fully conﬁgurable module, which
allows the psychologist to decide which parameters they require capturing before
the commencing of the session.
3.3

Cave Scene Manager (CSM)

The Cave Scene Manager Module is used for the internal representation of a user
in the VE and manages the basic hierarchy. It provides a generic abstraction layer
to the underlying VR hardware allowing system independence. By utilising the
tracked users head position and ﬁeld of view, it manages which objects would
be observed and thus require rendering. It controls how this should be achieved
and maps the resulting display onto the VR hardware.
3.4

Scene Controller

The Scene Controller Module takes care of the maintenance and control of the
active environment. It handles the position and movements of any dynamic objects. It looks after the the logical hierarchies between objects, and uses these
for grouping their behaviour.

4

Application Areas

Creating applications that fulﬁl the needs of psychologists and therapists has
traditionally being an expensive and complex process, involving large amounts
of a developers time and eﬀort. This has not always delivered what the end
users required. But by using our approach we aim to assist the end users in
developing co-operative environments that fulﬁl their needs, by allowing them
to quickly and easily build these environments themselves.

442

R. Jamieson, A. Haﬀegee, and V. Alexandrov

Two speciﬁc applications have been develop which address diﬀerent psychological needs with varying levels of co-operation. The ﬁrst application is concerned
with addressing the requirements of creating a fully co-operative environment for
the treatment of situational phobias. Where as the second application is used to
create a automatic co-operative experimental environment for studying aspect of
human behaviour. These have been both developed using the same framework,
using modules of the VieGen framework that fulﬁl their requirements.
4.1

Fully Co-operative Virtual Environment

As mentioned previously VR has been used for the successful treatment of situational phobias. One such phobia, that has very serious consequences for the
clients who suﬀer from it is, Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD). This is usually caused by the client being placed in a scenario that causes a traumatic event
to occur to that person. This could be a violent assault, terrorist attacks, military
combat amongst others. We have based our application on a military combat
environment. This application was required to be fully co-operative due to the
fact that the client must engage with their therapist. They share the environment in terms of the client and therapist are communicating continually about
the environment and situations that occur within the session. They discuss the
feelings/emotions that gets invoked during the session. This co-operation must
take place to allow the client to move on emotionality/psychologically.
The therapist uses an input devices with contains a GUI, which allows them
to control the environment variables (e.g. time of day, audio, movement of people/vehicle). Based on the clients case notes, the therapist will have a record of
the traumatic event that lead to the clients PTSD. From this information the
therapist can increase the intensity of the environment (e.g. more explosions, insurgents appearing) and guide the client to a successful outcome. This outcome
will involve a reduction in the clients PTSD symptoms. The current application
is based on a simple environment that allows the client to navigate through an
scenario that resembles a downtown market in a middle eastern country (see
Figure 2(a)), there are also people and Vehicles within the environment (e.g.
soldiers, Humvee). Other features include the ability to add extra audio eﬀects
(e.g. gunﬁre, explosions, sirens), we can also add and remove insurgents (see
Figure 2(b)) from the environment.
The environment has been tested on a number of volunteers. Due to the serious
nature of the illness, it was not possible to intially test the environment with
clients suﬀering from PTSD. The volunteers time was used to test the immersion
of the environment versus a HMD version. Also tested was the interaction with
the diﬀerent elements within the environment (e.g. insurgents being added and
remove from the scene). The audio elements are vital to the feeling of presence
with the environment and various combinations where tested with the volunteers
feeding back on the most realistic audio eﬀects.

Immersive Co-operative Psychological Virtual Environments (ICPVE)

443

Fig. 1. (a) Market Place (b) Insurgent Appearing

4.2

Automatic Co-operative Virtual Environment

The ability to create controllable, measurable and realistic environments is a
requirement for psychologists that seek to study diﬀerent aspect of human behaviour. The developed application was required to be a fully automatic cooperative environment, the user would complete the task set and the system
would move onto the following task, thereby the system and user are automatically co-operating with the psychologist. This feature allowed the psychologist
to observe and analyse the users behaviour and reactions. The application developed was concerned with customer shopping behaviour, with the aim being
to carry out a psychological analysis of whether diﬀerent layouts of products,
both in positioning and in shelf dressing around them, would have any eﬀect on
the choice of users’ selected products.
Two series of trials of the environment were carried out with a range of diﬀerent
users. The ﬁrst being a Search Test, this test was to record the movements and
time taken for a user attempting to locate a product in a VE. The user started
next to one of a number of diﬀerent shelf layouts. They were shown one or two
virtual products when they then had to locate on the shelf. By recording how the
user moved with the environment, including their head positions and movements,
it was possible to reconstruct the way they acted within the test. The purpose of
this test was to discover if there was any relationship between searching and the
layouts used. An example of this trail can be seen in Figure 3(a).
The second trail was a Primed Selection Test, this test required the user
to move along a ﬁxed path within the environment. Along the path were ten
categories of products. The ﬁrst time along the path the subjects were asked to
select speciﬁc items from a list, and the second time they were free to choose
themselves. The hypothesis being investigated, was whether priming the users
with the sample product would cause them to select, or at least notice those
items. An example of this trail can be seen in Figure 3(b).
These trials were conducted with 16 users, who completed both tasks. The main
points of note that came from these trails were that the eﬀects of the diﬀernet
layouts did have an noticeable eﬀect on the users ability to ﬁnd particular products
and that if a user was primed about a certain product they could ﬁnd it quicker,
and were more likely to choose the primed product when given a free choice.

444

R. Jamieson, A. Haﬀegee, and V. Alexandrov

Fig. 2. (a) Search Trail (b) Primed Selection trail

5

Conclusion and Future Work

This paper has described the successful development of two diﬀerent co-operative
psychological environments for immersive VR systems. Each application has
incorporated the required levels of co-operation that is needed. This ranged from
fully co-operative to automatic co-operative environments. These applications
are currently at diﬀerent stages of implementation, the automatic co-operative
environment (i.e. customer shopping behaviour) has been utilised in successfully
testing various diﬀerent hypothesis on a wide range of diﬀerent consumers, where
as the fully co-operative environment (i.e. PTSD) is awaiting user trails which
should commence shortly.
Future work will include expanding the range and complexity of the consumer
trails in the automatic environment. We will also endeavour to increase the cross
section of consumers that are to be tested. Automatic environments that incorporate tracking the eye position of the consumer rather than head position will
be investigated as this should increase the accuracy of the gaze data captured.
Increasing the realism of the fully co-operative environment by the use of haptic feedback will be researched. The range of audio clips for both environments
will be expanded which also should increase the feeling of presence within each
application. Expanding the range of PTSD environments will be investigated,
to try and discover if there is a need for this approach within other professions
which are exposed to potentially stressful scenarios (e.g. ﬁre-ﬁghters, police). Research will also be carried out into the possibilities and advantages of enabling
the environments to be networked.

References
1. Sutherland, I.: A head-mounted three-dimensional display. In: Proceedings of Fall
Joint Computer Conference, vol. 33, pp. 757–764 (1968)
2. Cruz-Neria, C., et al.: The CAVE: audio visual experience automatic environment.
Communication of the ACM 35(6), 64–72 (1992)
3. Slater, M., et al.: Immersion, Presence and Performance in Virtual Environments:
An Experiment using Tri-Dimensional Chess. ACM Virtual Reality Software and
Technology (1996)

Immersive Co-operative Psychological Virtual Environments (ICPVE)

445

4. Schuemie, M.J., et al.: Treatment of Acrophobia in Virtual Reality: a Pilot Study.
In: Broeckx, F., Pauwels, L. (eds.) Conference Proceedings Euromedia, Antwerp,
Belgium, May 8-10, pp. 271–275 (2000)
5. Rizzo, A.A., et al.: User-Centered Design Driven Development of a VR Therapy
Application for Iraq War Combat-Related Post Traumatic Stress Disorder. In: Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on Disability, Virtual Reality and
Associated Technology, pp. 113–122 (2006)
6. Broll, W.: Interacting in distributed collaborative virtual environments. In: VRAIS,
Los Alamitos, pp. 148–155 (March 1995)
7. Margery, D., et al.: A general framework for cooperative manipulation in virtual
environments. In: Gervautz, M., Hildebrand, A., Schmalstieg, D. (eds.) Virtual Environments, Eurographics, pp. 169–178. Springer, Heidelberg (1999)
8. Haﬀegee, A., et al.: Creation and Control of Interactive Virtual Environments. In:
Alexandrov, V.N., van Albada, G.D., Sloot, P.M.A., Dongarra, J. (eds.) ICCS 2006.
LNCS, vol. 3992, pp. 595–602. Springer, Heidelberg (2006)

