Design Hierarchical Component-Based WebGIS
Yingwei Luo, Xiaolin Wang, Guomin Xiong, and Zhuoqun Xu
Dept. of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University, Beijing, P.R.China, 100871
lyw@pku.edu.cn

Abstract. A practical component-based WebGIS named as Geo-Union is presented. Geo-Union consists of four layers: storage layer, service layer, component layer and application layer. Service layer can be partitioned into another
two layers: client service layer and server service layer. The architectures and
object constitutions of each layer in Geo-Union are discussed in details. The
Web application model of Geo-Union is also presented. At last, some future
works in WebGIS, such as interoperability, security, distributed computing and
intelligent computing, are indicated and simply explored.

1 Introduction
Geographical Information System, GIS, is an effective tool that digitally reflects the
geometry spatial situation on which human society lives and the various transitional
spatial data. GIS describes the attributes of these spatial data and simulates the action
of geospatial objects in a model way. Under the supports of software and hardware,
GIS uses the given formats to support input/output, memory and display. It also provides the service of inquiring geometry spatial information, doing compositive analyses and making assistant decision. After several years’ development, GIS is being
wildly used in every aspect and plays an important role.
WebGIS is the Internet GIS that has Browse/Server architecture. Recently,
WebGIS application has become more and more popular in many GIS user communities [1] because of the fascinating development of computer networks as well as the
more and more popular use of the Internet. The key steps to promote WebGIS to a
more practical situation are rational adjusting computation functions and enhancing
performance. In this paper, a practical multi-layer component-based WebGIS model
Geo-Union and its Web application model are discussed.

2 Multi-layer Component-Based WebGIS Model Geo-Union
Component modeling is one of the main approaches to enhance functions of WebGIS.
Geo-Union system is based on component technique and Client/Server architecture.
The system includes four layers: storage layer, service layer, component layer and
application layer, with client and server existing in service layer [2-4], shown in Figure
1. The multi-layer component-based model enables GIS functions to be distributed in
network effectively and brings high reusability of the system. Furthermore, it provides
effective functions for further development and integration with other systems.
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3516, pp. 515 – 522, 2005.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

516

Y. Luo et al.

Fig. 1. Architecture of Geo-Union

2.1 Geo-Union Storage Layer
Storage Layer is the fundamental part in Geo-Union architecture, responsible for
storage management of GIS data. With the help of ORDB, the layer stores and manages geography spatial and non-spatial data. Main objective of the layer includes how
to present and store GIS data and how to maintain relations of these data. Below is
type of GIS data: (1) Layer: Collection of spatial entities with the same type. (2) Entity: Spatial object composed of geometry and attribute data. Geometry data represents geometrical location of spatial object while attribute data describes society data.
(3) Legend: A method to visualize Spatial Entity. (4) Legend library: Composed of
0~n Legends. (5) Reference system: Reference frame and Attitude frame of the Layer.
(6) Display Setting Item: Mapping relation between Spatial Entity and Legend. (7)
Display Setting: Composed of Display Setting Items.
Figure 2 shows the relations among GIS data. Encapsulation and management of
GIS data exist in all the layers: server, client and component layer, and the relation in
each layer are the same.

Fig. 2. E-R map in Geo-Union Storage Layer

2.2 Geo-Union Service Layer
Service Layer is responsible for management and access of GIS data, and composed
of Geo-Union Client and Server. Geo-Union Client, as a server, provides data accessing and processing services for Geo-Union Component Layer, while Geo-Union
Server manages and retrieves spatial data from Geo-Union Storage Layer, as a client.
Geo-Union Client and Server are two independent but highly related parts: the Server
provides functions such as data accessing service, spatial data index, basic spatial
relation query, transaction and data sharing; through those services provided by the
Server, the Client provides basic GIS tools and re-development functions. Cache, part

Design Hierarchical Component-Based WebGIS

517

of Geo-Union Client, can reduce network load thus improve system response rate.
Cache is also in Geo-Union Server, with similar but different implementation to the
Client. Geo-Union Client can be used in the development of server simulator, whose
Cache enables less network load and quick system response rate.
! Geo -Union Server
Geo-Union Server is the only interface to GIS data for Geo-Union client. Through
interaction with Storage Layer, the Server provides Geo-Union client with following
services: connection service, data accessing service (cache service included), transaction and data sharing service. Those services are implemented mainly by a series of
object component, including connection object, data object and cache object. These
objects have corresponding structure and function with those in Geo-Union Client.
In Geo-Union Server, a data source table is used to manage multiple distributed
spatial databases. Therefore one Geo-Union Server can serve multiple Geo-Union
Clients simultaneously. Geo-Union Clients can also access multiple spatial databases
through Geo-Union Server (shown in figure 3).

Fig. 3. Geo-Union Server and Geo-Union Client

! Geo-Union Client
Geo-Union Client is deployed on the client machine and connected with Geo-Union
Server, providing GIS data accessing service and data processing service. Geo-Union
client include the following functions: GIS data network access and management, GIS
data object management, general spatial analysis arithmetic and spatial data cache
management. Structure of Geo-Union Client is showed in figure 4. Below are the
main objects in Geo-Union Client:
(1) Connection Object. Similar to Connection Object in Geo-Union Server, it manages communicating connections, GIS data access and transactions between Client
and Server. It is also responsible to store and release connection relevant data objects
in memory, maintain caches in Client and reduce network data flow.
(2) Data Object. Include Layer, Entity, Geometry Object, Record Collection, Map,
Reference System, Display Setting, Display Setting Item, Legend Library and Legend. Considering the storage and access in Client’s memory, the Client only supports
two statues of Data Object: binding and dissociation. In other words, the Client can
not only bind Data Object with data in Storage Layer through Geo-Union Server, but
also store Data Object in its own memory. Below are status details of every kind of
Data Object: (a) Layer is a collection of Entity. Layer also implements some basic
spatial search operations such as K-near search, search for entities nearest to a specified entity in a layer. (b) Entity is the atomic access unit in GIS data, including Entity

518

Y. Luo et al.

Identifier, geometry object attribute, user attribute and annotation. (c) Geometry Object includes point, multipoint, line, multi-line, polygon and bitmap. Basic spatial
arithmetic of relation between Geometry Objects is also provided. (d) Record Collection. As another interface to access Entities besides Layer, Record Collection is the
uniform interface to access spatial and user attributes. It can store the results of
searching for entities in a layer in the form of snapshot, support cursor operation, and
support both immediate and batch update modes. (e) Map manages and accesses layers’ structure information in Client. Through a Map Object, the system can organize
layers into a practical map.
(3) Arithmetic Object. Arithmetic Object implements general spatial analysis
arithmetic such as overlay analysis, network analysis and etc.
(4) Spatial Data Cache. In Spatial Data Cache, historical records of Data Object are
stored to avoid retrieving repeatedly the same data from servers, thus reducing network load and user waiting time.

Fig. 4. Design Architecture of Geo-Union Client

2.3 Geo-Union Component Layer
Geo-Union Component Layer can provide Geo-Union Application Layer with many
services. Geo-Union Component Layer is the encapsulation of Geo-Union Client and
offers outer users GIS service interfaces to compose a complete GIS component library. The interfaces include Data Access Object, Map Display Object, Geometry
Object, Function Object, Legend Edit and Display Object, Tool Object and etc. Composition and relation of these objects can be shown as figure 5.
! Data Access Object
Data Access Object provides GIS data manipulation functions as below: (1) GxConnection, connection object for GIS data access on the server. Operations such as connection or disconnection, layer object management, reference system management,
display setting object management, legend library object management and transaction
are allowed in GxConnection. (2) GxLayer, layer access object. Operations such as
receiving and changing layer basic information, search and analysis based on layer,
managing and searching entities in a layer, importing and exporting data are allowed.
(3) GxEntity, entity object, through which users can access geometry and property

Design Hierarchical Component-Based WebGIS

519

data of an entity. (4) GxLegendLib, legend library. Each legend has a number greater
than 0. (5) GxLegend, used for describing a legend. (6) GxReferenceSystem, used for
describing a reference system. (7) GxDisplaySetting, display setting, which describes
the visualization method of a layer. (8) GxDisplaySettingItem, one item in a display
setting, which describes the visualization method of a kind of entities. (9) GxRecordset, search record set, composed of searched results. (10) GxFields, field connection
of an entity. (11) GxField, one field of an entity. (12) GxSelection, selected entity
number connection.

Fig. 5. Object Diagram in Component Layer of Geo-Union

! Map Display Object
Map display object can control and display GIS data, it includes: (1) GxMapView,
map display control, is used for displaying map. In order to facilitate development on
this control, we provide a tool management object and a group of input events.
Through the tool management object GxTools, different tool objects (see also Tool
Object) can be added in GxMapView to implement many special functions such as
map edit, entity select, map measure and so on. The input events are all mouse or
keyboard relevant and can be used in secondary development to implement customized functions. (2) GxMap is an abstract concept, can be displayed in GxMapView.
One GxMap is corresponding to a collection of GxMapLayers. (3) GxMapLayers, a
collection of map layers, can manage its owned map layers. (4) GxMapLayer, map
layer in abstract concept, is corresponding to the map layer in storage. GxMapLayer is
the map layer provided for users and includes legend configuration, reference system
and annotation.
! Geometry Object
Geometry Object includes GxPoint (point entity), GxPoints (point collection), GxLine
(line entity), GxLines (line collection), GxPolygon (polygon entity), GxRect (rectangle entity), GxBitmap (bitmap) and so on.

520

Y. Luo et al.

! Function Object
Function Object has two functions: one is that it can help users utilize other objects
conveniently in the secondary development process; the other function is enable users
to carry on special analysis in a more convenient way. (1) GxError, error handling
objec. (2) GxEnumeration, enumeration object to contain the results of enumeration
methods in GxConnection such as EnumLayer (enumerate all layers), EnumLegendLib (enumerate all legend libraries), EnumReferenceSystem (enumerate all reference systems), EnumDisplaySetting (enumerate all display settings) and so on. (3)
GxObjectFactory, object factory. In IIS ASP programming, only ActiveX control
object s can be created directly and other programmable objects must be created
through controls in a indirect way. Therefore, GxObjectFactory is designed to support
the creation of GIS object in all circumstances. (4) GxArray, is a kind of array, whose
element can be any type or object. (5) GxSet is a kind of set, whose element can be
any type or object. No element is the set can be equal to any other element. (6) GxUtitlity, a special function utility object, contains some functions which are difficult to be
implemented in some visualized programming languages such as VisualBasic, Delphi,
PowerBuilder. The functions includes object creating (i.e. creating a GxPoint object
by x and y coordinates), special statistics and coordinate transforming. (7) GxAnalysis, special analysis object, including overlay analysis, clipping analysis and connectivity analysis.
! Legend Edit and Display Object
Legend Edit and Display Object can create, edit, manage and explore legends. It includes GxLegendEditor (legend edit control), GxLengendLibView (legend library
explore control) and GxLengendView (legend display control).
! Tool Object
Tool Object implements a set of basic mouse interfaces, including GxTools (tool
manage object to manage a set of other tool objects), GxPick (pick entities in a map
layer), GxInputLine (input line entities in a map layer), GxInputPolygon (input polygon entities in a map layer), GxInputRect (input rectangle entities in a map layer),
GxZoomIn (map zoom in), GxZoomOut (map zoom out) and GxPalm (map roam).
2.4 Geo-Union Application Layer
In Geo-Union Application Layer, users can develop customized GIS applications.
This layer’s main job is to obtain customized GIS application by pruning and integrating services provided by Component Layer.

3 Web Application Model of Geo-Union
Geo-Union has complete functions and flexible adaptabilities. A series of techniques
to construct GIS application system are provided by Geo-Union, including server
construction and application development. Geo-Union not only supports stand-alone
environment, but is quite suitable for developing GIS application system, especially
Web-based GIS application in network environment.

Design Hierarchical Component-Based WebGIS

521

Geo-Union component layer contains a group of ActiveX controls and relative programmable objects. ActiveX controls can be embedded in Web pages directly. Web
application model in Geo-Union is shown in figure 6.

Fig. 6. Web Application Model in Geo-Union

Explorer communicates with Web server through HTTP and then gets WebGIS
application module. Explorer interprets and executes the application module after
receiving it. WebGIS applications are developed with Geo-Union components in
specific application domain. WebGIS application and Web server compose WebGIS
application server. WebGIS application can also access Geo-Union server to handle
requests from Explorer.
Geo-Union server provides outer users interfaces to search and access spatial and
non-spatial interfaces. As a client of Geo-Union server, Web server accesses geometry data through Geo-Union server, using ODBC or COM/DCOM. Explorer also
needs accessing spatial and non-spatial data when interpreting and executing WebGIS
application module. Here, as a client of Geo-Union server, explorer can search and
access data using DCOM. When accessing spatial data which is transferred in vector
form, explorer does not need downloading all data of the layer, but requests dynamically required entity data from Geo-Union server using entity data miss request algorithm. At the same time, as a client, Geo-Union server accesses spatial database to get
spatial and non-spatial data through ODBC.
Based on commercial ORDBs, spatial database manages spatial and non-spatial
data tightly relative with WebGIS application. Geo-Union server accesses database
through ODBC, so the database needn’t be confined in a certain specific databases.

4 Conclusion
Geo-Union system has been applied in many fields in China, such as pipe network
integration information system, electric information system, water environment information system and fire emergency information system. At present, these systems
are under stable and correct condition. What is more, the system keeps unfailing performance after repetitious visits.
Geo-Union system is also the result of research and application in some critical
techniques of WebGIS. However, to reach higher practicability, many works left as

522

Y. Luo et al.

follows: (1) As the development of Internet, more and more spatial data become
available. But these data have different formats. It is still hard to share the data and
services between various GIS. In order to solve this problem, people have studied
standardization of GIS, but the actual open GIS has not been formed. (2) Along with
the further open of Internet, the security of visiting spatial data is an unavoidable
problem which WebGIS has to face. It is hoped that the secret spatial data in Web
can’t be achieved unlawfully. (3) WebGIS will meet the needs of thousands upon
thousands users who visit Internet at the same time. How to guarantee the exactitude
of concurrency and how to use the system ability farthest to meet the users’ visit
needs are the keys to making WebGIS worthy of its name. (4) Nowadays, intelligent
agent technique is a main research direction of software domain. It provides an effective solution for establishment of complicated distributed software system. Of course,
agent technique also provides a fire-new method for the establishment of WebGIS [6].
Researches on how to exert agent technique on distributed GIS construction and combine it tightly with geometry spatial metadata are not only for GIS data sharing and
service sharing, but for deep GIS application cooperation and intelligent GIS information services. Furthermore, the researches provide a simple and convenient agentbased system development method for users, thus having abroad application future
and important practicality [7].

Acknowledgement
This work is supported by the National Research Foundation for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education of China under Grant No. 20020001015; the 973 Program
of China under Grant No.2002CB312000; the National Science Foundation of China
under Grant No.60203002; the 863 Program under Grant No. 2002AA135330 and
No. 2002AA134030; the Beijing Science Foundation under Grant No.4012007.

References
1. Zhang, Li, et al: Geographic Information System in the Internet Age (in Chinese), ACTA
GEODAETICA et CARTOGRAPHICA SINICA, 27(1): 9-15 (1998).
2. Luo, Yingwei, et al: The Components Design for WebGIS (in Chinese), Chinese Journal of
Image and Graphics, 4(A): 79-84 (1999).
3. Li, Muhua: Research and Implementation of the Componentization of Distributed WebGIS
(in Chinese), [Master Dissertation]. Beijing: Peking University (2000).
4. Wu, Jian: A Study on Spatial Data Management in Component-based Distributed WebGIS
(in Chinese), [Master Dissertation], Beijing: Peking University (2000).
5. Cong, Shengri: Key Issues on ORDB-Based Component GIS (in Chinese), [PhD Dissertation], Beijing: Peking University (1999).
6. M. Wooldridge and N. R. Jennings: Intelligent Agents: Theory and Practice, Knowledge
Engineering Review, 10(2): 115-152 (1994).
7. Luo, Yingwei, et al: The Research on Geo-Agents (in Chinese), Journal of Computer Research and Development, 37(12): 1504-1512 (2000).

