SCA-Based Reconfigurable Access Terminal
Junsik Kim1, Sangchul Oh1, Eunseon Cho1, Namhoon Park1, and Nam Kim2
1

Mobile Telecommunication Research Division
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute, Daejeon, Korea
{junsik,scoh,escho,nhpark}@etri.re.kr
2
Dept. of Comput. & Commun. Eng., Chung-Buk Nat. Univ., Cheongju, Korea
namkim@chungbuk.ac.kr

Abstract. In this paper, we propose a Reconfigurable Access Terminal (RAT)
which is composed of SDR(Software Defined Radio) hardware platform test
bed and SCA(Software Communication Architecture) - based software
platform. Specifically, we propose a design of the SDR Access Terminal
middleware, wireless protocol software component and the procedure of
reconfiguration which changes one mode into the other mode. Our RAT system
shows that it is capable of changing mode between WiMAX(World
Interoperability for Microwave Access) and HSDPA(High Speed Downlink
Packet Access). The radio access protocol and application components of RAT
are designed through a SCA adapter.
Keywords: SCA; SDR, Reconfiguration, Software Component, Middleware.

1 Introduction
The SDR, which is a communications device whose functionality is defined in
software, has made itself become a key enabling technology in order to realize such a
flexible and reconfigurable radio system. Several research works have involved in the
development of SDR systems and their efforts focus on hardware design and software
framework. However, the current SDR system is insufficient to provide their full
potential due to the performance problems. The SCA specification by JTRS(Joint
Tactical Radio System) establishes a hardware-independent development framework
with baseline requirements for the software definable radios [1]. The SCA has been
published to provide a common open architecture that can be used to build a family of
radios across multiple domains. The SCA also supports software reusability.
Meanwhile, the SCA aims to define a middleware that allows baseband, modulation,
protocols modules working together[2][3].
The remainder of this paper is as follows. We provide an overview of the SCA
which is a software platform for the RAT and provides a flexible and reconfigurable
environment in Section 2. In Section 3, we present the RAT system architecture and
functionalities which includes hardware platform and software platform architecture.
Then, we describe the procedure of reconfiguration function. Finally, conclusions are
drawn.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 713–716, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

714

J. Kim et al.

2 SCA Overview
The SCA defines an Operating Environment (OE) and specifies the services and
interfaces that the applications use from the environment. The interfaces are defined
by using CORBA IDL and graphical representations are made by using Unified
Modeling Language (UML). The OE consists of a Core Framework (CF) that is the
essential set for the open interface, a CORBA middleware and a POSIX-based OS.
The CF describes the interfaces, their purposes and operations[1]. It provides an
abstraction of the underlying software and hardware layers for software application
developers. The SCA compatible systems must implement these interfaces. The
application components of the SCA divide into two parts, CORBA and Non-CORBA
components. The communication between CORBA components and Non-CORBA
components is possible through a SCA adapter[4].

3 Reconfigurable Access Terminal
We describe our sample RAT platform architecture based on SCA. Fig. 1 describes
the reference implementation system architecture for demonstrating SCA-based RAT
software download function between WiMAX and HSDPA. On the hardware
platform, it is organized by the air interface waveform software components from the
software download center using over the air download scheme[2].

Fig. 1. Reconfigurable Access Terminal

3.1 RAT Hardware Platform Architecture
The functional modules on hardware platform are composed of mother board,
processor board with GPP(General Purpose Processor), FPGA for base band modem,
IF board, RF module and reserved DSP board. As user interface ports, Ether-net port,
USE2.0 port, UART port and JTAG for FPGA downloading/debugging are provided.
As main control processor, PowerPC embedded in XC2VP30 operates at 150 MHz
(Upto 300MHz is available in Xilinx data sheet). 128 Mbyte FLASH is used for

SCA-Based Reconfigurable Access Terminal

715

program ROM, 128 Mbyte SDRAM is used for program RAM. Two 1Mbit DPRAM
(CY7C028) are provided for reserved data memory for MAC hardware. The both of
RF and HSDPA modem is under construction, therefore, at the HSDPA mode, the
lower transport layer of MAC connected to LAN through a modem simulator and
tested.
3.2. RAT Software Platform Architecture
The RTOS, CORBA, and SCA CF reside on the main board memory and application
components are downloaded from the download center or other auxiliary memory.
The radio protocol and application components of the RAT system divide into two
parts, CORBA and Non-CORBA components. The communication between CORBA
components and Non-CORBA components is possible through the SCA adapters.
WF Subsystem

C F S ubsystem
Instantiation
fork() and exec()
Initialize ()

Waveform
Manager

getPort()
connectPort()

Domain
Manager

Start/Stop

Assembly
Controller

start()
stop()

Device
Manager

File
Manager

Change Property
query(configProperties)
configure(configProperties)

Executable
Device

File
System

Shutdown
PHY
Resource
Adapter

MAC
Resource
Adapter

TE
Resource
Adapter

stop()
disconnectPort()
releaseObject (ac)
releaseObject (res)

File
System

Log

Application
Factory

Application

Log/Event
log()
event()

Fig. 2. RAT middleware operation on the Software platform

Fig. 2 shows the middleware operation on the software platform and interfaces
between the subsystems of our RAT system. The software platform is specified by
two main subsystems which are CF (Core Framework) subsystem and WF
(Waveform) subsystem. The CF subsystem, provides the SCA software environment
that explained before, makes the efficient operation each manager possible as the
middleware which comprises the waveform which is the application managing the
wireless access and which it runs. The WF subsystem is comprised of the wireless
access protocol and application components, and it is applied in the position of a
middleware with the object of a drive. The CF subsystem installs and comprises the
wireless access software components on the WF subsystem through a command
including the start / stop, the change property for the parameter delivery, a shutdown,
the history log / event for message passing, and etc. and runs.

716

J. Kim et al.

4 Reconfigure Procedure
In previous section, we presented the hardware and software platform of the RAT
system. Each platform has the proper structure to reconfigure the system. In this
section, we describe the mode change function as the core function of the SDR. The
mode change function is initiated from the RATM which is software block, and
responsible for the management of the RAT. As mentioned above, the RAT can
provide the service of two modes i.e. WiMAX and HSDPA independently. When the
RAT is currently on service with the WiMAX mode, the user (or operator) via the
RATM wants to change the HSDPA mode. When the RATM decides to change the
mode, it sends the change mode request with a HSDPA software package to the MC
which is software block and responsible for the mode control of the RAT, and it
unpacks and installs the HSDPA software package into the specified device modules.
The MC sends the change mode request to the device modules. Once receiving the
change mode request, the device modules let the WiMAX software modules stop and
shutdown. If the change mode procedure of the WiMAX software modules is
complete, the MC sends the reconfigure request to the component update unit. After
the update completion, the MC sends the execution request to the device module.
Once receiving the execution request, the device modules let the software modules of
the HSDPA run. If the entire change mode procedure is complete, the MC responses
the RATM.

5 Conclusion
This paper represents a Reconfigurable Access Terminal developed on the basis of the
SCA standard architecture and it is capable of providing the WiMAX and the HSDPA
service. The RAT currently adopted an interim architecture using a SCA adaptor.
However, if there are more advances in the SCA technology as well as the SDR
hardware, the architecture of the RAT will be upgraded for the system performance.
Specifically, we designed SCA-based RAT software platform and illustrated the
procedure of reconfiguration which changes one mode into the other mode. The
research of reducing the reconfiguration time, FPGA componentization, and software
modem improvement should be studied later.

References
1. JTRS website, http://www.jtrs.army.mil
2. SDR Forum website, http://www.sdrforum.org
3. Saehwa Kim, Jamison Masse, Seongsoo Hong, and Naehyuck Chang : SCA-based
Component Framework for Software Defined Radio, Proceedings of the IEEE Workshop on
Software Technologies for Future Embedded Systems 2003, May 15-16, (2003) 3-6
4. EunSeon Cho, ChangKi Kim, YeonSeung Shin, and JinUp Kim : SCA-based multi-LAN
application development, Proceedings of VTC2004-Fall, 26-29 Sept. (2004) 1978 - 1982

