CAD recognition using three mathematical models
J. Martyniak, K.Stanisz-Wallis, L.Walczycka
Dept. of Biostat. & Medic. Informat., Collegium Medicum Jagiellonian University, Cracow, Poland
P\PDUW\Q#F\INUHGXSO

, P\ZDOOLV#NLQJDF\INUHGXSO

Abstract. In this paper we presents the Bayesian diagnostic model and the logistic regression model with
two different entrance strategies for determining factors predicting CAD risk. In the (R) methodological
strategy the appropriate ratios lipids/apoproteins were considered as independent variables, in the (PC) the
principal components analysis was used as data reduction techniques. The model based on Bayes’ Theorem
and the logistic regression model were good predictive models. It is the main of the project to try to design a
tool for diagnosing.

1. The Aim
Coronary artery disease remains still the greatest cause of premature death for the Polish population. In the
industrial countries they are responsible for 50% of all the death cases. The reasons of this are related to the
adverse changes in the population’s lifestyle resulting in the increase of the so called “ risk factors” for
development of arteriosclerosis, leading to coronary artery disease ( CAD ). The concept of “ risk factor “ comes
from a long – term studies of Framingham population, in which the existence of several egzo-and endogenic
phenomena has been shown, which are causally related to the CAD occurrence.
Taking into account the recent clinical studies, scientific achievements and more complete understanding of the
peril and the action mechanism of the “ risk factors “ the International Commission for Prevention of Coronary
Artery Disease, in cooperation with the International Society for Arteriosclerosis and Obesity, the European
Society of Hypertension and the Diabetes Society has prepared an accurate and comprehensive document
concerning the primary and secondary prevention of coronary artery disease.
The early detection and elimination of the risk factors of the CAD is particularly important., because in recent
years the clinical form of the disease has been found in many young persons.
The earlier and greater is the awareness of the risk level for development of the disease in a given patient, the
more appropriate and on – time decisions will be taken regarding the prevention of its development. The related
changes in the patient’s nourishment habits and lifestyle and the necessity of pharmacological treatment ( choice
of the appropriate medicine and its dose ) depend on the global risk assessment – the probability of coronary
artery disease development in a given population, family and even particular patient.
Therefore the practical importance of prediction of the coronary artery disease development can be hardly
overvalued. This fact stimulates the search for the best methodological solution.
Among more than 250 risk factors described up to date at least three have been recognized as independent i.e.
individually responsible for development of the disease. These are: disorders in lipid level, uncured arterial
hypertension and smoking. The lipid metabolism disorders have been found to be a primary risk factor for the
CAD.
In the above mentioned huge amount of available information the contemporary mathematical methods become
indispensable during the elaboration of results of experimental and clinical studies.
It is important to predict individuals „at risk” on the base of biochemical analyses. The aim of the study was to
compare the anticipation accuracy of three different methods using a logistic regression analysis and the
Bayesian diagnostic model.

2. The Data
The database used in the present study has been collected in the Dept. of Clinical Biochemistry, Chair of Clinical
Biochemistry and Diagnosis in the Collegium Medicum of Jagiellonian University ( CMUJ ), Cracow, and it
contained anonymous data of patients treated in the Clinic for Metabolic Diseases, CMUJ ( including period
1985-1990 ), the Institute of Cardiology, CMUJ ( 1992-1998 ) and groups of patients from a selected population
of healthy persons from the Tarnow Voiodship ( the POL – MONICA project, realized in years 1985-1998 ).
228 subjects comprising 95 patients with arteriographically evidenced CAD (males, aged 47.99+11.12) and 133
healthy control (males, aged 47.11+7.29) without CAD were studied.
Blood samples were withdrawn after overnight fasting. Plasma levels of biochemical variables were assayed
using automatic colorimetric methods, except insulin determined by radioimmunoassay.

Plasma lipid profile was determined as follows: total and free cholesterol and trigliceryde level in plasma (Ch,
fCh, tg) and lipoproteins VLDL (VLDL-Ch, VLDL-fCh, VLDL-tg), LDL (LDL-Ch, LDL-fCh, LDL-tg) and
HDL (HDL-Ch, HDL-fCh, HDL-tg).
Esterified cholesterol was calculated (eCh, VLDL-eCh, LDL-eCh, HLDL-eCh).
Apolipoprotein A1 level in plasma and HDL (apoA1, HDL-apoA1), alipoproteina B level in plasma and VLDL,
LDL (apoB, VLDL-apoB, LDL-apoB); as well as protein B in VLDL, LDL and HDL (VB, LB, HB) were also
determined.
Plasma glucose and insulin were determined in fasting state (Glu0, Ins0), and after 30, 60 and 120 min. during
the oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) (Glu30, Glu60, Glu120, Ins30, Ins60, Ins120 respectively).
Sum of glucose (SumGlu) and insulin (SumIns) were calculated as an area under glycemic and insulin kinetic
curves estimated during OGTT respectively. Body mass index (BMI [kg/m2]) was calculated.

3. Statistical methods
A logistic regression model with two different entrance strategies for determining factors predicting CAD
prevalence was used. In the first (R) methodological strategy the appropriate ratios lipids/apoproteins were
considered as independent variables. Principal component analysis was used as data reduction techniques for the
second strategy (PC).
A model based on Bayes’ theorem was used for calculating post-test probability.
The data set for the both methods was divided in two groups:
I – the learning set ( 121 patients - 72 persons in good health and 49 persons with CAD )
II –the test sets ( 107 patients - 57 persons in good health and 50 persons with CAD )
SAS and STATISTICA PL programmes were used for calculations.

4. R strategy
4.1 Logistic Regression Model
For whole group of patients the relationship between five scores and CAD was explored by the logistic
regression analysis. The probability of the appearance of the CAD (Y) conditional by the variable (xp) can be
calculated by means of the following form :

p( Y = the appearance of CAD ) =

where:

exp(b

0

1 + exp(b

+ b x + ... + b x )
1 1

0

p

p

+ b x + ... + b x )
1 1

p

(1)

p

x1 ,x2,...xp - vector of independent variables – ratios, calculated from biochemical variables:
SumGlu/SumIns, LDL-Ch/LDL-apoB, HDL-Ch/HB, HDL-tg/HDL-apoA1 and BMI
bo ,b1,...bp - unknown coefficient of the regression
Y – dependent variable.

Table 1 shows the variables which significantly influence the appearance of the CAD.
Table 1. The significance of logistic regression coefficients assessed by the Wald chi-square statistic
Ratios of
variables

Coefficient
bi

Standard error

p - Value

SumGlu/SumIns

-26,35

6,58

0,0001

HDL-Ch/HB

-6,42

3,23

0,049

HDL-tg/HDL-apoA1

14,51

6,16

0,02

b0

4,50

2,39

0,062

(test Walda)

5. PC strategy
5.1 Principal Components Analysis
Principal components analysis is the multivariate data reduction technique.
This analysis selects the linear combination of the variables that best capture the variability of the data in a
multidimensional space.
Given a data set with n numeric variables, m principal components can be computed. Each principal component
is a linear combination of the original variables, with coefficients equal to the eigenvectors of the correlation or
covariance matrix . The eigenvectors are customarily taken with unit length .
The principal components are sorted by descending order of the eigenvalues, which are equal to the variances of
the components .
We have n variables, X1, X2, ..., Xn all of which are standardised, and we desire to generate m composite
variables of the form:
Yi = ωi 1X1 + ωi 2X2 + ... + ωi nXn

for i =1,..,m

(2)

where m<n and ωij are selected to „ explain „ the maximum possible variance. That is Y1 will have the largest
possible variance (λ1) subject to the restriction:
n

∑ω
j =1

2
1j

=1

Y2 will be uncorrelated with Y1 and have the next largest possible variances (λ2 with λ1>λ2 ) etc., until we obtain
m such uncorrelated composite variables all of which have weights normalized and variances λ1 > λ2 > .... >λm.
The percentage of the variance of the original n variables explained by the m composite variables is
100( λ1 + ... +λm )/( λ1 + ... + λn )
We call the m composite scores in this context component scores .
5.2 Data reduction
The resulting scores are linear combination of the 34 original variables which are selected to be uncorrelated
with each other.
We can retain only scores with eigenvalues greater than 1. In essence this is like saying that, unless a score
extracts at least as much as the equivalent of one original variable, we drop it. Using this, we would retain 8
principal components.
The selected principal components were:
fraction V : VLDL-tg, VLDL-Ch, VB, VLDL-eCh, VLDL-fCh, tg
fraction L : fCh, LDL-eCh, LDL-Ch, eCh, Ch, apoB, LDL-apoB
fraction LH: LDL-fCh, LDL-apo B, LB, HDL-tg, HDL-fCh, height, BMI
fraction Totalgluc: Glu60, Glu120, SumGlu
fraction Ins: Ins30, Ins60, SumIns
fraction H : HDL-Ch, HDL-eCh, HB, apoA1, HDL-apoA1
fraction Weight: weight
fraction Glu0: Glu0, Glu30
The resulting components were included in a logistic regression that selected a model with eight scores .
5.3 Logistic Regression Model
For whole group of patients the relationship between five scores and CAD was explored by the logistic
regression analysis. The probability of the appearance of the CAD (Y) conditional by the variable (xp) can be
calculated by means of the previous form (1);
where:
x1 ,x2,...xp - vector of independent variables selected principal components:
• fraction V
• fraction L
•
fraction LH
• fraction Totalgluc
• fraction Ins
• fraction H
• fraction Weight

• fraction Glu0.
The significance of logistic regression coefficients was assessed with the Wald chi-square statistic.
Table 2 shows the variables which significantly influence the appearance of the CAD.

Table 2. Significance levels of the Wald test

Principal

Coefficient

Standard error

p - Value

Component

bi

fraction V

-1,45

0,45

0,0017

Fraction H

-1,80

0,45

0,0011

Fraction Ins

-3,24

0,68

0,000

Fraction Weight

0,99

0,4

0,016

Fraction Glu0

1,91

0,52

0,0004

b0

0,13

0,38

0,743

(test Walda)

6. Bayes Theorem
Bayes’ theorem is a quantitative method for calculating the posterior probability using the prior probability.
Let { B n } be a countable measurable partition of Ω and P(A) > 0 and B1 ∪ B2 ∪ ... ∪ Bn = Ω and

Bi ∩ B j = ∅ for i ≠ j and P(Bi )> 0 for i = 1, …n.
Then
P(BkA) =

P( A Bk ) ⋅ P( Bk )
n

∑ P( A B ) ⋅ P( B )
i =1

i

(3)

i

where P(AB) is called the conditional probability of event A given event B.
We propose to use the theorem of Bayes as a tool to predict CAD for the individual patient. This model
computes the posterior probability of an appearance CAD given a set of patients symptoms, syndromes or
laboratory values..
Let X = {x1, x2, …x6} will be a set of patient’s syndromes, symptoms or laboratory values and xi ∈ { 0 , 1} and
xi represent the presence or the absence of those variables. The Bayes probability we can calculate as
P(CADX)=

P( X CAD ) ⋅ P(CAD )
P( X CAD ) ⋅ P(CAD ) + P( X WITHOUTCAD) ⋅ P(WITHOUTCAD)

4)

where
P(CAD) is the prior probability of CAD
P(WITHOUTCAD) = 1 – P(CAD)
P(X|CAD) = P(x1|CAD)⋅P(x2|CAD)…⋅P(x6|CAD) for xi = 1,…,6
P(X|WITHOUTCAD) = P(x1|WITHOUTCAD)⋅P(x2|WITHOUTCAD)…⋅P(x6|WITHOUTCAD)
The following independent ( Pearson’s chi-square test ) syndromes, symptoms and laboratory values were
selected: tg, Ch, LDL-Ch, HDL-Ch, BMI, tg/HDL-Ch.

7. Results
The results of examination of model quality are only for the test sets.

Table 3. The results of PC model and R model.

PC model

R model

expected

expected
WITHOUT CAD

40

6

10

51

WITH CAD
WITHOUT
CAD

Sensitivity = 86,96%

WITH CAD WITHOUT CAD
observed

observed

WITH CAD

specificity =83,61%

WITH CAD
WITHOUT
CAD

32

14

46

15

Sensitivity = 69,58%

specificity = 75,41%

8. Predictive value
The predictive value of e test is simply the post - test probability that a disease is present based on the results of
a test. The predictive value of a positive test depends on the test’s sensitivity, specificity, prevalence and can be
calculated of the following form:
PV+ =

( sensitivity )(( prevalence)
( sensitivity )( prevalence) + (1 − specifity )(1 − prevalence)

(5)

The PV+ index is also one of form of Bayes’ theorem.
Table 4 show the predictive value ( PV+ index ) of a positive test in three methods.

Table4. Results of comparison of different predictive models

Number of
Model

parameters

PV+ index

Bayesian analysis

6

0.841

PC model

34

0.807

R model

3

0.679

9. Conclusion
The principal component analysis followed by stepwise logistic regression analysis showed the better predictive
power of prevalence in the large and complex CAD data base than methodological strategy of ratios
lipids/apoproteins considered as independent variables. The Bayes’ theorem model also shows a relatively high
predictive power compared with other two models.

10. References
1. Marshall G., Grover F., Henderson W., Hammermeister K.: Assessment of predictive models for binary
outcomes: an empirical approach using operative death from cardiac surgery. Statist. Med. 13 (1994). 15011511.

2. Buring J.E., O’Conner G.T., Goldhaber S.Z.: Risk factors for coronary artery disease: a study comparing
hypercholesteronemia and hypertriglyceridemia, Eur.J.Clin.Invest.. 1989. 19. 419 - 423
3. Hosmer D.W., Lemeshow S.: Applied Logistic Regression . 1st ed. New York, John Wiley & Sons. 1989
4. D'
Agostino R.B., Belanger A.J., Markson E., Kelly-Hayes M. and Wolf P.A. : Development of health risk
appraisal functions in the presence of multiple indicators:
the Framingham Study nursing home
institutionalization model. Statist.Med. 14. 1995.1757-1770.
5. Douglas G. Altman: Predictal statstics for Medical Research, CHAPMAN &HALL/CRC. rep.1999
6. Shortliffe E.H., Perreault L.E., Wiederhold G., Fagan L.M.: Medical Informatics. Springer-Verlag New York
(2001). 64 – 131
7. Grémy F., Salmon D. : Bases statistiques. Dunod, Paris. 1969

