Dynamics of Granular Heaplets:
A Phenomenological Model
Yong Kheng Goh1,2 and R.L. Jacobs2
1

Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Essex,
Colchester CO4 3SQ, United Kingdom
kygoh@essex.ac.uk
2
Department of Mathematics, Imperial College,
London SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom
r.jacobs@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract. When a discrete granular layer on a uniform substrate is
tapped from beneath the material piles up into discrete heaps which
gradually coarsen. We investigate the relaxation dynamics of the heaping process. We present a non-linear phenomenological partial diﬀerential equation to describe the formation of the heaplets. This equation is
derived from the continuity equation for a diﬀusive powder system and
from a constitutive equation giving the current as the sum of three terms:
the ﬁrst proportional to the gradient of the height proﬁle with a limiting
factor, the second related to the average curvature of the heap surface
and the third related to the Gaussian curvature.

1

Introduction

When we perturb a layer of granular material a rich variety of interesting phenomena can occur depending on the nature of the perturbation. Examples are
subharmonic wave patterns and oscillons in vertically vibrated granular layers [1,
2]; compaction and memory eﬀects in tapped tall granular columns [3,4]; and
stratiﬁcation of a granular mixture ﬂowing down an inclined plane [5,6]. Even
simple experiments such as tapping a thin granular layer, result in interesting
phenomena such as the formation of isolated granular “droplets” (heaplets) [7].
In this article we are particularly interested in a simple system that consists of a thin layer of granular material subjected to a series of discrete taps
from beneath. We are interested in constructing a computer model of the dynamics of formation of heaplets in the tapped granular layer. The ﬁrst section
of the article describes an experimental setup in which the phenomena can be
observed and also shows typical morphologies that develop. Then we introduce
our phenomenological model by constructing a surface free-energy functional.
The dynamics of the system is then derived by setting the time-derivative of a
density equal to the functional derivative of the free-energy and the result is cast
into the form of an equation of continuity. The equation is solved numerically
and results are presented. Finally we summarise our results.
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3037, pp. 332–339, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

Dynamics of Granular Heaplets: A Phenomenological Model

333

Fig. 1. A layer of silica beads subjected to gentle taps. The ﬁrst picture (a) is the initial
ﬂat layer with pictures (b)–(d) showing the morphology of the layer after k = 20, 40,
and 100 taps.

2

A Simple Experiment

A homogeneous and thin (1–3 particles depth) layer of silica beads (approximately 30µm in diameter) is prepared on a thin glass plate. The layer is then
tapped from below at the center. After each tap we wait for a long enough period until all activity on the surface of the layer has ceased before tapping again.
Figure 1 shows a series of photographs obtained from an experiment on a tapped
silica layer with nearly constant tapping intensity.
The layer is initially ﬂat as shown in Figure 1a. After several taps, the ﬂat
layer of silica beads becomes unstable and starts to corrugate (Figure 1b). As
the number of taps increases, corrugations coarsen and the layer now forms a
landscape of ridges (Figure 1c). The pattern ﬁnally develops into more isolated
heaplets (Figure 1d). The experiment is fairly robust in the sense that the frequency and intensity of the taps do not have to be carefully controlled for the
pattern to develop. When the pattern is fully developed, the heaplets become
nearly stable against any further taps, with the characteristic size and the rate
of the formation of heaplets being proportional to the intensity of the taps.
Duran [8] made a close analogy between the heaplet formation process and
the de-wetting process of a layer of water on a glass plate. The value of this
analogy can be seen from the above ﬁgures where clusters of silica beads slowly
coalesce to form small heaplets as if under the inﬂuence of surface tension. Of

334

Y.K. Goh and R.L. Jacobs

course there is no true surface tension since the silica beads interact via hard
core repulsions but an eﬀective surface tension can come arise from convective
drags [7] or the inelasticity of the particles [9].

3

Equation of Continuity and Current Equation

It is useful to have quasi-hydrodynamic equations to describe the dynamics of
heaplet formation. However there is no obvious time variable in the problem and
we need to take care in the continuum modelling. In the tapped layer there are
two distinct phases of activity with diﬀerent time scales in the dynamics. The ﬁrst
is an excitation phase when the layer is tapped. This is followed by a relaxation
phase during which the perturbed layer relaxes towards a meta-stable state.
Ordinary clock time cannot be used as a proper time variable for the purpose
of continuum modelling, since the actual duration between two consecutive taps
is unimportant (provided the system relaxes completely.) What is important is
the number of tap cycles that the layer has undergone. Therefore a more useful
“time” variable is the number of taps rather than the clock time. In this paper
time t refers to a continuum version of the number of taps.
We want to set-up an equation of mass continuity with a constitutive current
equation to model heaplet formation on a tapped granular layer. The current
equation must describe lateral diﬀusion of the granular particles to regions of
higher density. This leads to an eﬀective attraction between particles and encourages the formation of heaps. However the slope of the side of a static heap
cannot exceed a value determined by the angle of repose, θr of the material.
This suggests that the eﬀective diﬀusion is limited by a slope-dependent factor
and goes to zero at a critical slope equal to tan θr . Further terms are needed
in the current equation and are related to the curvatures of the surface of the
layer. These terms should describe the situation when the system is tapped and
protrusions are eroded away so that the sides of the heaps become as smooth as
possible i. e. the curvature of the surface becomes as small as possible.
Gathering these requirements we introduce a surface free energy functional
1
1
d2 x − D(γ) |∇ρ|2 − B|∇ρ|4 +κ(γ)[tr(ρij )]2 +κ (γ)[det(ρij )]2
2
2
(1)
where the density ﬁeld ρ(x, t) i. e. the mass per unit area is proportional to the
height of the layer assuming no compaction during tapping. D,√κ and κ are positive parameters that depend on the tapping intensity γ, and 1/ B = tan θr is the
critical slope of the material. Here ρij is the Hessian matrix ρij = ∂ 2 ρ/∂xi ∂xj .
The ﬁrst two terms mimic the eﬀective attractive and give rise later to a diﬀusion equation with negative time i. e. one that favours the accumulation rather
than the dissipation of heaps. The trace and determinant in the last two terms
are the two rotational invariants of the Hessian matrix.
Now we assume that ρ(x, t) evolves so as to minimise the free energy according to model A Langevin dynamics, in Gunton’s terminology [10], and this gives
F [ρ] =

Dynamics of Granular Heaplets: A Phenomenological Model

335

an equation of motion of form
∂ρ
δF
= −ζ
,
∂t
δρ(x, t)

(2)

where ζ is a rate constant that sets the time scale of the growth of the pattern
and is set to unity by choice of units. F is deﬁned as in (1). Taking the functional
derivative of the free energy and substituting into (2) we get
∂ρ
= −∇ · D(γ)(1 − B|∇ρ|2 )∇ρ + κ(γ)∇(∇2 ρ) + κ (γ)g .
∂t

(3)

The components of the two-dimensional vector g in the last equation are
gx =

∂K ∂ 2 ρ ∂K ∂ 2 ρ
−
∂x ∂y 2
∂y ∂x ∂y

(4)

gy =

∂K ∂ 2 ρ ∂K ∂ 2 ρ
−
,
∂x ∂x ∂y
∂y ∂x2

(5)

and

where K = det(ρij ). This is just the equation of continuity with a constitutive
equation for the mass current
J = D(γ)(1 − B|∇ρ|2 )∇ρ + κ(γ)∇(∇2 ρ) + κ (γ)g.

(6)

However g given by (4) and (5) is not unique and g is chosen in the above
form to avoid calculating ﬁfth derivatives numerically later in the simulation.
Alternative forms of g can give rise to the same equation for ρ on substituting
into (3). These forms of g diﬀer from the form given above by an additional gauge
term which is the curl of an arbitrary vector. One example of these alternative
forms is found by interchanging K and ρ in (4) and (5).
We now give a physical interpretation of the terms in the free energy functional. The ﬁrst term and the second term give the diﬀusion term proportional
to ∇ρ with limiting factor (1 − B|∇ρ|2 ) in (3). The diﬀusion term must have
the opposite sign to the usual (if |∇ρ| is small and the limiting factor is positive)
in order to mimic the short-range attractive force between particles. Thus the
coeﬃcient D must be positive so that grains diﬀuse toward each other to form
clusters. The limiting factor (1 − B|∇ρ|2 ) can be understood as the result of
anisotropy in the system due to gravity and ensures that the slope of the heaps
cannot exceed the critical slope. Because of the opposite sign of the diﬀusion
term the equation can be understood as a negative time diﬀusion equation.
The last two terms in F come from the squares of the two rotational invariants
of the Hessian matrix ρij . These invariants are the trace and the determinant
of ρij . They are lowest order approximations to the average and Gaussian curvatures of the surface and we now refer to them as such. We can understand
these curvature terms intuitively thus. As the system is tapped protrusions are
eroded so that the sides of the heaps becomes as smooth as possible i. e. the
curvatures of the surface become as small as possible. Equation (2) ensures the

336

Y.K. Goh and R.L. Jacobs

system evolves to minimise the curvatures of the surface. There are no linear
terms in F proportional to the trace and determinant because as we can show,
with periodic (or free) boundaries, these give no contribution to the equation of
motion of ρ.

4

Calculations

We now solve (3) with (4) and (5) numerically by discretising the spatial variables
on an N × N square lattice using a simple mid-point algorithm to deal with the
time variable. We can use either periodic boundary conditions or hard boundary
conditions. However we are only interested here in the pattern formation process,
not the interaction of the system with the container wall so here we use only
periodic boundary conditions. Various initial conditions are possible but here we
start oﬀ with a level granular layer with random height ﬂuctuations of amplitude
10−5 superimposed. This amplitude is small compared to the ﬁnal average height
of the heaps which is determined by the value of the parameter B and the length
of time for which the calculation is run.
Stability problems arise if κ is negative. This can be easily seen if we take
the Fourier transform of the linearised equation which is
∂ρk
= (D k 2 − κ k 4 )ρk .
(7)
∂t
If κ is positive small ﬂuctuations of long-wave-length in the initial state are
unstable to growth until limited by the non-linear term proportional to B in
J . This is in accordance with observation. If κ is negative small ﬂuctuations of
long-wave-lengths in the initial state grow and are not limited by the non-linear
term because the term proportional to κ dominates. Negative values of κ and
κ are thus quite unphysical because they imply that protrusions are not eroded
away but grow indeﬁnitely as they accrete grains in a situation where there is
no real attractive force between grains.
As time increases instabilities develop from the density ﬂuctuations and grow
into heaps. While the heaps grow grains from the surrounding areas are depleted.
This creates discontinuities in the layer and introduces extra complications when
calculating derivatives of the density ﬁeld. To avoid this we assume in the simulation that the surface of the layer never touches the base of the container.
The assumption enables us to avoid these problems but it has a draw-back since
the heaps will continue growing until the whole system unrealistically becomes
a single big heap. In reality the surface of the layer eventually touches the base
of the container and the heaps become very nearly stable and cease to grow.
In the following we take a box size L = 1 divided into 104 cells so that
N = 100. We take the following values for the parameters: D = 1, B = 103 ,
κ = 10−4 , and we vary κ so that we can see the balance between the terms
aﬀecting the occurrence of heaps and ridges. We use periodic boundary conditions throughout.
Figure 2 shows late-time plots of the surface for values of the parameters
where the Gaussian curvature term is unimportant (κ = 10−6 ). The appearance

Dynamics of Granular Heaplets: A Phenomenological Model

337

Fig. 2. A three-dimensional plot and a grey-scale contour plot of the surface produced
by our diﬀerential equation after a long time. The parameters used to produce the plot
favour the production of heaps i. e. κ
κ.

Fig. 3. A three-dimensional plot and a grey-scale contour plot of the surface produced
by our diﬀerential equation after a long time. The parameters used to produce the plot
favour the production of ridges i. e. when κ is comparable to κ (in this case κ = κ).

of the heaps is similar to those found experimentally except that our calculations display structures that are more homogeneous which is to be expected
for a surface with no edges and periodic boundary conditions. Figure 3 shows
late-time plots of the surface for values of the parameters where the Gaussian
curvature term is important (κ = 10−4 ). The resulting structure is a pattern of
labyrinthine ridges. The pattern is similar to the patterns that have been found
in the early stage of the experiments performed (c.f. Figure 1c). An interesting feature of these last ﬁgures from a theoretical point of view is that they
show long-range correlations which arise from a purely local theory. The term
discouraging saddles leads to long-range correlations along the ridges.
The diﬀerences in the morphologies of the results can be understood by looking at the surface free energy in (1). Equation (3) is derived by minimising the

338

Y.K. Goh and R.L. Jacobs
-10
2

Log(W )

-15

-20

-25

-30
-10

-8

-4

-6

-2

0

Log(t)

Fig. 4. Log-log plot for W 2 versus t. The solid line corresponds to the parameter
κ = 10−6 , the dotted line corresponds to κ = 10−4 and they are oﬀset vertically by
unity for clarity. A reference line (dashed) with slope 2/3 is plotted to aid comparison
with the late-time behaviour for both small and large κ curves.

functional F[ρ], and therefore the dynamic of the system is towards minimal surface curvature. For small values of κ , the trace term is important and [tr(ρij )]2
is small at locations where two local perpendicular curvatures curve in opposite
directions ∂ 2 ρ/∂y 2 = −∂ 2 ρ/∂x2 , i. e. at saddle points or where the surface is
smooth. Thus the equation produces a profusion of saddle points. Thus the fact
that two heaps (or two valleys) join at a saddle point suggests that minimising
the trace term encourages the formation of as many heaps as possible. On the
other hand, for slightly larger values of κ , the determinant term encourages the
formation of ridges. This can be seen from a similar argument to that used for
the trace term. We can always choose a local reference frame (x , y ) such that
det(ρij ) = ∂ 2 ρ/∂x 2 ∂ 2 ρ/∂y 2 . Minimising the determinant term in (1) requires
∂ 2 ρ/∂x 2 ∂ 2 ρ/∂y 2 = 0 which means the surface is either ﬂat in one direction but
is curved in the perpendicular direction (which is true for ridges); or the surface
is ﬂat in both directions (but unstable due to the diﬀusion term).
Figure 4 shows a log-log plot of the roughness W 2 of the pattern for both
small (κ = 10−6 ) and large (κ = 10−4 ) values of κ . Here W 2 is deﬁned as
W 2 = (ρ(x, t) − ρ¯)2 ,

(8)

where the average is over all lattice sites. W 2 measures the mean square deviation
of the height of the surface from its mean and is zero for a level surface and grows
as the heaplets grow. W 2 is proportional to the square of the characteristic length
scale of the pattern in the horizontal direction because
√ the slope of the surface
is almost everywhere equal to the critical slope 1/ B. As can be seen from

Dynamics of Granular Heaplets: A Phenomenological Model

339

Figure 4, the dynamics of (3) can be divided into at least 3 regimes. For t < 10−7 ,
the system tends to become smoother because slopes greater than the critical
slope decrease. For 10−7 < t < 10−5 there is a rapid formation of heaps due to
the growth of ﬂuctuations. For t > 10−5 the heaps have reached their critical
slope and then grow coarser but with the ﬁxed critical slope almost everywhere.
In the late-time regime, W 2 ∼ t2/3 . This scaling law is consistent with Siegert
and Plishke’s model [11] of molecular-beam epitaxy deposition. Despite an extra
deposition term and the absence of a Gaussian term in their model, they have
observed the same scaling law for the characteristic size of the mound formed in
the deposition process.

5

Conclusion

We have studied a phenomenological model of a tapped granular layer. The
model is derived by minimising a surface free energy consisting of four terms:
two terms which give rise to the slope-limited negative-time diﬀusion, the average
curvature term, and the Gaussian curvature term. The negative-time diﬀusion
terms mimic the clustering eﬀects described also by an eﬀective surface tension.
The curvature terms are needed because the system must evolve to a conﬁguration of less protrusion. They also control the pattern formed: a striped pattern if
the Gaussian curvature term is important; discrete heaplets if the average curvature term is dominant. In both cases the pattern coarsens with the number of
taps and the coarsening of the width of the pattern is described by W ∼ t1/3 .

References
1. Melo, F., Umbanhowar, P.B., Swinney, H.L.: Hexagons, kinks, and disorder in
oscillated granular layer. Phys. Rev. Lett. 75 (1995) 3838
2. Umbanhowar, P.B., Melo, F., Swinney, H.L.: Localised excitation in a vertically
vibrated granular layer. Nature 382 (1996) 793
3. Knight, J.B., Fandrich, C.G., Lau, C.N., Jaegar, H.M., Nagel, S.R.: Density relaxation in a vibrated granular material. Phys. Rev. E 51 (1995) 3957
4. Nowak, E.R., Knight, J.B., Ben-Naim, E., Jaeger, H.J., Nagel, S.R.: Density ﬂuctuations in vibrated granular materials. Phys. Rev. E 57 (1998) 1971
5. Makse, H.A., Havlin, S., King, P.R., Stanley, H.E.: Spontaneos stratiﬁcation in
granular mixtures. Nature 386 (1997) 379
6. Ristow, G.H., Riguidel, F.X., Bideau, D.: Diﬀerent characteristics of the motion
of a single particle on a bumpy inclined line. J. Phys. II France 4 (1994) 1161
7. Duran, J.: Rayleigh-Taylor instabilities in thin ﬁlms of tapped powder. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 87 (2001) 254301
8. Duran, J.: Ripples in tapped or blown powder. Phys. Rev. Lett. 84 (2000) 5126
9. Goh, Y.K., Jacobs, R.L.: Coarsening dynamics of granular heaplets in tapped
granular layers. New J. Phys. 4 (2002) 81
10. Gunton, J.D., Droz, M.: Introduction to the theory of metastable and unstable
states. Volume 183 of Lecture notes in physics. Springer-Verlag, Berlin (1983)
11. Siegert, M., Plischke, M.: Formation of pyramids and mounds in molecular beam
epitaxy. Phys. Rev. E 53 (1996) 307

