Chordal Graphs in Computational
Biology - New Insights and Applications
(Keynote Talk Abstract)
Teresa M. Przytycka
NCBI/NLM/NIH
przytyck@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov

Recent advances in experimental techniques resulted in accumulation of vast
amounts of information, which is often represented by various types of biological
networks. Therefore it is not surprising that increasingly more complex graphtheoretical tools are developed to analyze such biological networks and extract
biologically meaningful patterns. In this talk I will describe the research done in
my group directed towards computational analysis of biological networks.
Graph theoretical representation of biological relationships provides insight
into the evolution of biological systems and their function. For example, in order to focus on the properties of multi domain proteins and the relationships
between them, we introduced and studied graph theoretical representation of
multidomain proteins called domain overlap graph. In the domain overlap graph,
the vertices are protein domains and two domains are connected by an edge if
there is a protein that contains both domains. We demonstrate how properties
of this graph such as chordality and the Helly property can indicate various
evolutionary mechanisms [1].
The concept of domain overlap graph can be seen as an example of a more
general construction, the construction of character overlap graphs. We show that
character overlap graphs for characters that are appropriate to use in parsimony
methods are characterized by signiﬁcant under-representation of holes, and thus
are relatively close to chordal graphs. This characterization explains success in
constructing evolutionary trees using parsimony method for some characters (e.g.
protein domains) and lack of such success for other characters (e.g. introns). In
the latter case, the understanding of mathematical obstacles to applying the
parsimony method in a direct way has lead us to a new algorithm that is able
to bypass these obstacles [2].
A major challenge in systems biology is to understand the intricate network
of interacting molecules. The complexity in biological systems arises not only
from various individual protein molecules but also from their organization into
systems with numerous interacting partners forming protein complexes and functional modules. We focus on the analysis of protein-protein interaction networks
directed towards recovering temporal relation and overlaps between functional
groups. We developed a graph-theoretical framework, based on properties of
chordal graphs and cographs [3]. We apply our approach to delineate pheromone
signaling pathway from the high throughput protein-protein interaction network.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part II, LNCS 3992, pp. 620–621, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

Chordal Graphs in Computational Biology

621

Acknowledgement
This work was supported by the intramural research program of the National
Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine.

References
1. Przytycka, T.M., Davis, G., Song, N., Durand, D.: Graph Theoretical Insights into
Multidomain Protein Evolution. Proc. RECOMB 2005, Lecture Notes in Computer
Science 3500 (2005) 311–325.
2. Przytycka, T.M.: An important connection between network motifs and parsimony
models. Proc. RECOMB 2006, to appear (2006).
3. Zotenko, E., Guimaraes, K.S., Jothi, R., Przytycka, T.M.: Decomposition of Overlapping Protein Complexes: A Graph Theoretical Method for Analyzing Static and
Dynamic Protein Associations. Proc. 1st RECOMB Satellite Meeting on Systems
Biology, to appear (2006).

