Computational Modeling of Collective Human
Behavior: The Example of Financial Markets
Andy Kirou1 , Bla˙zej Ruszczycki1 , Markus Walser2 , and Neil F. Johnson1
1

2

Department of Physics, University of Miami,
P.O. Box 248046, Coral Gables, FL 33124 USA
Landesbank Baden-W¨
urttemberg, Am Hauptbahnhof 2, 70173 Stuttgart, Germany
A.Kirou@umiami.edu

Abstract. As a result of the increased availability of higher precision
spatiotemporal datasets, coupled with the realization that most realworld human systems are complex, a new ﬁeld of computational modeling
is emerging in which the goal is to develop minimal models of collective
human behavior which are consistent with the observed real-world dynamics in a wide range of systems. For example, in the ﬁeld of ﬁnance,
the ﬂuctuations across a wide range of markets are known to exhibit certain generic stylized facts such as a non-Gaussian ‘fat-tailed’ distribution
of price returns. In this paper, we illustrate how such minimal models
can be constructed by bridging the gap between two existing, but incomplete, market models: a model in which a population of virtual traders
make decisions based on common global information but lack local information from their social network, and a model in which the traders
form a dynamically evolving social network but lack any decision-making
based on global information. We show that a combination of these two
models – in other words, a population of virtual traders with access to
both global and local information – produces results for the price return
distribution which are closer to the reported stylized facts. Going further, we believe that this type of model can be applied across a wide
range of systems in which collective human activity is observed.
Keywords: complex systems, socio-economic systems, virtual traders,
collective behavior.

1

Introduction

Socio-economic systems were traditionally treated from the points of view of
game theory or traditional economic theory. These approaches – while undoubtedly successful in terms of gaining insight into core features – are unable to
address the issue of how and why such systems produce the ﬂuctuating external
signals that they do [1,2,3,4,5]. Human systems as diverse as traﬃc, Internet
downloads, and ﬁnancial markets, are all known to produce large-scale ﬂuctuations – for example, in the number of cars taking a certain road, or the number of
people accessing a certain website, or the number of people trying to sell a stock
at certain times [1,2,3,4,5]. In previous decades, there was typically an insuﬃcient amount of reliable data available for researchers to address such problems
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2008, Part I, LNCS 5101, pp. 33–41, 2008.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

34

A. Kirou et al.

of dynamics. Nowadays, with the increase in online logging of data – from social,
governmental and commercial sectors – this area of modeling now becomes very
attractive. However few advances are likely to be made analytically, since any
meaningful explanation of the dynamics must be related back to what the collection of individual objects are doing. In other words, it is what physicists call
a many-body problem – one in which the objects are subjected to endogenous
and exogenous feedback and nonlinear interactions – and it is known that such
many-body problems are in general intractable. Given the additional feature
that the objects themselves may be semi-autonomous (i.e. they each have some
form of independent decision-making ability such that a given external input
may yield various possible outputs depending on some internal state of the object itself) the only realistic route toward advancing our understanding of such
systems must surely be driven by computational modeling and simulation. In
short, such socio-economic systems are complex – and the key to understanding
the dynamics of such complex systems is provided by computer simulation.
Among the wide range of socio-economic ﬁelds that have attracted the interest of complexity scientists, is the goal of trying to understand ﬁnancial market
dynamics [1,2,3,4,5]. This is partly because ﬁnancial markets produce such high
frequency data, and partly because the possible actions of an individual trader
are quite simple: buy, sell or do nothing at any timestep. A wide range of interesting stylized facts have emerged based on analysis of the real market data over
a wide range of timescales – from seconds through to days, weeks and months. In
particular, it has been found that the distribution of price returns (i.e. changes
in price between a given time t and a time t + Δt later) do not follow the simple
distribution expected from a random walk. The standard model of a ﬁnancial
market – based on the eﬃcient market hypothesis – is that price-changes are
like the toss of a coin. They are supposedly independent – hence if we assume
that each trader trades according to the toss of a coin, then the probability of
buying and selling would a priori be 12 if we ignore the ‘do nothing’ option.
Counting a head as +1 in terms of price change, and a tail as −1, the probability distribution for having a given price-change ΔP = Nbuy − Nsell is simply
the probability of obtaining Nbuy heads and Nsell tails from N coin-tosses, such
that N = Nbuy + Nsell . This is a binomial expression, which then approaches a
Gaussian in the large-N limit. We note in passing that it is more common in
the ﬁnance literature to consider the logarithm of price-changes rather than the
price-change itself, hence the distribution of returns in the ideal, random-walk
market is log-normal. However the two distributions are essentially indistinguishable in most ﬁnancial markets, since the returns are typically much smaller than
the prices themselves.

2

Collective Non-randomness in the Human World

As a rough ﬁrst approximation, ﬁnancial market behavior is not far from the
Gaussian model. However, many independent detailed empirical studies of ﬁnancial market returns have conﬁrmed that major deviations begin to arise

Computational Modeling of Collective Human Behavior

35

in the tails of the distribution [1,2,3,5]. Speciﬁcally, the distribution of pricechanges ΔP deviates from Gaussian behavior even at moderate values of ΔP .
In particular, the probability of intermediate-to-large price-changes is larger than
the random coin-toss model would suggest. This leads to the so-called ‘fat tail’
terminology which is often used to describe real ﬁnancial markets when they
‘misbehave’. In fact, such fat-tailed behavior is common across a wide range
of socio-economic domains [1]. In many scientiﬁc settings such as physics, such
deviations from Gaussian behavior in the tail of the distribution might be considered a mere detail, since the average behavior of the system is typically what
counts. However real-world ﬁnance is all about risk – in particular, the risk of
large unexpected price-changes – and so these deviations are actually the most
important features of the distribution, contributing to abnormally high estimates
of the moments of the distribution such as the variance.
The fact that large price-changes are more likely than expected – and in more
general socio-economic settings, that large traﬃc jams or heavy Internet downloads are more likely than expected – suggests that the population is unintentionally behaving in a coordinated way. It is as though the supposedly independent
coin-tosses of the N traders are not in fact independent: when one comes up
heads, they are all more likely to come up heads, and vice versa with tails. It is
as though the population of traders was inter-connected in some way. The fact
that getting the best price in a ﬁnancial market is a competitive activity – in the
same way that managing to grab space on a busy road, or a download on a busy
website, are also competitive – means that such coordination is very unlikely to
have arisen through some intentional population-level decision making. There is
no central controller – and even if there were, the fact that individual objects are
competing to win means that no central controller would necessarily be listened
to or followed by individual members of the population.
This coordination observed in many scenarios where populations of humans
are competing for some limited resource, thereby leading to larger than random
probability for large events, is characteristic of many human systems [1,4]. But if
so, what causes it and how can we provide a quantitative model of it? Because of
the generic nature of the fat-tail statistics, any useful model should not depend
on the details of the particular market or type of trader, or road or type of car,
or website or type of computer. Instead it must be some fairly general feature of
collective human activity.
The fundamental question as to what underlying model might best represent
such collective coordination, has inspired a new breed of computer-based scientiﬁc investigation involving physical, biological and social scientists. At its root, a
system such as a ﬁnancial market, traﬃc system, or the Internet, involves agents
(i.e. people) deciding between a few options (e.g. buy, sell, do nothing) based
on some limited information – which may be global or locally generated – and
then competing with the remaining agents for the available resource or reward.
Any collective coordination will require some form of trader inter-connectedness.
One way in which this could have arisen, is if subsets of the traders form social groups such that they and their immediate friends or associates, coordinate

36

A. Kirou et al.

their actions (i.e. bias their decisions and hence eﬀectively connect their coins
during the coin-toss). In fast-moving ﬁnancial markets, such groups are likely
to change fairly rapidly, and should at least be accounted for using dynamical
models of such group formation. This idea has led to a particular class of models
based on dynamical cluster formation. Notable examples include the dynamical
clustering model of Egu´ıluz and Zimmermann [7] and of others in biology [6],
[8]. A second way in which coordination could have arisen, concerns how agents
react to a particular piece of common information. Models of this form, of which
a notable example is the so-called Grand Canonical Minority Game [9], feature
agents whose actions are dictated by a strategy (or set of strategies). In the ﬁrst
case of real clusters, the grouping is intentional, while in the second case agents
form unintentional groups (i.e. crowds) as a result of using the same strategy at
the same time and hence acting identically over a short period of time. These
two classes of model are complementary. Each of these models is ‘minimal’ in
the sense that they are the simplest known examples which seem to capture
the essential ingredients of clustering and decision-making respectively. To date,
the two classes of model have been studied separately – however, they should
clearly both be combined in order to understand the interplay of local and global
information on collective group formation and hence the collective dynamics.
In this paper, we take the ﬁrst steps in this direction of analyzing a collective
human system in which there are local interactions as observed in the Egu´ıluz
and Zimmermann [7] model (i.e. E-Z model) and global interactions as observed
in the Grand Canonical Minority Game [9] (i.e. GCMG). The focus of this paper
is to show how adding global interactions to the E-Z model, does indeed improve
the ﬁt with the known empirical distributions of ﬁnancial market returns. Our
construction is a modiﬁed E-Z model in which the agents are randomly assigned
the trading strategies and apply their strategy based on the last two price movements. Unlike the full GCMG, the model does not include an explicit strategy
score. Instead, the system behaves as a relative majority voting system.

3

Relative Majority Vote

The relative majority vote system is speciﬁed by two parameters, the total number of agents N and the consensus parameter x. To set up a timescale, we need to
prescribe some form of timescale constant. At each time-step, an agent is chosen
at random and the group to which the agent belongs is identiﬁed. The size of
this group is denoted as s. Once a particular group has been identiﬁed, it makes
a decision in the following way: Each agent votes either to sell, buy or wait (see
Fig. 1) with approximate probability 1/3 for each of the listed options. If the
number of votes for the most popular decision exceeds the threshold, which is
deﬁned as
T ≡x·s
(1)
the consensus is reached and the decision is performed. Otherwise there is no
consensus and the group fragments into single individuals. The group that decides to wait does not trade, but instead merges with another group by choosing

Computational Modeling of Collective Human Behavior

37

Global information 10
m(10) = 2

+1

+1
0

0

+1

1

-1

2

0

3

-1

-1

consensus?

yes

wait > buy & wait > sell

global outcome
is 0
cluster merges

sell > buy & sell > wait

buy > sell & buy > wait

global outcome
is 0

global outcome
is +1

no

in case of a tie
one of the tied actions
is picked at random

global outcome
is 0
cluster fragments

Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of the decision process in our multi-agent model

randomly any other agent from the entire population and then joining with the
group to which this agent belongs. For a particular group of size s, let us denote
the number of agents who vote to sell, buy or wait (and merge with another
group) as S, B, W respectively. The conditions for the group decision are as
follows:
Fragments:
(W < T ) ∧ (S < T ) ∧ (B < T )
Buys:
(B ≥ T ) ∧ (B > S) ∧ (B > W)
(2)
Sells:
(S ≥ T ) ∧ (S > B) ∧ (S > W)
Merges:
(W ≥ T ) ∧ (W > B) ∧ (W > S)
We also need to account for the fact we may have a tied number of votes. This
is resolved by randomly picking one of the two tied decisions, e.g. if
(S ≥ T ) ∧ (S = B) ∧ (S > W)
then the group either sells or buys with equal probability. The decisions presented
in Eq. (2) are exclusive, therefore the corresponding conditional probabilities (on
the condition that the particular group is chosen) satisfy the equation
pˆ frg + pˆ sell + pˆ buy + pˆ merge = 1 ,

(3)

where pˆ frg is the probability that the group fragments. Note that the above
conditional probabilities depend on the group size s. From the symmetry of Eqs.
(2) and (3) we see that it is suﬃcient to know pˆ frg since

38

A. Kirou et al.

Fig. 2. Cumulative distribution of price returns ΔP in arbitrary units, for
the consensus parameter x = 37% (thicker solid line), x = 41% (dashed line) and
x = 47% (dashed-dotted line). The number of agents is 10000. The thin solid lines
indicate the scaling behavior observed for the cumulative probability distribution
for returns ΔP in the pure E-Z model and for typical empirical market data [2].
The underlying probability distribution for price-changes p(ΔP ), follows a power-law
p(ΔP ) ∼ (ΔP )−α over a range of ΔP values in both the E-Z and real market data,
with α = 1.5 for the pure E-Z model and α ∼ 4 for empirical market data.

pˆ sell = pˆ buy = pˆ merge =

1 − pˆ frg
.
3

(4)

We calculate the combinatorial expression as
pˆ frg (s) =

s!
3s

s−1 min(T −1,s−W)
W=0

B=s−T −W

1
W!B!(s − B − W)!

(5)

The system may be described by mean ﬁeld theory (disregarding the ﬂuctuations and ﬁnite size eﬀects). We denote by ns the average number of groups of
size s. For the steady state, the set of master equations is semi-recursive1 and is
written as
−

s
1
1
pˆ frg (s)(1 − δs1 )ns −
pˆ merge (s) + 2
N
N
N
s−1

s =1
1

s pˆ merge (s ) s ns
s =1

N

s ns (s − s )ns pˆ merge s + δs,1

+

N

pˆ frg (s )s 2 ns = 0 .
s =s+1

The equation for nl depends on ni for all i = 1 . . . l − 1.

(6)

Computational Modeling of Collective Human Behavior

39

The above set may be solved numerically2 . In order to include corrections from
the ﬂuctuations and the ﬁnite size eﬀect, we need to perform direct simulations
of the system described by Eq. (6).
We are interested in the situation when the consensus parameter is within
the range of x = (33 1/3 %, 50 %). If x < 33 1/3 % there is no fragmentation.
If x > 50 % we have the absolute majority vote condition. When x → 33 1/3 %
from above, we expect the return distribution to approach the one for the original
Egu´ıluz-Zimmermann system, which shows a power law with exponent 1.5 over a
large scale of return sizes. As we increase x slightly above 33 1/3 %, the dominant
behavior of the buy/sell probabilty pˆ buy = pˆ sell for the large groups (i.e. of order
s 100) yields an exponential cut-oﬀ, while for smaller s we have the ﬁnite size
eﬀect. This modiﬁes the model in two ways, by changing the group distribution
(since the conditional probabilities enter Eq. (6)) and the trade mechanism.
Unlike the E-Z system [7] where mostly the large groups trade, we expect to
have the trades coming from the actions of the small groups with the exponential
cut-oﬀ due to the behavior of Eq. (5).

4

Simulation Results

The simulations were performed for a system with N = 104 agents, m = 2,
and 106 time steps, with three diﬀerent values of the consensus parameter. The
initial state of information was (1, 1). After 105 timesteps, in order to allow the
system to reach equilibrium, the returns where computed as follows: if a cluster
of size s decides to buy, the return is +s. If a cluster of size s decides to sell, the
return is −s. After the simulation was complete, the time was rescaled by adding
the returns of two consecutive timesteps since on average a transaction occurred
once every two timesteps. Thus the results in Fig. 2 are eﬀectively for 9 × 105 /2
timesteps. It is observed that indeed most of the trades come from the action of
the small groups. As the consensus parameter is increased, the distribution of
returns can be seen to fall more sharply due to the increasing dominance of the
exponential cut-oﬀ. Our results demonstrate that the feature of allowing agents
access to global information and subsequent decision-making, when built into
a model focused on local group formation (i.e. E-Z), leads to a hybrid model
which can better capture features of the known empirical distributions. In short,
both local group formation and global information are important when building
a minimal computational model of ﬁnancial markets. By extension, the same
statement should hold for collective human activity in any domain in which
competition exists between a collection of interconnected agents.

5

Discussion

We have proposed a simple model system that represents a ﬁrst step in the
quest to develop minimal, individual-based computational models of real
2

The numerical procedure for solving Eq. 6 is eﬀective for modest values of N , since
at least 1/2 N 2 iteration steps are required.

40

A. Kirou et al.

socio-economic systems in which both local and global interactions are featured.
Such minimal models aim to incorporate the minimum number of rules, and
hence parameters, such that individuals’ behavior and interactions still appear
credible; yet at the same time, the emergent dynamics should remain consistent
with the maximum possible number of empirical stylized facts based on realworld data. In our particular case, we have incorporated global interactions via
the heterogeneity of strategies held by the agents, as well as agent memory in
the locally interacting system via the grouping mechanism.
Our speciﬁc results are as follows. The scenario in which the agents are allowed
to vote introduces an exponential cut-oﬀ starting on the scale for which eﬀects
connected to the discrete nature of the system may be neglected. Our results
show that those who usually trade are the small groups, and that there are no
trades coming from the large groups. By contrast in the original E-Z model, the
conditional probabilities were constant and any particular large group trades
more often than a particular small group. The most realistic minimal model
(which is as yet undiscovered) should lie somewhere in between. Any voting
scenario is a Poisson process which introduces an exponential cut-oﬀ into the
system. This exponential cut-oﬀ appears on a scale where the number of individuals involved is suﬃciently large that we may disregard the discrete nature
of the system. The modeling and the computational challenge is therefore as
follows: How can the present model be further enhanced such that it reﬂects the
more complex behavior of the individuals through the possession of memory, behavior based on past experience, and the passing of information between groups
concerning whether to trade or not?
In terms of more general issues of computational modeling, we have tried to
highlight the need to develop minimal computational models of real
socio-economic systems through individual-based behavior. Future theoretical
developments in such ﬁelds lie beyond simply integrating some form of phenomenological equation. Moreover, this sort of socio-economic modeling is an
application of computation that is set to boom in the future given the growing
availability of high-frequency data from socio-economic systems – and the fundamental philosophical need for theories which treat dynamical ﬂuctuations in
addition to mean behavior. One particular example in which this philosophy is
now being developed, is in improving our understanding of human conﬂict – by
looking at the stylized facts of conﬂict dynamics in exactly the same way as has
been done for ﬁnancial markets. Indeed, we have recently shown that remarkably
similar minimal computational models can be built, exhibiting equally satisfying
agreement with empirical data, simply by combining together global and local
interactions among agents. This work on human conﬂict will be discussed in
more detail elsewhere.

References
1. See for example, the wide range of publications and conferences around this common
theme of computational modeling of socio-economic systems,
http://www.unifr.ch/econophysics

Computational Modeling of Collective Human Behavior

41

2. Bouchaud, J.-P., Potters, M.: Theory of Financial Risk and Derivative Pricing: From
Statistical Physics to Risk Management, 2nd edn. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (2004)
3. Mantegna, R.N., Stanley, H.E.: An Introduction to Econophysics: Correlations and
Complexity in Finance. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1999)
4. Johnson, N.F.: Two’s company, three is complexity. Oneworld, New York (2007)
5. Johnson, N.F., Jeﬀeries, P., Hui, P.M.: Financial Market Complexity. Oxford University Press, Oxford (2003)
6. Gueron, S., Levin, S.A.: The Dynamics of Group Formation. Mathematical Biosciences 128, 243–246 (1995)
7. Egu´ıluz, V.M., Zimmermann, M.G.: Transmission of Information and Herd Behaviour: An Application to Financial Markets. Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 5659–5662 (2000)
8. Cont, R., Bouchaud, J.-P.: Herd Behavior and Aggregate Fluctuations in Financial
Markets. Macroeconomic Dynamics 4, 170–196 (2000)
9. Challet, D., Zhang, Y.C.: Emergence of Cooperation and Organization in an Evolutionary Game. Physica A 246, 407–418 (1997)

