Study of Electron Transport in Composite Films
Below the Percolation Threshold
2
ˇ 1,2 , and Jiˇr´ı Skvor
ˇ
Rudolf Hrach1,2 , Stanislav Nov´
ak2 , Martin Svec
1

2

Department of Electronics and Vacuum Physics,
Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Charles University,
V Holeˇsoviˇck´
ach 2, 180 00 Prague 8, Czech Republic
rudolf.hrach@mff.cuni.cz
Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, J. E. Purkynˇe University,
ˇ
´ ı nad Labem, Czech Republic
Cesk´
e ml´
adeˇze 8, 400 96 Ust´
novaks@sci.ujep.cz

Abstract. Composite and nanocomposite ﬁlms consisting of metal objects embedded in a dielectric matrix are studied by computer experiment. The electron transport through the composites is calculated in the
case when the basic conductivity mechanism is the tunnel eﬀect. It was
found that the conductivity of composite ﬁlm is located into tunneling
clusters strongly inﬂuenced by objects arrangement in composite ﬁlm.

1

Introduction

Composite and nanocomposite ﬁlms represent class of promising materials with
many applications in electronics, optics, catalysis and biotechnology [1]. The
characteristics of such composite ﬁlms depend strongly on both size and spatial
distributions of embedded particles, which is inﬂuenced by used technologies –
evaporation, laser deposition, plasma-assisted technologies, etc. [2], [3]. For most
technologies it was observed that the resulting ﬁlms contain nanometer-sized
particles with excellent uniformity, at least for small ﬁlling factors.
The properties of composite ﬁlms vary with the ﬁlling factor chosen. For small
ﬁlling factors the structure contains individual particles completely insulated by
dielectric matrix and the ﬁlm has dielectric properties. With increasing ﬁlling
factors the conductivity increases and tunnel current is observed below the percolation threshold. Finally, the transition into metallic state occurs.
Conventional characterization techniques of thin ﬁlms fail for these new materials and novel advanced techniques are needed in order to describe the properties of composites. The goal of their morphological analysis is to characterize
the forms and spatial distribution of individual objects in the ﬁlm. For this purpose, the image analysis applied to micrographs of either projections or planar
sections of composite ﬁlms is the most suitable [4].
The investigation of electrical properties of composites theoretically leads to
the nearly insurmountable diﬃculties, therefore a computer experiment is often
used [5]. This text focuses on the study of transport properties of composite
ﬁlms below the percolation threshold, in order to ﬁnd correlation between ﬁlm
structure and its electrical conductivity.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part I, LNCS 3991, pp. 806–809, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

Study of Electron Transport in Composite Films

2

807

Model

First, several sets of simulated composite structures were prepared. The structures consist of spherical objects of ﬁxed radii embedded in a 3D working ﬁeld
with characteristic dimensions from 1000 × 1000 × 100 to 1000 × 1000 × 500
units plus 10% margin. In the case of composite ﬁlms the length unit of the
model corresponds approximately to 0.1 nm. The spatial distribution of objects
was determined by the static hard-sphere model. The model parameter, diffusion zone DZ ∈ 0, DZmax , denotes the minimum distance between edges
of objects, the positions of which are generated randomly. The value of DZ
sets the degree of arrangement of metal objects in the dielectric matrix; the
larger the value of DZ, the more arranged structures are. In order to guaranty the suﬃcient precision of the results, the typical number of objects in
the model varied between 1 × 103 and 1 × 104 and several structures with the
same parameters were generated (about 10). Fig. 1 shows examples of prepared
structures. In some cases the hard-sphere model is not satisfactory; hence, more
sophisticated models corresponding to various types of experimental data were
developed [6].

Fig. 1. Images of composite ﬁlms, their sections and projections. Left – diﬀusion zone
minimal, right – diﬀusion zone maximal (DZ/DZmax = 100 %).

Besides the bulk (3D) composite structures, their 2D analogies also were used.
These artiﬁcial structures, in contrast to 3D structures, enable better visualization of acquired results and allow easier evolution of algorithms. The 2D models
of composite structures use the 1000 × 1000 working region with the same parameters – radii and diﬀusion zones – as the corresponding 3D models.
The electric current ﬂowing through the composite ﬁlm was calculated by
the kinetic Monte Carlo method. The electron tunneling in a low voltage approximation was selected as a mechanism of conductivity in accordance with
experimental data. The whole transport algorithm has three main parts: (i)
emission of electrons from negatively biased electrode; (ii) tunneling of electrons
between particular objects, causing changes in their charging; (iii) and the collection of electrons by positively biased electrode, all parts treated stochastically.
The electron transport was studied as an iterative process until reaching the

808

R. Hrach et al.

steady state of both potential distribution and intensities of conduction paths.
Fig. 2 shows the potential distribution in 2D analogies of composite structures
in the dependence on the arrangement of objects.

Fig. 2. Steady-state potential distribution in 2D analogies of composite ﬁlms denoted
by equipotentials and by colours of individual clusters. Left – DZ/DZmax = 33 %,
right – DZ/DZmax = 100 %.

3

Results of Transport Study

The simulations were carried out for several sets of structures, both 3D and 2D,
varying in the degree of objects arrangement. The type of electrical conductivity depends on the ﬁlling factor of composite structure. Below the percolation
threshold the tunneling appears between objects and electrodes and the terms
typical for ohmic conductivity like inﬁnite cluster, backbone and dead-ends [7]
change their meanings. The inﬁnite cluster has now spread to much more objects
and we call it tunneling cluster. The description of these structures and study of
their properties is the goal of our simulations. Fig. 3 shows the tunneling clusters in structures with diﬀerent degrees of ordering. The intensity of the electric
current ﬂowing through each channel is depicted by the shade of grey colour.

Fig. 3. Currents ﬂowing between electrodes. From left to right – DZ/DZmax = 33, 67
and 100 %.

During the analysis of tunneling cluster the channel with the largest intensity
of electric current (so-called main conductivity channel) and its critical bond was

Study of Electron Transport in Composite Films

809

determined. The critical bond is the bond that causes the weakest conductive
connection between two objects in the main conductivity channel. Fig. 4 shows
the main conductivity channels of the structures from Fig. 3; the critical bonds
are also marked in the channels. Relative values of the electric current ﬂowing
through these channels are 0.151, 0.083 and 0.052 for DZ/DZmax 0.33, 0.66 and
1.0, resp. (the ﬂuctuations for various samples were about 20 %).

Fig. 4. Main conductivity channels and their critical bonds (indicated by arrows), i.e.
the maximal resistors. From left to right – DZ/DZmax = 33, 67 and 100 %.

4

Discussion

The electrical characteristics of composites depend on the degree of arrangement
of metal objects. To describe this eﬀect caused by the decreasing dispersion of
distances between objects, one can claim: (i) the total current increases; (ii) the
potential distribution in the structure becomes more uniform; (iii) the number
of current paths increases; (iv) the current paths become shorter and better
arranged; (v) the main conductivity channel becomes shorter and more arranged.
Acknowledgements. The work is a part of the research plan MSM0021620834
that is ﬁnanced by the Ministry of Education of Czech Republic. The support of
the projects 1ET400720409, GAUK-237/2005 and 1P05OC013 is acknowledged.

References
1. Naka, K., Itoh, H., Park, S.-Y., Chujo, Y. Polymer Bulletin. 52 (2004) 171
2. Faupel, J., Fuhse, C., Meschede, A., Herweg, C., Krebs, H.U., Vitta, S. Appl. Phys.
A 79 (2004) 1233
3. Biederman, H., Martinu, L.: Plasma Deposition, Treatment and Etching of Polymers, Academic Press, New York (1990)
4. Nov´
ak, S., Hrach, R. Materials and Manufacturing Processes 17 (2002) 97
5. Sheng, P. Phil. Mag. B 65 (1992) 357
ˇ
6. Hrach, R., Svec,
M., Nov´
ak, S., Sedl´
ak, D. Thin Solid Films 459 (2004) 174
7. Stauﬀer, D., Aharony, A.: Introduction to Percolation Theory, Taylor and Frencis,
London (2003)

