Chairs’ Introduction to Workshop on Computational
Finance and Business Intelligence
Yong Shi1,2, Shouyang Wang3, and Xiaotie Deng4
1

Research Center on Fictitious Economy & Data Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing, 100190, China
yshi@gucas.ac.cn
2
College of Information Science & Technology, University of Nebraska at Omaha,
Omaha, NE 68182, USA
yshi@unomaha.edu
3
Laboratory of Management, Decision and Information Systems, Academy of Mathematics and
Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China
sywang@amss.ac.cn
4
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, China

Abstract. We have been organizing the Workshop on Computational Finance
and Business Intelligence (CFBI) at International Conference on Computational
Science (ICCS) since 2003. This workshop at ICCS, Baton Rouge, Louisiana,
U.S.A., May 25-27, 2009 focuses on computational science aspects of asset and
derivatives pricing, financial risk management, and related topics to business
intelligence. It will include but not limited to modeling, numeric computation,
algorithmic and complexity issues in arbitrage, asset pricing, future and option
pricing, risk management, credit assessment, interest rate determination, insurance, foreign exchange rate forecasting, online auction, cooperative game
theory, general equilibrium, information pricing, network band witch pricing,
rational expectation, repeated games, etc.

1 Introduction
The 15 papers are accepted for CFBI, ICCS 2009. The first paper, “Lag-Dependent
Regularization for MLPs applied to Financial Time Series Forecasting Tasks”, by
A. Skabar, proposes a lag-dependent regularization technique by which the influence
that a lag has in determining the forecast value decreases exponentially with the lag.
The second paper, “Bias-Variance Analysis for Ensembling Regularized Multiple
Criteria Linear Programming Models”, by P. Zhang, X. Q. Zhu, Y. Shi, explores biasvariance decomposition on RMCLP method, and concluded that boosting based
RMCLP will mostly further improve the RMCLP models. The third paper,
“Knowledge-rich Data Mining in Financial Risk Detection”, by Y. Peng, G. Kou,
Y. Shi, studies the concept of chance discovery into financial risk detection to build
the knowledge-rich data mining process and therefore increase the usefulness of data
mining results in financial risk detection. The fourth paper, “Smoothing Newton
Method for l1 Soft Margin Data Classification Problem”, by W. B. Chen, H. X. Yin,
G. Allen et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2009, Part II, LNCS 5545, pp. 513–514, 2009.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

514

Y. Shi, S. Wang, and X. Deng

Y. J. Tian, presents a smoothing Newton method for solving the dual of the l1 soft
margin data classification problem. The fifth paper, “Short-term Capital Flows in
China Trend, Determinants and Policy Implications”, by H. Z. Yang, Y. P. Zhao,
Y. J. Ze, builds a structural model-VECM to explore the determinants of net flows of
short-term capital in China. The sixth paper, “Finding the Hidden Pattern of Credit
Card Holder’s Churn: a Case of China”, by G.L. Nie, G. X. Wang, P. Zhang,
Y. J. Tian, Y. Shi, provides a framework of the whole process of churn prediction of
credit card holder. The seventh paper, “Nearest Neighbor Convex Hull Classification
Method for Face Recognition”, by X.F. Zhou, Y. Shi, introduces a novel classifier
called Nearest Neighbor Convex Hull Classifier for face recognition. The eighth paper, “The Measurement of Distinguishing Ability of Classification in Data Mining
Model and Its Statistical Significance”, by L. L. Zhang, Q. X. Wang, J. Wei,
X .Wang, Y. Shi, discusses the overlapping degree, and use K-S statistics to examine
the confidence level of the results from data mining model, and construct the
nonparametric statistics of AUC. The ninth paper, “Maximum Expected Utility of
Markovian Predicted Wealth”, by E. Angelelli, S. O. Lozza, proposes an ex-post
comparison of portfolio selection strategies based on the assumption that the portfolio
returns evolve as Markov processes. The tenth paper, “Continuous Time Markov
Chain Model of Asset Prices Distribution”, by E. Valakevičius, introduces a continuous time Markov chain model for asset dynamics. The 11th paper, “Foreign Exchange
Rates Forecasting with a C-Ascending Least Squares”, by L. Yu, X. Zhang,
S.Y. Wang, proposes a modified least squares support vector regression (LSSVR)
model. The 12th paper, “Multiple Criteria Quadratic Programming for Financial
Distress Prediction of the Listed Manufacturing Companies”, by Y. Wang, P. Zhang,
G. L. Nie, Y. Shi, applies the Multiple Criteria Quadratic Programming (MCQP)
model to predict financial distress of the listed manufacturing companies. The 13th
paper, “Kernel Based Regularized Multiple Criteria Linear Programming Model”, by
Y. H. Zhang, P. Zhang, Y. Shi, extends RMCLP into solving non-linear problems by
kernel trick. The 14th paper, “Retail Exposures Credit Scoring Models for Chinese
Commercial Banks”, by Y. H. Yang, G. L. Nie, L. L. Zhang, designs the target system
of individual credit scoring with individual housing loans data, and established an
individual credit scoring model including testing. The 15th paper, “The Impact of
Financial Crisis of 2007-2008 on Crude Oil Price” by X. Zhang, L. Yu, S. Y. Wang,
proposes an EMD-based event analysis approach for better estimation of the impact
of extreme events on crude oil price volatility.
Finally, the chairs would like thank all of the program committee members as well
as the reviewers for their valuable comments on the submissions. Without their support, the workshop cannot continue as it is now. We will work hard to participant in
ICCS 2010 again.

：

