A webMathematica Application for Mathematics
Learning
Giovannina Albano, Bernardo D’Auria, and Saverio Salerno
DIIMA – Dipartimento di Ingegneria dell’Informazione e Matematica Applicata
Universit`
a degli Studi di Salerno
84084 Fisciano (SA) - ITALY
{albano,dauria}@diima.unisa.it, salerno@unisa.it

Abstract. In this talk we would like to present MoMAMath, an on-line
interactive software for mathematics learning, based on Mathematica and
WebMathematica. The software has been realized by the authors and it
has been experimented to support classical courses of basic mathematics
for ﬁrst year engineering students at the University of Salerno. MoMAMath aims to improve to the didactic potentialities of the traditional
textbook. In fact it is completely interactive and based on the learning
by doing approach. MoMAMath’s distinctive feature is the possibility of
on-line interactive exercise sessions, besides other classical services like
theory sessions, asynchronous communication with teachers, and so on.

1

Scenario

In this paper we present MoMAMath, that is an on-line interactive software for
mathematics learning. At the moment it is in Italian and it is accessible through
the following web site www.momanet.it/momamath.
Which is the scenario of the development of MoMAMath? We live in the
Information and Communication Society which is more and more a Knowledge
society. This has impact on our approach to learn and teach! Moreover it fosters
a globalization process in High Education in Europe. This has brought in Italy a
reform of the Italian University system, which aims to have two level of degree:
a three-year “short degree”, more technical; followed by two optional years, ending with a deeper ﬁve-year “specialised degree”. The programs of the ﬁrst level
degree are very reduced w.r.t. the ones before reform, especially for the theoretical part, that is proofs of theorems, mathematical theoretical background.
They aims to “give an idea” and then to solve exercises. Moreover time to teach
has been reduced. Thus it is important to change methods and techniques of
learning and teaching. This is more and more true, because otherwise we will
have just people able to do standard computations or solve standard problems,
but not people able to face new problems.
The impact of the new technologies has brought on many changes in activities, contents, strategies, and attitudes in education. With respect to the mathematics the new environment requires to choose an approach based on descriptive,
intuitive, experimental and inductive aspects. There are multiple initiatives for
P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2657, pp. 754–763, 2003.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

A webMathematica Application for Mathematics Learning

755

using the computer in learning process. It is sometimes used as a complementary tool for educational training, or sometimes as a learning instrument on its
own. MoMAMath can be used both as complementary tool and as a learning
instrument on its own for people who have not the chance to attend a classical
course. We have experimented MoMAMath with engineering ﬁrst year students,
as complementary tool besides classical lectures.

2

General Description

The main aims of MoMAMath are ﬁrst of all to support mathematics learning, then to give a qualitative improvement to the didactical properties of the
traditional textbook.
The potential users are students of the scientiﬁc faculties of the universities,
but more in general we can say any Internet user who is interested in learning
basic mathematical concepts.
In the following we will describe the general characteristics of MoMAMath:
– Access trough a common web browser: MoMAMath is simply accessed by
any web browser, so you need just a computer and an internet provider.
– Personal accounting by login e password: each user access to a personal
working space by login and password and then s/he can choose topics, type
of exercise, theory and so on.
– User-friendly interface: the access to the various sections can be done by
clicking on some menu, the link to other exercises or theory pages is given by
hot words or buttons. In the main page a help explains the use of MoMAMath
and the syntax of the main functions.
– Hypermedia organization: the organization is hypermedial thanks to links
that interconnect various sections. The hypermedial structure allows the autonomous organization of the connection links and of the logical consequence
of the expositive text, so that the student can decide his personal learning
path.
– Menu for the selection of the topics: menu are available for selecting topics
and various types of exercises.
– Memory of the state of the exercise when the user logs out: when a user
logs out because he wants to interrupt his/her exercise session, the system
memorizes the state of the exercise so that, when the same user logs in again,
s/he ﬁnds the exercises in the exact point in which s/he left it.
Let us see the main functionalities of MoMAMath.
First of all, you can make exercises: when, where, how many you want! In
the next section we will precise what “how many” means.
Then you can require to do a simulation of exam, that is in a ﬁrst phase
you can learn some techniques to solve exercises choosing a priori what kind
of exercise you are going to solve. In the exam session, you can require to the
system to generate some exercises randomly chosen in the available set. So the

756

G. Albano, B. D’Auria, and S. Salerno

student can check ﬁrst his/her capability to recognize what kind of exercise s/he
has to solve and then if s/he is able to solve that exercise.
Moreover an on-line teacher is present and the students can interact with
him/her. At the moment, the interaction is asynchronous, that is just by email,
but we plan to introduce some synchronous facilities such as forums.
Of course, the students have the possibility of consulting theory pages and
help on-line.

3

Innovations and Advantages

In this section we want to point out the main innovations of MoMAMath.
First of all, our software allows to perform exercise sessions interactively online. It can generate inﬁnity (and always diﬀerent) exercises : this is an important
feature because MoMAMath has not a database, containing exercises and solutions, but they are randomly generated on the ﬂy by the software any time that
a student requires one. Algorithms have been implemented in Mathematica in
order to generate suitable exercises, which are consistent also from didactical
point of view.
We have chosen the divide and conquer strategy, splitting each exercise into
one or more elementary steps; that is the student is guided to the solution facing
easier sub-problems. At each step a hint is given and an interaction is required,
so that students have to give an answer to the current sub-problem. A suitable
theoretical link is also available. If the student is wrong in his answer, the system
for the ﬁrst time impose to re-insert the answer in order to stimulate the students
to try again, then if the student made mistake again, the system gives the chance
of viewing the correct result if the student wants.
As you can image, the evaluation of the correctness of the given answer is
done. We want to underline that it is not just to say “correct” or “uncorrect”.
The system in fact is able to recognize errors of a (most probably) theoretical
character (e.g. logical inconsistencies) and computational errors.
Correspondingly, a diﬀerent warning message is generated, suggesting the
most likely nature of the error and suitable means of correcting it (within the
MoMAMath environment). This feature proved particularly useful in saving time
during the error correction phase, since students did not have to unusefully
repeat the whole theoretical background in case of mere computational errors
and, conversely, receiving a timely warning when they needed to get a better
understanding of the underlying theory. Therefore, the previous functionality
can be regarded - at least from the experimental points of view - as a kind of
support, increasing the success rate for a ﬁnal examination on the subject.
Moreover, MoMaMath oﬀers a “simulation of exam”. At any time of the
his/her learning path, the student can decide to test its level of knowledge on
one or more topics. S/He chooses the topics and how many exercises for each
topics s/he wants to solve and the system generates an exam on the ﬂy, choosing
randomly the exercises in the selected topics of various diﬃculties. The student

A webMathematica Application for Mathematics Learning

757

is required to solve by hand the problems checking directly the ﬁnal answer. If
s/he fails in some exercise, he is sent back to the step by step procedure.
Further advantages are the personalization of the instruction and diﬀusion
of the instruction. Each user is able to personalize his/her instruction, choosing
topics to study and time to dedicate. It could be possible to create personalized
learning path based on the number and on the type of the carried out exercises
stored by the system. The teacher can individuate the points of great diﬃculty
in itself thanks to the possibility of generation of statistics of the performed
exercises.

4

Development Environment

In this section we brieﬂy describe the development environment.
For the implementation of MoMAMath we have used Mathematica for the
management of the exercises; WebMathematica for the delivery of the exercises
and uPortal for the management of the users.
The architecture is split into two servers: one that executes the uPortal application and one that executes WebMathematica and Mathematica. The user
from the client side accesses to the system using a common web browser (at the
moment Internet Explorer and Netscape are supported). The html pages which
are delivered are generated by uPortal that manages the accounting (that is it
communicates with a database in which all the users are registered). When a
user requires a new page (for example clicking on a button or a hot word), such
request is received by uPortal that interprets it and dialogues with WebMathematica calling the suitable page for that exercise. The MSP page contains the
calls to the suitable Mathematica functions for that exercise and the needed instructions to construct the html page with the results of the current step of the
exercise. Such instructions are exactly the functions of the package.

5

MoMAMath Portal

In the following ﬁgure 2 a representation of the areas that make the portal is
given. The header area contains the logo, the accounting information and controls, and useful e-mail addresses. The user may contact the site-administrator
for questions about the portal and its use, s/he may also send feedback with
comments, suggestions and remarks about the MoMAMath application, and at
least s/he may ask for a teacher support for problems related to the exercises.
The topics area is used to collect the exercises on the same subject. For
example in MoMAMath for the course of “Matematica I” the topics are: Limits,
Derivatives, Functions, and in addition the Exam Session.
List of Exercise Typologies area is a menu containing the list of the available
exercises about the chosen topic. Selecting one item from the list it loads in the
working area the last exercise of that kind that the user has studied and has left
incomplete.

758

G. Albano, B. D’Auria, and S. Salerno

Fig. 1. MoMAMath architecture

The working area is plainly the area reserved to the execution of the exercise,
and it contains also the number of exercises available to the user, since the
number of exercises in MoMAMath per Account is limited.

6

Examples

Let us show now some examples to illustrate the system. The ﬁrst chosen example
is a single step exercise but it clariﬁes what we mean for “elementary step” and
what kind of check the system is able to do.
Consider the following exercise regarding vector spaces:
Determine the dimension and a basis of the vector space V represented by
the linear system:
−x1 + 4x2 + x3 − 3x4 = 0
−3x1 + 2x2 − 3x3 + 2x4 = 0
The system suggests the steps to do:
Reduce the coeﬃcients matrix of the given system to echelon form and determine a basis for the space V .
Moreover some instructions related to the syntax are given:

A webMathematica Application for Mathematics Learning

759

Accounting
Supporting E-mail and info
Topics Area
Number
of
exercises

List of Exercise
typology

Working Area

Command Buttons

Fig. 2. MoMAMath portal

Note that each vector has to be insert between curly braces using commas to
separate the components. If the basis contains a number of vectors less than the
number of boxes, just leave blank.
The student is expected to insert the dimension and a basis of V . Suppose
s/he answers dimV = 3 and gives the basis {{1, −1, 0} , {2, −2, 1} , {−1, 2, 0}}.
The system check the given solution and give the following feedback:
The dimension of the space V is wrong. Note that the dimension of the space
V the number of the variables minus the number of the linear independent rows
of the coeﬃcients matrix. Compute again the dimension and ﬁll the blank boxes.
Finally pay attention to the length of the vectors you have inserted!!
In this case the system has revealed two errors. First, the dimension of the
space is wrong: this can be due to a computational error (for example the rank
of the matrix) or to a theoretical gap and the system recalls how to compute
the dimension. Then, the system gives a warning because the inserted vectors
cannot be in the space because of their wrong length.
At this stage the student has to try again to solve the exercise. Suppose that
the new answer is dimV = 2 and the basis {{1, −2} , {3, −5} , {0, −5}}. The
system check the given solution and give the following feedback:
The dimension of the space V is correct, but the given answer is incoherent because the dimension of the space V you have inserted is not equal to the
dimension of the list of the vectors in the basis. Note that the dimension of a
vector space is exactly the number of the vectors of any basis of the space. It is
better you have another look at the theory.

760

G. Albano, B. D’Auria, and S. Salerno

Moreover note that not all the vectors you gave generate the space V , because
they are not solutions of the given system. Compute again the basis and ﬁll the
blank boxes.
Finally pay attention to the length of the vectors you have inserted!!
From now on, the student may choose to re-try to solve by himself the exercise
or to see the solution.
At a ﬁrst look, the previous exercise may seem too diﬃcult to require to be
solved in one step! Solving homogenous linear system and reducing a matrix to
echelon form are considered elementary steps and no hints or guide are given.
This is because such processes are developed step by step in previous exercises
as we show in the following.
Compute the dimension and a basis of the nullspace of the homogeneous linear
system:

 −2x1 + 8x2 + 6x3 − 4x4 = 0
4x1 + 2x2 − 2x3 + 24x4 = 0

x1 + 5x2 + 2x3 + 10x4 = 0

S.

The steps in which the exercise is split are:
– compute the rank of the matrix A and give the dimension of the nullspace

– how many solutions have the system?
The following step depends on the number of the solutions given by the
student:
– case 0: the system checks the answer and gives feedback;
– case 1: the system asks the student to give the component of the solution;
– case ∞: the system requires: Give the indices of the columns corresponding
to the independent variables. Consider as dependent variables those corresponding to the pivot columns. Insert the echelon form of the coeﬃcients matrix.
In the last case, a further step is available to have a basis of the nullspace:
Compute the solution of the system corresponding to the following value of
the independent variables: x3 = 1, x4 = 0 and x3 = 0, x4 = 1.
Finally we point out that each exercise is algorithmized in a unique block
so a ﬁnite sequence of “elementary steps” is presented and the student has to
follow. What we mean by “elementary step” is a step actually simple or already
explained in details in previous exercises. These decomposition actually is not
formalized in the application, but it could be easily represented by means of an
ontology.
By using an ontology, indeed, it could automatized the process of solving the
elementary single steps, letting the user to open the linked exercise instantiated
with the data of the studied example. This may be seen as an up-down procedure
to solve the exercise that the student may use in dependence of the diﬃculties
s/he faces.
The study of a function, being an exercise with a more complex structure,
is the only kind of exercise that is exploded in a diﬀerent form. As it is shown
in the following ﬁgure 3 the student can select from the combo box which phase

A webMathematica Application for Mathematics Learning

761

s/he is interested in. Indeed, the study of a function is composed of a well-known
sequence of phases, each one made by more elementary steps. For example the
student may choose to study the asymptotes of the function and s/he is required
for these steps:
1– limits to the ﬁnite extremes of the domain
2– equations of vertical asymptotes
3– limits to the +∞ and −∞
4– equations of horizontal asymptotes
5– equations of oblique asymptotes

Fig. 3. Study of a function

7

Students’ Feedback, Diﬃculties, and Future Work

MoMAMath has been experimented at the Faculty of Engineering of the University of Salerno. It has been used as complementary tool for the ﬁrst year
mathematics students. The students attended classical lectures, then they were
habilitate to use the software for their own extra exercise sessions.
The students have found MoMAMath a good tool at least to learn standard
solution techniques and to help them in recovering personal gaps since the stepby-step procedure is able to guide them in reaching the solution.
Anyway most of the students guess that MoMAMath is not able to substitute
a human tutor: their feedback stress the importance of the interaction with the

762

G. Albano, B. D’Auria, and S. Salerno

teacher! The diﬀerence between a software and a human teacher is that the latter
is intelligent, that is people can reason, have the capability of understanding the
actual diﬃculties even if they are tacit or not well-expressed. Students require
more interactivity with the tutor, at least by the software support: at the moment
they have just email to communicate with the tutor, but they miss synchronous
and direct tools which allow them to clarify doubts exactly when they arise.
We have to mention technical diﬃculty too, related in particular to the mathematics: the mathematical notation on the web is an open problem, not so many
browsers support MathML. Our solution at the moment consists in giving output in symbolic mathematical language by using images while the input requires
textual Mathematica syntax. This implies that students become familiar with
Mathematica syntax and this requires an extra eﬀort. We are working to a solution which allows to give input using WebEquation.
Last, but not the least, diﬃculty consists in constructing such software is the
didactical planning. We need diﬀerent competencies and diﬀerent people: the
expert of the contents, the teacher with didactical and disciplinary experience,
the expert of pedagogy, the computer scientist, the expert of communication and
so on. It is diﬃcult to have people from diﬀerent areas together, and it is more
and more diﬃcult that they dialogue among them because of diﬀerent languages
they use.
Here are some ideas for future work:
– personalization of the hints w.r.t. to the cognitive user proﬁle;
– more collaboration with the teacher and with other students: in particular
introduction of synchronous communication tools;
– personalization of the environment for the student: in particular, the chance
to have possibility of having personal notes linked with some particular exercise, save some exercises, personal links to other connected material in the
web and so on;
– introduction of virtual scientiﬁc experiments that can suggest both the comprehension of complex phenomena and the learning of mathematical concepts
and results.
Acknowledgement. MoMAMath is the result of a project in which are involved
diﬀerent instituions: the Department of Information Engineering and Applied
Mathematics of the University of Salerno; the Centre of Excellence “Methods
and Systems for Learning and Knowledge”, which is approved and ﬁnanced by
the Italian Ministry of Scientiﬁc and Technological Research, singular in Italy
on such theme; MOMA which is a society oriented to advanced services and
to the diﬀusion of the innovation; the Centre of Research in Pure and Applied
Mathematics which is a centre of research which has developed competences and
experiences of high level with many European projects.

A webMathematica Application for Mathematics Learning

763

References
1. Albano, G., Cavallone, A., D’Apice, C., Salerno, S.: Mathematica and didactical
innovation. Proceedings IMS’99 (International Mathematica Symposium), (1998)
available at
http://south.rotol.ramk.ﬁ/ keranen/IMS99/ims99papers/ims99papers.html
2. Albano, G., D’Apice, C., D’Auria, B., Manzo, R.: A new approach to teaching/learning mathematics. Proceedings of EAEEIE2000Ulm (Annual Conference
on Innovations in Education for Electrical and Information Engineering) (2000) 1–5
3. Albano, G., D’Apice, C., D’Auria, B., Salerno, S.: Statistical interpretation of mechanical models by using simulation. Proceedings ICSEE 2000 (International Conference on Simulation and Multimedia in Engineering Education) (2000) 215–220
4. Galliani, L.: Open Distance Learning: innovazioni pedagogiche e didattiche. in Matteuzzi M., Banzato M. (1999)
5. Ligorio, M.B., Caravita, S.: Technology For Communication and Metacognition. International Symposium on Mathematics/Science Education and Technology (1994)
6. Miner, R., Topping, P. (Design Science, Inc): Standards-based Math on the Web.
(2001) available at http://www.dessci.com/webmath/status/status Jan 01.stm
7. Miner, R., Topping, P. (Design Science, Inc): Authoring Tools. (2002) available at
http://www.dessci.com/webmath/status/status Jan 02.stm

