A Fast Real Time Link Adaptation Scheme for
Wireless Communication Systems
Hyukjun Oh1 , Jiman Hong2 , and Yongseok Kim3,
1

Kwangwoon University, Seoul, Korea
hj oh@kw.ac.kr
2
Soongsil University, Seoul, Korea
jiman@ssu.ac.kr
3
Samsung Electronics, Suwon, Korea
yongseokkimasi@samsung.com

Abstract. In this paper, a fast real time link adaptation scheme for
wireless communication systems is proposed. The proposed scheme is
employing multi-stage adaptation controls based on channel state information (CSI). The optimal link adaptation scheme is known to have high
complexity to implement, and it shoud be run iteratively to deal with
time varying wireless channels in a short time. The proposed method
determines the speed of channel variation using CSI’s, then it applies
the most appropriate link adaptation methodology or algorithm to the
current time varying rate of channels. For examples, a simple up/down
transmit power adjustment is used for the very fast time varying channel condition. On the other hand, the optimal link adaptation scheme
is directly applied in the very slow varying channel state. The proposed
multi-stage link adaptation scheme can be easily implemented in real
time wirelss communication systems because of its capability of selecting
an appropriate real time link adaptation scheme adaptively to each channel variation rate. The design example on the selected platform shows
that the proposed scheme is very eﬃcient in real time applications of
the link adaptation in wireless communications, while its performance is
maintained close to the optimal.

1

Introduction

Eﬃcient utilization and allcation of the resources over the propagation channel
is certainly one of the major challenges in wireless communication system design [1]. Especially, a modern day wireless communications system is required
to operate over channels that experience fading and multipath. Given the evergrowing demand for wireless communication, a higher eﬃciency, higher performance wireless communications system is desirable. In order to improve the
eﬃciency and decrease the complexity of the system, CSI’s can be transmitted
This research work has been supported by Seoul R&BD Program in 2007.
Corresponding author.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 933–940, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

934

H. Oh, J. Hong, and Y. Kim

back to the transmitter unit in order to precondition the signal before transmission. These preconditioning or transmit coordination works are called link
adaptations.
One such communications system is an orthogonal frequency division multiplex (OFDM) system with CSI feedbacks. Its multicarrier nature with CSI
feedbacks allows the use of link adaptation to enhance its performance signiﬁcantly [1], [2]. The idea of link adaptation in OFDM is as follows. Based on the
channel characteristic given by CSI’s, the number of bits to be transmitted, the
level of modulation and the transmission power in each sub-carrier are selected
in order to increase the transmission bit rate [3], [4] or reduce the required
transmit power [5].
For example, in a standard TDMA system employing OFDM with link adaptation, each user is allocated a ﬁxed time slot and only that user can transmit
in that time slot. These unused sub-carriers, as a result of link adaptation, are
wasted and cannot be used by other users during that time slot. However, the
sub-carriers that are in deep fade over the link between the base station (BS)
and the designated mobile user may not be in deep fade over the links between
the BS and other mobile users. This motivates us to consider the link adapation schemes that users share the downlink transmission by adaptively using
diﬀerent sub-carriers, instead of using diﬀerent time slots as in a TDMA system.
This approach will allow all the sub-carriers to be used eﬀectively. However, its
algorithm is not simple to implement like one proposed in [6] that is not suitable for the time varying channel as the required computation makes real-time
implementation impractical.
The optimal link adaptation strategy is to perform link adaptation schemes
like power allocation, sub-carrier allocation, bit allocation, user allocation, modulation and coding allocation every time the propagation channel condition is
changed. Unfortunately, however, it is quite diﬃcult to perform the optimal
link adaptation strategy in the fast time varying channel condition, because its
complexity is pretty high to be run in real time.
In this work, we propose a link adaptation scheme that is simple to implement.
Link adaptation strategy is developed which results in minimum transmit power.
Also real-time heuristic allocation algorithm which is close to the optimum while
having much fewer computations is also proposed. The proposed scheme is employing multi-stage adaptation controls as per channel variation rate based on
channel state information (CSI). The proposed method determines the speed of
channel variation using CSI’s, then it applies the most appropriate link adaptation methodology or algorithm to the current time varying rate of channels. For
examples, a simple up/down transmit power adjustment is used for the very fast
time varying channel condition. On the other hand, the optimal link adaptation
scheme is directly applied in the very slow varying channel state. The proposed
multi-stage link adaptation scheme can be easily implemented in real time wirelss
communication systems because of its capability of selecting an appropriate real
time link adaptation scheme adaptively to each channel variation rate. We compare the performance and complexity of these algorithms with existing ones to

A Fast Real Time Link Adaptation Scheme

935

show the eﬀectiveness and eﬃciency of the proposed scheme. Such design examples on the selected platform shows that the proposed scheme is very eﬃcient in
real time applications of the link adaptation in wireless communications, while
its performance is maintained close to the optimal.

2

System Model

The structure of a multiuser OFDM system using link adaptation is shown in
Fig. 1.

Fig. 1. System model of OFDM system with link adaptation

Let K be the number of users supported by the system and N be the number of sub-carriers. Also, let Sk denote the number of sub-carriers required by
user k. Assume each sub-carrier has a bandwidth that is much smaller than the
coherence bandwidth of the channel and the instantaneous channel gain of each
sub-carrier for every user is known to the base station. In the transmitter side,
the link adaptation algorithm assigns sub-carriers to each user according to the
channel gains. The bit stream of each user is then transmitted out using the assigned sub-carriers. In each sub-carrier, the assigned bits are modulated with a
power level that can overcome the fading of the channel. In addition to the power
required to transmit the bits in the AWGN channel, power proportional to the
inverse of the corresponding sub-carrier channel gain ak ,” is needed. The modulated signals of all the sub-carriers are then transformed into time domain using
IFFT and cyclic preﬁx is inserted to eliminate the ISI. Dedicated sub-carriers
are reserved for the broadcasting of the sub-carrier allocation or link adaptation

936

H. Oh, J. Hong, and Y. Kim

information of which each receiver can retrieve to determine the corresponding
sub-carriers for receiving the data. In the receiver side, after removing the guard
interval and transforming the time domain samples into the frequency domain
symbol, the user demodulates the sub-carriers prescribed by the link adaptation
of allocation information to recover the original bit stream. The goal of the link
adaptation is to minimize the total transmit power of all the users while satisfying the data transmission requirement for each user. Given P is the transmit
power of a sub-carrier in the AWGN channel and pk,n is a binary assignment
variable which is equal to 1 if sub-carrier n is assigned to user k or equal to 0
otherwise, the total transmission power is given by
N

K

PT = min

pk,n
n=1 k=1

P
α2k,n

(1)

The objective is to ﬁnd the values of the assignment variables, pk,n , to minimize pT while satisfying the following constraints,
N

pk,n = Sk ,

k ∈ {1, 2, ..., K}

(2)

pk,n = 1,

n ∈ {1, 2, ..., N }.

(3)

n=1

N

n=1

Constraint (2) speciﬁes that the total number of sub-carriers allocated to user
k is Sk and constraint (3) speciﬁes that each sub-carrier can only be allocated
to one user.

3

Optimal Link Adaptation

The above optimization problem is similar to the classical assignment problem
in the area of linear programming. Therefore, we can solve this problem by
ﬁrst transforming it into an equivalent assignment problem. Here each user is
expanded to Sk sub-users and for every sub-user, only one sub-carrier will be
allocated. The channel gain of the sub-user is equal to that of the original user.
The optimization problem then becomes Eq. (1) with K = N . The constraints
N
(2) are also transformed to n=1 pk,n = 1 with K = N .
Numerous methods have been proposed to solve this classical assignment problem. One of them is the famous Hungarian method proposed in [7] of which the
computation complexity of the algorithm is O(n4 ). In a time varying channel,
the channel characteristic of users changes frequently. To cope with this situation, we need a link adaptation algorithm like a sub-carrier allocation above
that is fast enough to allocate the subcarrier within the coherence time of the
channel. Unless it is fast enough, the actual link adaptation operation cannot be
run in real time while keeping achieving the required performance. The optimal

A Fast Real Time Link Adaptation Scheme

937

link adaptation strategy is to run the optimal link adaptation algorithm like
the sub-carrier allocation given in above continuously as per channel variations.
Ideally, the link adaptation should be done before the channel varies. It is quite
diﬃcult goal to achieve and it is even impossible for fast varying channels with
high speed mobiles. That is, the complexity of the above optimal algorithm is
too large that an optimal solution may not be generated within the coherence
time, especially for a fast-fading channel. Therefore, we propose a heuristic link
adaptation scheme that satisﬁes the real time requirement.

4

Proposed Multi-stage Link Adaptation Strategy

The optimal link adaptation algorithm of sub-carrier and transmit power allocations addressed in the previous section is not appropriate for the real time
operation due to its high complexity and duty cycle limitation in fast varying
channel condition. In this section, we propose using CSI’s to determine the current channel variation rate and propose to use the computationally eﬃcient link
adaptation alogorithm optimized for the estimated speed of channel variations.
The channel variation rate is not required to be very accurate because the
characteristics of the propogation channel is not changing rapidly as per the
channel variation rate. Its characteristics are more dependent on the trend of
channel variation speed rather than the exact rate or speed of the variations.
In this paper, we propose to classfy propagation channel conditions into three
categories as per the estimated channel variation rate: slow, medium, and high
speed. These three categories reﬂect the trend of channel variation. Slow varying channel means that noticeable changes in their characteristics are observed
after relatively long time is elapsed. High speed categoty means that signiﬁcant
changes in their channel properties are observed in very short time. That is,
the acutal rate of channel variations is not important. The more relevent information to reﬂect the changes in their characteristics is how much they have
been chaged actually. In this paper, we propose to use such relevent information based on CSI’s intead of estimating the rate of channel variations directly.
In other words, the trend of channel variations are divided to three groups of
microscopic, mediumscopic, and macroscopic channel changes.
The proposed multi-stage link adaptation strategy is very simple. First, three
stages of link adaptations are set up: microscopic, medium scopic, and macroscopic channel changes. For each stage, there exists the link adaptation algorithm
optimized for the characteristic of each stage. For example, the link adaptation
algorithm of the ﬁrst stage for microscopic change in channel should be simple
enough to be run fast. A simple up/down power control would be a good candidate for the link adaptation algorithm of this stage. In Stage 3, the optimal link
adaptation algorithm of allocatioins in Section 3 can be used because macroscopic changes in channel are infrequent usually. Therefore, periodic runnings of
the optimal allocation algorithm should be suﬃcient for Stage 3. Because the
required duty cycle is pretty long in this case, there is no problem to run the
optimal algorithm in real time. On the other hand, Stage 2 must compensate

938

H. Oh, J. Hong, and Y. Kim

for the possible performance loss when the noticeable channel changes happen
in a time shorter than Stage 3 running period. For this, the stage 2 kicks in and
run the link adaptation algorithm optimized for this stage asynchronously if the
accumulated channel variation from CSI’s is larger than a threshold. Stage 1
keeps running during the call. On the other hand, the running period of Stage 3
is determined by the threshold T h. Fig. 2 shows the only simpliﬁed version of the
ﬂow chart of the proposed link adaptation scheme due to the space limitation.
G

Run Stage 1 Link Adaptation
(Microscopic channel change)
Up/Down power control

Accumulated channel variation quantity> T
NO
YES
Run Stage 2 Link Adaptation
(Mediumscopic channel change)
Limited optimal allocation

NO
Stage 3 running period ?
(Dependent on the threshold Th)
YES
Run Stage 3 Link Adaptation
(Macroscopic channel change)
Full optimal allocation

Fig. 2. The simpliﬁed ﬂow chart of the proposed multi-stage link adaptation

5

Simulation Results

To show the eﬀectiveness of the proposed multi-stage link adaptation scheme,
the performance and complexity of the proposed method is compared with the
optimal and sub-optimal ones in [6] and [8]. Here we consider an OFDM system
with several multi-stage switching rates and thresholds. Several mobile speeds
of 0km/h, 3km/h, 30km/h, 60km/h, 90km/h, and 120km/h are considered to
simulate the various rates of channel variations. The basic unit of performing
the link adaptation is multiple of frames.
The performance of the proposed scheme is shown in Fig. 3 together with the
optimal one that is performing the link adaptation every frame. In practice, the
optimal scheme is hardly ﬁnished in a frame, so that it cannot be used in the real
time application. In addition, sub-optimal scheme of running the link adaptation
over two frames is also shown in the same plot for the comparison purpose. Four

A Fast Real Time Link Adaptation Scheme

939

diﬀerent link adaptation duty cyle threshold values of 1, 0.1, 0.01, and 0.001 are
simulated to show the eﬀectiveness of the proposed multi-stage link adaptation
scheme. As the threshold value increases, the duty cycle of Stage 3 is increased
so that the total number of full link adapation operations is reduced. It results
in much less complexity and suﬃcient cycle time for the real time operation.
Note that Stage 1 of simple power control for microscopic channel variations
and Stage 2 link adaptation for mediumscopic channel variations are running
asynchronously regardless of the threshold values for Stage 3 duty cycle. Table 1
summarizes the total number of the full link adaptation operations to compare
the complexity of the proposed scheme with the optimal one.

G

10

10

10

-1

-2

-3

BER

10

0

10

10

10

10

-4

-5

‫ڬ‬
‫ڬ‬

LA per 1 frame, 10000
LA per 2 frame, 5000
Th=0.001, 1432
Th=0.01, 484
Th=0.1, 132
Th=1, 12

-6

‫ڬ‬

-7

0

2

4

‫ڬ‬
‫ڬ‬
‫ڬ‬
6

8

10
Eb/No

12

14

16

18

20

Fig. 3. The performance of the proposed method

Fig. 3 shows that the performance of the proposed multi-stage link adaptation
scheme is close to the performance of the optimal method while considerable
reduction in the total number of full link adaption operations is achieved as
shown in Table 1.
It is obvious that the proposed multi-stage link adaptation scheme can provide
the real time operations in practical wirelss communication systems even without
noticeable performance degradation. The performance gap between the proposed
method and the optimal one will becomes noticeable eventually when the rate
of channel variation is very high. In this case, however, correct CSI’s cannot be
available at BS side at the right timing because of CSI feedback loop delay. Even
optimal method also suﬀers from it.

940

H. Oh, J. Hong, and Y. Kim
Table 1. Simulation Parameters
Speed
3km/h
30km/h
60km/h
90km/h
120km/h

6

Duty cycle in frames
T h = 0.01 T h = 0.001
132
42
22
7
14
5
10
3
8
2

Conclusion

In this paper, we considered the real time link adaptation strategy for downlink
OFDM transmission. To satisfy the time variation of fading channel, a realtime heuristic multi-stage link adaptation strategy based on the determined
channel variation speed using available CSI’s was proposed. Switchig between
optimized link adaptation stages were controlled adaptively. Simulation results
show that the proposed multi-stage link adaptation scheme provides a solution
that is considerably simpler to implement than the optimal method, and that is
appropriate for the real time applications, while its performance is very close to
the optimal solution.

References
1. Rohling, H., Grunheid, R.: Performance of an OFDM-TDMA Mobile communication
system. Proc. IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference (1996) 1589-1593
2. Czylwik, R.: Adaptive OFDM for wideband radio channels. Proc. IEEE Globecom
conference (1996) 713-718
3. Rhee, W., Cioﬃ, J.: Increase in capacity of multiuser OFDM system using dynamic subchannel allocation. Proc. IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference (2000)
1058-1089
4. Yin, H., Liu, H.: An Eﬃcient Multiuser Loading Algorithm for OFDM-based Broadband Wireless Systems. Proc. IEEE Globecom conference (2000) 103-107
5. Chen, Y., Chen, J., Li P.: A fast suboptimal subcarrier, bit, and power allocation
algorithm for multiuser OFDM-based systems. Proc. IEEE International Conference
on Communications (2004) 3212-3216
6. Wong, C., Cheng, R., Letaief, K., Murch, R.: Mutliuser Sub-carrier Allocation for
OFDM Transmission using Adaptive Modulation. Proc. IEEE Vehicular Technology
Conference (1999) 479-483
7. Khun, H.: The Hungarian Method for the Assignment Problem. Naval Research
Logistics Quarterly 2 (1955) 83-97
8. Wong, C., Tsui, C., Cheng, R., Letaief, K.: A real-time sub-carrier allocation scheme
for multiple access downlink OFDM transmission. Proc. IEEE Vehicular Technology
Conference (1999) 1124-1128

