An Enhanced Location Management Scheme
for Hierarchical Mobile IPv6 Networks
Myung-Kyu Yi
Dept. of Computer Science & Engineering Korea University,
1,5-Ga, Anam-Dong, SungBuk-Gu, Seoul 136-701, South Korea
kainos@disys.korea.ac.kr

Abstract. In this paper, we propose an enhanced location management scheme for minimizing signaling costs in hierarchical Mobile IPv6
(HMIPv6) networks. If the mobile node’s mobility is not local, in our proposal, the mobile node sends location update messages to correspondent
nodes in the same way as Mobile IPv6 (MIPv6). After the creation of a
spatial locality of the mobile node’s movement, the mobile node sends
location update messages to the correspondent nodes in same way as
HMIPv6. Therefore, our proposal can reduce signaling costs in terms of
packet transmission delays in HMIPv6 networks. Therefore, our proposal
oﬀers considerable performance advantages to MIPv6 and HMIPv6.

1

Introduction

Mobile IPv6 (MIPv6) provides an eﬃcient and scalable mechanism for host mobility within the Internet [1]. It allows an IPv6 node to be mobile and arbitrarily
change its location on the IPv6 Internet while still maintaining existing connections. However, MIPv6 causes in a high signaling cost when it updates the
location of an Mobile Node (MN) if it moves frequently [2]. Thus, Hierarchical
Mobile IPv6 (HMIPv6) is proposed by IETF to reduce signaling costs [2]. It uses
a new MIPv6 node called the Mobility Anchor Point (MAP) to handle Mobile IP
registration locally. It is well known that the performance of HMIPv6 is better
than that of MIPv6 [2]. This is especially true when the basic assumption is
that 69% of a user’s mobility is local. If the user’s mobility is not local, performance of HMIPv6, in terms of delays for packet delivery, is worse than that of
MIPv6, due to the encapsulation processing by the MAP. Since all packets from
a Correspondent Node (CN) to an MN are ﬁrst delivered through the MAP, it
is possible that the MAP can become bottlenecked. Therefore, the load of the
search and tunnelling processes increase on the MAP as the number of MNs
increase in the foreign or home networks. It is a critical problem for the performance of HMIPv6 networks. To overcome these drawbacks, we will introduce an
enhanced location management scheme, called AHMIPv6, for minimizing signaling costs in HMIPv6 networks. In our proposal, location registration with the
Home Agent (HA) and MAP is exactly the same as that in HMIPv6. However,
the MN sends a Binding Update (BU) message to the CN with either on-Link
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3516, pp. 967–970, 2005.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

968

M.-K. Yi
Location update
Packet delivery

CN

oA
RC

MN movement

HA

(7)

LC
oA

INTERNET
(4)

(3)

MAP

LC
oA

(6)
(1)

oA
LC

MN

MN

m=0

m=1

A
Co

(5)

MN

RCoA

A
RCo

/R

LCoA

LCoA

/
HoA

(2)

MN

m=2
m=3
Tm = 3

(8)

MN

MN

m=4

m=5

MAP domain

Fig. 1. The System Model for the Proposed Scheme in HMIPv6 Networks

Care-of-Address (LCoA) or Regional CoA (RCoA), based on the geographical
locality properties of the MN’s movements. To do so, we deﬁne m and Tm as the
number of subnet crossings and the value of the movement threshold to decide
whether the MN’s mobility is local or not, respectively. If m is less than Tm ( i.e.,
m < 3 in Fig. 1 ), the MN sends a BU message to the CN with the LCoA. Otherwise, if m is greater than or equal to Tm , the MN sends a BU message to the
CN with the RCoA. Therefore, the CN can directly send packets to the MN
without the intervention of the MAP, and before the creation of geographical
locality properties of the MN’s movements.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the proposed
procedures of location update and packet delivery using the enhanced mobility
management scheme called AHMIPv6. Finally, our conclusions are presented in
Section 3.

2

Protocol Description

This section describes the location update and packet delivery procedure.
2.1

Location Update Procedure

Similar to HMIPv6, each MN has two addresses, an RCoA and an LCoA. Each
MN has a value of m and Tm . While m is the number of subnet crossings within
the MAP domain, Tm is the threshold value which decides whether the MN
sends a BU message to the CN with the LCoA or the RCoA. Whenever an MN
enters a new MAP domain, it sets the value of m to zero. Tm can be adjusted
based on the user’s mobility pattern and current traﬃc load.
Fig. 2 presents the procedure for a location update by sending the BU message. The procedures for a location update are as follows:

An Enhanced Location Management Scheme

( m ≥K )

(m<K)

MN

969

MN

MAP

CN

BU ( RCoA, LCoA ) / BA
BU ( LCoA, HoA ) / BA
BU ( RCoA, LCoA ) / BA
BU ( RCoA, HoA ) / BA

- When a MN moves within a MAP domain

Fig. 2. The Proposed Location Update Procedure

• If an MN moves to a diﬀerent MAP domain, then:
1) the MN obtains two CoAs: an LCoA and an RCoA.
2) Then, it registers with its MAP and HA by sending a BU message, and it
sets the value of m to zero.
• Otherwise, if an MN moves within the same MAP domain, then:
1) the MN gets a new LCoA.
2) The MN registers with its MAP by sending a BU message.
After registration with the MAP, the MN compares the value of m with Tm .
Case 1. If the value of m is less than Tm , then:
3-1) the MN sends a BU[HoA,LCoA] 1 message to the CN.
Case 2. Otherwise, if the value of m is greater than or equal to Tm , then:
3-2) the MN sends a BU[HoA,RCoA] 2 message to the CN. After the sending of the
BU[HoA,RCoA] message, the MN does not send any other BU messages to
the CN before it moves out of the MAP domain.
As a result, the MN performs registration with the CNs using an RCoA or
an LCoA, depending on its mobility pattern.
2.2

Packet Delivery Procedure

Fig. 3 presents the procedure for packet delivery in our proposal. In our proposal,
the packet delivery procedure is exactly the same to that in MIPv6 or HMIPv6.
The CN does not need to consider whether it has an RCoA or an LCoA of the
MN in its binding cache entry. If a CN has an LCoA of the MN in its binding
cache entry, it sends packets directly to an MN. Thus, the proposed scheme can
achieve optimal routing, the same as MIPv6. Otherwise, if a CN has an RCoA
1
2

BU with the binding between the MN’s HoA and LCoA.
BU with the binding between the MN’s HoA and RCoA.

970

M.-K. Yi

Invalid
Lifetime

CN

Valid
Lifetime

Valid
Lifetime

CN (RCoA) CN (LCoA)

HA

MAP

MN

Send indirectly via the HA and MAP
or send directly
Send indirectly
via the MAP
Send directly

Fig. 3. The Proposed Packet Delivery Procedure

of the MN in its binding cache entry, it must send the packets to the MAP ﬁrst
using an RCoA. Then, the MAP encapsulates and forwards them directly to the
MN. If a CN has no binding cache for the MN, it sends the packets to the home
link, then the HA intercepts and tunnels them to the MN using the LCoA or
RCoA.

3

Conclusions

In this paper, we proposed an enhanced location management scheme for minimizing signaling costs in HMIPv6 networks. In our proposal, location registration
with the HA and MAP is exactly the same as that in HMIPv6. However, the
MN sends a BU message to the CN with either an LCoA or an RCoA, based on
the geographical locality properties of the MN’s movements. To do so, we deﬁne
m and Tm as the number of subnet crossings and the value of the movement
threshold, to decide whether the MN’s mobility is local or not, respectively. If
m is less than Tm , the MN sends a BU message to the CN with an LCoA. Otherwise, if m is greater than or equal to Tm , the MN sends a BU message to
the CN with an RCoA. Therefore, the CN can directly send packets to the MN
without the intervention of the MAP, before the creation of geographical locality
properties of the MN’s movements. Therefore, our proposal achieves signiﬁcant
performance improvements by using the MN’s selection to send a BU message
to the CN, either with an LCoA or an RCoA.

References
1. D. B. Johnson, C. E. Perkins, and J. Arkko,“Mobility support in IPv6,” IETF
Request for Comments 3775, June 2004.
2. H. Soliman, C. Castelluccia, K. El-Malki, and L. Bellier, “Hierarchical Mobile IPv6
mobility management (HMIPv6)”, IETF Internet draft, draft-ietf-mipshop-hmipv602.txt (work in progress), June 2004.

