A Categorial Context with Default Reasoning Approach
to Heterogeneous Ontology Integration
Ruliang Xiao1,2 and Shengqun Tang1
1
2

State Key Lab of Software Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China
Department of Information & Management, Hunan Finance & Economics College,
Changsha 410205, China
xiaoruliang@163.com

Abstract. With context unceasingly changing, available information among
ontologies of different information sources is often heterogeneous. It is crucial
to develop scalable and efficient ontological formalism. This paper presents a
categorial context-based formalism with default reasoning, in which context
information is extensively considered, and from the category theory point of
view, we syncretize default reasoning and make a categorial context extension
to description logics (DL) for heterogeneous ontology integration. The core part
of the formalism is a categorial context based on the DL, which captures and
explicitly represents the information about contexts, and constructs
nonmonotonic default reasoning. Based on the formal framework, a prototype is
developed based on JESS, RACER and Protégé OWL plugin, which can
integrate different ontologies from multiple distributed sources with context
information using default reasoning.
Keywords: ontology integration, categorial context, default reasoning,
description logics.

1 Introduction
Generally speaking, ontologies are shared models of a domain that encode a view
which is common to a set of different parties, and contexts are local not shared
models that encode a party’s subjective view of a domain. While the environment
keeps unceasingly changing, semantic information in the constant ontology can’t
reflect the dynamic context. Context-awareness is one of the fundamental
requirements for fitting the semantics of the unceasingly changing context. With the
increased availability of large and specialized online ontologies, the issues about the
integration of independently deployed ontologies have become even more
outstanding. Hence, it is crucial to develop efficient ontological formalism for
overcoming the semantics heterogeneity of multiple information sources so as to
make the public (shared) and local harmonious. In the last few years, a lot of efforts
have been done[3,4,5,6,7]. In our work, we concentrate on the integration of
heterogeneous metadata information in the Semantic Web resources. A novel
categorial context with default reasoning approach is presented here that is capable of
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part II, LNCS 4488, pp. 681–688, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

682

R. Xiao and S. Tang

representing and efficiently dealing with some challenges. The organization of the
paper is as follows: in section 2, from the category theory and description logic point
of view, we define several conceptions relative context. In section 3, a categorial
context formalism CContext-SHOIQ(D+)DL is proposed, which is extension to the
description logic (DL). Section 4 constructs nonmonotonic default reasoning based on
CContext-SHOIQ(D+)DL. In Section 5, we develop a prototype system for integrating
context information from multiple distributed sources using default reasoning based
on JESS, RACER and Protégé OWL plugin. At the end, we discuss the related work
and make a conclusion in Section 6.

2 Categorial Context Definition
Category Theory is a mathematics theory, which studies “objects” and “morphisms”
between them, and may summarize all knowledge and knowledge processing from the
structural angle[8]. The concept of Category embodies some abstract properties of the
composition operator “◦” for functions that “reasonably” must be guaranteed.
The category has the systematic characteristics, on the contrary, SHOIQ(D+) DL
that is equivalent to the OWL-DL fragment of OWL (Web Ontology Language)[1,2],
is dispersed. The context is the structure knowledge that possesses the systematic
characteristic. Just as the direction pointed in the literature [8], there exists close
corelation between category and knowledge base. Hence, we will survey the context
based on the SHOIQ(D+) DL from the point of view of category theory.
Definition 1 (Context). A context is a kind of category, which is given by a binary
form <,>,  as a collection of conceptions (objects) in the SHOIQ(D+)DL, denoted
by A,B,C …;  as a collection of relations (roles)(arrows) in the SHOIQ(D+) DL,
denoted by R, S, …. From the ontological point of view, a categorial context is
showed itself a mini ontology.
For example, γ.C, means conception C depends context γ. Supposed that γ
represents “Cold-War-era”, C denotes “super country”, γ.C means a kind of solid
meanings “USA”, and “USSR”.
Definition 2 (Subcontext). A context U is a subcontext of a context V, if
• U0 ŒV0, where U0, V0 is the conceptions set with respect to U, V respectively.
• U1ŒV1; where U1, V1 are the relations (or roles) set with respect to U, V
respectively.
• composition and identities in U coincide with those of V.
Definition 3 (Functor). Given two contexts U and V, a functor F: U→V consists of
operations:
F0: U0→V0 and F1: U1→V1, where U0, U1 are the conceptions set and roles set of
the context U respectively, V0 , V1 are the conceptions set and roles set of the context
V respectively, such that
• Provided that f: A→B occurs in the context
the V.
• For every object A∈ U, F1(idA)=id F0(A).

Ｕ, F (f): F (A)→F (B) must be in
1

0

0

A Categorial Context with Default Reasoning Approach

683

• If g◦f is defined in the context U, then F1(g)◦ F1(f) is defined in the context V , and
F1(g◦f)=F1(g)◦ F1(f).
Definition 4 (Context Sequence). Provided that there is a serial of contexts that
construct a concrete environment, we call this environment Context Sequence. It can
be denoted as γn.…γ2.γ1, where γj. as (j=1,2, … , n) context. This kind of context
sequence is called Context-Aware Scenes too.

3 Our Formal Framework: CContext-SHIOQ(D+)DL
Based on these definitions of categorial context (CContext), we take the notion of
context as the core mechanism for representing semantics, and combining with the
SHOIQ(D+) DL of OWL, to get an extensive CContext-SHOIQ(D+) DL. We use ‘γ’ to
denote a context.
Definition 6. Suppose that Г is a set of contextual names, ‘γ’ a context name within Г,
 a set of conceptions,  a set of roles, γ. means whole conception set  depending
on the context γ. Similarly, roles within context γ denotes γ.,  holds a subset of +
with respected to transitive roles, +m, context γ holds a role name set »{R|Rœ}, in order to avoid operating R- -, we add a new kind of role inv(), and a new
transitivable function tran(). Tran(R)=true if and only if Rœ+, or inv(R) œ+. We say
a role R, within a context γ, is a simple if the R is not transitive, and it is not
compositive by a transitive role R and others, otherwise R is complex.
General inclusion axioms about role are in possession of as following form:
(1) γ.R mγ.S, where R,Sœγ.;
(2) γ1.R mγ2. S, where γ1,γ2œГ, γ1. R, γ2.Sœγ. and γ1 mγ2;
(3) γ1.R mγ2. R, where γ1, γ2œГ, γ1.R, γ2. R œγ. and γ1 mγ2;
After added context conception into SHOIQ(D+), conception set within CContextSHOIQ(D+) DL holds property as follows: γ.<C,R>=<γ. C, γ. R>.
“O” stands for nominals (classes whose extension is a single individual) within
SHOIQ(D+)DL, and a single individual a can be denoted as a conception by an
operator{a}. Therefore, every conception within SHOIQ(D+) DL must be a
conception within CContext-SHOIQ(D+) DL:
If γ.C, γ.Dœγ., γ.Rœγ., S is a simple role depending on a context, and n is a
non-negative integer, then γ.C+γ.D, γ1.C+γ2.D, γ.C*γ.D, γ1.C*γ2.D, γ1.ŸC, γ.R.C, bγn
R.C, r γn R.C all are conceptions.
General inclusion axioms about conception are in possession of as following form:
(1) γ.C mγ.D, where γ is a categorial context and γ œГ, C, Dœγ..
(2) γ1.C mγ2.D, where γ1, γ2œГ, γ1. C, γ2. D œγ.  and γ1 mγ2;
(3) γ1.C mγ2. , where, γ1, γ2œГ, γ1. C œγ.  and γ1 mγ2.

Ｃ

From the above general inclusion axioms, we all know that a Tbox is still a set of
general inclusion axioms.
Suppose that I={a,b,c,…}, an assertion must be in the form of : a: γ.C, (a,b): γ.R,
where a, bœI, Cœγ., Rœγ. . An Abox consists of limited number of assertions.

684

R. Xiao and S. Tang

Definition 7. A CContext-SHOIQ(D+) DL interpretation is a pair I=(∆I,⋅I), where ∆I
contains a nonempty set of objects (the resources) of I , is called domain; and a
function (.)I maps every role to a subset of ∆Iμ∆I such that, for conceptions C,D, roles
R,S, non-negative integer n, #M means the cardinality of M.
(1)(γ. R) I = (γI. RI)+, for Rœ+
(2) (γ. R-)I = {<γI. x, γI.y>|<y, x >œγI.R I}
I
I
I
I
I
(3) (γ. C *γ. D) =γ . C …γ .D
(4) (γ1.C *γ2.D)I =γ1I.C I …γ2I.D I
I
I
I
I
I
(6) (γ1.C +γ2. D)I =γ1I. C I»γ2I. D I
(5) (γ. C +γ. D) =γ . C »γ .D
I
I
I I
(7) (γ1.ŸC) =γ1 \γ1 .C
(8) (∀γR.C) I={x|∀y.<x,y>œγI.RI implies yœγI.C I }
I
I
I
(9) (∃γR. C) ={x|∃y.<x,y>œγ . R and yœγI.C I }
(10) (bγn R. C) I={x|#{y.<x,y>œγI. RI and yœγ.CI }bn}
(11) (rγn R. C) I={x|#{y.<x,y>œγI. R I and yœγI.C I }rn}
An interpretation I satisfies a terminology set Tbox T, if only if every general
inclusion axiom γ1.C mγ2.D, γ1 I. C I Œγ2 I. D I. we denote this I as model of T, I╞T.
For the context γ, we defines it as follows that γIŒ I, γI. C I=γI…C I , γI. RI=γI…R I.
As far as Abox is concerned, single individual aœI, an interpretation for it is aIœóI,
and satisfies some assertions as follows that:
(1) a: γ.C, if only if a IœγI…C I;
(2) (a,b): γ, if only if (a I, b I) œγI… R I;
(3) a ∫b, if only if a I∫b I .
Definition 8. A global interpretation (global-I) for context sequence γn. … γ2. γ1, is
(γn. …γ2. γ1) global-I =γn I »…»γ2 I»γ1 I; On the other hand, a local interpretation (localI) for it, is (γn. …γ2. γ1) local-I =γn I ………γ2 I…γ1 I, where γj (j=1,2, …, n) as context
and γjœГ.
Definition 9. A interpretation for context migration (γn. … γ2. γ1)~γn+1, includes global
interpretation ((γn. … γ2. γ1)~γn+1) global-I and local interpretation ((γn. … γ2. γ1)~γn+1)
local-I
.
According to all these descriptions hereinbefore, there exists subsumption and
satisfiability in our CContext-SHOIQ(D+)DL as in the SHOIQ(D+)DL, and tableau
arithmetic[1] also can be our an important tool for testing conception satisfiability in
the new CContext-SHOIQ(D+)DL. When the context migration takes place, we will
focus on realizing default reasoning in the Rules Layer as following next section.

4 Syncretizing Default Reasoning into CContext-SHOIQ(D+)
Currently, the Ontology Layer has reached a certain level of maturity with W3C
recommendations such as OWL-DL Web Ontology Language, and most interest
focuses on the Rules Layer and its integration with the Ontology Layer. Reasoning
with ontology languages will be important in the Semantic Web if applications are to
exploit the heterogeneous ontology integration. We will discuss nonmonotonic default
reasoning[11] for realizing the Rules Layer to facilitate such integration under our
formalism.

A Categorial Context with Default Reasoning Approach

685

4.1 Related Default Reasoning
This section will briefly recall the default reasoning. Default logic[11] is one of the
oldest and most studied nonmonotonic. It is an extension of classical logic with
default rules. A default theory is a pair (U,V), where U is a set of first-order formulae,
V is a set of defaults in form

γ ←ϕ :¬ψ1,…,¬ψn
whereas ϕ, γ , and ψi i=1,2,…,n are classical first-order logic formulae, ϕ is called the
prerequisite, γ is called the consequent of the default, ψi is a consistency condition or
justification. The default has the following intuitive meaning—if ϕ is inferable and,
for all ψi i=1,2,…,n is not inferable, then infer γ .
4.2 Default Reasoning Approach to Categorial Context Functor
The experience in building practical applications has revealed several shortcomings of
many semantic and computational problems. On the one hand, SHOIQ(D+) DL, which
acts as one of DLs, is fragment of first-order logic. Its semantics is based on the Open
World Assumption (OWA) of classical logic, while default rules are based on a
Closed World Assumption (CWA), imposed by the different semantics for logic
programming over categorial context functor. How to integrate the OWA of
SHOIQ(D+) and the CWA of rules in a “proper” way? i.e., how to merge monotonic
and nonmonotonic logical subsystems from a semantic viewpoint? On the other hand,
decidability and complexity of reasoning are two crucial issues in systems combining
DL knowledge bases and default rules. In fact, reasoning in DL knowledge base is
decidable and default reasoning is decidable, our combination perfectly syncretizes
default reasoning into CContext-SHOIQ(D+), preserving decidability and balancing
between OWA and CWA.
Definition 10. Categorial Context Default Reasoning is constructed into the
formalism CContext-SHOIQ(D+) as above. Provided that Г is a set of contextual
names, γ, ϕ and ψ are categorical context names within Г,  a set of conceptions,  a
set of roles. γ.X, ϕi.Yi, and ψi.Xi (i=1,2,…,n) are conceptions or roles in γ, ϕ and ψ of
CContext-SHOIQ(D+), Categorial Context Default Reasoning satisfies such rule as
follows,

γ.X ←ϕ1.Y1,…,ϕn.Yn :¬ψ1.X1…¬ψn.Xn
where ϕ. Yi is called the prerequisite, γ.X is called the consequent of the default, ψi.Xi
is a consistency condition or justification.
The default has the following intuitive meaning—for all ψi.Xi (i=1,2,…,n) is not
derivable, and if ϕ.Yi is derivable, then derive γ.X, i.e. If there exists an interpretation I
such that I satisfies ϕ1.Y1(x),…,ϕn.Yn(x) ( x is a variable ) and doesn’t satisfy every ψi.Xi
(x) (1≤i≤n), then I satisfies γ.X (x). Otherwise, if I satisfies every ψi.Xi (x) (1≤i≤n),
then I satisfies ¬γ.X (x).
For example, provided that there are three scenes, i.e. here are three contexts U,V
and W, available information come from other context names U and V, in general, we
assign the current context as W, to state that a person can speak except if s/he is a
dummy, we can use the default rule

686

R. Xiao and S. Tang

W.CanSpeak(x)← U.Person(x): —V.Dummy(x).
If there is a individual named John in a domain of individuals, then the closed default
rule is W.CanSpeak(John)← U.Person(John): not V.Dummy(John).
Integrating a Categorical Context-SHOIQ(D+)DL with nonmonotonic default
reasoning simply means the possibility of writing a “hybrid” knowledge base
containing a TBox, an ABox, and a set of Defult reasoning rules. This hybrid
syncretizing includes two main directions: loose syncretizing and strict syncretizing.
As far as loose syncretizing is concerned, because of the context always unceasingly
changing, when agents migrating between context-aware scenes, with the migrating
between different scenes, there must be context functor transition. Hence, loose
syncretizing often takes place in the local interpretation for context migration (see
section 3). As to strict syncretizing, it often takes place in the global interpretation for
context migration (see section 3).

5 A Context-Aware Prototype System
Based on our CContext-SHOIQ(D+)DL formal framework, we develop a prototype
system based on protégé OWL plugin, RACER reasoner and JESS [12,13,14,15] for
integrating ontology information as well as default information from multiple
different information sources based on context sequence. Protégé is an open platform
for ontology modeling and knowledge acquisition, Protégé OWL plugin supports to
edit categorial context ontology and can be connected to RACER reasoner. RACER
system implements a highly optimized tableau calculus for the very expressive
SHOIQ(D+)DL, also provides facilities for satisfiablity, subsumption, and
instantiation reasoning. JESS, a Java Expert System Shell, can be used as a default
reasoning engine.
User 1
Server
Ontology
Knowledge
Base
User 2

Internet

Ontology
Knowledge
Base

Ontology
Knowledge
Base

.
.
.

User n
Ontology
Knowledge
Base

Fig. 1. An architecture of prototype with different information sources

Figure 1 shows the architecture of the case system. The whole distributed system is
constructed by multiple local information sources, each of which describes and
classifies every user’s ontology knowledge base. Interactive process of the distributed

A Categorial Context with Default Reasoning Approach

687

users embodies the context-aware property. This context-aware property is decided by
every ontology knowledge bases of user domain.
The overall process of software architecture in the server is showed in the
following Fig.2. As far as reasoning with ontologies and default reasoning rules is
concerned, it consists of the following steps:
(1) Default reasoning rules is edited by Protégé OWL plugin.
(2) The user OWL ontology is loaded into Protégé OWL plugin.
(3) Categorial Context is extracted by Categorial Context Manager assisted by
Protégé OWL plugin.
(4) After the user OWL ontology is passed by consistency checking, it is loaded
into the RACER.
(5) Concept and role instances of RACER ABox are translated into JESS facts
assisted by Categorial Context Manager, and it should be processed by
consistency checker in succession.
(6) Default Reasoning Rules Manager helps the rules OWL ontology to be
converted into JESS facts.
(7) JESS facts are changed into RACER assertions.
(8) According to the application requirement, a new ontology is build.
Integrating Ontology Based on Multiple Different Ontology Sources
JESS (Java Expert System Shell )

RACER
Exceptional Handler

Default Reasoning Rules Manager

Consistency Checker

Categorial Context Manager

User 1
Ontology

User 2
Ontology

Protege OWL plugin

.......

User n
Ontology

Fig. 2. Software architecture of the different ontology integration in the server

This context-aware prototype system is combined with default reasoning, and all
our work is ongoing. We will introduce relative other work in the next paper.

6 Related Works and Conclusion
Some researchers do much work in the ontological integration field. Their works can
be classified as three classes: upper-ontology, mappings-OWL, and ε-connection.
Wang takes advantage of upper ontology for modeling context[9]. Bouquet in the
reference [3] proposes that a local ontology in C-OWL is considered as a context.
Mappings are made of bridge rules that express semantic relations, and it can be used
for representing modular ontologies and combining different viewpoints. In the
literature [5], Kutz presents a extension of DL. Grau expands Kutz method into the

688

R. Xiao and S. Tang

OWL-DL in the literature [4]. These approaches above are mainly at the angle of
technology, and there is not any context reasoning rule based their methods besides
tableaux algorithm. But, our work mainly focuses on the meta-level methodology.
In the paper, CContext-SHOIQ(D+) DL, a novel categorial context formalism with
default reasoning rules is proposed. The aim is to do some research for methodology
of ontology integration. According to our prototype system, the practice proves that
our research is valuable. This is only the beginning to explore the context of an
evolving ontology, and a lot of challenge need to be done by our further efforts.

References
1. Baader, F., Calvanese, D., McGuinness, D.L., Nardi, D., Patel-Schneider, P.F.,eds.: The
Description Logic Handbook: Theory, Implementation, and Applications. Cambridge
University Press (2003).
2. Horrocks. I.: Description Logics in Ontology Applications. In Beckert, B.(ed.): Automated
Reasoning with Analytic Tableaux and Related Methods. LNAI 3702. Springer-Verlag,
Berlin(2005), 2-13
3. Bouquet. P., Giunchiglia. F., Frank van Harmelen et al. C-OWL: Contextualizing
Ontologies. In D. Fensel et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2003, LNCS 2870, Springer-Verlag,
Berlin(2003),164–179
4. Grau. B.C., Parsia. B., Sirin. E.: Working with Multiple Ontologies on the Semantic Web.
In S.A. McIlraith et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2004, LNCS 3298, Springer-Verlag, Berlin (2004)
620–634
5. Kutz. O, C. Lutz, F. Wolter, and M. Zakharyaschev. E-connections of abstract description
systems. Artificial Intelligence 156(1): (2004) 1-73
6. Tan. P., Madnick. S., Tan. K-L.: Context Mediation in the Semantic Web: Handling OWL
Ontology and Data Disparity Through Context Interchange. In C. Bussler et al. (Eds.):
SWDB 2004, LNCS 3372, Springer-Verlag, Berlin (2005) 140 – 154,
7. Schmidt. A.: Ontology-Based User Context Management: The Challenges of Imperfection
and Time-Dependence. In R. Meersman, Z. Tari et al. (Eds.): OTM 2006, LNCS 4275,
Springer-Verlag, Berlin (2006) 995–1011
8. Lu. R-Q.: Towards a Mathematical Theory of Knowledge. J.Comput. Sci. & Tech. Nov.
(2005), Vol.20, No.6, 751-757
9. Wang X.H., Zhang D.Q., Gu. T.,et al. Ontology Based Context Modeling and Reasoning
using OWL. Proceedings of the Second IEEE Annual Conference on Pervasive Computing
and Communications Workshops (PERCOMW’2004).
10. Horrocks .I, Peter F. Patel-Schneider. A proposal for an OWL rules language. In Proc. of
the 13th international conference on World Wide Web (WWW 2004), (2004) 723-731
11. Reiter .P.: A Logic for Default-Reasoning. Artificial Intelligence. 13 (1980) 81-132
12. Haarslev.V., Möller. R.: RACER User’s Guide and Reference Manual: Version 1.7.6,
December, (2002)
13. Haarslev. V., Möller.R.: Practical Reasoning in Racer with a Concrete Domain for Linear
Inequations. In Ian Horrocks et al. (Eds.): Proceedings of the International Workshop on
Description Logics (DL-2002), April (2002)
14. Eriksson, H.: Using JessTab to Integrate Protégé and Jess. IEEE Intelligent Systems. 18(2):
(2003) 43-50
15. Golbreich C., Imai A. Combing SWRL rules and OWL ontologies with Protégé OWL
Plugin, Jess RACER. 7th Internation Protégé Conference, Bethesda, (2004)

