Computational Analysis and Simulation of
Vacuum Infusion Molding Process
Young Seok Song1 and Taikyeong T. Jeong2,
1

2

Center for Composite Materials
University of Delaware, Newark, DE 19716 USA
youngseoks@gmail.com
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Delaware, Newark, DE 19716 USA
ttjeong@alumni.utexas.net

Abstract. The current work focuses on resin bleeding process during
the Seeman composite resin infusion molding process (SCRIMP), which
is a subset of liquid composite molding (LCM) process. Finite diﬀerence
method (FDM) is implemented to predict the preform thickness, bleeding resin volume, and ﬁber volume fraction by using a non-rigid control
volume. After the ﬁbrous preform is completely impregnated, the resin
ﬂow within the preform has a great impact on the dimension and mechanical properties of the ﬁnal composite parts. As the resin ﬂows out of
the preform, the resin pressure and preform thickness are reduced, which
increases the ﬁber volume fraction and the dimension tolerance of the
preform.
In this paper, the inﬂuence of resin ﬂow rate at vent in the mold is
also investigated. It is found that there is a critical ﬂow rate to optimize
the SCRIMP process at the vacuum line.

1

Introduction

The SCRIMP is a variant of the traditional resin transfer molding (RTM) process, which is known to be suitable for processing large-scale composite structures [1], [2], [3]. The process can be explained as follows. The dry preform is laid
up and covered with a very high permeable media. A peel ply is laid in between
them. All of the layers are then sealed in a plastic ﬁlm/bag and then vacuum is
applied to evacuate entrapped air. When the resin inlet line is opened the resin
is driven by atmosphere pressure through the infusion line until the preform is
fully impregnated and the resin is cured. Since the process uses a single-sided
tool, room temperature resin and vacuum only, SCRIMP shows great potential
ability to form large-scale composites parts [4], [5], [6].
The resin bleeding stage of SCRIMP is from the time when preform is fully
infused to the time when resin is completely cured. The ﬂow behavior of resin
during this period will signiﬁcantly aﬀect the dimensional tolerance, ﬁber volume fraction and the void content of the composite. Spatial variation in thickness
T. Jeong is the corresponding author.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part III, LNCS 3993, pp. 113–119, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

114

Y.S. Song and T.T. Jeong

and ﬁber volume fraction inﬂuences the mechanical properties of the composite
laminate. In the SCRIMP process, resin is infused by opening the infusion line.
During the infusion process, there exists a pressure gradient along the preform
from the infusion line to the vacuum line. Since the sealed preform is not conﬁned by the mold on top, the resin pressure gradient should cause a thickness
gradient of the preform, which will be frozen in the cured ﬁnal composite part.
SCRIMP processing can be described as two diﬀerent stages. The ﬁrst stage is
the infusion stage, which ends when the preform is infused completely. The second stage is the post-infusion stage, which starts after the ﬁrst stage and ends
when the resin is completely cured. Much attention has been paid on the ﬁrst
stage and much research has been done [6], [7], [8], [9] [10], to understand the
resin ﬂow and saturation behavior and to fulﬁll a proper infusion strategy. When
the infusion is complete, therefore, one generally closes the infusion line or keeps
resin circulating till the resin cures. It seems that the entire SCRIMP process has
been complete by the end of the ﬁrst stage, however, during the post-infusion
stage, resin ﬂow, pressure gradient, thickness gradient and the rheological properties of the resin continue changing as a function of time and location. These
changes will ﬁnally determine the dimensional tolerance, ﬁber volume fraction;
void content and mechanical properties of the composite.
In this paper, SCRIMP process is investigated by using FDM. We, particularly, establish a computational model for resin bleeding process in SCRIMP to
analyze the resin ﬂow behavior and examine the eﬀects of diﬀerent processing
parameters, resin and fabric properties on the change of laminate thickness and
ﬁber volume fraction.

2

Description of Resin Bleeding Process

2.1

Governing Equations

Darcy’s law can be used as the basic momentum governing equation. For onedimensional problem, it can be expressed as follows.
μx =

K dP
Qx
=− ·
A
μ dx

(1)

where μx is the ﬂow velocity in x-axes and A is the cross-sectional area of preform. K is the eﬀective permeability of the preform, μ is the viscosity of resin,
and dP
dx is the pressure gradient of the resin. When the ﬁlled mold is rigid, the
one-dimensional equation of mass conservation for the ﬂuid can be written as.
dμx
=0
dx

(2)

Substituting equation (1) into equation (2) leads to:
d K dP
( ·
)=0
dx μ dx

(3)

Computational Analysis and Simulation of Vacuum IMP

115

This equation implies a linear pressure distribution between the resin infusion
line and the ﬂow front. If the resin pressure at the infusion line is P0 , the pressure
distribution would have of the following form.
P = P0 (1 −

x
)=0
xf

(4)

where xf is the location of the ﬂow front.
During the SCRIMP process, the preform is compressed by the atmospheric
pressure and there is no rigid mold on top of the preform. Therefore the resin
pressure gradient will cause the thickness variation across the preform. Since the
preform for SCRIMP is not rigid, the resin pressure distribution may deviate
from equation (4). However, when the preform is fully infused, the thickness
will not change if one circulates the resin. At that situation, the preform can
be approximately considered rigid and the resin pressure can be expressed by
equation (4).
The ﬂow behavior of resin and thickness change during the post-infusion period is related to diﬀerent processing scenarios and parameters. After the preform
is infused completely, if one circulates the resin until cured, a pressure gradient
in the part will remain the same as that during the infusion period and thus the
thickness gradient will be frozen into the part after cure. So, measures usually
need to be taken before the resin is cured.
SCRIMP process can be assumed as compressible in the thickness direction
and incompressible in the in-plane directions. A one-dimensional semi-rigid control volume of the preform after complete infusion is employed in the current
study. We obtain equation (5), from the mass conservation principle.
Qin − Qout = dv

(5)

where Qin is the ﬂow rate entering the control volume and Qout is the ﬂow rate
out of the control volume. dv denotes the rate of volume change of the control
volume. By using Darcy’s law, ﬂow rates in and out to the control volume can
be expressed as.
K ∂P (x, t)
K ∂P (x, t)
Ain = −
W ε(x, t)
μ
∂x
μ
∂x
K ∂P (x + dx, t)
K ∂P (x + dx, t)
Qout = −
Aout = −
W ε(x + dx, t)
μ
∂x
μ
∂x
∂
K ∂P (x, t)
K ∂P (x, t)
W ε(x, t) +
[−
W · ε(x, t)] · dx
≈−
μ
∂x
∂x μ
∂x
∂ε(x, t)
dv =
· W · ε(x, t)
∂t
Qin = −

(6)
(7)

(8)

where W is the width, ε is the thickness of preform, and t is the time. After
substituting equation (6), (7), and (8) into equation (5), we ﬁnally obtain
K ∂P (x, t)
∂ε(x, t)
∂
[− ·
· W · ε(x, t)] =
∂x μ
∂x
∂t

(9)

116

Y.S. Song and T.T. Jeong

The thickness of the preform at any time can be expressed as
ε(x, t) = f (P (x, t))

(10)

Researchers have modeled the relation between preform thickness and resin
pressure both empirically and analytically. We have used a fourth order polynomial empirical equation as our compaction model. Equation (9) can then be
rewritten as
∂
K ∂P (x, t)
∂f (P (x, t))
[− ·
· W · f (P (x, t))] =
∂x μ
∂x
∂t
2.2

(11)

Computational Scheme

When the infusion line is closed, there is no resin entering into the preform. At
the boundary surface x = 0, the ﬂow rate entering a control volume Qin = 0.
The ﬂow rate of resin out of the control volume is equal to the rate of change of
volume.
ε(x, t)
K ∂P (x, t)
· ε(x, t) =
· dx
(12)
μ
∂x
∂t
On the other end, x = L, resin ﬂows out through a tube. Considering the
control volume at the end, the ﬂow rate into the control volume is
Qin = −

K ∂P (x, t)
·
· W · ε(x, t)
μ
∂x

(13)

The ﬂow rate out of the volume is actually the ﬂow rate in the tube and can
be expressed as
π · a4
· P (x, t)
(14)
Qout = Qtube =
8μ · L0
where a is the radius of the tube, L0 is the length of the tube, and μ is the
viscosity of the resin. Therefore the boundary condition can be expressed as,
−

K ∂P (x, t)
HP (x, t)
∂ε(x, t)
· ε(x, t) −
=
· dx
μ
∂x
W
∂t

(15)

4

π·a
where H = 8μ·L
. At the moment when infusion line is closed (t = 0), the resin
0
pressure can be derived from the one dimensional Darcy’s law and conservation
principle. It is well known that the permeability of the preform is determined
by the structure and ﬁber volume fraction of the preform. Since the thickness
of the preform changes with time and location during the process, therefore, the
permeability is also a function of time and location. The following equation is
the relationship between permeability and ﬁber volume fraction.

K=κ

(1 − Vf )3
Vf 2

(16)

Computational Analysis and Simulation of Vacuum IMP

117

Fig. 1. Preform thickness change as a function of location (vacuum tube radius a = 2
mm)

where κ is the Kozeny Carman constant and Vf is the ﬁber volume fraction.
One-dimensional central ﬁnite diﬀerence method was employed to implement the
numerical analysis. The detail description of ﬁnite diﬀerence scheme is shown in
Figure 1. The length of preform was divided into m segments and time was also
divided into small steps. Using the diﬀerence scheme presented, equation (9) can
be discretized as
∂ K ∂P (x, t)
[ ·
· ε(x, t)] ≈
∂x μ
∂x

n
K i n εi ·
·
(
μn

n
Pi+1
−Pin
x

x

− εi−1 n ·

n
Pin −Pi−1
x

x

εn − εni−1
∂ε(x, t)
= i
∂t
t

x

)
(17)
(18)

Then, equation (9) can be recast as
n
n
εi n + 1 = rin · [εi n · (Pi+1
− Pin ) − εni−1 · (Pin − Pi−1
)] + εi n

where ri n =

3

Kin
μn

·

t
x2

(19)

.

Results and Discussion

Figure 1 shows the preform thickness changes as a function of distance from
infusion line at diﬀerent time during the post-infusion period in the case of
vacuum tube radius, a, of 2 mm. The origin point is the infusion line position
and the point x = 650 mm is the position of the vacuum line. It can be seen that
the thickness at the infusion side decreased and that at vacuum side increased
with time. As time passed by, the thickness gradient became smaller and ﬁnally
became almost uniform after 6 hours when the gel point of the resin is reached.
In the case of the tube radius is larger than 2 mm, the thickness at vacuum side
not changed with time. The decrease of thickness gradient was only caused by
the decrease of thickness at the infusion side.

118

Y.S. Song and T.T. Jeong

Fig. 2. Resin volume ﬂowing out of the preform as a function of time with respect to
various tube diameters, from 0 mm to 4.5 mm

Fig. 3. Fiber volume fraction as a function of time with respect to various tube diameters, from 0 mm to 4.5 mm

Figure 2 presents the resin volume ﬂowing out of preform during post-infusion
and Figure 3 is the ﬁber volume fraction change with time when the various
tube diameters (from 0 mm to 4.5 mm) are applied. It can be seen that larger
vacuum tube sucked out more resin from the perform and the panel reached
higher ﬁber volume fraction. However, excessive loss of resin before gel point may
lead to voids in the composite laminate. Uniform thickness, high ﬁber volume
fraction and low void content are the objectives for SCRIMP processing. Using
the analysis presented above, we can balance and optimize these properties by
choosing the proper radius of vacuum tube.

4

Conclusion

The post-infusion stage of the SCRIMP process signiﬁcantly aﬀects the dimensional tolerance, ﬁber volume fraction, and the bleeding resin volume. FDM is
implemented to predict the preform thickness, bleeding resin volume, and ﬁber

Computational Analysis and Simulation of Vacuum IMP

119

volume fraction by using a non-rigid control volume. As the resin ﬂows out of the
preform, the resin pressure and preform thickness are reduced, which increases
the ﬁber volume fraction and the dimension tolerance of the preform. In this
paper, the inﬂuence of resin ﬂow rate at vent in the mold is also discussed. This
work provides a practical tool to optimize the SCRIMP processing and the ﬁnal
composite properties.

Acknowledgment
The author would like to thank the referees for their valuable comments.

References
1. S. M. Lewit, J. C. Jakubowski, “Low cost VARTM process for commercial
and military applications,” 42nd International SAMPE Symposium, vol. 42, pp.
1173-1187, May 4-8, 1997
2. L. Joubaud, V. Achim, F. Trochu, “Numerical simulation of resin infusion and
reinforcement consolidation under ﬂexible cover,” Polym. Compos., vol. 26, pp.
417-427, 2005
3. Y. S. Song, K. Chung, T. J. Kang, J. R. Youn, “Prediction of permeability tensor
for three dimensional circular braided preform by applying a ﬁnite volume method
to a unit cell,” Compos. Sci. Technol., vol. 64, pp. 1629-1636, 2004
4. S. W. Beckwith, C. R. Hyland, “Resin transfer molding: a decade of technology
advances,” SAMPE Journal, vol. 34, pp. 7-19, 1998
5. M. K. Kang, W. I. Lee, H. T. Hahn, “Analysis of vacuum bag resin transfer molding
process,” Phys. Lett. A, vol. 329, pp. 207-213, 2004
6. T. G. Gotowski, G. Dillon, “The elastic deformation of ﬁber bundles, Advanced
composite manufacturing,“ New York John Wiley & Sons, 1997
7. R. Mathur, D. Heider, C. Hoﬀmann, J. W. Gillespie, S. G. Advani, B. K. Fink,
“Flow front measurements and model validation in the vacuum assisted resin transfer molding process,” Polym. Compos., vol. 22, pp. 477-490, 2001
8. Y. Song, W. Chui, J. Glimm, B. Lindquist, F. Tangerman, “Applications of front
tracking to the simulation of resin transfer molding,” Computers Math. Applic.,
vol. 33, pp. 47, 1997
9. T. Jeong and A. Ambler, “Design trade-oﬀs and power reduction techniques for
high performance circuits and system,” Springer-Verlag, ISSN: 0302-9743, 2006
10. J. Ni, Y. Zhao, L. J. Lee, S. Nakamura “Analysis of two-regional ﬂow in liquid
composite molding,” Polym. Compos., vol. 18, pp. 254, 1997

