MADEW: Modelling a Constraint Awareness Model
to Web-Based Learning Environments
Pilar Herrero and Angélica de Antonio
Facultad de Informática. Universidad Politécnica de Madrid.
Campus de Montegancedo S/N.
28.660 Boadilla del Monte. Madrid. Spain
{pherrero,angelica}@fi.upm.es

Abstract. In this paper, we present a web application developed at the
Universidad Politécnica de Madrid with an special peculiarity: this web
application is based on the extension and reinterpretation of one of the most
successful models of awareness in Computer Supported Cooperative Work
(CSCW), called the Spatial Model of Interaction (SMI), which manage
awareness in Collaborative Virtual Environments (CVEs) through a set of key
concepts. MADEW implements the key concepts of the SMI, introducing some
extensions –associated to human-like factors such as Sense Acuity and Internal
Filters- and providing some reinterpretations of these key concepts for the
context of Web applications.

1 Introduction
The concept of awareness of other users assumes very different meanings depending
on the situation. In 3D web-based collaborative environments, awareness of other
participants may have a physical interpretation, while awareness in non-graphical
environments must be interpreted in a more abstract way.
The aim of this research line started up at the Universidad Politécnica de Madrid is
to make a new formal awareness model based on the reinterpretation and extension of
one of the most successful models of awareness in Computer Supported Co-operative
Work (CSCW), called the Spatial Model of Interaction (SMI).
Our model not only extends and reinterprets the key concepts of the SMI, but also
takes into account some human-like factors – like, for example, Sense Acuity and
Internal Filters. The new abstract reinterpretation that we are going to develop will be
applied to the context of asynchronous WEB applications, 3D Web-based
Collaborative Environments and web based learning environments.

2 The Spatial Model of Interaction (SMI)
As we mentioned in previous sections, these key concepts are based on the main
concepts of a CSCW awareness model known as The Spatial Model of Interaction
(SMI) [1].
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3036, pp. 545–548, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

546

P. Herrero and A. de Antonio

The spatial model, as its name suggests, uses the properties of space as the basis
for mediating interaction. It was proposed as a way to control the flow of information
of the environment in CVEs (Collaborative Virtual Environments). It allows objects
in a virtual world to govern their interaction through some key concepts: medium,
aura, awareness, focus, nimbus, adapters and boundaries.
Aura is the sub-space which effectively bounds the presence of an object within a
given medium and which acts as an enabler of potential interaction. In each particular
medium, it is possible to delimit the observing object's interest. This area is called
focus "The more an object is within your focus the more aware you are of it". The
focus concept has been implemented in the SMI as an “ideal” cone limited by the
object’s aura.
In the same way, it is possible to represent the observed object's projection in a
particular medium. This area is called nimbus: "The more an object is within your
nimbus the more aware it is of you". The nimbus concept, as it was defined in the
Spatial Model of Interaction, has always been implemented as an sphere in a visual
medium. The radio of this sphere has an “ideal” infinite value, although in practice, it
is limited by the object’s aura.
The implementations of these concepts –focus and nimbus- in the SMI didn’t have
in mind human aspects, thus reducing the level of coherence between the real and the
virtual agent behaviour.
The main concept involved in controlling interaction between objects is
“awareness”. One object’s awareness of another object quantifies the subjective
importance or relevance of that object. The awareness relationship between every pair
of objects is achieved on the basis of quantifiable levels of awareness between them
and it is unidirectional and specific to each medium. Awareness between objects in a
given medium is manipulated via focus and nimbus. Moreover, an object's aura, focus,
nimbus, and hence awareness, can be modified through boundaries and some artefacts
called adapters.

3 Introducing Some Human-Like Factors
The SMI was integrated with different versions of the MASSIVE (Model,
Architecture and System for Spatial Interaction in Virtual Environments) platform
with some controlling parameters [2]. However, any of these implementations
reflected properly real life for two reasons. The first one is that any of this
implementations has considered all the key concepts of the SMI at the same time. The
second and very important reason is that the SMI didn’t consider human-like factors
such as the "Sense Acuity" - the sense’s specific ability to resolve fine details - or the
“Internal Filters” – the selection of those objects that we are interested in.

MADEW: Modelling a Constraint Awareness Model

547

4 An Asynchronous Interpretation of our Key Awareness
Concepts
Some research has already been carried out by our research group to make this
extension possible. An example of this is MADEW [3,4]. We also have some
publications as the paper published at the Workshop on Awareness and the www in
the ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work 2000 (CSCW’00)
[4].
The outcome of this research has been an abstract and preliminary interpretation in
the context of an asynchronous collaboration of both the key SMI concepts and some
of the human-like factors introduced in this dissertation. In this interpretation, all
these key concepts have been defined as:
• Awareness: This concept will quantify the degree, nature or quality of
asynchronous interaction between a user and the WEB-based environment.
• Focus: It can be interpreted as the subset of the web space on which the user has
focused his attention. It can relate both to content and to other users. Regarding
content, it can be computed by collecting information about the set of places that
the user has visited while navigating through the Web and the set of resources that
have been used. Regarding other users, it can be computed by collecting
information about areas of common interest and effective past interactions.
• Nimbus: It is the user’s projection over the WWW space. It can be defined as the
set of owned resources that the user is interested in sharing with others and the
kind of other users that could or should be informed about the user's activities.
• Aura: As in CVEs, this concept will be used to determine the potential for user
interactions.
• Boundaries: They are used to divide the web space into different areas and regions
and provide mechanisms for marking territory, controlling movement and for
influencing the interaction properties of the web space.
• Sense Acuity: This concept will be used to limit the depth of search for interesting
contents or users and the kind of information that the user can receive from the
web site. The maximum number of links to be crossed and the format of the
information can be established. The concept of Visual Acuity, which has been used
in CVEs, can be interpreted as the extent of restrictions on the visual information
that the user can receive from the web. A maximum acuity value will authorise the
user to get all kinds of visual information (images and videos) from the web, while
a minimum value will forbid him to acquire visual information. Similarly, Sound
Acuity can be interpreted as the level of permission to receive sound effects from
the information that is displayed at the web site. Just as in UNIX with its files and
directories, it could be interesting to define a series of permissions to control the
reception of information from the web: T (General Acuity): Permit access to just
text information; V xxx (Visual Acuity): Permit xxx types and amount of visual
information; S xxx (Sound Acuity): Permit xxx types and amount of sound effects.
• Internal Filters: Focus and nimbus could be restricted by the user's internal state
and desires. For instance, focus could be restricted through potential collaborator's
profiles and through content filters. We will only be aware of the users that are
within our focus and fall into our defined profiles. The history of previous
interactions and their effects on our mood or internal state can also restrict our

548

P. Herrero and A. de Antonio

focus or nimbus. Thus, a successful interaction will increase our level of attention
to users or contents that fall into a similar profile.

5 An Implementation of This Interpretation
This asynchronous interpretation of these awareness concepts has already been
implemented in a prototype system, called MADEW (Awareness Models developed
in Web Environments) to be used for training and educational purposes. MADEW
was carried out at the Universidad Politécnica de Madrid and it was tested with quite
successful results [3].
MADEW was implemented as an electronic trademark course that an enterprise
offered to its employees. Besides the typical set operations associates to a web course
and to the management of users in a software application –such as introduce new
users, remove users or modify user’s details -, this course controlled employee access
to some specific web areas, the format in which employees could access this
information (visual or auditory) and the kind of information they could pick up from
the course. The hierarchy of permissions was established by the enterprise depending
on the position of the employee in the enterprise.

References
1.

2.
3.

4.

Benford, S., and Fahlén, L.E. A spatial model of interaction in large virtual environments,
in Proc. Third European Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work
(ECSCW'93), Milano, Italy. Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp. 109-124.
Greenhalgh, C., Large Scale Collaborative Virtual Environments, Doctoral Thesis.
University of Nottingham. October 1997.
Fernández E. MADEW: Modelos de Awareness Desarrollados en Entornos Web. End of
Career Works supervised by P. Herrero. School of Computer Science. Universidad
Politécnica de Madrid, 2002.
Herrero P., De Antonio A., A Formal Awareness Model for 3D Web-Based Collaborative
Environments. Published in Proceedings of the Workshop on Awareness and the www.
ACM 2000 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW 2000).
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA, 2000.

