An Artificial Immune Algorithms Apply
to Pre-processing Signals
Mariusz Święcicki1, Wiesław Wajs2, and Piotr Wais3
1

Institute of Computer Modelling
Cracow University of Technology, Kraków, Poland
mswiecic@pk.edu.pl
2
Institute of Automatics
University of Mining and Metallurg, Kraków, Poland
wwa@ia.agh.edu.pl
3
The State Higher School of Vocational Education in Krosno
waisp@poczta.onet.pl

Abstract. Over the past few decades there has been a growing interest in the
use of biology as a source of inspiration for solving computational problems.
The motivation of this field is primarily to extract useful metaphors from natural biological systems, in order to create effective computational solutions to
complex problems in a wide range of domain areas. The more notable developments have been the neural networks inspired by the working of the brain,
and the evolutionary algorithms inspired by neo-Darwinian theory of evolution.
This paper presents the theory of an immune network model, and it tries to apply to solve signal classification problems.

1 Introduction to Architecture Human Immune System
The immune system of vertebrates is composed of a great variety of molecules, cells,
and organs spread all over the body. There is no central organ controlling the functioning of the immune system.The main task of the immune system is to survey the
organism in the search for malfunctioning cells from their own body (e.g., cancer and
tumour cells), and foreign disease causing elements (e.g., viruses and bacteria). Every
element that can be recognised by the immune system is called an antigen (Ag). The
cells that originally belong to our body and are harmless to its functioning are termed
self (or self antigens), while the disease causing elements are named nonself (or nonself antigens). The immune system, thus, has to be capable of distinguishing between
what is self from what is nonself; a process called self/nonsel discrimination, and
performed basically through pattern recognition events. The main functions of the B
cells include the production and secretion of antibodies (Ab) as a response to exogenous proteins like bacteria, viruses. Each B cell is programmed to produce a specific
antibody. The antibodies are specific proteins that recognize and bind to another particular protein. The production and binding of antibodies is usually a way of sending
signal for other cells to kill or remove the bound substance.
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3037, pp. 703–707, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

704

M. Święcicki, W. Wajs, and P. Wais

2 An Artificial Immune Network for Signal Analysis
Main goal our system is classification signals so there are some problems that have to
solve. The first problem is connected with algorithm of learning immune network.
The next problem is related to structures of data, which are responsible for representation of signals. Solutions of these problems are presented below. The last paragraph
shows result of classification signals by our immune network.
The signal comes inputs system, is interpreted as antibody (Ab) so task of immune
network is found antigen Ag that will be suitable for Ab. The Ag-Ab representation
will partially determine which distance measure shall be used to calculate their degree
of interaction. Mathematically, the generalized shape of a molecule (m), either an
antibody (Ab) or an antigen (Ag), can be represented by a set of real-valued coordinates m = <m1, m2, ..., mL>, which can be regarded as a point in an L-dimensional
real-valued space.
D

=

L

∑

i=1

(ab

i

− ag

)

2

i

(1)

The affinity between an antigen and an antibody is related to their distance that can be
estimated via any distance measure between two vectors, for example the Euclidean
or the Manhattan distance. If the coordinates of an antibody are given by <ab1, ab2,
..., abL> and the coordinates of an antigen are given by <ag1, ag2, ..., agL>, then the
distance (D) between them is presented in equation (1), and that use real-valued coordinates and that measure distance are called Euclidean shape-spaces.
In this article, we based on algorithm that was proposed in paper [1, 3] by de Castro and Von Zuben. This learning of immune net algorithm was adapted to classifying
signals. Below this algorithm is presented. The learning algorithm lets building of set
that recognizes and represents the data structural organization. The more specific the
antibodies, the less parsimonious the network (low compression rate), whilst the more
generalist the antibodies, the more parsimonious the network with relation to the
number of antibodies. The suppression threshold controls the specificity level of the
antibodies, the clustering accuracy and network plasticity.
For each Agj ∈ Ag do
Determine its affinity fi,j, i = 1,...,N, to all Abi. fi,j = 1/Di,j, i = 1,...,N
A subset Ab{n} contains the n highest affinity antibodies is selected;
The n selected antibodies are going to clone proportionally to their antigenic
affinity
The set C is submitted to a directed affinity maturation process generating a
mutated set C*
Determine the affinity dk,j = 1/Dk,j among Agj and all the elements of C*:
From C*, re-select ζ% of the antibodies with highest put them into matrix of
clonal memory;
Apoptosis: eliminate all the memory clones from Mj whose affinity Dk,j >
σd:
Determine the affinity si,k among the memory clones:

An Artificial Immune Algorithms Apply to Pre-processing Signals

705

Clonal suppression: eliminate those memory clones whose si,k < σs:
Concatenate the total antibody memory matrix with the resultant clonal
memory Mj
Determine the affinity among all the memory antibodies from Ab{m}:
Network suppression: eliminate all the antibodies such that si,k < σs:

3 Result of Experiments
This part of our paper includes results of which will be discussed. As was mentioned,
we tried to construct system, which was able to classifying signals. Our experiments
will consist of two phases, the first phase is phase of learning process of immune
network. The second phase is phase of testing process. During Phase of testing, the
signals will contain noise so it will make that process of recognizing will be either
difficult or even impossible. For that reason the trained artificial immune net have to
be cable of generalizing of signals. All Samples of signals have the same number of
values. A Distance between either Ag and Ab or Ab and Ab will be counted by using
the equation (1). A Set, which is used for training artificial immune net, includes
patterns of signals. As was mentioned, in our case, the samples of signals that are
included will be interpreted as antigens during the teaching process by having been
trained net. A first task of system will be classification of samples, which belong to
family of functions that are described by equations (2).
f 1 ( t , i ) = sin( i ⋅ x )
where

(2)

f 2 ( t , i ) = sign (sin( i ⋅ x ))
t ∈ [0 , 5 ⋅π ]

: i ∈ [ 0 . 2 , 1 . 2 ];

N u m b e r o f C l u s te r s ( V a ll e y s )
12

10

8

6

4

2

0

0

5

10

15

20

25

Fig. 1. Number of clusters (Peaks + 1, or Valleys) for this MST

There are 60 samples subdivided into 4 clusters (non-overlapping classes). Fig. 1
depict result of training of the immune network. Each of classes contains 6 cells. The
net had following training parameters: n = 4, ζ = 0.2, σd = 1.0, σs = 0.001 and d=10.

706

M. Święcicki, W. Wajs, and P. Wais

The stopping criterion is a fixed number of generations: Ngen = 200. The resulting
network contains 22 cells. The suppression threshold (σs) controls the specificity
level of the antibodies, the clustering accuracy and network plasticity. In order to
provide the user with important information on how to set up the immune network
algorithm parameters.
The change of parameters algorithm have influence on sensitivity analysis of the
algorithm. An Especially, the σs suppression threshold is responsible for sensitivity
work of the immune net.
3.1 A Phase of Testing of Artificial Immune Net
On input of the trained immune net will be delivered samples of signals don’t belong
to the learning set. The samples of signals were intentionally deformed by added
noise. In the Fig. 2 is result of the immune net answer. The dashed line presents values of input sample. The continuous line shows the best answer of our net. The algorithm that was described in the third paragraph, returns a queue of possible answer.
The queue is ordered and first place in the queue is occupied by vector of signal values that are connected with class that is matched an input signal.
1 .5

1

0 .5

0

-0 .5

-1

0

10

20

S a m p le of sig n a l

30

40

50

60

70

80

T h e b e s t a n sw e r o f n e t

Fig. 2. Result of process classification input signal

As we can see, the Fig.2 shows very interesting case, because although the input
signal was very deformed, the artificial immune network correctly classified it. That
is mean that the net is able to generalization of input signals.

4 Conclusion
This paper described mechanics of immune network in human organism. In this paper
is included describing positive selection. It is known that these the phenomenon are
used for building of artificial immune systems.. The model is connectionist in nature
but it follows an evolutionary-like learning algorithm that is the immune clonal selec-

An Artificial Immune Algorithms Apply to Pre-processing Signals

707

tion principle. Finally, there was presented model of application that based on immune network theory. The application was solving problems of identification signals.

References
1. De Castro, L. N., Von Zuben, F. J. (2000a), An Evolutionary Immune Network for Data
Clustering, Proc. of the IEEE SBRN, pp. 84-89.
2. De Castro, L. N., Von Zuben, F. J. (2000b), The Clonal Selection Algorithm with Engineering Applications, GECCO’00 – Workshop Proceedings, pp. 36-37.
3. De Castro, L. N., Von Zuben, F. J. (1999), Artificial Immune Systems: Part I – Basic Theory and Applications, Technical Report – RT DCA 01/99, p. 95.

