Spherical Binary Images Matching
Liu Wei and He Yuanjun
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiaotong University,
Shanghai, 200240, P.R. China
liu-wei@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract. In this paper a novel algorithm is presented to match the spherical
binary images by measuring the maximal superposition degree between them.
Experiments show that our method can match spherical binary images in a more
accurate way.
Keywords: spherical binary image, matching, icosahedron, subdivide.

1 Introduction
Spherical image plays an important role in optics, spatial remote sensing, computer
science, etc. Also, in the community of computer graphics, spherical image frequently
finds applications in photorealistic rendering[1], 3D model retrieval[2], virtual reality[3]
or digital geometry processing[4-5].
Compared with various algorithms for planar images matching and retrieval, there
is nearly no analogy for spherical ones up to now. But in some occasions, one can’t
avoid facing the task of matching spherical images. Since spherical binary images
(SBIs) are used in a majority of cases, we emphasize our attentions on them. In this
paper we propose an effective method to match SBIs by measuring the maximal
superposition degree between them.

2 Our Method
In our research, we assume that the similarity between SBIs can be measured by the
maximal superposition degree between them, which also accords with the visual
apperception of human beings. While we know that spherical surface is a finiteunbounded region, it hasn’t any information of border and also we can’t find its start
and end, which baffles the matching. The key of this problem is trying to obtain the
result in a finite search space and the error is certain to decrease along with the
increase of search space. That is to say, we need to be capable of explicitly controlling
the error according to practical requests. In this paper, we divide the SBIs into umpty
equivalent regions and compare the difference between the corresponding regions of
two SBIs, the sum of which is the superposition in an orientation. Then we rotate one
SBI around its center with given rule and make another analogical calculation. And
after finite comparisons, their similarity can be obtained by choosing the case with the
most superposition.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part II, LNCS 4488, pp. 146–149, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Spherical Binary Images Matching

147

As we know that regular polyhedra are uniform and have facets which are all of
one kind of regular polygon and thus better tessellations may be found by projecting
regular polyhedra onto the unit sphere after bringing their center to the center of the
sphere. A division obtained by projecting a regular polyhedron has the desirable
property that the resulting cells all have the same shapes and areas. Also, all cells have
the same geometric relationship to their neighbors. So if we adopt a regular polyhedron
as the basis to divide the SBIs, their distribution will also satisfy the requirements of
uniformity and isotropy. Since the icosahedron has the most facets of all five types of
regular polyhedra, we adopt it as a basis in our realization.
The division for a SBI has random orientation, which makes it difficult to compare.
For simplification, we firstly investigate the method to compare two SBIs in the same
orientation. As the SBIs have been divided into 20 equivalent spherical triangles, our
method is to subdivide each into four small ones according to the well known
geodesic dome constructions for several times(Fig.1) to form more compact trigonal
grids. If the gray of the SBI in the position of a grid’s center is 1, we tag this grid with
1, or otherwise 0. Then we totalize the superposed grids with the same tags and
calculate its proportion as the metric for similarity.

Fig. 1. The grids for a SBI in three resolutions

Suppose that the spherical icosahedron basis has been subdivided for N times and m
be the number of superposed grids with the same tags, then the similarity S between
the SBIs in this orientation can be defined as

m
.
20 * 4 N

Comparison of SBIs in the same orientation only reflects the superposition degree
in one situation, and therefore to obtain an all-around matching, we have to search for
more orientations to get the actual similarity. The varieties of orientation are achieved
through two steps in our realization:
Firstly, we rotate the icosahedron basis of one SBI around its center to obtain
another posture which is superposed with the prior one. Because the icosahedron has a
“Symmetrical Group(SG)” with its rank being 60, we need only rotate it 60 times to
get the most superposition in the group, that is, the max superposition in one SG
S G = max S i , i = 0,1,",60 . Fig.2 shows three orientations in a SG of a SBI for
example. Notice that the SBI is rotated along with the basis, too.

148

W. Liu and Y. He

Fig. 2. Three orientations in one symmetrical group, from which we can observe that the
trigonal meshes are superposed ( N = 2 )

Secondly, we learn that though rotations and comparison in one symmetrical group
can get a nearly approximate matching, the problem hasn’t been completely finished,
yet. An undoubted fact is that the relation between the SBI and its icosahedron basis is
randomly fixed at the beginning, which may create a non-optimal discretization of SBI
for matching. To solve this problem, we adopt to experiment on other relations, which
will perhaps alter the shape or distribution of the discrete SBIs. Our method is to rotate
the icosahedron basis while maintaining the SBI fixed to obtain another SG. To ensure
that all SGs are distributed uniformly and able to cover different angles to solve the
rotation problem effectively, we adopt the relaxation mechanism proposed by Turk[6],
which intuitively has each directions of a SG push around other ones on the sphere by
repelling neighboring directions, and the most important step is to choose a repulsive
force and a repulsive radius for the interval.
Suppose we need L different SGs, there are totally 60 L rotations between the
two SBIs. The average maximum error of rotation angle A for two SBIs in longitude
and latitude can be roughly estimated using the following formula:

360 180
1080
×
= 60 L ⇒ A =
A
A
L

(1)

The calculation is acceptable. Then we can decide the actual similarity between the
SBIs as S max = max S Gj , j = 0,1,", L − 1 . Also, we can easily analyze and
conclude that the whole time complexity of our algorithm is O ( L ∗ 4 ) .
Foremost, we evaluate the retrieval performance of these combinations. Assume
that the query SBI belongs to the class Q containing k SBIs. The performance of
N

each combination of parameters ( N , L ) can be evaluated using the percentage of the

Q that appeared in the top (k − 1) matches. As the query SBI is
excluded from the computation, successful rate is 100% if ( k − 1) SBIs from the
class Q appeared in the top ( k − 1) matches. In our experiments, two parameters
need be decided: N and L . To balance all the influencing facts, we test 18 cases to
decide the most appropriate combination in which N ∈ {2,3,4} and
L ∈{10,11,12,13,14,15} . Thus the number of grids for a SBI ranges from 320,
SBIs from the class

1280 to 5120.

Spherical Binary Images Matching

149

In the experiments, we test various kinds of SBIs and from each kind we choose
five SBIs as the query and test the results. Table 1 lists the average performances of
the 18 cases, from which we find that when N = 3 and L = 15 , the arithmetic
obtains the best performance. Of course, since there is nearly no acknowledged
benchmark and interrelated reports on SBI matching up to now, our experiments and
result of performance can only be an attempt.
Table 1. Average Performances (%)

N/L
2
3
4

10
31.3
34.1
33.2

11
33.4
34.9
34.1

12
33.7
35.4
34.5

13
34.1
36.3
35.7

14
34.9
37.1
36.4

15
35.4
37.9.
37.2

As for the results, we make a tersely analysis. Generally speaking, discretization in
a high resolution will approach the original SBIs in a more accurate way, but too fine
division will arouse the explosion of information and data, also result in general loss
of description, and as a result a compromise must be considered. In addition, the
performance is certain to improve along with the increase of L , as bigger L leads to
more adequate matching.

3 Conclusion and Further Work
In this paper, a tentative method is proposed to match spherical binary images based
on superposition degree. Experiments show fairish performances, which preliminarily
validates its idea. As for the further work, global descriptors or feature vectors which
are analogous to that for planar images had better be extracted in advance to further
support off-line matching for mass retrieval.
Acknowledgements. This research has been funded by The National Natural Science
Foundation of China (60573146).

References
1. Sing K. A Survey of Image-based Rendering Techniques. Technical Report Series, CRL
97/4, Cambridge Research Laboratory
2. Kazhdan M, Funkhouser T. Harmonic 3D shape matching. Computer Graphics Proceedings
Annual Conference Series, ACM SIGGRAPH Technical Sketch, Texas, (2002)
3. Shigang L, Norishige C. Estimating Head Pose from Spherical Image for VR Environment.
The 3rd IEEE Pacific Rim Conference on Multimedia, Morioka, (2002), 1169-1176
4. Wu Y, He Y Tian H. Relaxation of spherical parametrization meshes. The Visual Computer,
(2005), 21(8): 897-904
5. Rhaleb Z, Christian R, Hans S. Curvilinear Spherical Parameterization. The 2006 IEEE
International Conference on Shape Modeling and Applications, Matsushima, 11-18
6. Turk G. Generating Textures on Arbitrary Surfaces Using Reaction-Diffusion. Computer
Graphics, (1991), 25(4): 289-298

