Design and Implement Controllable Multicast Based
Audio/Video Collaboration
Xuan Zhang1,2, Dongtao Liu1, and Xing Li1,2
1

Network Research Center
Department of Electronic Engineering
Tsinghua University ,Beijing China, 100084
zhangx@cernet.edu.cn , ldt@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
xing@cernet.edu.cn
2

Abstract. Multicast based audio/video collaboration system is one of
representative applications in next generation internet. Adopting multicast
technique could save bandwidth for multipoint-to-multipoint audio/video
communication. Lack of ubiquitous native multicast limits the application, and
current multicast based A/V collaboration systems lack effective control
mechanism. This paper introduces one controllable audio/video collaboration
system based on multicast. The control and management on audio/video
collaboration are presented. The system has been implemented and applied on
CERNET.
Keywords: Controllable collaboration, audio/video, multicast.

1 Introduction
The multipoint audio/video collaboration systems have played important roles in Next
Generation Internet [1][2]. Among collaboration techniques IP multicast has
advantage on saving bandwidth for group communication. This makes it advanced
comparing to centralized system on large scale multi-party A/V collaboration.
Some IP multicast based A/V collaboration applications Access-grid[3]
INDIVIA[4], have been employed in internet. But problems remain to be solved to
these current systems. The control and manage on current multicast-based A/V
collaboration systems are not effective and not easy to be employed when the scale is
large, for example, the voice echo and noise problem during collaboration.
This paper introduces the IP multicast based A/V collaboration system. The control
and management on multicast based audio/video tools are presented, performance
monitor and congestion control are described. We have implemented and applied the
controllable audio/video collaboration system on CERNET successfully.

2 Control and Management on Audio/Video Collaboration
In multicast based audio/video collaboration system, each user could receive all video
and audio streaming from other users in the group. Users talk to each other equally,
there are no centralized control or manage. This equality in many-to-many advances
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 701–704, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

702

X. Zhang, D. Liu, and X. Li

interactive quality for collaboration. On the contrary, lack of control and management
cause problems during collaboration such as noise or echo. How to focus current
speaker’s video among the dazzling video windows of the group is another issue.
To manage and control the participants’ audio/video in collaboration, we propose
one mechanism based on chairman control panel to control and manage the A/V
during collaboration. The control panel is managed by chairman. During session
course the control panel could monitor the audio/video states and control video/audio
by sending control message. The messages are sent via unicast or multicast way
according to request.
The multicast based audio/video tools we adopted are originally from rat/vic
[5].We modified the tools to meet the goal of management and control.
2.1 Control and Manage on Audio
In audio collaboration, users in group could speak equally and freely. Avoiding the
unwanted voice such as noise or echo is hoped. Chairman or administrator should be
able to control it when abnormal voices happened. Here we adopt the scheme
combining voice volume monitoring and remote control as figure 1.

Fig. 1. The chairman control panel with audio monitor interface

The left of figure 1 presents the audio monitor interface, the users’ voice volume
values ranging from 0 to 16383 are displayed in user-list. We call the voice volume as
powermeter. According to powermeter chairman could judge which user is speaking
or making noise. When any speaker makes noise or echo, chairman could mute the
speaker remotely by sending Audio/mute message to the speaker from control panel.
Figure3 shows how chairman mutes user (202.112.24.38) remotely via control panel.
2.2 Control and Management on Video
During multicast based video collaboration, users could receive all users’ video
streaming and see all the others’ video windows simultaneously. When the number of
video windows is large, how to focus the current speaker video window is necessary.

Design and Implement Controllable Multicast Based Audio/Video Collaboration

703

Commonly, the current speakers, chairman and local video should be focused and
their video windows should be enlarged.
Figure 2 shows one layout for video windows, the main speakers, local video and
slider window are enlarged, the other participants’ video remain as stamp windows.
Stamp video windows
Speaker1
Video
Window

Slide
Window

Local
Video
Window

Speaker2
Video
Window

Fig. 2. Video window layout during collaboration

How to build and maintain the focusing-based video layout automatically for all
users is important for group collaboration. Typically, when the current speakers
change, the enlarged video windows for speakers should be changed accordingly to
all users synchronously.
We implement the video layout by defining four types of Enlarged Video Windows
(EVW) class: EVW/local, EVW/slide, EVW/speaker1 and EVW/speaker2. The EVW
classes are identified by video source identification SSRC. Among them EVW/local
and EVW/slide are usually constant and can be designated at beginning.
But EVW/speaker1 and EVW/speaker2 would change during collaboration course.
We d\efine messages Video/speaker1 and Video/speaker2 (as table 1) as EVW control
message for EVW/speaker1 and EVW/speaker2. When one new speaker begins to talk,
the chairman could select the new speaker from the user list in control panel (as
figure 1), and send the current speaker’s SSRC to all users by sending Video/speaker1
and Video/speaker2 message. When end user receives the newly Video/speaker
messages, the end system would change their current speaker EVW automatically
according to received control message. The Video/speaker1 and Video/speaker2
messages are multicast to all users in the group, so all the users could switch their
speakers’ EVW synchronously. Figure 3 shows one instance of video layout with
EVW and stamp video, during one forum on IPv6.
Table 1. Control messages for video
Message type
Video/bit-rate-send
Video/speaker1
Video/speaker2

Description
bit rate of video sending for flow control
EVW control message for EVW/speaker1 with SSRC
EVW control message for EVW/speaker2 with SSRC

704

X. Zhang, D. Liu, and X. Li

3 Application Cases
The multicast based audio/video collaboration systems have been employed to more
than 38 cities covering all provincial capitals of China. In 2006, some checking and
report meetings for research project were held via A/V collaboration system. Figure 3
shows one scene on IPv6 forum via the collaboration system on CERNET.

Fig. 3. Instance of video layout with EVW, one application case on IPv6 forum

4 Conclusion
The controlling and managing are important for many-to-many A/V collaboration. In
this paper, we introduce one controllable multicast based audio/video collaboration
systems. The audio/video collaboration controlling and managing mechanisms are
discussed. We have implement and applied the collaboration systems on CERNET.
The application would extend to CERNET2 (the Chinese next generation internet).

References
1. Internet2 consortium, http://internet2.edu/ .
2. Geoffrey Fox, Wenjun Wu, Ahmet Uyar, Hasan Bulut,Shrideep Pallickara, “Global
Multimedia Collaboration System”, 1st International Workshop on Middleware forGrid
Computing, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, (June 2003)
3. Access Grid Project, http://www.accessgrid.org
4. W.T. Ooi, P. Pletcher, and L.A. Rowe,INDIVA: Middleware for Managing a Distributed
Media Environment, SPIE Multimedia Computing and Networking, (January 2004).
5. http://www-mice.cs.ucl.ac.uk/multimedia/software/

