The Monte Carlo and Molecular Dynamics Simulation of
Gas-Surface Interaction
Sergey Borisov, Oleg Sazhin, and Olesya Gerasimova
Department of Physics, Ural State University, 620083, Ekaterinburg, Russia
sergei.borisov@usu.ru

Abstract. A testing procedure and a program product for modeling gas-surface
scattering process have been developed. Using the developed product the
numerical simulation of the thermal transpiration phenomenon at free molecular
conditions of the gas flow in channels with the use of different scattering
kernels has been carried out. The surface structure influence on energy and
momentum exchange in a gas-surface system has been studied by the use of
Molecular Dynamics method.

1 Thermal Transpiration Phenomenon Study by Monte Carlo
Method Realized for Different Gas-Surface Scattering Kernels
The most well-known diffuse-specular scheme of the boundary conditions to the heat
and mass transfer equations of rarefied gas dynamics developed by Maxwell is
successfully used for the majority of practical calculations (see, for instance, [1]). But
some experimental data and corresponding theoretical calculations based on this
scheme come into conflict with each other. As an example, one of the results of such
calculations affirms that the thermal transpiration phenomenon (or “thermo molecular
pressure difference effect” as it appears in scientific papers) does not depend on the
kind of the gas and the surface state [2]. Such result contradicts the rather reliable
experiments, for instance [3]. Apparently, the diffuse-specular scheme is not suitable
for the correct description of the gas-surface scattering process at the non-isothermal
rarefied gas flow, the striking example of which is the thermal transpiration
phenomenon.
The use of the diffuse-specular scheme does not provide the dependence of
scattering process on the gas molecule state that leads to contradiction between the
theory and the experiment especially for non-isothermal gas flow. To eliminate such
contradiction the boundary conditions that include certain data about the state of gas
molecules interacting with the surface must be applied.
Nowadays, besides the diffuse-specular scheme other boundary conditions based
on scattering kernels developed by Epstein [4] and Cercignani-Lampis [5,6] are
widely recognized. The mathematical forms of these kernels contain certain
expressions where the velocity of a gas molecules incident on the surface and the
surface temperature are included. The Cercignani-Lampis and the Epstein scattering
kernels are based on a certain physical ground and they satisfy all the requirements
established for a scattering kernel [7].
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3516, pp. 143 – 146, 2005.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

144

S. Borisov, O. Sazhin, and O. Gerasimova

To test the correctness of modeling the gas-surface scattering the program product
that provides simulating the behavior of non-interacting molecules in finite space
while changing the shape of the limited surface as well as the modeling method of the
scattering process, the surface temperature distribution and the initial gas state has
been developed. The free molecular version of the Monte Carlo direct simulation
method [8] has been realized. The efficiency of the program product has been
demonstrated on the example of reaching the equilibrium state of the gas in the bulbs
of various forms at the temperature perturbation of the surface. On the base of this
product the results that do not contradict the principal postulates of the gas kinetic
theory have been achieved. This fact has initiated our interest to apply the developed
approach for studying the thermal transpiration phenomenon in rarefied gas at nonisothermal conditions that meets the problem in description while using the scheme of
boundary conditions based on the Maxwell scattering kernel.
To understand the problem let us consider the free molecular stationary gas flow in
cylindrical channel connecting two bulbs where the gas is in the equilibrium with the
“hot” and the “cold” bulb at the temperature Тh and Тc accordingly. The main
equation for the gas pressure reached in each bulb is

γ
Ph ⎛ Th ⎞
⎟ ,
= ⎜⎜
Pc ⎝ Tc ⎟⎠

(1)

where Ph – the gas pressure in the hot bulb, Pc – the gas pressure in the cold bulb, γ –
a so called thermal transpiration coefficient.
The γ value is observed close to ½ in all simulation procedures that use the
Maxwell kernel with any kernel parameter. The simulation of the thermal
transpiration phenomenon with the use of Cercignani-Lampis and Epstein kernels
demonstrates significant dependence of the thermal transpiration coefficient γ on the
kernel parameters.
It has been shown that with the use of both the Cercignani-Lampis and the Epstein
kernels the thermal transpiration effect depends on the channel’s length/radius ratio,
the surface temperature distribution along the channel and does not depend on the
bulbs’ temperature ratio. The stationary gas temperature distribution inside the
channel depends on the channel’s length/radius ratio and practically does not depend
on the kernel parameters. The stationary gas concentration distribution depends both
on the channel’s length/radius ratio and the kernel parameters.
The comparison with the most reliable experiments shows that the simulation
based on the use of the Cercignani-Lampis scattering kernels provides satisfactory
description of the gas-surface scattering at non isothermal rarefied gas flow conditions
at all. Due to strong dependence of the thermal transpiration coefficient on kernel
parameters one can expect similar result while using the Epstein kernel.

2 Molecular Dynamics Simulation of Energy and Momentum
Transfer in a Gas/Solids System
A great number of structural models describing current gas dynamics experiments and
forecasting and momentum exchange in a “gas – rough surface” system have been

The Monte Carlo and Molecular Dynamics Simulation of Gas-Surface Interaction

145

developed. Every model corresponds to definite material, grain orientation and
surface structural phase. An attempt to build an adequate model of surface structure
and to describe the real experiment for rarefied gas flow in a rectangular channel with
the rough walls has been realized with the use of Monte Carlo Test Particle
Simulation Method [9]. Other approach for statistical modeling the roughness
proposed in [10] is based on the assumption that the separate elements of the surface
microstructure are the cones of the same height and top angle. These approaches for
simulation of the surface structure as similar ones are not adequate completely to the
real situation because of their “artificial” character based on “imagination” but not on
the topography of the real surface.
The methods of scanning probe microscopy, in particular, atomic force microscopy
that are developed intensively last years give on opportunity to get an information on
specific features of the surface structure and to develop boundary conditions adequate
to the real situation. The attempt to simulate the surface structure with the use of such
approach has been realized recently [11].
In this study we investigate the topography of platinum plate used in gas dynamics
experiments to estimate the roughness of the real surface. The surface structure has
been studied with the use of AFM Explorer in a contact regime of scanning. Using the
obtained data the main parameters characterizing surface microstructure have been
determined.
1,0
0,8

ατ

0,6
0,4
SL = 1
0.25

0,2
0,0

-60

-40

-20

0

20

40

60

The incident angle θ, deg
Fig. 1. The tangential momentum accommodation coefficient ατ for xenon/platinum system

To simulate the gas-solids interaction the classical molecular dynamics method is
applied. The Knudsen’s accommodation coefficients for tangential and normal
momentum, as well as for kinetic energy have been calculated taking into account the
gas nature and the surface structure. The results of the tangential momentum
accommodation calculation for xenon/platinum system as a function of an incident
angle θ for two values of the velocity ratio SL are presented in figure 1. SL is
introduced as a ratio of the surface movement velocity to the most probable gas
molecule velocity.

146

S. Borisov, O. Sazhin, and O. Gerasimova

3 Conclusions
The results of numerical simulation of the thermal transpiration phenomenon at free
molecular conditions of the gas flow in channels with the use of the Maxwell, the
Cercignani-Lampis and the Epstein scattering kernels are presented. The principal
outcome of the study is the statement that in contrast to the Maxwell scheme of
boundary conditions the use of the Cercignani-Lampis and the Epstein kernels permits
to describe more correctly the non-isothermal internal rarefied gas flow. The obtained
results show that there are no principle problems for gas-surface interaction
description using numerical simulation procedures, in particular DMCS and
molecular dynamics method. Some technical problems could be met under way of the
AFM data use in simulations and finding acceptable form of interaction potentials as
well as their parameters.

Acknowledgments
The research described in this publication was made possible by Awards No: 03-535117 of INTAS and No: REC-005 (EK-005-X1), Y2-P-05-15 of U.S. Civilian
Research & Development Foundation for the Independent States of the Former Soviet
Union (CRDF).

References
1. Siewert, C. E.: Poiseuille and thermal-creep flow in cylindrical tube. J. Comp. Physics 160
(2000) 470-480.
2. Sharipov F., Seleznev V.: Data on Internal Rarefied Gas Flow. J. Phys. Chem. 27 (3)
(1998) 657-706.
3. Edmonds T., Hobson J.P.: A study of thermal transpiration using ultra high vacuum
techniques. J. Vac. Sci. Technol. 2 (1965) 182-197.
4. Epstein M.: A model of the wall boundary condition in kinetic theory. J. AIAA 5(10)
(1967) 1797-1800.
5. Cercignani C., Lampis M.: Kinetic model for gas-surface interaction. Transp. J. Theory
and Stat. Phys. 1 (1971) 101-114.
6. Lord R.G.: Some further extensions of Cercignani-Lampis gas-surface interaction model.
J. Phys. Fluids 7 (1995) 1159-1161.
7. Cercignani C.: The Boltzmann Equation and its Application. Springer, New York (1988).
8. Bird G.A.: Molecular Gas Dynamics and Direct Simulation of Gas Flows. Oxford
University Press, Oxford (1996).
9. Sazhin O.V., Kulev A.N., Borisov S.F.: The role of the surface structure in formation of an
ultra rarefied gas flow in a channel. J. ThermoPhysics & Aeromechanics, 8(3) (2001)
391-399.
10. Sawada T., Horie B.Y., Sugiyama W. J. Vacuum, 47(6-8) (1996) 795-797.
11. Gerasimova O.E., Borisov S.F., Boragno C., Valbusa U.: Modeling of the surface structure
in gas dynamic problems with the use of the data of atomic force microscopy. J. Eng. Phys.
& Thermophys., 76(2) (2003) 413-416.

