Traﬃc Grooming Based on Shortest Path in
Optical WDM Mesh Networks
Yeo-Ran Yoon, Tae-Jin Lee, Min Young Chung, and Hyunseung Choo
Lambda Networking Center,
School of Information and Communication Engineering,
Sungkyunkwan University, Korea
{ookuma, tjlee, mychung, choo}@ece.skku.ac.kr
Abstract. This paper investigates the static traﬃc grooming in WDM
optical mesh networks. Our objective is to improve the network throughput and to minimize the blocking probability. As take care of this problem
eﬃciently, we propose Shortest-path First Traﬃc grooming(SFT) algorithm. The comprehensive computer simulation shows that our proposed
algorithm is up to about 14% superior to the existing one known to be
eﬀective.

1

Introduction

Optical wavelength-division multiplexing (WDM) is a promising technology to
accommodate the explosive growth of Internet and telecommunication traﬃcs.
With each optical link capable of carrying traﬃc on several wavelengths, each
one of which supports traﬃc in the Gbps range. However, the traﬃc requested by
individual connection is still in the Mbps range. Hence, to utilize the available
bandwidth eﬃciently, several connections have to be grouped onto the same
wavelength.This requires strategic routing and wavelength assignment (RWA)
of each connection [1].
The problem of RWA on sub-wavelength demands with the objectives of minimizing the network cost and optimizing network throughput is called “traﬃc
grooming” problem which refers to the techniques used to combine lower-capacity
components onto available wavelengths. Traﬃc grooming has received considerable attention recently, and there are many related work in the literature. In
recent past, there have been eﬀorts towards solving the traﬃc grooming problem for mesh networks. This issue has been addressed in both the static [4, 5] as
well as the dynamic [3] scenarios.
In this paper, we consider the static traﬃc grooming for the WDM mesh
networks. We propose a Shortest-path First Traﬃc grooming (SFT) algorithm
in objective to maximize the network throughput and to minimize the blocking
probability.The proposed algorithm uses eﬀective routing method instead of previous shortest path routing, then low-capacity connection requests are eﬃciently
This work was supported in parts by Brain Korea 21 and the Ministry of Information
and Communication, Korea. Corresponding author: Prof. H. Choo.
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3516, pp. 1120–1124, 2005.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

Traﬃc Grooming Based on Shortest Path in Optical WDM Mesh Networks

1121

groomed together and carried. According to the computer simulation, the SFT
algorithm achieves 14% improved performance in terms of the network throughput, compared with the Maximizing Single-hop traﬃc(MST) algorithm[5].

2

Related Works and Problem Statement

Current and future WDM networks are increasingly arranged in general mesh
topologies. Indeed, much recent work has focused on grooming traﬃc in mesh
networks [3, 4, 5]. Existing work on traﬃc grooming has considered two types of
traﬃc model: static traﬃc model and dynamic random traﬃc one. In the static
traﬃc model, all capacity demands are known in advance and do not change over
time. The studies for static grooming are [4, 5]. In the dynamic random traﬃc
model, a demand is assumed to arrive at a random time and last for a certain
amount of time in random. The work in [3] studied traﬃc grooming issues in
dynamic traﬃc environment.
In general when solving the traﬃc grooming problem, traﬃc requests are carried through single-hop grooming and multi-hop grooming. Single-hop grooming
is a method that allows a connection to transverse a single lightpath. On the
other hand, multi-hop grooming is a method that allows a connection to traverse
multiple lightpaths. In multi-hop grooming, a connection can be dropped at intermediate nodes and groomed with other low-capacity connections on diﬀerent
lightpaths before it reaches its destination node.
The traﬃc grooming problem can be formulated as follows [5]. Given a network conﬁguration (including physical topology, where each edge is a physical
link, number of transceivers at each node, number of wavelengths on each ﬁber,
and the capacity of each wavelength) and a set of connection requests with diﬀerent bandwidth granularities, such as OC-12, OC-48, etc., we need to determine
how to set up lightpaths to satisfy the connection requests. Because of the subwavelength granularity of the connection requests, one or more connections can
be multiplexed on the same lightpath.

3

Shortest Path First Traﬃc Grooming (SFT)

Our goal is to improve the network throughput by using the eﬃcient routing algorithm for traﬃc grooming. MST algorithm [5] assigns lightpaths by adaptive
routing using Dijkstra’s shortest-path, however it ﬁnds the shortest path under
the current network status which may not be the real shortest one because the
network status is changed frequently. For that reason, we apply a routing algorithm that preferentially assigns the shortest paths which are found on the
original network status in the proposed SFT algorithm.
The proposed SFT algorithm uses both ﬁxed routing based on shortest paths
and adaptive routing. Firstly this algorithm only assigns lightpaths of connection requests which are available to use shortest paths in the original network
status. Then connection requests which are not proper to use shortest paths go
for employing adaptive routing before trying other wavelengths. If we use SFT

1122

Y.-R. Yoon et al.

algorithm employing this routing method, more demands are carried through
shortest paths and resources are used eﬃciently than that of using MST. Furthermore, connection requests which are not carried through single-hop traﬃc
grooming have more chances to be carried through multi-hop grooming.
Step 1: Constructing a virtual topology
1.1: Sort all node pairs (si , di ) according to the sum of uncarried traﬃc
requests T (si , di ) between si and di , and put them into a list L in a
descending order.
1.2: Find a shortest path for each (si , di ) and its hop count (h(si , di )) by
using Dijkstra’s shortest-path algorithm.
1.3: Setup a lightpath for each node pair (si , di ) in the list L just by using
the shortest path obtained in Step 1.2 subject to transceiver constraints. If we assign the lightpath, let T (si , di ) = M ax[T (si , di )-C, 0] and
delete edges of the assigned lightpath from the physical topology. If we
cannot use the shortest path obtained in Step 1.2, send (si , di ) to list
L . And if there are not available lightpaths due to short of transceivers
or deleted edges, move (si , di ) to L .
1.4: Setup lightpaths for node pairs (si , di )s in L using the adaptive routing,
subject to transceiver constraints. If we fail, move (si , di ) to L ;
Otherwise, we assign the lightpath and let T(si , di ) = M ax[T (si , di )-C,
0]. Then edges of the assigned lightpath are deleted from the physical
topology.
1.5: Go to Step 1.3 until lists L and L become empty.
Step 2: Routing the low-speed connections on the virtual topology constructed
in Step 1.
2.1: Route all connection requests which can be carried through single
lightpath hop, and update the network status for the virtual topology.
2.2: Route the remaining connection requests using currently available spare
capacity of the virtual topology based on their sum of uncarried
traﬃc request value T (si , di ).
Step 3: Back to the original network status, store L in L and repeat Steps 1
and 2 until entire wavelengths are fully exhausted

4

Numerical Results

The performance of SFT algorithm developed in this paper is compared against
well-known MST on the NSFNET and random network topologies. NSFNET
has 14 nodes and 21 links as shown in Fig. 1(a) and random networks are generated based on [2]. We compare SFT and MST algorithms in terms of network
throughput. We show the results of the MST and the proposed SFT algorithm
on NSFNET in Fig. 1(b). We have constructed the resulting graphs for number
of wavelengths per each ﬁber link versus network throughput. The results show
that our SFT performs better than MST algorithm with respect to network
throughput at any number of wavelengths per link. As you see here, the SFT
algorithm outperforms 3% ∼ 14% over MST.

Traﬃc Grooming Based on Shortest Path in Optical WDM Mesh Networks
11

10

12

0

7
3

1

2

1123

4

8

6

5

13

9

(a) NSFNET topology.

(c) Throughput in random networks
(N = 15, W = 10, Tr
= 15).

(b) Throughput comparison
NSFNET
(Tr = 15).

in

(d) Throughput in random networks
(N = 15, Pe = 0.6, W
= 10, Tr = 15).

Fig. 1. Throughput comparison

In Fig. 1(c), we compare the network throughput of MST and SFT algorithms
in random topologies with 15 nodes when the edge existence probability between
node pairs(Pe ) increases. We observe that the SFT algorithm demonstrates 4% ∼
10% higher throughput than the MST. In Fig. 1(d), we plot the results that the
number of demands versus network throughput in random topologies. We can see
that the throughput of SFT algorithm acquires 5% ∼ 18% better performance
than that of MST. And as the number of demands increases, the performance
of the SFT algorithm becomes better.

5

Conclusion

We investigated the traﬃc grooming in WDM optical networks and proposed an
improved heuristic algorithm with respect to network throughput called Shortest
path First Traﬃc grooming (SFT). This algorithm consider the shortest path
on original graph and uses as many shortest paths as possible for the demands.
We showed that the SFT algorithm outperforms MST with various aspects in
NSFNET and random networks.

1124

Y.-R. Yoon et al.

References
1. R. Ramaswami and K. N. Sivarajan, Optical Networks: A Practical Perspective.
San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1998.
2. A.S. Rodionov and H. Choo, “On generating random network structures: Connected
Graphs,” Springer-Verlag Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 3090, pp. 483 491,
Sep. 2004.
3. S. Thiagarajan and A. K. Somani, “Capacity fairness of WDMnetworks with grooming capability,” Opt. Networks Mag., vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 24-31, May/June 2001.
4. H. Zhu, H. Zang, K. Zhu, and B. Mukherjee, “A novel, generic graph model for traﬃc
grooming in heterogeneous WDM mesh networks,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Networking,
vol. 11, pp. 285-299, Apr. 2003.
5. K. Zhu and B. Mukherjee, “Traﬃc grooming in an optical WDM mesh network,”
IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 20, pp. 122-133, Jan. 2002.

