A Real Time Radio Link Monitoring Using CSI
Hyukjun Oh and Jiman Hong
Kwangwoon University, Seoul, Korea
{hj oh, gman}@kw.ac.kr

Abstract. In this paper, a real time radio link monitoring scheme for
wireless communication applications is proposed. It can be used as a
part of the radio resource management for the eﬃcient radio link control
in wireless communication systems. The proposed method is based on
the use of the channel state information transmitted or generated by
mobile terminals and base stations. In contrast to the existing radio
link monitoring schemes, the proposed method can provide very fast
responses to the channel variations so that it is appropriate for the real
time operations. In addition, the proposed scheme is computationally
eﬃcient to implement.

1

Introduction

Eﬃcient utilization and allcation of the spectrum for cellular communications
is certainly one of the major challenges in cellular system design [1]. In radio
transmission subsystems, techniques such as deployment of time and space diversity systems, use of low noise ﬁlter and eﬃcient equalizers, and deploy of eﬃcient
modulation schemes can be used to suppress interference and extract the desired
signal [1]. Co-channel interference caused by frequency reuse is the most restraining factor on the overall system capacity in wireless networks, and the main idea
behind channel assignment strategies is to make use of radio propagation path
loss characteristics in order to maximize the carrier-to-interference ratio (CIR)
and hence increase the radio spectrum reuse eﬃciency. Some parameters that can
be used for indicating such radio propagation channel conditions is often called
channel state information. For example, signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), carrier-tointerference ratio (CIR), received signal strength indicator (RSSI), and much
more.
The purpose of radio resource management (RRM) can be summarized as
follows [2], [3]:
–
–
–
–

Ensure planned coverage for each service.
Ensure required connection quality.
Ensure planned (low) blocking.
Optimize the system usage in run time.

The present research has been conducted by the Research Grant of Kwangwoon
University and Seoul Metropolitan Government in 2006.
Corresponding author.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part IV, LNCS 3994, pp. 991–998, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

992

H. Oh and J. Hong

To achieve the above goals, RRM has several dedicated functions. RRM functions can be itemized to six elements: admission control, load control, packet
scheduler, resource manager, handover control, and power control [3]. Any of
them is very closely tied with the radio link status or condition [3]-[5]. Especially, connection based RRM functions are critically dependent on the radio link
condition. Therefore, the radio link monitoring functionality is one of the most
critical elements in the wireless communication system combined with RRM. In
addition, the response time of radio link monitoring function determines the performance of overall RRM operations. The real time operationality of the radio
link monitor or even faster response time in the real time radio link monitoring
function is the key design factor.
The overall performance of RRM is much more improved as RRM response
time is shortened further. As mentioned above, the basic foundation for good
RRM is knowledge about the current propagation channel condition because
the best RRM is supposed to react to the time-varying propagation channel
condition most properly. RRM gets the required propagation channel information from the radio link monitoring function. This leads to emphasizing of the
radio link monitoring functionality and the real time operation of the radio link
monitoring with very fast response time is critical to improve the overall system
performance. Recently, it has been noted that the real time radio link monitoring functionality plays an important role in several radio resource management related works in real time wireless communication systems recently for this
reason [5], [6].
Existing radio link monitoring schemes are mostly dealt by higher layers [3][5]. In results, the response time for radio link status change of previous radio
link monitoring schemes are slow and they are appropriate for non-real time
or limited real time RRM functions. Hence, there is a big room for possible
performance improvement of the overall system by adding the fast real-time
radio link monitor. Existing previous schemes are utilizing a long-term observation of the propagation channel condition and they take reactions to the cases
where there is a noticeable big change in the propagation channel condition such
as radio link failure [3]-[5]. In other words, they cannot react to the current
instantaneous channel condition properly. It is possible to extend the current
existing schemes to deal with the instantaneous radio link state, but it is quit
complex and it is even not implementable in some real-time communication
systems.
In this paper, a real time radio link monitoring scheme for wireless communication applications is proposed. It can be used as a part of the radio resource
management for eﬃcient radio link control in wireless communication systems.
The proposed method is based on the use of the channel state information transmitted or generated by mobile terminals and base stations. In contrast to the
existing radio link monitoring schemes, the proposed method can provide very
fast responses so that it is appropriate for the real time operations. In addition, the proposed scheme is computationally eﬃcient to implement and it is
appropriate for the real time operations. The proposed scheme can provide very

A Real Time Radio Link Monitoring Using CSI

993

eﬃcient real time radio link monitoring functionality in the wireless communication systems combined with the radio resource management.
This paper is structured as follows: Section 2 describes our system model
with the applications of wireless communications used for our work. Section 3
addresses the proposed radio link monitoring algorithm appropriate for the fast
real-time wireless communications using the channel state information.

2

System Model

In this section, the target system model is addressed. A usual RRM system with
radio link monitoring function is shown in Fig. 1 [3], which comprises several system parameters that can be used or controlled by joint combination of RRM and
radio link monitor. The input of the real-time RRM system consists of two tables
and a set of traﬃc parameters such as the number of carriers, the number of data
users, the multi-slot classes, and the traﬃc loads of voice and data. All of these
are controlled by RRM given radio link monitor results. The control outputs of
the system are the radio resource related parameters such a delay calculated as
Time to First Bit (TTFB), average throughput, bandwidth utilization, number
of retransmissions, modulation and coding schemes, and resource allocations [3].

BLER vs. Link Condition
(CIR, SNR, RSSI, …)

Parameters

Number of carriers
Voice load
WAP load
MMS load
Data users
Multi-slot class

Delay vs.
Link Condition / Limit
(CIR, SNR, RSSI, …)

RLC/MAC
Resource Allocation
Radio Link Monitor

Throughput vs.
Link Condition / Limit
(CIR, SNR, RSSI, …)
B. Utilization vs.
Link Condition / Limit
(CIR, SNR, RSSI, …)

PDF vs. Link Condition
(CIR, SNR, RSSI, …)
Fig. 1. A system model

So far, such important system tables have been built based on non-real time
radio link monitor results obtained through long-term observable radio link parameters. It causes the performance degradation when the radio link is fast
time-variant because it can reﬂect only long-term variations of the propagation
channel. During the short-term variation of the radio link, the existing radio link
scheme cannot update its radio link state fast enough because it doesn’t have
detailed state of the radio link or it doesn’t support real-time processing [3]-[5].
In results, the design of real-time radio link monitor that is able to detect fast

994

H. Oh and J. Hong

time-varying channel condition is indispensable. The importance of such a radio link monitoring capability gets more important as wireless communication
systems gets more evolved to support very high speed mobile over 250km/h.
Another thing that we must point out is what parameters or what indicators
are available and appropriate for this purpose of the real-time radio link monitoring that can reﬂect fast varying radio link conditions. As mentioned above,
several parameters are being utilized by RRM and radio link monitor. None of
them is appropriate for the short-term radio link state monitoring. Most wireless
communication systems have the parameter of channel state information (CSI)
for the reliable transmissions. CSI’s are available in the form of the signals from
the base stations or in the form of direct estimations by the end-user equipment.
In general, CSI is used in physical layer to react to the fast-varying propagation
channel condition. It is quite complex in the sense of multiple detailed levels that
it is represented. Many variants or forms of system parameters can be regarded
as CSI. Any form of CSI’s can be used for this purpose. The most promising and
preferable one is instantaneous or short-term signal to interference ratio (SIR)
or some other indicators directly related to the instantaneous SIR values. In
this paper, we consider the use of one candidate of the TPC bit that is directly
generated from short-term SIR values. The details are addressed in Section 3.
The overall RRM function combined with radio link monitor provide several
RRM functionalities as shown in Fig. 2. It shows an example of function-level
description of targeted system model [3]. As shown in the ﬁgure, the radio link
monitoring scheme plays a fundamental basic role in the system. Each block
belongs to one of two categories of network based and connection based functions [3]:
– Network based functions
• Admission control (AC).
• Load control (LC).
• Packet scheduler (PS).
• Resource Manager (RM).
– Connection based functions.
• Handover Control (HC).
• Power Control (PC).
Because our interest is focused on the system with the application of wireless communications, the best target system would be cellular phone. Mainly,
it consists of three parts: application related components like several multimedia peripherals and application processors, modem related components including
baseband processors, and RF chains [6]. It is assumed that the dedicated application or modem processor is equipped with an operating system and it serves
as a brain for performing the proposed radio link scheme in this paper. A real
time operating system (RTOS) would be appropriate for this purpose, but we
do not limit the form of possible operating system in our study, because the
operating system is not of our interest in this paper. It simply provides a room
for central control of the RRM and radio link monitoring scheme. The embedded

A Real Time Radio Link Monitoring Using CSI

995

Radio Link
Monitor
RM

Resource
request

Radio Resource Info
- Codes
- Transport resources Resource info

RB info

AC
Load change estimation
RAB admission
L2 parameters
Transport Format
Combination (TFC)
DL power allocation

Target BLER/SIR
info

Load info
Load change
info
Load info

PS
LC

Active set info

PC

HC

Fig. 2. An example of function-level description of the overall system

processors currently used in designs take two possible shapes: microprocessors or
digital signal processors (DSP’s). They can be used separately as a single component, or they can be incorporated in a larger silicon chip in the form of embedded
cores along with program/data memory and other dedicated logics. In our system
model, any form and any kind of dedicated processors are allowed. The proposed
scheme is simple enough to support real time processing even with SW.

3

Proposed Real Time Computationally Eﬃcient Radio
Link Monitoring Scheme

A computationally eﬃcient signal processing algorithm is proposed to monitor
the propagation radio link condition. The algorithm should be simple to implement so that it can provide the fast response in the real-time processing and it
does not add another noticeable power dissipation to the overall system. The
proposed algorithm is based on CSI that is available in most wireless communication systems for the reliable transmissions [6]. In this section, we consider
the CDMA and OFDM cellular systems that are the most widely accepted third
generation standards for the cellular communications in the world. However, the
proposed scheme is not limited to those systems. It can be generalized easily to
other systems.
In CDMA systems, several diﬀerent CSI’s are estimated or transmitted by
the end-user terminal. Some of them are mandatory and some of them are for

996

H. Oh and J. Hong

performance improvements. It is natural to design the detection algorithm using
mandatory CSI’s. In CDMA systems, the CSI’s of the transmitted power control (TPC) bits are available in plenty of time. They have binary channel state
information. One is indicating that the current channel quality is good enough
to satisfy the required quality of service. The other is representing the channel
condition is not good enough to achieve the reliable transmissions.
The proposed radio link monitoring scheme simply estimates the frequency
of occurrence of this unsatisfactory and satisfactory channel state by counting
the number of the second state of the TPC bits during the given time period
like one given in [6]. Then, the current channel condition is regarded as the extremely good (bad) state if the majority of the TPC bits are the ﬁrst (second)
state in the given time frame. That is, if the counted number of the occurrences
of the corresponding CSI in the ﬁxed time duration is larger than a threshold,
the radio link monitor regards the current channel condition as the corresponding state. It can be processed in real time because of its simplicity. The proposed signal processing algorithm can be implemented in either logics or codes
easily.
In OFDM systems that are hot research topics in recent activities, most popular CSI’s are sub-carrier SIR’s. Both of long-term and short-term SIR measurements are possible. The short-term SIR values are good real time indicators for
the instantaneous radio link quality. However, it is a burden work to process
short-term sub-carrier SIR values with faster response because they are quiet
large amount of information to process in real-time when the number of subcarriers is large. A complex dedicated hardware would be required to process
them in real time for radio link monitoring.
In this paper, we propose a novel scheme to utilize such burden CSI’s eﬃciently
for radio link monitoring. The proposed method is very simple to implement and
make use of them possible for real-time processing even with SW codes.

Multi-level CSI
Binary/Tri-state
CSI

Quantization to
binary/tri-state

Count the
number of
occurrence
of the
correspondi
ng state

Compare

“count”

with the
state and
determine
the current
radio link
state

Do the
appropriate
RRM and
other
actions for
the
determined
state

Fig. 3. The proposed real time radio link monitoring method including the quantization

The proposed method is to quantize such burden CSI information to binary
or tri-states. In fact, one can try even larger number of states but it make the
radio link monitoring system fail to meet our purpose of real time processing
with simple codes due to the increased complexity. The proposed real time radio
link monitoring scheme based on the quantization is described in Fig. 3 and 4.
In any case, it can be processed in real time with fast response indicators of the

A Real Time Radio Link Monitoring Using CSI

997

radio link monitor. It requires only a couple of counters and a simple quantizer
to implement. In Fig. 4, an example of tri-state based radio link monitoring is
given.
Using our proposed method, any form of CSI’s can be utilized for achieving the
goal of the desirable radio link monitoring. For instances, ACK/NACK, several
event-indicating ﬂags, CRC check ﬂag, hybrid ARQ state information, and TPC
bits are appropriate for the binary state based radio link monitoring without
quantization. On the other hand, SIR, RSSI, CIR, noise variance, estimated
channel responses, and energy metric of decoders are useful for the real-time
radio link monitoring with quantization into binary or tri-state information.
NT = count_duration
TH0 = threshold0
TH1 = threshold1
TH2 = threshold2
target_state_indicator = INITIAL
count0 = 0
count1 = 0
Count2 = 0
t=0
Quantization of CSI to tristate
IF quant_state = state0
count0 ++
ELSE IF quant_state = state1
count1 ++
ELSE IF quant_state = state2
count2 ++

t=NT?

No

Yes

count0 > TH0?

No

Yes

No
count1 > TH1?
Yes
count2 > TH2?

No

Yes
target_state_indicator = STATE0

target_state_indicator = STATE1

target_state_indicator = STATE2

Do appropriate RRM actions for
STATE0

Do appropriate RRM actions for
STATE1

Do appropriate RRM actions for
STATE2

Fig. 4. An example of the proposed radio link monitoring scheme based on tri-state
radio link condition

998

4

H. Oh and J. Hong

Conclusions

In this paper, a possible way to improve the performance of the radio resource
management using the real-time radio link monitoring function based on the
channel state information available in usual wireless communication system has
been proposed. The proposed scheme is very simple to implement and to monitor
the propagation channel condition eﬀectively so that it can provide the real-time
operation even with SW codes. A signal processing algorithm to monitor the
radio link channel condition is also proposed using the available channel state
information combined with the quantization methodology.

References
1. Foschini, G., Golden, G., Valenzuela, R., Wolniansky, P.: Simpliﬁed Processing for
High Spectral Eﬃciency Wireless Communication Employing Multi-Element Arrays
IEEE Journals on Selected Areas in Communications, Vol. 17 (1999) 1843-1852
2. Merrill, W., Newberg, F., Sohrabi, K., Kaiser, W., Pottie, G.: Collaborative networking requirements for unattended ground sensor systems. Proc. IEEE Aerospace
Conference (2003) 1-13
3. Nowicki, E.: Resource allocation for multimedia messaging services over EGPRS.
Master of Science thesis, Dublin City University (2003)
4. Hattori, T., Sasaki, A., Momma, K.: A new mobile communication system using autonomous radio link control with decentralized base stations. Proc. IEEE Vehicular
Technology Conference (1987) 579–586
5. Nordstrand, I., Bodin, S.: Radio link failure. US Patent No. 5487071 (1996)
6. Oh, H., Hong, J., Ahn, H.: An intelligent power management scheme for wireless
embedded systems using channel state feedbacks Proc. International Conference on
Fuzzy Systems and Knowledge Discovery (2005) 1170-1173

