Most Power Reliable Paths Algorithm
for Maximizing the Lifetime of Energy
Constrained Sensor Networks
Moonseong Kim, Hyunseung Choo , and Won Kim
School of Information and Communication Engineering
Sungkyunkwan University, Korea
{moonseong, choo, wonkim}@skku.edu

Abstract. In wireless sensor networks, maximizing battery life (network lifetime), and thus the number of messages the networks can support (network capacity), is a key issue. In this paper, we propose an
algorithm, called Most Power Reliable Paths (MoPoRePa), for online message routing in energy constrained wireless sensor networks. The
time complexity of MoPoRePa is signiﬁcantly lower than the well-known
max min zPmin algorithm. Moreover, simulation studies show that MoPoRePa about 14.75 % and 8.05 % improvement over the max min zPmin
algorithm in terms of network capacity and the network lifetime, respectively.
Keywords: Wireless Sensor Networks, Network Capacity, and Network
Lifetime.

1

Introduction

Wireless sensor networks (WSNs) are composed of low cost sensors. Since low
cost sensors typically have short battery life, conserving battery energy is of
primary importance [1]. Li et al. [2,3] proposed an online message routing algorithm, called max min zPmin , with the view to maximizing the lifetime of WSNs.
To maximize the network lifetime and/or the network capacity, they balance the
energy consumed by a route and the minimum residual energy at the nodes
along the chosen route. The max min zPmin algorithm selects a unicast path
that uses at most zPmin energy, where z is a parameter to the algorithm and
Pmin is the energy required by the minimum energy unicast path. The algorithm
achieves over 80 % of the optimal in terms of network lifetime. However, the time
complexity of max min zPmin is very high. The reason is that the algorithm involves several invocations of the shortest path computation. The algorithm also
requires a lot of time to obtain the z parameter.
In this paper, we propose an algorithm called the Most Power Reliable
Paths (MoPoRePa) for online message routing in energy constrained WSNs.
Our objectives are as follows. One is to maximize the total number of messages
Corresponding author.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part III, LNCS 4489, pp. 465–468, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

466

M. Kim, H. Choo, and W. Kim

successfully carried by the network (or the network capacity) without making
any assumptions on future message arrivals. Another is to increase the network
lifetime when the message sequence is not known. We model the lifetime as the
earliest time at which communication fails. The MoPoRePa algorithm is very
simple, as it requires only one shortest path computation. Further, its performance is better than three previously proposed algorithms in terms of both
network capacity and network lifetime. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the MoPoRePa algorithm. Section 3 shows the results
of simulation studies. Section 4 concludes the paper.

2

Most Power Reliable Paths Algorithm

The ad hoc sensor network can be modeled as a directed weighted graph G =
(V, E) with node set V and edge (link or arc) set E. The energy consumed for
transmitting a unit message along link (u, v) ∈ E is associated with euv ≥ 0.
Let Pu denote the power of node u ∈ V . Formally, we wish to maximize the
number of messages in the system subject to the following constraints: 1) the
total power used to send all messages from node u does not exceed Pu and 2)
the number of messages from u to all other nodes is the same as the number of
messages from all other nodes to u. We assume that our algorithm has knowledge
of the topology of the network and the current energy utilization at all nodes
in the network. The topology of the network includes all the nodes and links
in the network as well as the energy used to transmit a unit message on each
link. The network topology can be learned by a node at the time it joins a
network.
Using a low energy path frequently leads to energy depletion of the nodes
along that path and in the worst case leads to a network partition. We propose an algorithm called Most Power Reliable Paths (MoPoRePa) algorithm.
The main idea is to increase the reliability of a path [4]. The potential reliable probability that the transmission along the link (u, v) ∈ E is fault free is
℘(u, v) = (PuT − euv )/PuT , where PuT is the power of the node u at time T . Let
πsd be a path from source s to destination d. The reliability of path s − d is
R(πsd ) = (u,v)∈πsd ℘(u, v). πsd is called a most power reliable s − d path if
R(πsd ) is maximum among all s − d paths. The link cost function for transmitting a unit message along link (u, v) ∈ E, is deﬁned as Cuv = − log ℘(u, v).
Then computing a most power reliable path is equivalent to computing a shortest
path using the link cost function C. The following summarizes the MoPoRePa
algorithm:
MoPoRePa Algorithm
1. Associate the potential reliable probability with each link.
2. Associate the link cost function with the probability.
3. Find the shortest path from source to destination with the cost.

Most Power Reliable Paths Algorithm for Maximizing the Lifetime

467

Generally, the logarithm function changes the multiplicative routing measure
into an additive routing measure as in equation (1).
− log

℘(u, v) =
(u,v)∈πsd

Cuv

(1)

(u,v)∈πsd

Hence, a most power reliable path can be computed in O(m + n log n) time
complexity (|V | = n, |E| = m) using the algorithm of Fredman and Tarjan [5].
In contrast, max min zPmin involves performing as many as m shortest path
computations. The running time is at most O(m(m + n log n)). Using binary
search, the running time can be reduced to O(log m(m + n log n)) [2,3].

3

Performance Evaluation and Discussion

Lifetime

For simulation studies of the MoPoRePa algorithm, we generated random networks by modifying the Rodionov and Choo’s mechanism [6] to include properties of ad hoc networks. We implemented in C our method of setting up the
paths. We generated 100 diﬀerent networks with 50 nodes and placed the nodes
randomly with density of 0.005 ∼ 0.03 nodes/m2 . We set the transmission radius of each node as 30m. The power consumption weights for transmitting a
message were euv = 0.001 · d3uv [7], where d is a distance, and the initial power of
each node is 30. We generated 1000 messages between all possible pairs of nodes
and distributed them evently.

(a) Network capacity

(b) Network lifetime

Fig. 1. Simulation results

We compared the MoPoRePa algorithm with three existing algorithms in
terms of the network capacity and the network lifetime. For the Pmin algorithm,
a message was routed on a path that consumes minimum total energy; i.e., z
is 1 in the max min zPmin algorithm. For the max min algorithm, a message
was routed along a path such that minimum residual energy fraction of nodes on

468

M. Kim, H. Choo, and W. Kim

that path is the maximum among all paths; i.e., z is ∞ in the max min zPmin
algorithm.
Fig. 1(a) shows the simulation results with respect to network capacity. The
performance of MoPoRePa algorithm is better than those of the other three
algorithms. The improvement is up to about 14.75 % compared to max min
zPmin . As indicated in Fig. 1(b), the lifetime of MoPoRePa is longer than that
of the other three algorithms. MoPoRePa is longer by up to 5.98 ∼ 8.05 %
compared to max min zPmin .

4

Conclusion

In this paper, we reported the results of our work on maximizing the lifetime
and capacity of energy-constrained wireless sensor networks. In particular, we
proposed and validated an online message routing algorithm, called MoPoRePa.
The algorithm is worthy because its time complexity is much lower than the bestknown algorithm, the max min zPmin algorithm. Moreover, simulation studies
showed that the algorithm is better than the max min zPmin , and a few others,
with respect to both network lifetime and network capacity.

Acknowledgment
This research was supported by Ministry of Information and Communication,
Korea under ITRC IITA-2006-(C1090-0603-0046).

References
1. Chang, J.-H., Tassiulas, L.: Energy Conserving Routing in Wireless Ad-hoc Networks. Proceeding of INFOCOM, Vol. 1. IEEE (2000) 22-31
2. Li, Q., Aslam, J., Rus, D.: Online Power-aware Routing in Wireless Ad-hoc Networks. Proceeding of MobiCom. ACM (2001) 97-107
3. Aslam, J., Li, Q., Rus, D.: Three Power-aware Routing Algorithms for Sensor Networks. Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing, Vol. 3. John Wiley & Sons
(2003) 187-208
4. Xue, G.: End-to-End Data Paths: Quickest or Most Reliable?. Communications
Letters, Vol. 2, No. 6. IEEE (1998) 156-158
5. Fredman, M. L., Tarjan, R. E.: Fibonacci Heaps and Their Uses in Improved Network Optimization Algorithms. Journal of the ACM, Vol. 34, Issue 3. ACM (1987)
596-615
6. Rodionov, A. S., Choo, H.: On Generating Random Network Structures: Connected
Graphs. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 3090. Springer-Verlag (2004)
483-491
7. Heinzelman, W. R., Chandrakasan, A., Balakrishnan, H.: Energy-Eﬃcient Communication Protocol for Wireless Microsensor Networks. Proceeding of the 33rd Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences. IEEE (2000)

