Modelling Macroscopic Phenomena with
Cellular Automata and Parallel Genetic
Algorithms: An Application to Lava Flows
Maria Vittoria Avolio1 , Donato D’Ambrosio2 , Salvatore Di Gregorio2,
Rocco Rongo1 , William Spataro2 , and Giuseppe A. Trunﬁo3
1
2

Department of Earth Sciences, University of Calabria, 87036 Rende (CS), Italy
Department of Mathematics, University of Calabria, 87036 Rende (CS), Italy
3
DAP, University of Sassari, 07041 Alghero (SS), Italy
{avoliomv, d.dambrosio, dig, spataro}@unical.it, trunfio@uniss.it
Abstract. Forecasting through simulations the shape of lava invasions
in a real topography represents a challenging problem, especially considering that the phenomenon usually evolves for a long time (e.g. from a
few to hundreds of days) and on very large areas. In the latest years, Cellular Automata (CA) have been well recognized as a valid computational
approach in lava ﬂow modelling. In this paper we present some signiﬁcant developments of SCIARA, a family of deterministic CA models of
lava ﬂows which are optimized for a speciﬁc scenario through the use of
a parallel genetic algorithm. Following a calibration-validation approach,
the model outcomes are compared with three real events of lava eﬀusion.
Keywords: Modelling and Simulation, Cellular Automata, Lava ﬂows.

1

Introduction

Lava ﬂows consist of unconﬁned multiphase streams, the characteristics of which
(e.g. temperature, rheologic parameters, velocity, phase state and shape) vary
in space and time as a consequence of many interrelated physical and chemical
phenomena (e.g. the ﬂow dynamic itself, the loose of thermal energy through
radiation, convecting air and conduction, the change in viscosity and the solidiﬁcation processes). Thus, forecasting the shape of lava invasions in a real
topography, given the lava eﬀusion rate (i.e. the volumetric ﬂux of lava from
the vent), requires the ability to perform accurate simulations of a typical multiphysics system. Besides, considering that the phenomenon usually evolves for
long time and on very large areas, standard approaches, such as those based on
diﬀerential equations and related approximate techniques, result of diﬃcult use.
On the other hand, it is well recognized that Cellular Automata (CA) can
represent a valid alternative in lava ﬂow modelling. A family of deterministic
CA models speciﬁcally developed for simulating lava ﬂows is SCIARA [1,2,3].
The model, which is optimized for a speciﬁc scenario through a parallel Genetic
Algorithm (GA), accounts for the relevant physical processes involved in the
macroscopic phenomenon and enables for the fast production of accurate forecasting of lava invasions. In this paper some characteristics of the latest version,
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part I, LNCS 4487, pp. 866–873, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Modelling Macroscopic Phenomena with CA and Parallel GAs

867

named SCIARA-fv, which introduces many model improvements and computational optimizations, is illustrated. Given the availability of historical data
regarding various eruptive episodes of Mount Etna (Italy), which is the most
active volcano in Europe, a cross-validation methodology is exploited for both
the parameter calibration and assessment of the model reliability in that speciﬁc
scenario. To this end, a new measure which takes into account simultaneously
the spatial and temporal dimensions has been employed as ﬁtness function for
the evaluation of the simulation results with respect to the real events. A parallel
Master-Slave GA is used for the model calibration in a training-case while the
validation is carried out on a test set constituted by diﬀerent real episodes.

2

Model Speciﬁcation

SCIARA-fv is the latest release in a family of bi-dimensional CA models for
lava ﬂows simulation, based on hexagonal cells. The model follows the Macroscopic Cellular Automata (MCA) approach [4], where: (i) the state of the cell
is decomposed in substates, each one representing a particular feature of the
phenomenon to be modelled; (ii) the transition function is split in elementary
processes, each one describing a particular aspect of the considered phenomenon.
Moreover, some parameters are generally considered, which allow to “tune” the
model for reproducing diﬀerent dynamical behaviours. Finally, several external
inﬂuences can be considered in order to model features which are not easy to be
described in terms of local interactions. Even though principally derived from
the SCIARA-hex1 version [3], SCIARA-fv embeds a better management of several aspects with respect to the original one, some of which will be described
later. Formally, the model is deﬁned as:
SCIARA-fv = R, L, X, Q, P, λ, γ

(1)

where:
– R is the set of hexagonal cells covering the ﬁnite region where the phenomenon evolves;
– L ⊂ R speciﬁes the lava source cells (i.e. vents);
– X = {Center, N W, N E, E, SE, SW, W } identiﬁes the hexagonal pattern
of cells that inﬂuence the cell state change (i.e. the cell itself, Center, and the
North-West, North-East, East, South-East, South-West and West neighbors);
– Q = Qa × Qt × QT × Q6f is the ﬁnite set of states, considered as Cartesian
product of “substates”. Their meanings are: cell altitude, cell lava thickness,
cell lava temperature, and outﬂows lava thickness (from the central cell toward the six adjacent cells), respectively. It is worth to observe that, in the
model, the third dimension, the height, is included as a property of the state
of the cell (i.e. a substate);
– P = {ps , pT v , pT sol , padv , padsol , pcool , pa } is the ﬁnite set of parameters
(invariant in time and space), which aﬀect the transition function (see Tab.
1 for the meanings of parameters in P );

868

M.V. Avolio et al.

– λ : Q7 → Q is the cell deterministic transition function;
– γ : Qt × N → Qt speciﬁes the emitted lava thickness from the source cells at
each step k ∈ N.
The main elementary processes which compose the transition function are outlined, in order of application, in the following subsections.
Lava Flows Computation. Lava rheological resistance is modelled in terms
of an adherence eﬀect, measured by ν, which represents the amount of lava
(i.e. thickness) that cannot ﬂow out of a cell towards any neighboring ones. In
particular, since lava rheological resistance increases as temperature decreases,
the model is expressed by means of the inverse exponential function [5]:
ν = k1 ek2 T

(2)

where T ∈ QT is the current lava temperature, while k1 and k2 are parameters
depending on lava rheological properties [6]. The values of k1 and k2 are simply
obtained by solving the system of equations:
padv = k1 e−k2 pT v
padsol = k1 e−k2 pT sol

(3)

Since the third spatial dimension, i.e. the height, is included in the model as
a substate, cell outﬂows can be computed by the algorithm for the minimization of diﬀerences described in [4]. The minimization algorithm, which is based
on the iterative fulﬁlment of the hydrostatic equilibrium principle through the
minimization of the diﬀerences in height, guarantees the mass conservation.
Let s[k] indicate the current value of the substate s for the k-th cell of the
neighborhood, with k = 0 for the cell under consideration. Let also a ∈ Qa
and t ∈ Qt be the cell altitude and cell lava thickness, respectively. In order
to compute lava outﬂows from the central cell towards its neighboring ones, the
minimisation algorithm is applied to the following quantities: the unmovable part
u[0] = a[0] + ν and the mobile part m[0] = t[0] − ν (i.e. the only part which can
be distributed to the adjacent cells). Let φ[x, y] denote the ﬂow from cell x to
cell y, thus m[0] can be written as:
X

φ[0, i]

m[0] =
i=0

Table 1. The parameters used in SCIARA-fv model
Parameter
ps
pT v
pT sol
padv
padsol
pcool
pa

Deﬁnition
time corresponding to a CA step
lava temperature at the vent
lava temperature at solidiﬁcation
lava adherence at the vent
lava adherence at solidiﬁcation
the cooling parameter
cell apothem

(4)

Modelling Macroscopic Phenomena with CA and Parallel GAs

869

where φ[0, 0] is the part which is not distributed, and X is the number of cells
belonging to the neighborhood X. During the minimization, the quantities in
the adjacent cells, u[i] = a[i] + t[i] (i = 1, 2, ..., X) are considered unmovable.
Let c[i] = u[i] + φ[0, i] ∀i be the new quantity content in the i-th neighboring cell
after the distribution and let cmin be the minimum value of c[i] ∀i. The outﬂows
X
are computed in order to minimise the expression i=0 (c[i] − cmin ). In [4] it is
shown that the simultaneous application of the minimization principle to each
cell gives rise to the global equilibrium of the system.
Thermal Exchanges and Lava Solidiﬁcation. It is assumed that a lava ﬂow
can be treated as if thermally well mixed, so that each cell has a temperature ﬁeld
constant in space. Besides, only thermal energy loss due to lava surface irradiation is considered. Although such a cooling model may not always be realistic,
it does yield a characteristic cooling time scale comparable to representative
emplacement times of some important typology of lava ﬂows.
Under this hypotheses, the new cell temperature Tt+Δt is determined in two
phases. In the ﬁrst phase, which accounts for the energy exchange directly related
to the mass exchange, the cell temperature Tavg is obtained as weighted average
of residual lava inside the cell and lava inﬂows from neighboring ones:
Tavg =

tr Tt [0] +
tr +

6
i=1 φ[i, 0]
6
i=1 φ[i, 0]

Tt [i]

(5)

where tr ∈ Qt is the residual lava thickness inside the central cell after the outﬂows distribution, Tt [k] ∈ QT is the lava temperature at the time step t for
the k-th cell of the neighborhood (i.e. k = 0 for the cell under consideration)
and φ[i, 0] the lava inﬂow from the i-th neighboring cell. Note that φ[i, 0] corresponds to the lava outﬂow from the i-th neighboring cell towards the central
one, computed by means of the minimisation algorithm.
The ﬁnal step updates the temperature given by (5) considering thermal
energy loss due to lava surface irradiation, which can be expressed by the Stefan–
Boltzmann equation. In particular, starting from a temperature Tt a good approximation of the temperature Tt+Δt is given by [6]:
Tt+Δt = Tt 1 +

3 Tt3 ε σ A Δt
ρcV

− 13

(6)

where ρ is the lava density, c the speciﬁc heat, V the volume, σ the StephanBoltzmann constant, Tt the absolute temperature at time t, A is the air exposed
area of the cell, ε is the surface emissivity and Δt is the step duration of the
CA. Thus, according to (6), the temperature Tavg computed in (5) is updated
through the following relation:
Tt+Δt [0] = Tavg

3
pcool Tavg
A ps
1+
V

− 13

(7)

where pcool accounts for the relevant lava’s physical properties and ps = Δt
(see Tab. 1). It is worth to note that the parameter pcool , the measurement

870

M.V. Avolio et al.

of which would be quite diﬃcult, is directly determined during the calibration
process exploiting the availability of real spatio-temporal data regarding past
events of the eﬀusion of a speciﬁc kind of lava. Finally, if the temperature drops
below the threshold pT sol , the lava solidiﬁes, that is, its thickness is added to
the geographical altitude of the cell and the lava thickness is reset to zero.

3

Model Calibration

Once that a MCA model has been deﬁned, two stages are needed to assess its
reliability: the calibration and validation phases. The former searches a set of
parameters able to adequately reproduce a speciﬁc real case; the latter tests
the model on a suﬃcient number of cases (which must be diﬀerent of those
considered in the calibration phase, though similar in terms of physical and
geological properties), permitting to give a ﬁnal response on the model goodness.
The calibration phase is performed by means of a GA similar to that applied
in [7], where parameters to be optimised were encoded as bit strings. Moreover,
the GA adopts a steady-state and elitist model, so that at each step only the
worst individuals are replaced. The remaining ones, required to form the new
population, are copied from the old one, choosing the best. In order to select
the individuals to be reproduced, the “binary-tournament without replacement”
selection operator was utilised. It consists of a series of “tournaments” in which
two individuals are selected at random, and the winner is chosen according to a
preﬁxed probability (0.6 in our case), which must be set greater for the ﬁttest
individual. Moreover, as the variation without replacement scheme was adopted,
individuals cannot be selected more than once. Employed genetic operators are
classic Holland’s crossover and mutation with probability of 1.0 and 2/44, respectively. In particular, the latter probability implies, on an average, two bits
mutated for each individual, as the genotype length was exactly 44 (see Tab. 2).
The number of individuals forming the initial population was set to 256, while
the number of individuals to be replaced at each GA step was set to 16.
One of the most important aspects of the calibration phase is the deﬁnition of
the ﬁtness function, i.e. the function which measures the level of agreement between the real event and the simulated one. In order to the model to well describe
the overall spatio-temporal dynamics of the system, the simulation should be
able to produce outcomes which correspond with the real phenomenon in terms
of its relevant characteristics (e.g. areal extension and shape, lava thickness and
temperature, invasion velocity) at some speciﬁc instants {t1 , . . . tk } ∈ [0, τ ], being τ the duration of the real event. Unfortunately, complete mapping of lava
characteristics corresponding to instants t < τ are rarely surveyed by geologists,
while only the ﬁnal shape of invasion is usually available. On the other hand,
for risk analysis purposes, the correspondence between real and simulated lava
shapes in the instant t = τ in which the real phenomenon reaches a steady-state
condition, is of particular interest. For the above reasons, the ﬁtness function to
be maximised was deﬁned in such a way to combine the two objectives as:
Θ=

Ωτ Ωτ +Δτ

(8)

Modelling Macroscopic Phenomena with CA and Parallel GAs

871

Table 2. The best set of SCIARA-fv parameters as obtained through calibration phase
Parameter
ps
pT v
pT sol
padv
padsol
pcool
pa

Explored range
[60, 180]
[1123, 1173]
[0.1, 2.0]
[6.0, 30.0]
[10−16 , 10−13 ]
-

Encoding bits
8
8
4
6
16
-

Best value
155.29 s
1373 K
1165.35 K
0.7 m
12 m
2.9 × 10−14 m3 K −3
5m

where Ω ∈ [0, 1] is a suitable measure of the spatial agreement between real and
simulated lava invasions, with Ω = 1 in case of perfect overlapping, while Δτ
is a small surplus time. When Θ = 1, then real and simulated events perfectly
overlap with the further condition Ωτ = Ωτ +Δτ , meaning that the simulation
reaches the steady-state exactly at the same time as the real event does. As
regards function Ω in (8), it was deﬁned as:
Ωt =

m(R ∩ S)
m(R ∪ S)

(9)

where t is the instant of evaluation, R and S represent the sets of cells aﬀected
by the real and simulated event, respectively, while m(A) denotes the measure
of the set A. Note that Ω ∈[0,1] and its value is 0 if the real and simulated
events are completely disjoint, being m(R ∩ S)=0, while it is 1 in case of perfect
overlap, being m(R ∩ S) = m(R ∪ S).

4

A Case of Study

At 3.00 AM on July 18-th, 2001, an eruption started from the fracture of Mount
Calcarazzi, on the southern ﬂank of Mt Etna (Sicily, Italy), at 2100 m a.s.l. The
event was fed by a medium lava ﬂow rate (about 7m3 /s) and, due to the steep
descent of the terrain in that area, pointed southwards creating the main danger
for the towns of Nicolosi and Belpasso. After 10 days of activity, it reached its
maximum extension, which was almost 6 Km in terms of run-out. Such event was
chosen as the reference case for the calibration phase, as it was considered suﬃciently representative of Etnean lava ﬂows and even characterised by a relative
brief duration. In particular, the second feature allowed to execute the elevated
number of simulations required by the GA in a reasonable amount of time. Moreover, to further speedup the experiments execution, a Master-Slave parallel GA
version was considered, instead of the sequential one, which simply split the individuals’ ﬁtness evaluation over the available “slave” processors, while the GA
steps are managed by the “master” one. It represents the simplest example of
parallel GA [8]. Accordingly, calibration was performed on a Nec TX7 NUMA
machine, composed by 4 quadri-processors Itanium class nodes, with an overall
RAM memory of 32 GB and a peak performance of 64 GFLOPS.

872

M.V. Avolio et al.

Fig. 1. Comparison between real and simulated events (charts report the lava emission
rate). Keys: 1) Area aﬀected by the real event but missed by the simulation; 2) Area
incorrectly forecasted as invaded by lava; 3) Area correctly forecasted as invaded by
lava; 4) Limits of real event, 5) Limits of simulated event.

On the basis of previous empirical attempts, ranges within which the values
of the CA parameters are allowed to vary were individuated in order to deﬁne
the GA search space (see Tab. 2), and a set of 10 experiments iterated for 100
steps. As regards the ﬁtness function, Ωτ was evaluated after τ = 10 days (which
corresponds to the duration of the real event), while Δτ was set to 3 days. Results
of the calibration phase are reported in Tab. 2. Note that parameter pT v was
set to a preﬁxed value, which corresponds to the typical temperature of Etnean
lava ﬂows at vents. Parameter pa was also preﬁxed, as it was imposed by the
detail of the considered topographic data. The parameter set listed in Tab. 2
allowed to reproduce the considered 2001 Nicolosi Etnean lava ﬂow (see Fig. 1,
case a), giving rise to a ﬁtness Θ = 0.72, which corresponds to Ωτ = 0.74
in terms of areal comparison. Such values indicate a good performance of the
model considering the signiﬁcant uncertainties which aﬀect both the measured
eﬀusion rate and the available topography data (while the GA proved to be able

Modelling Macroscopic Phenomena with CA and Parallel GAs

873

to explore quite well the parameter space, since in a calibration test against the
outcomes of the model itself it provided a solution with Ωτ ≈ 0.95). Besides,
as it can be observed in Fig. 1, a ﬁtness value of 0.72 can be considered as
satisfactory from a risk assessment and hazard mapping point of view, since the
adopted measure is fairly severe in terms of shape concordance.
The validation phase was carried out by testing the obtained parameters to
other real cases of study: the 2002 Linguaglossa and the 1991 − 93 Valle del Bove
events, both regarding Mt Etna (Sicily). The ﬁrst lasted 9 days, the second 473
days. Results are graphically illustrated in Fig. 1, case b) and c), respectively with
the corresponding emission rates. As expected, the best set of parameters (see
Tab. 2) permitted a satisfactorily reproduction of the considered phenomena: in
quantitative terms, the obtained Ωτ values were 0.71 and 0.85, respectively.

5

Conclusions

Simulating real lava invasions for hazard management requires models characterized by high reliability, robustness and low computational cost. Latest results,
reported in this paper, conﬁrm that the macroscopic approach based on CA and
evolutionary computation can provide such characteristics. Nevertheless, further
improvements could be achieved overcoming some of the simpliﬁed assumptions
of the presented model. Future research work will be addressed in this direction.

References
1. Crisci, G., Di Gregorio, S., Ranieri, G.: A cellular space model of basaltic lava ﬂow.
In: Proceedings International AMSE Conference Modelling & Simulation (Paris,
France, Jul.1-3). (1982) 65–67
2. Barca, D., Crisci, G., Di Gregorio, S., Nicoletta, F.: Cellular automata for simulating
lava ﬂows: A method and examples of the Etnean eruptions. Transport Theory and
Statistical Physics 23 (1994) 195–232
3. Crisci, G., Rongo, R., Di Gregorio, S., Spataro, W.: The simulation model sciara: the
1991 and 2001 lava ﬂows at mount Etna. Journal of Volcanology and Geothermal
Research 132 (2004) 253–267
4. Di Gregorio, S., Serra, R.: An empirical method for modelling and simulating some
complex macroscopic phenomena by cellular automata. Future Generation Computer Systems 16 (1999) 259–271
5. McBirney, A., Murase, T.: Rheological properties of magmas. Annual Review of
Earth Planetary Sciences 12 (1984) 337–357
6. Park, S., Iversen, J.: Dynamics of lava ﬂow: Thickness growth characteristics of
steady two-dimensional ﬂows. Geophysical Research Letters 11 (1984) 641–644
7. Spataro, W., D’Ambrosio, D., Rongo, R., Trunﬁo, G.A.: An evolutionary approach
for modelling lava ﬂows through cellular automata. In Sloot, P.M.A., Chopard, B.,
Hoekstra, A.G., eds.: LNCS - ACRI. (2004) 725–734
8. Cantu-Paz, E.: Eﬃcient and Accurate Parallel Genetic Algorithms. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Norwell, MA, USA (2000)

