Genetic Algorithmic Topology Control for
Two-Tiered Wireless Sensor Networks
Donghwan Lee1 , Wonjun Lee1 , and Joongheon Kim2
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, Korea
wlee@korea.ac.kr
2
Digital Media Research Lab., LG Electronics, Seoul, Korea

Abstract. This paper proposes an optimized topology control scheme
(GA-OTC) based on a genetic algorithm for clustering-based hierarchical wireless sensor networks (WSNs). By using a genetic algorithm, we
can obtain optimal solutions to multiple objective functions according
to the two criteria of both balanced energy consumption and minimized
total energy consumption of cluster heads while the entire WSNs ﬁeld is
covered by clusters. Through performance evaluation studies, we show
that GA-OTC achieves desirable properties.
Keywords: GA-OTC, WSNs, multiple objective functions.

1

Introduction

In recent years, many researches on wireless sensor networks (WSNs) have become one of the active research topics in wireless networking technologies [1].
Sensor nodes (SNs), the main components of WSNs, are deployed over the networked sensing ﬁelds, and perform speciﬁc tasks with the data processing, event
sensing, and data communicating [1]. Due to their limited power source, energy
consumption has become the most critical factor when designing WSNs protocols. Facing these challenges, several schemes to prolong the lifetime of WSNs,
including clustering-based topology control, have been investigated [2]-[9]. By
using an eﬃcient clustering-based topology control algorithm, several advantages can be obtained, i.e., (1) improving network connectivity and capacity, (2)
improving spatial reuse, and (3) mitigating the MAC-level medium contention
[2]-[4]. The clustering-based WSNs can be classiﬁed into two types [3]: i.e., homogeneous one and heterogeneous one. In homogeneous clustering-based WSNs
[5][6], by all SNs have same architectures, the algorithm for cluster head (CH)
election is required because the CH must be chosen among SNs. In this structure, each SN has the function for clustering which can be a burden to the
hardware constrained SNs. On the other hand, in non-homogeneous clusteringbased WSNs [7]-[9], diﬀerent types of nodes are used for CH-role. Therefore
a node which has a functionality of the CH has more computing power than
This work was supported by ITRC Project supervised by ITTA-2005 (C1090-05010019).
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 385–392, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

386

D. Lee, W. Lee, and J. Kim

SNs which is not the CHs. The non-homogeneous clustering-based WSNs, therefore, can achieve more energy-eﬃciency. In this paper, the non-homogeneous
clustering-based WSNs is considered as a reference network model. In WSNs,
balance energy consumption and minimized total energy consumption are required among CHs to prolong network lifetime [4][9]. To achieve the desired
properties, the method of regulating cluster radii is eﬀective as shown in [4][9].
As a method of regulating cluster radii, genetic algorithmic approach is used in
this paper. By using a genetic algorithm, the most notable optimization method,
we can achieve eﬀective performance in regulating cluster radii to obtain optimal
solutions.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 shows related
work. Section 3 describes our proposed algorithm. Section 4 shows performance
results. Finally, section 5 concludes this paper and shows future work direction.

2

Related Work

Clustering-based WSNs can be classiﬁed into two types [3]: i.e., homogeneous
clustering-based WSNs and hierarchical clustering-based WSNs. In homogeneous
clustering-based WSNs, the algorithm for cluster head election is required because the CH must be chosen among SNs. Therefore, SNs must have the functionality for clustering and controlling their clusters. This functionality of SNs
must be a burden to the hardware constrained SNs. On the other hand, in hierarchical clustering-based WSNs [3][8][9], diﬀerent types of SNs are used. A
mobile node with the functionality of CH has more computing power than a
SN which is not the CH. The hierarchical clustering-based WSNs, therefore, can
achieve more energy-eﬃciency. There are numerous topology control algorithms
for hierarchical clustering-based WSNs [7]-[9]. The proposed algorithm in [7]
uses three kinds of SNs for energy-eﬃciency. However the proposed scheme in [7]
must maintain global information. It can be a burden to CHs. Therefore, decentralized scheme is required in resource-constrained WSNs. The proposed scheme
in [8] has a two-tiered WSNs architecture. In the upper tier, there are CHs and
in the lower tier, typical SNs. In [8], however, the radii of clusters are ﬁxed. In
this system, the performance of scheme depends on each radius of the cluster.
That is to say, it can be a waste of energy when a cluster has a larger radius than
required. On the other hand, if a cluster has a smaller radius than required, it
cannot guarantee perfect coverage, means there is no area uncontrolled by a CH
in the networked sensing ﬁeld. Therefore, maintaining the optimal cluster radius
is important. However, it is impossible for [8], which has a ﬁxed radius system,
to regulate the cluster radius. On the other hand, our previous work, i.e., LLC
[9] can regulate the cluster radius for energy eﬃciency in WSNs. However in
LLC, there exists a maximum radius problem which can lead energy-ineﬃciency
in some network topology due to the assumption of the circularity of cluster
radius. With genetic algorithmic approach, the proposed scheme in this paper,
we can overcome maximum radius problem and achieve better performance.

Genetic Algorithmic Topology Control for Two-Tiered WSNs

387

Fig. 1. Examples of the grid which is assigned to 3 CHs and initial population (4 CHs)

3

Genetic Algorithmic Optimized Topology Control
(GA-OTC )

The aim of GA-OTC is is to propose an algorithm which covers all SNs and
considers energy consumption by a genetic algorithm. GA-OTC balances and
minimizes energy consumption of CHs. A sensor ﬁeld which needs covering with
CHs is segmented by a grid form. SNs are located in any point of each grid cell.
Once a grid cell is assigned to CH, CH communicates with SNs located in a grid
cell as shown in Fig. 1. The group of grid cells assigned to a CH is deﬁned as a
clustering area.
3.1

Energy Model of a Wireless Device

To describe GA-OTC, the energy model of a CH can be formulated as follows.
E = Ecommunicating + Eprocessing

(1)

Energy consumption on data communicating. Assuming an 1/d2 path
loss, where d is the distance between a CH and an SN, the energy consumed
when transmitting and receiving data are Eq. (2) and Eq. (3).
Etx = (αt + αamp · d2 ) · n

(2)

Erx = αr · n

(3)

αt , αamp , and αr are the energy/bit consumed by transmitter, transmitter opamp, and receiver. The total energy consumption on data communicating is
composed by Etx and Erx as shown in Eq. (4).
Ecommunicating = Etx + Erx

(4)

388

D. Lee, W. Lee, and J. Kim

Energy consumption on data processing. In general, the energy consumption on data processing is signiﬁcantly smaller than the energy consumption on
data communication. Therefore the energy consumption can be ignored.
3.2

Problem Formulation

We deﬁne a clustering set that a sensor j belongs to the clustering set of CH, i.e.,
Ci , for all sensors. Using an energy model for a CH denoted in section 3.2, the
communication energy (CE) between Ci and j, denoted as CEj,Ci , is calculated
as follows.
CEj,Ci = Etx + Erx = (αt + αamp · d2j→Ci ) · n + αr · n

(5)

where dj→Ci is the distance between j and Ci . Energy consumption of each CH
by every SN of its clustering set is calculated by adding up energy consumption
of all sensors in each clustering set, denoted as ECCi .
ECCi =

CEj,Ci

(6)

j∈Ci

Thus, the variance and average of energy consumption of CHs can be shown as
Eq. (7) and Eq. (8).
V (C) =

1
r

r

(ECCi − A (C))

(7)

i=0

A (C) =

1
r

r

ECCi

(8)

i=0

where r is the number of CHs. C is a vector that consists of set variables
(C1 , C2 , . . . . . . , Cr ). V and A are functions of C which denote variance and
average of energy consumption. Let us denote all possible solution space of C to
Ω, now we can construct objective functions for minimizing both variance and
average of energy consumption of CHs.
arg min V (C)

(9)

arg min A (C)

(10)

C∈Ω

C∈Ω

3.3

Topology Control Procedure

Initial population. Each P chromosome is set as follows. To assign grid cells
to each CH continuously, we use probabilistic iteration based in grassﬁre concept [12]. In this paper, we use propagation probability of grid cells instead of
threshold of grassﬁre concept. Probabilistic propagation starts in every initial
cell, where CH is located, and continues until all the cells are assigned to CHs
as shown in Fig. 1.

Genetic Algorithmic Topology Control for Two-Tiered WSNs

389

Fitness computation. The ﬁtness computation is designed with genetic algorithm. The proposed scheme in this paper uses simple additive weighting method
[13]. The objective function of multi-objective problem consists of the sum of
weighted objective functions. The ﬁtness computation function by using simple
additive weighting method is shown in Eq. (13), which is derived by Eq. (11)
and Eq. (12).
fv =

1
1
=√ =
σ
V
fa =

1
=
A

1
r
i=0 (ECCi

1
r

− A (C))

1
1
r

r
i=0 (ECCi )

F = wv · fv + wa · fa

(11)

(12)
(13)

where wv and wa are the weight values for determining which to be optimized.
The summation of weight values has to be one. We use simple additive method
described above instead of the pareto method, another well-known scheme which
determines optimal solution. The pareto method uses dominent-nondominent
relationships between solutions. However, this method is not appropriate to use
to determine which objective to optimize.
Selection. In this paper, we use roulette wheel selection, a common technique
that implements the proportional selection strategy. In roulette wheel selection
scheme which resembles survival of the ﬁttest in nature, the chance to be selected
for the reproduction of a chromosome is determined by its ratio of ﬁtness value.
Crossover. The crossover process is a probabilistic process which exchanges information between two parent chromosomes to generate two child chromosomes.
We use the crossover process which child chromosomes inherit one section from
each of parent chromosomes partitioned by random partitioning. This crossover
process might violate basic assignment principle deﬁned as the continuous cell
assignment, which is assumed in initial population. However, if the ﬁtness of such
a chromosome is low, it is dismissed in selection process. In this way, crossover
process helps algorithm converge into optimal solution as it guarantees the variety of populations.
Mutation. The mutation process in this paper is computed by exchanging of
boundary cells assigned to each CHs.
Optimal solution and terminal criterion. The process of ﬁtness computation, selection, crossover, and mutation is executed for a maximum number of
iterations. We use an elitist strategy to preserve the best parent chromosome.
Therefore a parent chromosome with the highest ﬁtness is always copied into
the next generation.

390

D. Lee, W. Lee, and J. Kim
0.2
0.18

Shortest Distance
LLC
GA−OTC with w =0.8,w =0.2

0.16

GA−OTC with w =0.2,w =0.8

Standard Deviation of Load

v

a

v

a

0.14
0.12
0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0
100

150

200

250

300

350

400

450

500

Number of Sensor Nodes

Fig. 2. Standard deviation of load with varying density (5 CHs)

4

Performance Evaluation

The performance evaluation of GA-OTC algorithm is shown in the aspect of
(1) balanced energy consumption among CHs and (2) minimized total energy
consumption. We plot the results obtained from our simulation in Fig. 2 and 3.
To evaluate our algorithm, we compare the results of the proposed scheme with
shortest distance based algorithm and Low-Energy Localized Clustering (LLC)
algorithm [9]. In shortest distance based algorithm a CH includes an SN in its
cluster if the distance between them is the minimum. LLC algorithm is the
algorithm which regulates the cluster radius for energy eﬃciency.
4.1

Balanced Energy Consumption

The graph shown in Fig. 2. indicates that GA-OTC algorithm achieves clearly
lower standard deviation with increase in density. Results demonstrate that our
approach GA-OTC with wv =0.8, wa =0.2 and GA-OTC with wv =0.2, wa =0.8
is better than shortest distance based algorithm and LLC algorithm. In LLC,
it causes ineﬀective radius problem compared to our algorithm. Because LLC
selects maximum radius to cover all sensor ﬁelds and its’ clustering radii of CHs
are ﬁxed to circle.
4.2

Minimized Total Energy Consumption

Average energy consumption on a CH will be minimum when shortest distance
based algorithm is used but the load will not be balanced. We try to minimize the
average energy consumption as good as shortest distance based algorithm with
increase in CHs. As shown in Fig. 3, GA-OTC with wv =0.2, wa =0.8 performs
better than LLC and GA-OTC with wv =0.8, wa =0.2. GA-OTC with wv =0.8,
wa =0.2 performs worse than LLC and GA-OTC with wv =0.2, wa =0.8 since

Genetic Algorithmic Topology Control for Two-Tiered WSNs

391

Average Communivation Energy on a CH

0.25
Shortest Distance
LLC
GA−OTC with w =0.8,w =0.2
v

a

GA−OTC with w =0.2,w =0.8
v

0.2

a

0.15

0.1

0.05

0

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Number of Cluster Heads

Fig. 3. Average energy consumption on a CH (300 SNs)

1

0.95

0.9

Standard deviation of load
Average communication
energy on a CH

0.85

0.8

0.75

0.7

0.65
wv=0.7, wa=0.3
w =0.6, w =0.4
wv=0.8, wa=0.2
v
a

wv=0.5, wa=0.5

w =0.4, w =0.6
v
a

wv=0.3, wa=0.7
w =0.2, w =0.8
v
a

Weight Policy

Fig. 4. Standard deviation of load and average communication energy on a CH with
varying weight policy (5 CHs, 300 SNs, normalized with respect to the highest value)

weight factors of it is focused on minimizing the variance rather than average
of energy consumption. Two demonstrated results are based on the aspect of
two weight policies. When wv =0.2, wa =0.8, weight of minimized total energy
consumption is greater than weight of balanced energy consumption, results
indicate that the average is better than wv =0.2, wa =0.8 and vice versa. The
graph shown in Fig. 4. clearly describes the tendency of the standard deviation
and average communication energy reﬂected by various weight policies. The
values on the counter domain are normalized with respect to the highest value.
This weight policy can be implemented to optimize various environments of
WSNs by changing weight factors. For example, in some WSNs, the survival of
every node can be the most important mission. In these cases, we can achieve
longer expected life time of SN that ﬁrst dies by giving more weight value to
weight factor wv . In case that total life time of WSNs is more important, the
bigger value is assigned to weight factor wa rather than wv .

392

5

D. Lee, W. Lee, and J. Kim

Conclusion and Future Work

A genetic algorithmic topology control scheme for WSNs, named GA-OTC, is
proposed to balance and minimize energy consumption. A genetic algorithm is
used to search for the optimal clustering set of SNs. In addition, in order to solve
a multi-objective problem, weight factors are used for two objective functions,
i.e., balanced energy consumption and minimized total energy consumption. By
using weight factors, GA-OTC can determine the objectives to optimize. Our
novel scheme shows better performance on balancing and minimizing energy
consumption than shortest distance based algorithm and LLC algorithm. As
for future work, we consider applying another meta-heuristic such as simulated
annealing and tabu search to the proposed optimized topology control scheme.

References
1. Akyildiz, I., Su, W., Sankarasubramaniam, Y., Cayirci, E.: Wireless Sensor Networks: A Survey. Computer Networks, Vol. 38. Elsevier (2002) 393-422
2. Mhatre, V., Rosenberg, C.: Design Guidelines for Wireless Sensor Networks: Communication, Clustering and Aggregation. Ad Hoc Networks, Vol. 2. Elsevier (2004)
45-63
3. Mhatre, V., Rosenberg, C.: Homogeneous vs Heterogeneous Clustered Sensor Networks: A Comparative Study. In Proc. IEEE Int’l. Conference on Communication
(2004)
4. Kim, J.,Choi, J., Lee, W.: Energy-Aware Distributed Topology Control for
Coverage-Time Optimization in Clustering-Based Heterogeneous Sensor Networks.
In Proc. IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference (2006)
5. Heinzelman, W., Chandrakasan, A., Balakrishnan, H.: An Application-Speciﬁc
Protocol Architecture for Wireless Microsensor Networks. Trans. Wireless Comm.
Vol. 1, IEEE (2002) 660-670
6. Younis, O., Fahmy, S.: HEED: A Hybrid, Energy-Eﬃcient, Distributed Clustering
Approach for Ad Hoc Sensor Networks. Trans. Mobile Computing. Vol. 3. IEEE
(2004) 366-379
7. Gupta, G., Younis, M.: Load-Balanced Clustering of Wireless Sensor Networks. In
Proc. IEEE Int’l. Conference on Communication (2003)
8. Pan, J., Hou, Y., Cai, L., Shi, Y., Shen, S.: Topology Control for Wireless Sensor
Networks. In Proc. ACM Int’l Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking
(2003)
9. Kim, J., Kim, E., Kim, S., Kim, D., Lee, W.: Low-Energy Localized Clustering: An
Adaptive Cluster Radius Conﬁguration Scheme for Topology Control in Wireless
Sensor Networks. In Proc. In Proc. IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference (2005)
10. Min, R., Bhardwaj, M., Cho, S., Sinha, A., Shih, E., Wang, A., Chandrakasan, A.:
An Architecture for a Power-Aware Distributed Microsensor Node. In Proc. IEEE
Workshop on Signal Processing Systems (2000)
11. Davis, L.: Handbook of Genetic Algorithms. Van Nostrand Reinhold, NY (1991)
12. Blum, H.: Biological Shape and Visual Science. Journal of Theoretical Biology,
Part I, Vol. 38. Elsevier (1973) 205-287
13. Hwang, C., Yoon, K.: Multiple Attribute Decision Making: Methods and Applications. Lecture Notes in Economics and Mathematical Systems, Springer-Verlag,
Berlin (1981)

