Automated Design Approach for Analog Circuit
Using Genetic Algorithm
Xuewen Xia1 , Yuanxiang Li2 , Weiqin Ying2 , and Lei Chen1
1

2

School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430079, China
State Key Lab. of Software Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China
laughkid@163.com

Abstract. The technology of electronic design automation (EDA) has
improved the eﬃciency of design process, however, designer is still required much special knowledge of circuit. During the past decade, using
genetic algorithm (GA) to design circuit had attracted many experts
and scholars. However, too much more attention was focus on a circuit’s
function and many other factors had been neglected which caused the
circuit had little applicability. This paper proposes an automated design
approach for analog circuit based on a multi-objective adaptive GA. The
multi-objective ﬁtness evaluation method, which can dynamic adjust parameter, is selected. And a parallel evolution strategy which separates
evolution of circuit structure and element value is adopted but also organically combined them by weight vectors. The experimental results
indicate that this approach obviously be able to improve the evolution
eﬃciency and could generate numbers of suitable circuits.
Keywords: Evolutionary algorithms, Electronic Design Automation,
Evolving hardware.

1

Introduction

In contrast to conventional circuit design where the designers were required much
special knowledge of circuit, Evolvable Hardware (EHW) technology needs fewer
designers’ intervention and special knowledge of circuit during the design process.
Evolutionary Hardware uses techniques derived from evolutionary computation such as genetic algorithm and genetic programming to develop electronic
circuits, which capable of solving real world problems. The researches of Koza
[1]and his collaborators on analog circuit synthesis through genetic programming
[2](GP) is likely the most successful evolutionary computation-based approach
so far, but this approach, like many other experiments, indicated that design an
applicable circuit, especially analog circuit, is very time-consuming [3], and even
is infeasible. There-fore, various experiments on speeding up the GA computation have been undertaken [4], and other approaches to the problem have been
undertaken by using variable length chromosome [5].
In this paper, a simple encoding scheme based on Spice Netlist ﬁle format is
selected. And a dynamic adjusting method based on evolutionary strategy which
could improve the evolution eﬃciency is selected. Two representative analog
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 1124–1130, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Automated Design Approach for Analog Circuit Using Genetic Algorithm

1125

circuits are adopted to test the approach because design analog circuit is more
diﬃcult than design digital circuit.
The paper is organized as follows. The approach of evolving analog circuits,
includes the presentation of circuit, the evolutionary strategy and the evaluation
method are introduced in section 2. In section 3, the results of experiment and
analysis are presented. At last, a conclusion is provided.

2
2.1

Approach of Evolving Analog Circuits
Encoding and Decoding Scheme

It is an elementary problem in evolvable hardware that to chose a suitable
method of encoding and decoding. In general, there are two methods: Global
encoding, which refers to encoding with all information of a circuit, and local
encoding, which refers to encoding with the part information of a circuit. The
latter method is selected in this paper in which the circuit has been separated
into two parts: structure part and element value part. And these two parts are
respectively evolved with each local coding.
Instead of some detailed requirements to initialize the circuit, there are only
the numbers of elements and the type of it should be deﬁned advance according
to the experiential knowledge of circuit’s complexity.
For the structural evolution, the type and link-nodes of elements are encoded
into binary code, but the value of it is not included. The number of an element’s
nodes is determined by the maximum nodes that the element has.
E1 = [T ype, N ode1, N ode2 , ..., N oden ].

(1)

In (1), T ype denotes the index of element type, while N odei ( i[1, n] ) denotes
each link-node of element. The value of element is random generated at the
beginning of evolution process. The chromosome of a circuit is composed of
every element’s binary code which linking with each other.
For the value evolution, the code is almost the same as structure evolution,
but the element’s value is, instead of link-node, encoded.
E2 = [T ype, V alue1, V alue2 , ..., V aluem].

(2)

In (2), the V alui (i ∈ [1, m] ) denotes many diﬀerent parameters of an element, and the number of the element’s value is determined by it’s T ype. For
example, the resistivity and the linear temperature-coeﬃcient are selected to be
parameters of a resistance.
Before simulated by SPICE emluator, these two results (structure and elements) should be combined in order to get the whole information of a circuit.
Firstly, the set of element from structural evolution should be decoded individually, so the type of each element could be acquired by table querying, and every
link-nodes of element should be recorded in order to obtain the topology of circuit. Then the set of value of each element should be obtained by decoding the

1126

X. Xia et al.

set of element from value evolution. Finally the whole data of each element in
the circuit are presented. The format could be described as fellow:
E = [T ype, N odei, V aluej ].
2.2

(3)

Simulate Circuit with Pretreatment Code

wing to the features of genetic algorithm’s encoding model and the operators
of it, the element’s link condition might not be directed properly. It may cause
some topology errors which could result in more than ﬁfty percents of circuits be
illegal, which would obviously decrease the eﬃciency and feasibility of evolution
because majority of time is spent on the simulating during the process. To avoid
this case, the circuit must be pretreated and be checked for these cases:
1. Less than 2 connections at a node;
2. No DC path to ground from a node;
3. 3. Inductor/voltage source loop found.
These errors could be obtained by scanning the circuit advance, and then corrected or deleted them, as a result, the circuit’s validity could be guarantied to
some extend.
At last, combining the whole valid circuit’s information and the commands of
output data, a regular SPICE Netlist ﬁle would be generated, hence the simulation could be proceed successfully by software SPICE.
2.3

Evolutionary Strategies Based on the Dynamic Adjusting
Weight Vector

Since rates of mutation and crossover inﬂuence the eﬃciency of genetic algorithm, so they should be altered along with evolution process and the ﬂuctuation of environment. Because of the parallel two layers evolutionary strategy,
mutation rates (Ps m) and crossover rates (Ps c) of structural evolution have relations to those of value evolution. With the increasing generation and the rates
of ﬁtness, Ps m and Ps c of structure and value will became less.
Psm = K1 (1 − exp(−

dF itness
))
dGeneration

Psc = K2 Psm

(4)
(5)

In the equations above,K1 ∈(0, 1),K2 ∈(0, 1).
Pv = exp(−(Psc + Psm ))

(6)

After the start of value evolution, the rates of mutation and crossover resume in order to preventing local convergence. Based on the traditional theory
of evolutionary algorithm, the algorithm could not search eﬀectively after the
population had con-verged [6,7]. The approach in this paper could obtain optimal parameters from sorts of circuit, so it overcome local convergence during
the early period, and also avoid some cases that one circuit been eliminated for
its unsuitable element value.

Automated Design Approach for Analog Circuit Using Genetic Algorithm

2.4

1127

Fitness Evaluation Method

The quality of evaluation function inﬂuences the result and the process of analog
circuit’s evolution greatly. A precisely comprehensive evaluation strategy would
direct evolution to a more eﬃcient process, which could obtain a more suitable
result in a relative short period.
In this paper, an oﬄine evolution model based on SPICE software has been
selected, and a multi-objective ﬁtness evaluation function is adopted in order to
meet many design objectives. The ﬁtness of circuit is described as:
F itness = f (g, s, p)

(7)

The vector g denotes the optimization degree of a circuit performance, s
denotes the number of type of elements, and p denotes the scale of a circuit.
The experiences of design during past remind us that a good circuit should have
less kinds of elements and small scale besides good performance. In this paper,
function f is described as follow:
3

f (g, s, p) = c1 g + c2 s + c3 p,

ci = 1

(8)

i=1

In (8),ci is weight vector which could be used to adjust the weight of three
parameters according to designer’s demands.
The performance of a circuit is determined by many aspects, so the vector
g should be deﬁned to be diversiﬁed function according to diﬀerent design objectives. Owing to the separated parallel evolution mode, the ﬁtness of circuit’s
structure and element value could be separated into two diﬀerent functions. In
the experiment of transistor ampliﬁer design, a stable ampliﬁer is the destination
of structural evolution, while its ampliﬁcation ratio is the mission of value evolution. When a low-pass ﬁlter is designed, the structural evolution will take charge
of low-pass performance, and the feature of frequency and voltage are left to
value evolution to be obtained. The evaluation strategy of transistor ampliﬁer’s
structure is to analyze the curve from transient analysis.
The evaluation function is g1 (x) that expressed by (9). The vector is a weight
vector, Vo (x) and Vi (x) respectively denotes the voltages of output and input.
Function h1 (x) evaluates the stability of ampliﬁcation of output voltage, and
function e(x) evaluates the AC work state of Bipolar Junction Transistor from
individual x in order to guarantee a stable working condition to the transistor in
its value domain. The value evaluation function is g2 (x) that expressed by (10).
The vector A is an expectant voltage gain, and function h2 (x) will evaluate the
diﬀerence between the expectant outcome and the experimenter’s.
g1 (x) = αh1

(
m

vom(x)
vom−1(x) 2
−
) + (1 − α)e(x),
vim(x)
vim−1(x)
(A −

g2 (x) = αh2
m

vom(x) 2
) + (1 − α)e(x),
vim(x)

α ∈ (0, 1)

α ∈ (0, 1)

(9)
(10)

1128

X. Xia et al.

The evaluation strategy of a low-pass ﬁlter structural evolution is to analyze
the curve from frequency analysis. The ﬁtness function is g3 (x) that expressed
by equation (11). vmax (x) and vmin (x) respectively expresses the maximum and
minimum of output curve, p(x) and q(x) are pass-cutoﬀ point and reject-cutoﬀ
point that could be measured by extremum analysis method. Extremum analysis
method is based on comparing every extremum point with vmax (x) to insure the
position of pass-cutoﬀ point and reject-cutoﬀ point, and analyzing the region
between the two points combine with each point’s slop or diﬀerential coeﬃcient
to insure pass-cutoﬀ frequency fp and reject-cutoﬀ frequency fr .
p(x)

n

(vmax (x) − voi (x)) +

g3 (x) = βh3 (
i=1

(voi (x) − vmin (x))), β∈(0, 1) (11)
i=q(x)

The evaluation strategy of low-pass ﬁlter value evolution is almost the same
as that of the transistor ampliﬁer. Evaluating the diﬀerence between experimental and expectant value of voltage gain and feature frequency, combining with
evaluating work state of operational ampliﬁer, the outcome of value evolution
could be obtained.

3

Experimental Results and Analysis

In this paper, two kinds of circuits, passive ﬁlter and ampliﬁer, are experimented
because that with the following reasons:
1. Filter circuit includes resistance, capacitor, and inductance, therefore the
circuit’s conﬁguration is very simple and it is easy to analyze the circuit.
Furthermore, the analysis of input-output characteristics of passive ﬁlter is
representative which involves many parameters of analog circuit.
2. Most analog circuit could be made up of resistance, capacitor, inductance,
and dynatron. So an ampliﬁer circuit which includes dynatron could represent majority structure of analog circuit.
3. When making an appraisal for a passive ﬁlter and ampliﬁer, many design
objectives should be considered, so the search of these circuits could testify
the validity of multi-objective evaluation strategy proposed by this paper.
The parameters of evolution are set as follow that maximal number of element
is 20, maximal number of node is 8, max generation is 2000, size of population
is 60 (40 for structure and 20 for value), initial rate of mutation and crossover
was Pm =0.1, Pc =0.03.
3.1

Experiment 1

In this experiment, the objectives of transistor ampliﬁer are prearranged that
voltage magniﬁcation is 350, the generate ratio of resistor, capacitance, power
supply, and transistor is 6:3:1:2.
A relative good circuit has been obtained after 800 1000 generations, and a
perfect circuit has selected to demonstrate in Figure.1:

Automated Design Approach for Analog Circuit Using Genetic Algorithm

1129

Fig. 1. The best voltage ampliﬁer structure from generation 1000

3.2

Experiment 2

In this experiment, the objectives of low-pass ﬁlter (LPF) are prearranged as
follow: voltage gain is 20 dB, transmission bands is 30KHz., the generate ratio
of resistor, capacitance, power supply, and transistor is 6:3:1:2.
A relative good circuit has been obtained after 800 1000 generations, and a
perfect circuit has selected to demonstrate in Figure.2:

Fig. 2. The best low-pass ﬁlter structure from generation 1000

This ﬁlter allows frequency lower than 30 kHz to pass through it, but prevented higher frequencies from doing so.
3.3

Analysis

As we know that the structure and values of elements contribute to an analog circuit’s function. Experiences indicate that congeneric circuits generally have the

1130

X. Xia et al.

same topology while some values of elements are diﬀerent. In the experiments
above, the proper topologies of a transistor ampliﬁer and a low-pass ﬁlter were
found during generation 500 600, despite that the magniﬁcation and the frequency
were not consistent with the prearrangement circuits. The posterior evolutions
were stress on how to adjust the values of elements in order to meet the scheduled
requirements. Experiences in this paper indicated that, compare with traditional
methods, this strategy shorten the period of EHW, especially in analog circuits.

4

Conclusions

In this paper, an evolution approach for designing analog circuit is proposed,
which adopts a parallel evolutionary strategy that separated evolution of circuit
into two parts, called structure and element value, which are organically combine by weight vectors. The experiments have indicated that parallel evolutionary strategy combining with separate ﬁtness evaluate scheme can automatically
design a circuit eﬃciently. Its excellence is saving time and multi-result.
Although little knowledge about circuit is required during EHW, however, the
special characteristics of a circuit would consequentially improve the eﬃciency
of EHW. So it is the main target of future researches that how to extract the
characteristics of structure and element value from a preconcerted circuit to
enhance the quality and to improve the eﬃciency of EHW. Since the strategies
and operators of genetic are also important to EHW, so these strategies and
operators should be explored and researched specially to ameliorate EHW.
Acknowledgement. This research is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No.60473014.

References
1. Koza, J.R. Bennett, F.H. Andre, M.A. et al.: Automated synthesis of analog electrical circuits by means of genetic programming. IEEE Trans. on Evolutionary
Computation 1(2) (1997) 109–128
2. Koza, J.R.: Genetic Programming: On the Programming of Computers by Means
of Natural Selection. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA (1992)
3. de Garis H.: Evolvable hardware: Genetic programming of a darwin machine.
In: Proceeding of Artiﬁcial Neural Nets ad Genetic Algorithms, Austria: SpringerVerlag (1993) 441–449
4. Cantu-Paz E.: A survey of parallel genetic algorithms. Calculateurs parallels 10(2)
(1998) 141–171
5. Iwata, M.: A pattern recognition system using evolvable hardware. In: Parallel
Problem Solving from Nature IV, Springer Verlag (1996) 761–770
6. de Garis H.: An artiﬁcial brain: Atr’s cam-brain project aims to build/evolve an artiﬁcial brain with a million neural net modules inside a trillion cell cellular automata
machine. New Generation Computing 12(2) (1994) 215–221
7. Goldberg, D.E.: Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization and Machine Learning.
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Reading,MA (1989)

