Service Agent-Based Resource Management Using
Virtualization for Computational Grid
Sung Ho Jang and Jong Sik Lee
School of Computer Science and Engineering
Inha University
Incheon 402-751, South Korea
ho7809@hanmail.net, jslee@inha.ac.kr

Abstract. The key purpose of computational grid is how to allocate grid
resources to grid applications effectively. Existing resource management
models with centralized architecture like GRAM and nimrod-G broker are
liable to generate communication overheads and bottleneck. Therefore, we
propose the service agent-based resource management model using virtualization for computational grid. Virtualization and agent-based system applied to
our model is able to improve load imbalance of grid broker and reduce
communication overheads. Experiment results demonstrate that the service
agent-based resource management model decreases 25.8% more job latencies
and 151.6% more communication messages than the centralized resource
management model.
Keywords: Grid Computing, Agent-based System, Resource Management.

1 Introduction
Computational grid [1], the core field of grid computing, enables us to get the ability
to perform high performance computing and large-scale simulation. The key purpose
of computational grid is how to allocate grid resources to grid applications with high
throughput and low latency effectively. But, the effective allocation of grid resources
is not an easy task because distributed grid resources have heterogeneous operating
systems and different system performances. Grid resources also have commercial
characteristics [2] that grid users pay for grid resource utilization and grid resource
providers make profits. And, we need to consider the QoS of the whole grid.
Diverse models like GRAM [3] and nimrod-G resource broker [4] have been
developed for the resource management of computational grid. GRAM (Globus
Resource Allocation Manager), the core component of globus toolkit, is developed to
facilitate processing requests for executing remote application and managing active
jobs. Nimrod-G resource broker, a grid application scheduler, is responsible for
resource discovery, selection, scheduling, and deployment of computations. But,
existing models are based on centralized architecture that deals with communications
between grid resources and grid applications. And, these models are unable to satisfy
commercial characters and meet the dynamic demand for grid resources due to the
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part II, LNCS 4488, pp. 966–969, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Service Agent-Based Resource Management Using Virtualization

967

passive resource transaction mechanism. Also, these models are liable to generate
communication overheads and bottleneck by communication messages concentrated
to grid broker and too many given tasks of grid broker.
Therefore, this paper proposes the service agent-based resource management
model using virtualization in order to solve problems of the centralized resource
management model. Agent-based system [5] provides the ability to unify and allocate
networked resources in the grid environment and is useful to solve technical problems
of distributed resource management. As applying agent-based system and
virtualization to our model, we can integrate grid resources of local networks and
construct a virtual grid computing system.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 proposes the service agent-based
resource management model. Section 3 demonstrates the efficiency of our model with
experiment results. The conclusion of this paper is in Section 4.

2 Service Agent-Based Resource Management Model
This paper proposes the service agent-based resource management model for the
effective resource management of computational grid. As shown in fig. 1, the service
agent-based resource management model consists of five types of components which
are grid user, grid resource provider, grid service agent, central grid broker, and local
grid broker.

Fig. 1. Service Agent-based Resource Management Model

Roles of each component are as follows. Grid user is in grid application level and
uses grid resources to solve its own computing problem as paying for resources. Grid
resource provider (GRP) is in grid fabric level and provides commercial grid
resources to grid users and makes profits. Central grid broker takes charge of grid
resource registry which services the data management of local grid resource group
and discovers grid resources suitable for requirements of grid users by data query.
Central grid broker also binds grid users with local grid broker of local network of
which grid resources satisfy the requirements.

968

S.H. Jang and J.S. Lee

Local grid broker is composed of local resource pool, resource cluster manager and
transaction coordinator. All grid resources connected with local network are stored to
local resource pool. Resource cluster manager divides grid resources of this pool into
classes and constructs several clusters. Transaction coordinator provides a transaction
mechanism by the negotiation of grid user and grid service agent.
Grid service agent, the key component of our model, consists of resource
allocation, resource deal module, synchronization module, resource monitor module,
and communication agent. Firstly, grid service agent constructs virtual computing
system as integrating networked grid resources of a cluster by virtualization
techniques [6] such as LUN (Logical Unit Number) mapping and masking. Virtual
computing system collects the local network attached computing resources into a
large computing system. This logical computing system can be allocated to any grid
user with adequate computing performance. It also can solve the physical complexity
of grid resources and provide the ability to monitor and control distributed grid
resources. Secondly, grid service agent manages metadata about location, owner, and
condition of grid resources and improves the monolithic update cycle of metadata as
updating and publishing metadata dynamically when the condition of grid resources is
changed. Thirdly, grid service agent takes charge of bidding for resource transaction
instead of grid resource providers because it costs a great deal for marketing,
management and communication if grid resource providers participate in resource
transaction in several. Finally, grid service agent prioritizes grid resources of virtual
computing system by performance like the processing time and the number of
processors.

3 Experiments and Performance Evaluation
For the performance evaluation of our model, we implemented it on the DEVS
modeling and simulation environment [7] and conducted experiments in comparison
with the centralized resource management model of which grid resource providers
participate in resource transaction in person.

Fig. 2. (a) Comparison of Job Latency (b) Comparison of Communication Messages (Service
Agent-based Resource Management Model (SARMM) vs. Centralized Resource Management
Model (CRMM))

Service Agent-Based Resource Management Using Virtualization

969

In our experiments, we assumed that grid resources of each model are processors
with multi queue and measured the job latency and communication message of each
model. Fig. 2 (a) and (b) illustrate variations of job latency and communication
messages by the number of transactions. As a result, the decreasing rates of job
latency and communication messages for the service agent-based resource
management model over the centralized resource management model are 25.8% and
151.6%. This result demonstrates that our model provides improved QoS with high
throughput and reduces communication overheads.

4 Conclusion
This paper proposed the service agent-based resource management model to solve
problems of existing centralized resource management models in the computational
grid environment. We applied virtualization and agent-based system to the service
agent-based resource management model in order to improve load imbalance of grid
broker and reduce communication overheads. Contrary to the centralized resource
management model, our model of which grid service agent takes charge of dealing
and monitoring grid resources instead of grid resource providers can generate more
resource transactions and profits than existing models. Experiment results
demonstrate that the service agent-based resource management model decreases
25.8% more job latencies and 151.6% more communication messages than the
centralized resource management model.
Acknowledgments. This work is supported by INHA UNIVERSITY Research Grant.

References
1. Berman, F., Fox, G., Hey, T.: Grid computing: making the global infrastructure a reality. J.
Wiley. New York (2003) p
2. Subramoniam, K., Maheswaran, M., Toulouse, M.: Towards a Micro-Economic Model for
Resource Allocation in Grid Computing System. In Proceedings of the 2002 IEEE Canadian
Conference on Electrical & Computer Engineering (2002) 782-785
3. Foster, I., Kesselman, C.: The Globus project: a status report. Heterogeneous Computing
Workshop, 1998. (HCW 98) Proceedings. (1998) 4 - 18
4. Buyya, R., Abramson, D., Giddy, J.: Nimrod-G: An Architecture for a Resource
Management and Scheduling System in a Global Computational Grid. The 4th International
Conference on High Performance Computing in Asia-Pacific Region (HPC Asia 2000),
IEEE Computer Society Press, USA (2000)
5. Mandutianu, S.: Modeling Agent-Based Systems. Formal Approaches to Agent-Based
Systems: In Proceedings of First International Workshop. FAABS 2000, Springer Verlag,
LNCS Vol. 1871 (2001)
6. Nanda, S., Chiueh, T.: A Survey on Virtualization Technologies. RPE Report, (2005)
7. Zeigler, B.P. (ed.): The DEVS Environment for High-Performance Modeling and
Simulation. IEEE CS & E, Vol. 4, No3 (1997) 61-71

