A Cheminformatics Approach for Zeolite Framework
Determination
Shujiang Yang1, Mohammed Lach-hab1, Iosif I. Vaisman1,2,
and Estela Blaisten-Barojas1,3
1

Computational Materials Science Center, George Mason University, MSN 6A2, Fairfax,
Virginia 22030, USA
2
Department of Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, George Mason University,
MSN 5B3, Manassas, Virginia 20110, USA
3
Department of Computational and Data Sciences, George Mason University, MSN 6A2,
Fairfax, Virginia 22030, USA
blaisten@gmu.edu

Abstract. Knowledge of the framework topology of zeolites is essential for
multiple applications. Framework type determination relying on the combined
information of coordination sequences and vertex symbols is appropriate for
crystals with no defects. In this work we present an alternative machine learning
model to classify zeolite crystals according to their framework types. The
model is based on an eighteen-dimensional feature vector generated from the
crystallographic data of zeolite crystals that contains topological, physicalchemical and statistical descriptors. Trained with sufficient known data, this
model predicts the framework types of unknown zeolite crystals within 1-2 %
error and shows to be better suited when dealing with real zeolite crystals, all of
which always have geometrical defects even when the structure is resolved by
crystallography.

1 Introduction
Zeolites are crystalline materials with regular structures consisting of molecular-sized
pores and channels. These crystals are widely used in the field of adsorption, ionexchange, heterogeneous catalysis (basically all gasoline production employs zeolite
catalysts), as well as in health applications, sensors, solar energy conversion [1].
There are hundreds of zeolite species occurring naturally and/or synthetically, and
millions more have been hypothetically proposed [2]. Zeolite crystals are constructed
from an underlying three-dimensional network of TO4 building block units. Within
this network there are loosely bonded exchangeable cations, adsorbent phases and the
building block central atom is tetrahedrally coordinated with four oxygen atoms.
Predominantly, Si, Al or P is the element in the center of the tetrahedral building
blocks and is referred as the T-atom. Zeolite networks are constructed by spatially
accommodating the TO4 building blocks by corner sharing the oxygens located at
their vertices. These networks span a certain length and then repeat periodically
along the crystal. Thus, these underlying networks depend directly on the connectivity
of TO4 units. Other zeolite crystal components such as cations, adsorbent phase,
G. Allen et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2009, Part II, LNCS 5545, pp. 160–168, 2009.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

A Cheminformatics Approach for Zeolite Framework Determination

161

chemical composition, and observed crystallography properties are irrelevant in the
determination of the underlying network. There are topological differences between
networks in different crystals. Once a crystal network possesses a recognized topology, the Structure Commission of the International Zeolite Association (IZA-SC)
approves it as an established framework type [3] and crystals displaying one of the
approved framework types are then cataloged as zeolites. Non-approved network
topologies fall into the category of hypothetical zeolites or are not zeolites. The
IZA-SC currently recognizes 186 unique framework topologies [3]. The IUPAC
Commission on Zeolite Nomenclature assigns a three-capital-letter acronym, the
framework type codes (FTC), to each framework topology [4]. Known zeolite crystals
belong to one of these topological categories. Crystals suspected to be zeolites that do
not meet the established framework types cannot be cataloged as zeolites.
The FTC is conventionally determined with the combined information of the coordination sequences (CS) [5] and vertex symbols (VS) [6] of a zeolite crystal. Although it is not excluded that different framework types would have identical coordination sequences and vertex symbols, these cases are infrequent [7]. The conventional
CS-VS method has limitations when applied to real zeolite crystals. Indeed, we noticed that multiple zeolite crystals in the Inorganic Crystal Structure Database (ICSD)
[8] are distorted in various ways or might not contain complete crystal information.
Coordination sequences or vertex symbols calculated for these crystals are erroneous
and as a consequence their FTC cannot be predicted.
Exploitation of data mining and machine learning approaches is emerging in recent
years in the field of chemical and materials informatics as a powerful approach for
designing models that are developed based on data archived in databases [9,10]. The
challenging task is to turn such models uniquely based on data analysis into novel
applications. Similar approaches have been successful in a diversity of fields ranging
from speech and vision recognition, robot control, business management, to bioinformatics and drug design.
In this work, we introduce a machine learning methodology for classifying zeolite
crystals according to their framework type. The model presented here is the secondgeneration Zeolite-Structure-Predictor (ZSP2) developed on a data set of around 1300
zeolite crystals contained in the ICSD. ZSP2 is an extension of the original ZSP
model [10] in which different topological descriptors are considered. The methodology used for building this model can be easily ported for the structural analysis of
other families of crystals.

2 Methodology
The ZSP2 uses Breiman’s Random Forest (RF) algorithm [11], which consists of an
ensemble of decision trees trained on a bootstrap sample of the training data. The
algorithm considers random groups of attributes for creating many trees rather than
using all attributes to build one tree. Classification predictions are made by majority
vote of all the trees. In this work the forest contains 100 trees and the WEKA [12]
implementation of RF is used throughout.

162

S. Yang et al.

2.1 Data Preprocessing
The process of cleaning the data is of paramount importance in data mining. When
queried for zeolite crystals, the ICSD gives about 1600 crystal entries. Data in these
entries are collected from published literature and do not include the framework type
information. Based on the structure content in each crystal entry, we were able to
assign the CS and VS to 1473 crystal entries by means of the zeoTsites package [13].
The remaining crystal entries have spurious geometry disorder or insufficient information in the database and no CS-VS could be determined precisely [14]. The CS and
VS of these 1473 crystals were compared with the IZA-SC table, confirming that
1370 crystals can be referred as zeolites belonging to 94 framework types. The conventional CS-VS method proves incapable for identifying a framework type of the
remaining 103 entries. Therefore the CS-VS method fails in 7.5 % of the cases to
assign a framework type to a suspected zeolite crystal.
In machine learning terminology a framework type is referred as a class and each
zeolite is referred as an instance. Machine learning models are more robust when
classes are populated by a large number of instances. The 1370 zeolite entries are
unevenly distributed among the 94 framework types. Indeed, class population ranges
from 1 to 351 instances. There are 53 classes populated with only one or two instances, which are clearly inadequate for developing a data-based model. Because of
this limitation, our machine learning study focuses on the 41 classes populated with at
least 3 instances. However, the model described in this work can be easily extended to
classify according to 186 classes in the zeolite case, and can be used for other crystal
families as well.
Although the ICSD is the largest and most comprehensive database of inorganic
crystals, it presents constrains for building models based on data contained in its repository. There is hope that the ICSD will continue adding crystals to the existing
portfolio, which would then allow for further informatics approaches based on the
crystal data to become useful to the materials and solid state chemistry community.
2.2 Feature Generation
An attribute is a descriptor of a certain crystal property. A feature is the specification
of an attribute. The ZSP2 model for classification of zeolites into framework types
includes categorical and quantitative features of topological, chemical and statistical
nature.
The topological descriptors in the ZSP2 are based on a statistical geometry approach
based on the Delaunay tessellation [15] of a supercell of each zeolite crystal [10].
Delaunay tessellation provides an objective, non-arbitrary definition of nearest
neighboring points in space. Depending on the motif of the points, such tessellation has
been used to characterize liquids [16,17], proteins [18], as well as zeolites [19]. The
ICSD crystal entries provide the asymmetric unit cell of the crystal resolved from X-ray
experiments. With this information, it is possible to generate the unit cell of a given
crystal and once the unit cell is known, a supercell containing several unit cells can be
generated numerically [20]. In the zeolites analyzed, the unit cells span a wide range of
sizes and contain between 20 and 3040 atoms (excluding the hydrogens).

A Cheminformatics Approach for Zeolite Framework Determination

163

With the purpose of proposing topological descriptors, large supercells of all 1370
zeolites are generated such that a spherical cut of fixed radius 35.32 Å could be
carved out of each supercell. The sphere radius is chosen to ensure that the carved
sphere in crystals with huge unit cells encompasses a central unit cell and at least one
neighboring unit cell in each of the three directions. The next step is to remove from
the supercell sphere all oxygen atoms, all cations, and the full adsorbent phase. Thus,
only T-atoms are retained inside the sphere. These T-atoms constitute the backbone of
the zeolite framework and the Delaunay tessellation is performed on points in space
coinciding with their location. This procedure yields the Delaunay simplices
(distorted tetrahedra), which contain T-atoms at their vertices. Tens of thousands of
Delaunay simplices are obtained per zeolite spherical supercell. Most simplices are
distorted tetrahedra with edges that can be very long. In contrast, the TO4 units that
sustain the zeolite framework are near-to-perfect tetrahedra with edge lengths consistent with small variations around the oxygen-oxygen bond length.
In this work, the proposed topological descriptors are based on three geometrical
properties of the Delaunay simplices: i) mean edge length ( d ) of the six edges of
each simplex; ii) in-sphere volume (iV) of the largest sphere inscribed in a simplex;
iii) tetrahedrality (T) defined as the degree of distortion of a simplex from a regular
tetrahedron:
5

T =∑

6

∑

i =1 j = i +1

(d i − d j ) 2
15d

2

,

where di is the i-th edge length of the simplex. Mean and standard deviation (σ) of
these three properties are calculated for all simplices within each zeolite. The six
topological descriptors are mean_ d , σ_ d , mean_iV, σ_iV, mean_T, and σ_T.
Additional geometrical descriptors were adopted by considering secondary simplices corresponding to a second coordination shell in Delaunay space [21]. Because
each simplex has four adjacent tetrahedra that share one of its faces, the four new
vertices can be linked into a larger tetrahedron defining the secondary simplex. Six
geometrical descriptors: mean_ d 2, σ_ d 2, mean_iV2, σ_iV2, mean_T2, and σ_T2,
based on secondary simplices were adopted.
Finally, six physical and chemical properties of a crystal are considered as descriptors: framework density (ρ), unit cell volume (Vo), space group (SG), and the chemical composition of T-atoms Si, Al and P ([Si], [Al], [P]). Among them, SG is the only
nominal feature.
In summary, the zeolite classifier model ZSP2 is based on an 18-feature vector composed of twelve topological/statistical descriptors and six physical-chemical descriptors.

3 Results and Discussion
The performance of the ZSP2 model depends on the size of the feature vector used to
create it. The performance is measured in terms of accuracy, which is defined as the
percentage of instances that the model classifies correctly. Traditional classifiers in
data mining contain very few classes, and typically the classification is reduced to two
classes, which can then be addressed in binary language. Considering the dataset of

164

S. Yang et al.

1370 instances and 41 classes, classification accuracy increases progressively as additional relevant features increase the dimensionality of the feature vector. This effect is
shown in Table 1, where the reported accuracy is calculated with stratified 10-fold
cross validation and averaged over ten trials. Classification accuracy is 90.6% with a
feature set containing the six topological descriptors based on the first Delaunay shell
(mean_ d , σ_ d , mean_iV, σ_iV, mean_T, and σ_T). By gradually adding features
from secondary simplices, T-atom composition, ρ, Vo, and SG, the classification
performance is progressively improved. Finally, with the 18 features included in the
model an impressive accuracy of 97.9% is reached. Consistently, the out of bag error
(OOB) decreases as classification accuracy increases.
The worth of features for this classifier was investigated by evaluating their information gain with respect to the classes considered. This analysis determines that mean
_ d , mean_iV, mean_T , ρ, Vo, SG, [Si], [Al] are the nine most significant features.
However, the ZSP2 built with the18-feature set is computationally very fast and thus
all 18 features are kept throughout this study.
To analyze the effect of the population size of each class on the ZSP2, seven different models were built each of them classifies into a similar number of classes, but
these classes are populated with different number of instances per class (x). Figure 1
illustrates the performance of the seven classifications. The plotted accuracy is a result of using stratified 10-fold cross validation and averaging over ten trials. Although
the classification process is dependent on the motif of classes involved in each data
group, it is evident that the ZSP2 model is more accurate when trained with well
populated classes. In fact, the ZSP2 yields 100% accuracy when built with six classes
that have more than 63 instances.
Table 1. ZSP2 classification with various feature sets, 1370 instances and 41 classes
mean_ d , σ_ d ,
mean_iV, σ_iV,
mean_T, σ_T,
mean_ d 2,σ_ d 2,
mean_iV2,σ_iV2,
mean_T2, σ_T2
[Si], [Al], [P]

mean_ d , σ_ d ,
mean_iV, σ_iV,
mean_T, σ_T,
mean_ d 2,σ_ d 2,
mean_iV2,σ_iV2,
mean_T2, σ_T2
[Si], [Al], [P],
ρ, Vo, SG

Feature set

mean_ d , σ_ d ,
mean_iV, σ_iV,
mean_T, σ_T

mean_ d , σ_ d ,
mean_iV, σ_iV,
mean_T, σ_T,
mean_ d 2,σ_ d 2,
mean_iV2,σ_iV2,
mean_T2, σ_T2

OOB

0.024±0.001

0.099±0.004

0.054±0.003

0.024±0.001

90.6±0.2

92.8±0.2

94.6±0.3

97.9±0.1

Accuracy
(%)

The model improvement through experience is demonstrated through its learning
curve. For this experiment, a balanced dataset is constructed such that each class is
populated equally. Figure 2 shows the learning curve of the ZSP2 when the model
classifies into six classes, each of them populated with 60 instances. In this figure the
accuracy (vertical axis) pertains to instances correctly classified from split of the total
number of instances (test-set) once the model was trained with the remaining split of

A Cheminformatics Approach for Zeolite Framework Determination

165

100

98

Accuracy (%)

96

94

92

90

88

86

3≤x≤4
5-class

x=5
7-class

6≤x≤7
6-class

9≤x≤13
6-class

14≤x≤19
5-class

21≤x≤33
6-class

x≥63
6-class

Group

Fig. 1. Classification performance of the ZSP2 obtained for seven data groupings with about
constant number of classes. “x” is number of instances per class.

Accuracy (%)

100

98

96

94

92
0

12

24

36

48

60

Training instances / class

Fig. 2. The learning curve of the ZSP2 built for a balanced dataset of 360 instances and six
classes

available instances (plotted on the abscissa). For each training/test split, the training
instances are drawn at random from the available data. Next, the test instances are
randomly drawn from the remaining instances. The split is repeated 100 times for
each point. Both mean and standard deviation of this process are shown in Figure 2. It
is clearly shown that the ZSP2 improves fast when the training set is small, then more
smoothly when the training set exceeds 24 instances/class, and reaches a plateau at

166

S. Yang et al.

about 42 instances/class. Finally, the ZSP2 model performs perfectly when trained
with 54 instances per class. Therefore, the ZSP2 yields perfect classification into six
classes for datasets containing 60 instances per class.
Among the 1370 available instances, 1041 of them are distributed in 11 classes
with more than 27 instances/class. The ZSP2 model for this 11-class dataset, using
stratified 10-fold cross validation and repeated ten times, classifies 99.3% of the instances correctly, which is not perfect but excellent.
The ZSP2 could be tested with larger datasets and more than 41 classes. However,
we have been limited to the content of the ICSD, which currently allows for as much
as 41-class classification as shown in Table 1. To predict the classification of instances falling within a class not included in the 41 trained classes, a bag class was
defined containing the 53 frameworks poorly populated in the ICSD. Now ZSP2 is
built with 1370 instances to classify into 42 classes including the bag-class. With ten
times 10-fold cross validation, the ZSP2 correctly classifies 95.3% of all instances. If
the number of classes is reduced by keeping in the ZSP2 only those classes populated
with x or more instances, and placing the rest into the bag-class, the predictive power
of the model improves as the number of classes decreases as shown in Table 2.
Table 2. The ZSP2 classification of four datasets including a bag-class
Dataset
Number of
instances per
class=x
Size of the bag
class
OOB
Accuracy (%)

Dataset1

Dataset2

Dataset3

Dataset4

x≥3

x≥9

x≥19

x≥63

65

157

251

477

0.052±0.003

0.037±0.003

0.027±0.002

0.009±0.001

95.3±0.1

96.5±0.1

97.3±0.1

99.0±0.2

During the data cleaning procedure 103 instances with determined CS-VS were
removed from the analysis because they were not consistent with any framework type.
The ZSP2 for a 41-class model predicts that 60 of these instances belong to these 41
classes. This finding was further corroborated by details given in the published literature that originated the entries in the ICSD of these 60 crystals.
Compared with the conventional method to assign zeolite framework types, the
ZSP2 machine learning model is more robust to geometry disorder and occasional
errors in the data. By examining the zeolite entries in the ICSD, it was noticed that
measured structural crystal data may differ substantially from perfect crystals. As a
consequence, erroneous FTC would be determined for these cases. On the other hand,
these types of errors are more likely to be tolerated by the ZSP2 model.

A Cheminformatics Approach for Zeolite Framework Determination

167

4 Conclusion
In this work we present the ZSP2, a machine learning model for classifying zeolites
crystals according to their framework type. The approach requires as input the resolved
crystallographic data of each crystal only for T-atoms in the framework. The ZSP2 is
then a more efficient model than the ZSP where the crystallographic resolution had to
contain all atoms. The complete crystallographic information is also required to assign
a framework type to a zeolite crystal using the conventional coordination sequence and
vertex symbol approach. The ZSP2 performance is highly accurate. Indeed, the model
is able to predict correct classification with up to 100% accuracy when enough data
are available. The novel approach is considerably more robust than the conventional
identification method and can potentially be used to study other families of crystals.
There are over 100,000 crystal entries in the ICSD and the ZSP2 model can be tailored for clustering and classifying with a variety of different objectives. Work is in
progress in this direction.
Acknowledgments. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation
grant CHE-0626111. Authors acknowledge the NIST Standard Reference Data Program for making available the ICSD zeolite data set.

References
1. Payra, P., Dutta, P.K.: Zeolites: a Primer. In: Auerbach, S.M., Carrado, K.A., Dutta, P.K.
(eds.) Handbook of Zeolite Science and Technology, pp. 1–19. Marcell Dekker, New York
(2003)
2. Foster, M.D., Treacy, M.M.J.: A Database of Hypothetical Zeolite Structures,
http://www.hypotheticalzeolites.net
3. IZA-SC and its Standard Database of Zeolite Frameworks, http://
www.iza-structure.org/databases/
4. Barrer, R.M.: Chemical Nomenclature and Formulation of Compositions of Synthetic and
Natural Zeolites. Pure Appl. Chem. 51, 1091–1100 (1979)
5. Meier, W.M., Moeck, H.J.: The Topology of Three-dimensional 4-Connected Nets: Classification of Zeolite Framework Types Using Coordination Sequences. J. Solid State
Chem. 27, 349–355 (1979)
6. O’Keeffe, M., Hyde, S.T.: Vertex Symbols for Zeolite Nets. Zeolites 19, 370–374 (1997)
7. Treacy, M.M.J., Foster, M.D., Randall, K.H.: An Efficient Method for Determining Zeolite
Vertex Symbols. Micropor. Mesopor. Mater. 87, 255–260 (2006)
8. Inorganic Crystal Structure Database (ICSD),
http://www.nist.gov/srd/nist84.htm
9. Fischer, C.C., Tibbetts, K.J., Morgan, D., Ceder, G.: Predicting Crystal Structure by Merging Data Mining with Quantum Mechanics. Nature Mater. 5, 641–646 (2006)
10. Carr, D.A., Lach-hab, M., Yang, S., Vaisman, I.I., Blaisten-Barojas, E.: Machine Learning
Approach for Structure-based Zeolite Classification. Micorpor. Mesopor. Mater. 117, 339–
349 (2009)
11. Breiman, L.: Random Forests. Machine Learning 45, 5–32 (2001)
12. Weka 3: Data Mining Software in Java,
http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka/

168

S. Yang et al.

13. Sastre, G., Gale, J.D.: Zeotsites: A Code for Topological and Crystallographic Tetrahedral
Sites Analysis in Zeolites and Zeotypes. Micorpor. Mesopor. Mater. 43, 27–40 (2001)
14. Yang, S., Blaisten-Barojas, E.: Internal communication to the ICSD
15. Delaunay, B.N.: Sur La Sphere Vide. Bull. Acad. Sci. USSR (in Russian) 7, 793–800
(1934)
16. Medvedev, N.N., Naberukhin, Y.I.: Analysis of Structure of Simple Liquids and Amorphous Solids by Method of Statistical Geometry. Zh. Strukt. Khimii 28, 117–132 (1987)
17. Vaisman, I.I., Brown, F.K., Tropsha, A.: Distance Dependence of Water Structure around
Model Solutes. J. Phys. Chem. 98, 5559–5564 (1994)
18. Vaisman, I.I.: Statistical and Computational Geometry of Biomolecular Structure. In: Gentle, J.E., Härdle, W., Mori, Y. (eds.) Handbook of Computational Statistics, pp. 981–1000.
Springer, New York (2004)
19. Foster, M.D., Rivin, I., Treacy, M.M.J., Friedrichs, O.D.: A Geometric Solution to the
Largest-free-sphere Problem in Zeolite Frameworks. Micropor. Mesopor. Mater. 90, 32–38
(2006)
20. Computational Crystallography Toolbox, http://cctbx.sourceforge.net/
21. Wako, H., Yamato, T.: Novel Method to Detect a Motif of Local Structures in Different
Protein Conformations. Protein Engineering 11, 981–990 (1998)

