Application Benefits of Advanced Equation-Based
Multiphysics Modeling
Lars Langemyr and Nils Malm
COMSOL AB, Tegnérgatan 23, SE-111 40 Stockholm, Sweden
Contact author: Nils Malm, telephone +46 8 412 95 291
nils@comsol.se

Abstract. In just the past few years, the field of mathematical modeling with
equation-based tools has seen a number of advances and innovations that allow
software developers to create programs that are at once far more powerful yet
easier to use. To illustrate the benefits that users gain from the latest features
and capabilities, this paper examines a problem where software that supports
extended multiphysics calculates the applied voltage needed to produce a
predefined thermally induced bending of a microscale device. The package used
in this problem is FEMLAB, an equation-based environment for solving a large
class of systems of coupled partial differential equations.
The software relies on a Galerkin discretization of a weak formulation of the
PDEs using generic shape functions. Arbitrary couplings between equations are
possible, and a correct discrete residual and Jacobian can be obtained for both
linear and nonlinear problems. Therefore, the software can handle tightly
coupled systems using an efficient all-at-once Newton solver or an implicit
time-stepping method.
Linear systems are described by giving coefficient values for a generic PDE
form. More general systems are specified as conservation laws where the user
defines an arbitrary flux vector and source for each equation. In addition, the user
has direct access to the underlying weak form, which adds additional flexibility to
the system. For the less mathematically oriented user, predefined application
templates set up the equations based on physical properties. The resulting equations
can be viewed, modified, and arbitrarily coupled to other physics.
Direct access to the weak form allows fully integrated multidimensional
modeling. Separate equations can be modeled on the boundary of a domain, or
contributions can be added to the main equations. In particular, the weak form
provides for the straightforward implementation of non-standard boundary
conditions and those conditions connecting different types of physics, as is the
case when doing, for example, fluid-structure interaction.
In traditional multiphysics problems, the interaction between fields is local in
space. In addition to such local couplings, FEMLAB supports the use of non-local
variables in any equation. We refer to that capability as extended multiphysics,
and it can be used to model control systems, couple multidimensional models,
couple discrete and semi-analytical models, solve inverse and optimization
problems, and more. Non-local coupling variables can be defined through
arbitrary coordinate mappings, as integrals over selected domains, or as integrals
along a given direction. FEMLAB internally knows the sensitivity of the coupling
variables with respect to the degrees of freedom, and therefore it can accurately
compute the full Jacobian for extended multiphysics model.
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3516, p. 129, 2005.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

