CORBA-Based Open Platform for Processes Monitoring.
An Application to a Complex Electromechanical Process
1

1,2

1

1

Karina Cantillo , Rodolfo E. Haber , Jose E. Jiménez , Ángel Alique , and
3
Ramón Galán
1

Instituto de Automática Industrial – CSIC, Campo Real km 0.200,
Arganda del Rey, Madrid 28500
{cantillo, rhaber, jejc, a.alique}@iai.csic.es
2
Escuela Politécnica Superior. Ciudad Universitaria de Cantoblanco
Ctra. de Colmenar Viejo, km. 15. 28049 - Spain
Rodolfo.Haber@ii.uam.es
3
E.T.S. de Ingenieros Industriales, Universidad Politécnica de Madrid,
c/ José Gutiérrez Abascal Nº2, Madrid 28006.
rgalan@etsii.upm.es

Abstract. The goal of this work is to develop an open software platform called
SYNERGY, supported by portable, low cost and worldwide-accepted
technologies (i.e., Real Time CORBA), focused on networked control systems.
Preliminary results of SYNERGY corroborate the viability for networked
control, supervision and monitoring of complex electromechanical processes
like high speed machining (HSM), on the basis of current communications and
computation technologies upon open architectures.

1 Introduction
During the last decade, successful applications of distributed real time systems have
grown considerably due mainly to the availability of new standards and open
architectures based on distributed objects (e.g., middleware Common Object Request
Broker Architecture CORBA). Indeed, the combination of these technologies with the
current control and supervision techniques based on classical and Artificial
Intelligence paradigms are the foundation for the development of the new generation
of networked control systems (NCS) [1,2,3]. In order to deal with communication
constraints in NCS, has increased the use of CORBA, which is structured in layers,
ORB core, services and the application layer, easing the development of distributed
applications [4].
This paper is organized as follows. The main characteristics of TAO (CORBA
implementation) are shown in section 2. A brief description of HSM process is
presented in section 3. The design and implementation of SYNERGY software
platform and results concerning networked real-time monitoring of HSM process are
presented in Section 4. Finally, some conclusions and remarks are provided.

M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3036, pp. 523–526, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

524

K. Cantillo et al.

2 Background
TAO, The ACE (Adaptive Communication Environment) ORB, unlike the most of
CORBA implementations in market (MT-Orbix, CORBAplus, Visiobroker,
miniCOOL, Orbacus), provides a predictable behaviour. TAO real time ORB core
shares a minimum part of ORB resources, reducing substantially the synchronization
costs and the priority inversion between the process threads. These characteristics are
responsible of a better performance of CORBA applications. Besides, TAO
implement the specification Real-Time CORBA (RT CORBA), to support real-time
distributed requirements, defining mechanisms and policies to control processor,
communication and memory resources [5,6,7].

3 High Speed Machining Process
In High speed machining (HSM), cutting force is considered to be the variable that
best describes the cutting process. This can be used to evaluate the quality and
geometric profile of the cutting surface, the tool wear and the tool breakage [8].
Relevant variables involved in HSM process are: cutting tool position (xp,yp,zp)
mm], spindle speed (s)[rpm], feed speed (f)[mm/min], cutting power ( Pc )[kW], cutting
force (F)[N], radial cutting depth (a)[mm] and cutting-tool diameter (d)[mm].
The laboratory at the CSIC is equipped with a KONDIA HS-1000 HSM centre and
Siemens SINUMERIK840D open computerized numerical control (CNC). The
communication between the CNC and the applications is done by a multiport
interface (MPI). External signals of the sensors and acquisition cards are acquired and
processed using a LABVIEW-based program called SignalAcquisition. The
application NCDDE Server, supplied by Siemens [9], allows to access real time data
in a machining centre.

4 Results
SYNERGY software platform consists in two main parts. A server application called
Monitoring-Server that comprises data acquisition, identification and communication
modules, and a client application called Remote-Monitoring, which includes
communication and control modules. This work is focused on the data acquisition and
the communication modules of the server and client application.
The communication modules were developed based in TAO (i.e., ACE5.3 TAO1.3
version). The TAO services and policies of RT CORBA used are: naming service, RT
ORB, RT POA, RT Current, Priority Mappings, Server_Declared Priority Model,
Server Protocol Policy, Explicit Binding, Private Connections, POA Threadpools.
The communication interface defined is depicted below.
module rtcontrol{
typedef sequence<string> arraydata;
interface monitor{
string request(in short item);

CORBA-Based Open Platform for Processes Monitoring

525

long inidataloop();
void dataloop(in long indini,out long indend,
in short item, out arraydata vcdts);};
interface controller{
typedef sequence<arraydata,6> sample;
void iniobtsample(out long ind);
long obtsample(in long ind,out sample mact);
};};
The acquisition module of Monitoring-Server application enables communications
with the NCDDE Server and SignalAcquisition applications (Figure 1). Data are
stored in a temporal matrix. Remote CORBA Object accesses the data matrix and
recover data.

Fig. 1. Platform for networked control, supervision and monitoring of high speed machining

The developed platform was evaluated under real HSM operations. The condition
of the cutting tool was also considered. The experiments were conducted considering
high and low traffic in network for assessing the effect of the network congestion in
the application performance. For the sake of space, only two cases are shown in
Figure 2. For a case study with high network traffic the mean delay was 10.89e-3
seconds and the variance of 6.897e-5 sec. In presence of low network traffic the mean
delay was 8.8826e-3 sec. and the variance was 2.312e-4 sec.

Fig. 2. Figure 2a show the behaviour of the communication delay (measure in seconds) for high
traffic and 2b for low traffic

526

K. Cantillo et al.

5 Conclusions
An open architecture for measuring variables in a HSM process has been developed.
Additionally, SYNERGY software platform has been designed for networked control,
supervision and monitoring for HSM with the following characteristics:
- Portability, low cost design and easy implementation of the developed software,
including the easiness to incorporate new technologies and control methodologies.
- Superior performance of real time TAO ORB for real time applications, providing
a deterministic and predictable behaviour.

References
1. Hristu, D., Morgansen, K.: Limited Communication Control. Systems & Control Letters,
Elsevier Science B.V. 37 (1999) 193-205
2. Wong, W.S., Brockett, R.W.: Systems with Finite Communication Bandwidth Constraints
II. Stabilization with Limited Information Feedback. IEEE Transactions on Automatic
Control, Vol. 44, 5 (1999) 1049-1053
3. Haber R.E., Alique J.R.: Nonlinear internal model control using neural networks:
Applications to machining processes, Neural Computing and Applications, Springer-Verlag
London Limited, 2004 (DOI 10.1007/s00521-003-0394-8).
4. Sanz, R.: CORBA for Control Systems. IFAC Algorithms and Architectures for Real-Time
Control, AARTC’2000. Palma de Mallorca, Spain (2000)
5. Schmidt, D.C., Levine, D.L., Mungee, S.: The Design of the TAO Real Time Object
Request Broker. Computer Communications, Vol. 21, 4 (1998) 294-324
6. TAO Developer’s Guide, Building a Standard in Performance. Object Computing, Inc.
TAO version 1.2 a, Vol. 1, 2. St. Louis (2002)
7. Schmidt, D.C., Mungee, S., Gaitan, S.F, Gokhale, A.: Software Architectures for Reducing
Priority Inversion and Non-determinism in Real-time Object Request Brokers. Journal of
Real-time Systems, Special issue on Real-time Computing in the Age of the Web and the
Internet Vol. 21, 1-2, (2001) 77-125
8. Haber R.E., Alique A., Alique J.R., Haber-Haber R., Ros S., Current trend and future
developments of new control systems based on fuzzy logic and its application to high speed
machining, Revista Metalurgia Madrid Vol. 38 (2002) 124-133
9. SINUMERIK 840D/810D/FM-NC. User Manual. Edition 09 2000, Siemens

