An Efficient User-Oriented Clustering
of Web Search Results
Keke Cai, Jiajun Bu, and Chun Chen
Deptartment of Computer Science, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, China, 310027
{caikeke, bjj, chenc}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract. As a featured function of search engine, clustering display of search
results has been proved an efficient way to organize the web resource. However, for a given query, clustering results reached by any user are totally identical. In this paper, we explored a user-friendly clustering scheme that automatically learns users’ interests and accordingly generates interest-centric clustering. The basis of this personal clustering is a keyword based topic identifier.
Trained by users’ individual search histories, the identifier provides most of
personal topics. Each topic will be the clustering center of the retrieved pages.
The scheme proposed distinguishes the functionality of clustering from that of
topic identification, which makes the clustering more personal and flexible. To
evaluate the proposed scheme, we experimented with sets of synthetic data. The
experimental results prove it an effective scheme for search results clustering.

1 Introduction
For the overwhelming information on Internet, conventional keyword-based Internet
search usually return hundreds of thousands of retrieved results, most of which are
irrelevant to what enquired. To solve this problem, automatic clustering technique has
been proposed. Its main idea is to group retrieved pages by common topics, which is
usually evaluated by the relevance among pages returned. Some schemes [1], [2]
compare the direct or indirect hyperlinks of pages to gauge their relevance, whereas
others, such as [3], utilize common keywords contained in different pages. These
methods enable effective identification of retrieved results, however most of them
rely particularly on retrieved web pages themselves to cluster. Consequently, for a
given query the clustering results are always static.
Recently, user-oriented personal service has been widely deployed in the domain
of search engine. A clustering scheme called content ignorant was invented [4], [5],
which performs the clustering of queries beforehand for pages clustering to build
upon. Though it provides a dynamic and rapid response for web surfing, its expansibility restrains because it can only establish mappings between queries and URLs that
have already been preprocessed. In this paper, we explore a user-friendly clustering
scheme that automatically learns user’ interests and simultaneously generates interestcentric clustering. Differed from conventional pages clustering schemes, our clustering is designed to make the clustering more individual but not to provide user the
most detailed clustering. The basis of this personal clustering is a keyword-based
topic identifier, which is fully trained by user’s individual search histories. When a
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3516, pp. 806 – 809, 2005.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

An Efficient User-Oriented Clustering of Web Search Results

807

user submits a query to search engine, it will automatically generate a set of topics
with individual characteristics, which will be utilized in later page clustering.

2 Personal Clustering Scheme
The proposed clustering model consists of three basic components: Personal Topic
Identifier, Query Executor and Personal Clustering Generator. Personal topic identifier recognizes personal topics of each user; Query executor processes user’s current
query and returns retrieved web pages; Personal clustering generator constructs the
final clustering display of the retrieved web pages. Among these, personal topic identifier is the kernel. It monitors and records user’s behaviors, and then denotes each
visited page as a weighted keyword vector. It is believed that users’ interests may lead
to frequent visit to web pages of specific topics, which correspondingly causes the
frequent co-occurrence of specific keywords. In this paper, such frequent keyword
sets are regarded as the personal topics.
Equation 1 represents weight computation of term tj to page pi. It is a modification
of TF-IDF weighting scheme [6]. Terms with weight more than system-predefined
threshold will be selected as page-related keywords. Influence factor log(N/ni,j) reflects the frequency of tj in the condition of all web pages. fi,j is the normalized frequency of term tj in web page pi. Parameter α reflect the position of term tj in page pi,
and it is more than 1 if tj appears in the title of pi, otherwise it is 1.
Wi,j =α* fi,j * log(N/ni, j) .

(1)

Considering the number restriction of clusters as well as the requirement of the
minimal overlap among clusters, we modify the CLOSET+ [7] frequency mining
algorithm to finish the process of personal topics identification. To avoid serious
overlap between closed keyword sets, we refine the results set so that if two keyword
sets are similar enough, they are emerged. Equation 2 is the similarity definition between two keywords set ks1 and ks2 by cosine distance.
sim(ks1, ks2) = ks1· ks2 / || ks1|| || ks2|| .

(2)

Based on the identified clustering topics as well as the retrieved query results, the
finial clustering can be easily realized through our defined keywords-based cluster
identifier. For a flat set of clustering C = {C1…Cn}, it consists of a set of rules fi → Ci,
i = 1…n. fi is a frequent keyword set, which represents the corresponding topic information of Ci. A web page p is considered belonging to the Ci, if p matches the rule of
fi → Ci Function ovp() in equation 3 measures the match degree between pages and
clusters, and the domain of its value ranges between 0 and 1. kp represents the keyword vector of page p. We cluster p to Ci if their overlap is no less than the predefined threshold minSim. It is possible that some retrieved cannot be mapped to any
cluster. In our paper, all these pages will be assigned to a separated cluster.
ovp(p, Ci) = |kp ∩ fi| / | fi | .

(3)

Table 1 shows the personal precision of three kinds of queries under personal clustering (PC) and normal clustering (NC). For clustering PC and NC, their personal

808

K. Cai, J. Bu, and C. Chen

precision Personal is defined as a cosine distance against MC, which is another clustering results obtained through manual definition. As show in Table 1, our personal
clustering method presents satisfactory adaptability in various queries, and its personal precision averagely reach about 83 percent. It shows that this clustering method
can perfectly capture any topic information mostly concerned by user, and accordingly form a set of user-topic related clusters.

Personal ( AC ) =

1
MC

∑ max ACi (sim(MC j , ACi )) .

(4)

ACi ∈AC

Table 1. Personal precision comparisons

Data
Source

Pages
Number

Clusters Number

Q1

99

MC
4

PC
3

NC
8

Personal Precision
(percent)
PC
NC
89.2
57.8

Q2
Q3

465
1220

6
9

8
7

16
27

82.1
79.8

Fig. 2. Internal similarity of clusters

internalSim =

1
C

34.8
10.5

Fig. 3. External dissimilarity of clusters

∑

Ci ∈C

1
Ci

∑ sim( x, y ) .

x∈Ci
y∈Ci

(5)

Fig. 2 and 3 show the quality of our clustering as client’ query become more and
more concentrated on some special topics. Internal similarity internalSim represents
inner cohesiveness of each cluster, and external dissimilarity dep describes the independence of different clusters. The definition of dep is built upon the overlap of different clusters [8]. Given a page p clustered to Ci, we define Op as the number of its
occurrence in other clusters.
As shown in Fig. 2, the form of user query topics directly decides the clustering
accuracy. With the gradual enrichment of user query topics information, the clustering

An Efficient User-Oriented Clustering of Web Search Results

809

becomes more and more accurate. Fig. 3 shows that this clustering can dynamically
adapt user query, and capture any personal topics well and truly.
dep(C ) =

1
C

∑

Ci ∈C

1
Ci

∑ (O p − 1) .

p∈Ci

(6)

3 Conclusions
This paper presents an efficient means for the personal clustering of retrieved web
pages by learning users’ interests with respect to their query histories, and further
using this information to realize a meaningful clustering. With the enrichment of user
history records, the clustering will pick and return even more accurate results.

References
1. Hou, J. and Zhang, Y., Utilizing Hyperlink Transitivity to Improve Web Page Clustering.
Proceedings of the Fourteenth Australasian Database Conference. Adelaide, Australia
(2003) 49-57
2. D. S. Modha and W. S. Spangler, Clustering hypertext with applications to web searching.
In Proceedings of the 11th ACM Conference on Hypertext and Hypermedia. San Antonio,
TX (2000) 143-152
3. Zhang Dong, Towards Web Information Clustering. PhD thesis. Southeast University, Nanjing, China (2002)
4. D. Beeferman and A. Berger, Agglomerative clustering of a search engine query log. In
Proceedings of the Sixth ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. Boston, MA (2000) 407-416
5. Mark Hansen, Elizabeth Shriver, Using navigation Data to Improve IR functions in the Context of Web Search. CIKM. (2001) 135-142
6. Ricardo Baeza-Yates, Berthier Ribeiro-Neto, Modern information retrieval. ACM Press.
(1999)
7. J. Wang, J. Han, and J. Pei, CLOSET+:Searching for the Best Strategies for Mining Frequent Closed Itemsets. In Proc. 2003 ACM SIGKDD. Int. Conf. on Knowledge Discovery
and Data Mining (KDD'03). Washington, D.C (2003)
8. F. Beil, M. Ester, and X. Xu., Frequent term-based text clustering. In Proc 8th Int. Conf. on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining KDD. (2002)

