The New Computational and Data Sciences
Undergraduate Program at George Mason
University
Kirk Borne, John Wallin, and Robert Weigel
Computational and Data Sciences, George Mason University,
Fairfax, VA 22030, USA

Abstract. We describe the new undergraduate science degree program
in Computational and Data Sciences (CDS) at George Mason University (Mason), which began oﬀering courses for both major (B.S.) and
minor degrees in Spring 2008. The overarching theme and goal of the
program are to train the next-generation scientists in the tools and techniques of cyber-enabled science (e-Science) to prepare them to confront
the emerging petascale challenges of data-intensive science. The Mason
CDS program has a signiﬁcantly stronger focus on data-oriented approaches to science than do most computational science and engineering
programs. The program has been designed speciﬁcally to focus both on
simulation (Computational Science) and on data-intensive applications
(Data Science). New courses include Introduction to Computational &
Data Sciences, Scientiﬁc Data and Databases, Scientiﬁc Data & Information Visualization, Scientiﬁc Data Mining, and Scientiﬁc Modeling &
Simulation. This is an interdisciplinary science program, drawing examples, classroom materials, and student activities from a broad range of
physical and biological sciences. We will describe some of the motivations and early results from the program1 . More information is available
at http://cds.gmu.edu/.

1

Data-Intensive Science: A New Vision for Science
Education

The development of models to describe and understand scientiﬁc phenomena has
historically proceeded at a pace driven by new data. The more we know, the more
we are driven to tweak or to revolutionize our models, thereby advancing our
scientiﬁc understanding. This data-driven modeling and discovery linkage has
entered a new paradigm [1]. The acquisition of scientiﬁc data in all disciplines
is now accelerating and causing a nearly insurmountable data avalanche [2]. In
astronomy in particular, rapid advances in three technology areas (telescopes,
detectors, and computation) have continued unabated [3] – all of these advances
1

The development of the Mason Computational and Data Sciences undergraduate
program is sponsored by the NSF CCLI (Course, Curriculum, and Laboratory Improvement) program, through award # 0737091.

G. Allen et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2009, Part II, LNCS 5545, pp. 74–83, 2009.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

The New Computational and Data Sciences Undergraduate Program

75

lead to more and more data [4]. With this accelerated advance in data generation capabilities over the coming years, we will require an increasingly skilled
workforce in the areas of computational and data sciences in order to confront
these challenges. Such skills are more critical than ever since modern science,
which has always been data-driven, will become even more data-intensive in the
coming decade [4,5]. Increasingly sophisticated computational and data science
approaches will be required to discover the wealth of new scientiﬁc knowledge
hidden within these new massive scientiﬁc data collections [6,7].
We live in an information age in which we are inundated with facts, tending
toward information overload. Though the data glut problem is not limited to
science, science is ﬁrst and foremost a forensic discipline – we gather evidence,
ﬁrst to develop a hypothesis, then to test our hypothesis, and ﬁnally to vindicate
or else to invalidate the hypothesis, at which point we gather more evidence, and
the process continues. We must educate the next generation scientists, if not all
citizens, in the principles of evidence-based reasoning, fact-based induction, and
data-oriented science. In particular, we must muster educational resources to
train a skilled data-savvy workforce: one that knows how to ﬁnd facts (i.e., data,
or evidence), access them, assess them, organize them, synthesize them, look at
them critically, mine them, and analyze them.

2

Background and Motivation

The growth of data volumes in nearly all scientiﬁc disciplines, business sectors,
and federal agencies is reaching epidemic proportions. This epidemic is characterized roughly by a doubling of data each year. It has been said that “while data
doubles every year, useful information seems to be decreasing” [8], and “there is
a growing gap between the generation of data and our understanding of it” [9].
In an information society with an increasingly knowledge-based economy, it is
imperative that the workforce of today and especially tomorrow be equipped to
understand data. This understanding includes knowing how to access, retrieve,
interpret, analyze, mine, and integrate data from disparate sources. This is emphatically true in the sciences. The nature of scientiﬁc instrumentation, which is
becoming more microprocessor-based, is that the scale of data-capturing capabilities grows at least as fast as the underlying computational-based measurement
system[10]. For example, in astronomy, the fast growth in CCD detector size
and sensitivity has seen the average size of a typical large astronomy sky survey
project grow from hundreds of gigabytes 10 years ago (e.g., the MACHO survey), to tens of terabytes today (e.g., 2MASS2 and Sloan Digital Sky Survey3
[3], up to a projected size of tens of petabytes 10 years from now (e.g., LSST,
the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope4 [4]). LSST will produce one 56K x 56K
(3-Gigapixel) image of the sky every 20 seconds, generating nearly 30 TB of
2
3
4

http://www.ipac.caltech.edu/2mass/
http://www.sdss.org
http://www.lsst.org

76

K. Borne, J. Wallin, and R. Weigel

data daily for 10 years. In the ﬁeld of Space Weather and Solar Physics, NASA
announced in 2008 a science data center speciﬁcally for the SDO (Solar Dynamics Observatory). The SDO will obtain one 4K x 4K solar image every 10
seconds, generating 1 TB of data per day. NASA recognizes that previous approaches to scientiﬁc data management, analysis, and mining will simply not
work. Consequently, we see the ﬂoodgates of data opening wide in astronomy,
high-energy physics, bioinformatics, numerical simulation research, geosciences,
climate monitoring and modeling, and more. Outside of the sciences, it is widely
documented that the data ﬂood is in full force in banking, healthcare, homeland
security, drug discovery, medical research, insurance, and (as we all have seen)
e-mail. The application of data mining, knowledge discovery, text mining, and
e-discovery tools to these growing data repositories is essential to the success of
agencies, economies, and scientiﬁc disciplines.
2.1

Data Sciences: A National Imperative

The article “Agencies Join Forces to Share Data” calls for more training in data
skills [11]. This article describes a new Interagency Working Group on Digital
Data, representing 22 federal agencies in the U.S., including the NSF, NASA,
DOE, and more. The group plans to set up a robust public infrastructure so that
all researchers have a permanent home for their data. One option is to create
a national network of online data repositories, funded by the government and
staﬀed by dedicated computing and archiving professionals. Who are these computing and archiving professionals? We believe that this professional workforce
must be trained in the disciplines of computational and data sciences. We are
addressing this societal need through the new CDS curriculum in the Mason
Department of Computational and Data Sciences (CDS).
Within the scientiﬁc domain, Data Sciences is becoming a recognized academic discipline. In a recent Data Sciences Journal article [12], it is argued that
now is the time for Data Sciences curricula. In another article [13], Data Science is again promoted as a rigorous academic discipline. Further, there was a
2007 NSF-cosponsored workshop on Data Repositories, which included a track
on data-centric scholarship, where they explicitly state what we now believe:
“Data-driven science is becoming a new scientiﬁc paradigm – ranking with theory, experimentation, and computational science” [14]. Another Data Sciences
Journal article states: “Without proper management of continuously-produced
important data and without the productivity of new disciplines based on data, we
cannot solve important problems of the world” [15]. An excellent article recently
described Informatics, the new paradigm of data-intensive science, as “the use of
digital data, information, and related services for research and knowledge generation” [16]. Consequently, many scientiﬁc disciplines are developing subdisciplines
that are information-rich and data-based, to such an extent that these are now
becoming (or have already become) recognized stand-alone research disciplines
and academic programs on their own merits. The latter include bioinformatics
and geo-informatics, but will soon include astroinformatics, e-Science, medical
informatics, and data science. Several national study groups have issued reports

The New Computational and Data Sciences Undergraduate Program

77

on the urgency of establishing scientiﬁc and educational programs to face the
data ﬂood challenges:
1. National Academy of Sciences report: “Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access
to Scientiﬁc Data” (1997) [17];
2. NSF report on “Knowledge Lost in Information: Report of the NSF Workshop on Research Directions for Digital Libraries” (2003) [18];
3. NSB (National Science Board) report on “Long-lived Digital Data Collections: Enabling Research and Education in the 21st Century” (2005);
4. NSF “Atkins Report” on “Revolutionizing Science and Engineering Through
Cyberinfrastructure: Report of the National Science Foundation Blue-Ribbon
Advisory Panel on Cyberinfrastructure” (2005) [19];
5. NSF-sponsored report with the Computing Research Association on “Cyberinfrastructure for Education and Learning for the Future: A Vision and
Research Agenda” (2005);
6. NSF report on “Cyberinfrastructure Vision for 21st Century Discovery”
(2007) [20];
7. JISC/NSF Workshop on Data-Driven Science & Repositories (2007) [14].
Each of these reports issues a call to action in response to the data avalanche in
science, engineering, and the global scholarly environment. For example, the NAS
“Bits of Power” report lists 5 major recommendations, one of which includes:
“Improve science education in the area of scientiﬁc data management” [17].
More recently, the Atkins Report stated that skills in digital libraries, metadata
standards, digital classiﬁcation, and data mining are critical [19].

3

Computational and Data Sciences at Mason: CUPIDS

The new Computational & Data Sciences curriculum at Mason uniquely responds to the recommendations of these national studies and reports. The urgent need for such a curriculum cannot be overstated, as the Atkins Report has
said: “The importance of data in science and engineering continues on a path of
exponential growth; some even assert that the leading science driver of high-end
computing will soon be data rather than processing cycles. Thus it is crucial
to provide major new resources for handling and understanding data” [19]. The
core and most basic resource is the human expert, trained in key data science
skills. As stated in the 2003 NSF “Knowledge Lost in Information” report, human cognition and human capabilities are fundamental to successful leveraging
of cyberinfrastructure, digital libraries, and national data resources [18].
CUPIDS5 is the NSF-supported “Curriculum for an Undergraduate Program
in Data Sciences” at Mason in the CDS Department. The central goal for the
CUPIDS project is to increase student’s understanding of the role that data
plays across the sciences as well as to increase the student’s ability to use the
technologies associated with data acquisition, mining, analysis, and visualization.
We have ﬁve objectives for this project:
5

Funded through NSF Award # 0737091.

78

K. Borne, J. Wallin, and R. Weigel

1. To teach students what Data Science is and how it is changing the way
science is being done across the disciplines
2. To change student’s attitudes about and improve their conﬁdence in using
computers to address scientiﬁc data problems
3. To increase student’s abilities to use visualization for generating and addressing scientiﬁc questions
4. To increase student’s abilities to use databases for scientiﬁc inquiry
5. To increase student’s abilities to acquire, process, and explore experimental
data with the use of a computer
As evident from this list, the goals of the CUPIDS project are focused primarily
on the Data Sciences, which are a subset of the educational goals and programs
within CDS. We describe several aspects of these programs below.
3.1

The CDS Degree Program and Curriculum

Students are required to complete a total of 18 credits (6 core courses) in computational and data sciences (CDS), 15 credits in computer science, 23 credits
in mathematics, 6 credits in statistics, 21-25 credits in a science concentration,
and 3-9 credits in CDS electives. Three concentration areas are currently oﬀered:
Physics, Chemistry, and Biology. Additional concentrations may be added to the
program in the future (perhaps astronomy, materials science, and geosciences).
For a given concentration, the 21-25 credits that a student must take in that
science discipline include the core courses that are required for majors matriculating in those programs. As much as possible, the core CDS courses include
scientiﬁc examples and applications from all of the science concentrations. Of
course, this implies a certain degree of heterogeneity in the scientiﬁc knowledge
of the students who come from diﬀerent ﬁelds. Consequently, the primary focus
of the CDS courses are on the techniques of computational and data sciences,
and not on the speciﬁc experimental and theoretical bases of the various science
disciplines. As part of their education, students are encouraged to undertake
an optional research project that allows them to gain useful experience in the
development of simulations and other aspects of computational science. To facilitate this interdisciplinary science environment, the CDS faculty have degrees
in the science disciplines (including Astronomy & Astrophysics, Space Weather,
Physics, Computational Fluids, Materials Science, Computational Chemistry,
Computational Statistics, Applied Mathematics, and more) and many of the
faculty have aﬃliations (or joint appointments) within those other departments.
The six required computational and data sciences core courses are:
1. CDS 101 Introduction to Computational & Data Sciences - Introduces the
use of computers in scientiﬁc discovery via simulations and data analysis.
2. CDS 301 Scientific Information and Data Visualization - The techniques
and software used to visualize scientiﬁc simulations, complex information,
and data visualization for knowledge discovery.
3. CDS 302 Scientific Data and Databases - Data and databases used by scientists, including data types, database queries, and distributed data systems.

The New Computational and Data Sciences Undergraduate Program

79

4. CDS 401 Scientific Data Mining - Data mining techniques from statistics,
machine learning, and visualization applied to scientiﬁc knowledge discovery.
5. CDS 410 Modeling and Simulations I - Numerical diﬀerentiation and integration, initial-value and boundary-value problems for ordinary diﬀerential equations, methods of solution of partial diﬀerential equations, iterative
methods of solution of nonlinear systems, and approximation theory.
6. CDS 411 Modeling and Simulation II - The application of modeling and simulation methods to various scientiﬁc applications, including ﬂuid dynamics,
solid mechanics, materials science, molecular mechanics, and astrophysics.
We describe below two of the core courses in more detail and we enumerate the
desirable skills that we expect for students who complete the program of study.
3.2

Course: Introduction to Computational and Data Sciences

This course provides an interdisciplinary introduction to the tools, techniques,
methods, and cutting edge results from across the Computational and Data Sciences. Students are shown how computational tools are fundamentally changing
our approach in the experimental, observational, and theoretical sciences through
the use of data and modeling systems. No mathematical background is assumed,
other than high school algebra. Qualitative results are emphasized, to show the
problems and challenges facing researchers today. Examples are drawn from both
the “real world” familiar to students and also from the frontiers of science where
these techniques are being used to solve complex problems.
Upon completion of the course, students should be able to:
1. Describe how data are represented within a computer, from binary numbers
to arrays and databases.
2. Explain how scientiﬁc data are acquired, processed, stored, reduced, and
analyzed using computers.
3. Express how we create knowledge from data and information using visualization and data mining.
4. Create eﬀective ways to visualize simple data sets.
5. Conduct and explain simple simulations of complex phenomena.
6. Express how changing computing technologies further scientiﬁc research, and
how the technological and scientiﬁc progress are tied together.
Lecture topics in the course include: the scientiﬁc method; computer internals
(binary numbers and logic circuits); computer algorithms and tools (Matlab introduction); data acquisition; signal processing (understanding noise and error);
scientiﬁc databases; data reduction and analysis; data mining; computer modeling; numerical simulations; visualization; high-performance computing; and future directions in computational science.
3.3

Course: Scientific Data Mining

This course provides a broad overview of the knowledge discovery (data mining) process, as applied to scientiﬁc research. Data mining is the search for

80

K. Borne, J. Wallin, and R. Weigel

hidden meaningful patterns in large databases (e.g., find the one gene sequence
in a large genome DNA database that always associates with a specific cancer).
These patterns and relationships are often expressed as rules (e.g., if a blue starlike object is found next to a faint unusual-shaped galaxy in a large astronomy
database, then the blue object might be a distant quasar whose outburst in being
triggered by a collision with that galaxy). Consequently, data mining is sometimes
referred to as the process of converting information from a database format into
a knowledge-based rule format. Identifying these patterns and rules from enormous data repositories can provide signiﬁcant competitive advantage to scientiﬁc
research projects and in other career settings.
Data mining is motivated and analyzed in this course as the “killer app” for
large scientiﬁc databases (i.e., a key enabler of scientiﬁc discovery). Data mining
techniques, algorithms, and applications are covered, as well as the key concepts
of machine learning, data types, noise handling, feature selection, data transformation, and similarity/distance metrics. Techniques are analyzed speciﬁcally in
terms of their application to scientiﬁc research problems. Several scientiﬁc case
studies are drawn from the science research literature, including astronomy, space
weather, geosciences, climatology, bioinformatics, numerical simulation research,
drug discovery, health informatics, combinatorial chemistry, digital libraries, and
virtual observatories. Prerequisites for this course include the undergraduate Scientiﬁc Data and Databases course and mathematics/statistics courses.
Upon completion of the course, students should be able to:
1. Express the role of data mining within scientiﬁc knowledge discovery.
2. Express the most well known data mining algorithms and correctly use data
mining terminology.
3. Express the application of statistics, similarity measures, and indexing to
data mining tasks.
4. Identify appropriate techniques for classiﬁcation and clustering applications.
5. Determine approaches used for mining large scientiﬁc databases (e.g., genomics, virtual observatories).
6. Recognize techniques used for spatial and temporal data mining applications.
7. Express the steps in a data mining project (e.g., cleaning, transforming,
indexing, mining, analysis).
8. Analyze classic examples of data mining and their techniques.
9. Eﬀectively prepare data for mining and use data mining software packages.
Lecture topics in the course include: scientiﬁc motivation for data mining; quantitative and statistical concepts; software packages; data preparation (previewing,
cleaning dirty data, normalization, transformation); distance and similarity metrics for clustering and classiﬁcation; supervised learning methods; unsupervised
learning methods; scientiﬁc data mining case studies; and special topics (time
series, image mining, spatial data, and outlier/event/anomaly detection).
3.4

Results from the Program and Future Work

Early results from the program include the following: (a) the B.S. (CDS major)
was approved in 2007; (b) the minor was approved in 2008; (c) the ﬁrst courses

The New Computational and Data Sciences Undergraduate Program

81

(CDS 101 and 302) were oﬀered in Spring 2008; (d) additional courses (CDS 301
and 401) were oﬀered in Fall 2008; (e) ∼10 students are currently majoring in
the program; and (f) one new course has been approved and will be oﬀered in
the coming year: CDS 151 Data Ethics in an Information Society.
We have identiﬁed a need for additional courses in order to retain students in
the program. The initial selection of core courses includes only one course before
the Junior year: CDS 101. This was not a problem with the ﬁrst wave of students majoring in the program, all of whom were Junior-level transfer students.
To address the retention problem for the newest students, we are developing additional courses, which may include courses in computational tools for scientists
and discipline-speciﬁc topics. We have received a small “pedagogy” grant from
the Mason College of Science to develop a new Gen Ed course for science majors:
CDS 120 Computational and Data Tools for Scientists. This course will employ
novel student-led peer instruction approaches, to enable the course to scale to
large numbers of students. The goal is to make this course the default computational tools course for all science majors at Mason. At present, these students
take a computer languages course from the I.T. school, which does not have a
science focus nor does it include scientiﬁc applications. CDS 120 will cover presentation tools (Powerpoint, HTML), analysis tools (spreadsheets), databases,
search methods, basic programming in Matlab, overview of data acquisition and
signal processing, and numerical simulations (veriﬁcation and validation).
In the area of discipline-speciﬁc courses, we are considering developing a basic
course in tools for computational biology and bioinformatics, to meet the speciﬁc
needs of students in Biology. Though this course is biology-speciﬁc, it is consistent with another discipline-speciﬁc course that is now under review: “Materials
Science with Applications to Renewable Energy.” We are also discussing with the
Mason Physics & Astronomy department a concept for developing a course in
Astroinformatics. In these cases, we are drawing upon the considerable expertise
of the CDS faculty in speciﬁc science areas to develop and to oﬀer computational
and data science courses for majors in those scientiﬁc disciplines. Such courses
would not be required for all CDS majors, but they will be appropriate electives
for CDS students in the corresponding science concentration.
3.5

Similar Programs at Other Universities

We are aware of a few similar programs at other universities. In nearly all of these
cases, the focus is either on (i) computational science (with little attention to data
sciences), (ii) data sciences (generically, not within the context of teaching science), or (iii) data sciences within the context of a single speciﬁc science. Type (i)
progams include the CACR (Center for Advanced Computation and Research)
at Caltech (who do have a strong connection with Astronomy and therefore are
moving toward a focus on cyber-enabled data sciences), and many other computational science programs (e.g., LSU’s CCT, U. Texas’ TACC). Type (ii) programs
include the Discovery Informatics program at the College of Charleston. Type (iii)
programs include the POCA (Partnership in Observational and Computational
Astronomy) at SCSU and Clemson University, Purdue’s Discovery Informatics

82

K. Borne, J. Wallin, and R. Weigel

program, the emerging joint programs between CS and astronomy departments
at Notre Dame, and similarly at U. Michigan. Beyond these are the science
programs in data sciences, including Cornell’s new DISCOVER data-driven science program6 (with a focus on astronomy plus other disciplines) and the new
e-Science Institute at U. Washington7 (focusing on oceanography, environmental
sciences, and astronomy) – these two programs appear to be most similar to the
Mason CDS program.

4

Conclusions and Summary Remarks

Computational and Data Sciences are emerging ﬁelds involving applications of
sophisticated simulation and data-oriented methods to build models and solve
problems in science and engineering. Recently emerged interdisciplinary areas
in the chemical, physical and biological sciences (such as biotechnology, nanotechnology, molecular electronics, photonics in nanoscale systems, and energetics of DNA/protein binding) require highly-qualiﬁed professionals with strong
computational skills to work closely with experimentalists in solving complex
scientiﬁc and engineering problems. Emerging data-intensive science ﬁelds (such
as Geoinformatics, Bioinformatics, Astroinformatics, and Materials Informatics)
require specially trained professionals with strong data skills to address ubiquitous data-intensive applications in science, industry, and government. Computational and data sciences complement existing theoretical and experimental
science approaches and may be thought of as a new mode of scientiﬁc inquiry.
The new CDS undergraduate science program at Mason complements the
existing graduate program in Computational Science & Informatics (CSI), which
has existed since 1992, having graduated 175 PhDs to-date. There are over 90
graduate courses in the Mason CSI program, covering many science disciplines.
In conclusion, we summarize the key features of the CDS program:
– Who? – Students with a broad interest in computers and sciences will beneﬁt
from the program.
– Why? – Students graduating with a traditional discipline-based bachelors
degree in biology, chemistry, or physics generally do not have the required
computational background necessary to participate as productive members
of modern interdisciplinary scientiﬁc research teams, which are becoming
increasingly computational- and data-intensive. The motivating theme and
goal of the CDS program are to train the next-generation scientists in the
tools and techniques of cyber-enabled science (e-Science) to prepare them to
confront the emerging petascale challenges of data-intensive science.
– What? – The BS program in CDS provides science students with a variety of
opportunities to become research professionals possessing interdisciplinary
knowledge, including sciences and applied mathematics, augmented with
strong computational and data-oriented skills. This program has a significantly stronger focus on data-oriented approaches to science than do most
6
7

http://arecibo.tc.cornell.edu/DRSG/Links.aspx
http://escience.washington.edu/

The New Computational and Data Sciences Undergraduate Program

83

Computational Science and Engineering (CSE) programs. Graduates from
this program will acquire interdisciplinary knowledge and will be able to
apply scientiﬁc principles in solving complex real-world problems.
– How? – Students in this program are exposed to a wide range of computational and data science applications, and will learn computational science
tools, high-performance computing, applied and theoretical computational
techniques, modeling and simulation, statistical analysis, optimization, data
& information visualization, scientiﬁc database applications, scientiﬁc data
mining & knowledge discovery in databases (KDD), and data-intensive science research methods. The CDS program has been designed speciﬁcally
to focus both on simulation (Computational Science) and on data-intensive
applications (Data Science) within an interdisciplinary science environment.

References
1. Mahootian, F., Eastman, T.: Complementary Frameworks of Scientiﬁc Inquiry.
World Futures journal (2009) (in press)
2. Bell, G., Gray, J., Szalay, A.: arxiv.org/abs/cs/0701165 (2005)
3. Gray, J., Szalay, A.: Microsoft technical report MSR-TR-2004-110 (2004)
4. Becla, J., et al.: arxiv.org/abs/cs/0604112 (2006)
5. Szalay, A.S., Gray, J., VandenBerg, J.: arxiv.org/abs/cs/0208013 (2002)
6. Gray, J., et al.: arxiv.org/abs/cs/0202014 (2002)
7. Borne, K.D.: Data-Driven Discovery through e-Science Technologies. In: 2nd IEEE
Conference on Space Mission Challenges for Information Technology (2006)
8. Dunham, M.: Data Mining Introductory and Advanced Topics. Prentice-Hall, New
Jersey (2002)
9. Witten, I., Frank, E.: Data Mining: Practical Machine Learning Tools and Techniques. Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco (2005)
10. Gray, J., et al.: Scientiﬁc Data Management in the Coming Decade,
arxiv.org/abs/cs/0502008 (2005)
11. Butler, D.: Agencies Join Forces to Share Data. Nature 446, 354 (2007)
12. Smith, F.: Data Science as an Academic Discipline. Data Science Journal 5, 163
(2006)
13. Cleveland, W.S.: Data Science: an Action Plan for Expanding the Technical Areas
of the Field of Statistics. International Statistics Review 69, 21 (2007)
14. NSF/JISC Repositories Workshop (2007),
http://www.sis.pitt.edu/~ repwkshop/
15. Iwata, S.: Scientiﬁc “Agenda” of Data Science. Data Science Journal 7, 54 (2008)
16. Baker, D.N.: Informatics and the 2007-2008 Electronic Geophysical Year. EOS 89,
485 (2008)
17. Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientiﬁc Data,
http://www.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id=5504
18. Knowledge Lost in Information: Report of the NSF Workshop on Research Directions for Digital Libraries, http://www.sis.pitt.edu/~ dlwkshop/report.pdf
19. Report of the NSF Blue-Ribbon Advisory Panel on Cyberinfrastructure,
http://www.nsf.gov/od/oci/reports/atkins.pdf
20. Cyberinfrastructure Vision for 21st Century Discovery,
http://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2007/nsf0728/index.jsp

