On Monte Carlo Simulation for the HJM Model
Based on Jump
Kisoeb Park1 , Moonseong Kim2 , and Seki Kim1,
1

2

Department of Mathematics, Sungkyunkwan University
440-746, Suwon, Korea
Tel.: +82-31-290-7030, 7034
{kisoeb, skim}@skku.edu
School of Information and Communication Engineering
Sungkyunkwan University
440-746, Suwon, Korea
Tel.: +82-31-290-7226
moonseong@ece.skku.ac.kr

Abstract. We derive a form of the HJM model based on jump. Heath,
Jarrow, and Morton(HJM) model is widely accepted as the most general
methodology for term structure of interest rate models. We represent the
HJM model with jump and give the analytic proof for the HJM model
with jump. We perform the Monte Carlo simulation with several scenarios to achieve highly precise estimates with the brute force method in
terms of mean standard error which is one measure of the sharpness of the
point estimates. We have shown that bond prices in HJM jump-diﬀusion
version models of the extended Vasicek and CIR models obtained by
Monte Carlo simulation correspond with the closed form values.

1

Introduction

Approaches to modeling the term structure of interest rates in continuous time
may be broadly described in terms of either the equilibrium approach or the
no-arbitrage approach even though some early models include concepts from
both approaches. The no-arbitrage approach starts with assumptions about the
stochastic evolution of one or more underlying factors, usually interest rate. Bond
prices are assumed to be functions of the these driving stochastic processes.
Heath, Jarrow and Morton (HJM)[4] is widely accepted as the most general
methodology for term structure of interest rate models. The major contribution
of the HJM model [4], as it allows the model to be no-arbitrage, a major improvement over the Ho and Lee[5] and other similar models. We will represent the HJM
model with jump. In pricing and hedging with ﬁnancial derivatives, jump models are particularly important, since ignoring jumps in ﬁnancial prices will cause
pricing and hedging rates. Term structure model solutions under HJM model
with jump is justiﬁed because movements in forward rates display both continuous and discontinuous behavior. These jumps are caused by several market
Corresponding author.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part I, LNCS 3991, pp. 38–45, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

On Monte Carlo Simulation for the HJM Model Based on Jump

39

phenomena money market interventions by the Fed, news surprise, and shocks in
the foreign exchange markets, and so on. The HJM model with jump uses as the
driving stochastic dynamic variable forward rates whose evolution is dependent
on a speciﬁed volatility function. The most models of forward rates evolution in
the HJM framework result in non-Markovian models of the short term interest
rate evolution. This model depend on the entire history of forward rates. Therefore, this model is diﬃcult of the actual proof analysis of the HJM model with
jump. In this study, we got achieved to make the actual proof analysis of the
HJM model with jump easy. The HJM model with volatility function was studied by Hull and White, Carverhill, Ritchken and Sankarasubramanian (RS)[9],
Inui and Kijima, and Bhar and Chiarella in their attempt to obtain Markovian
transformation of the HJM model. We examines the one-factor HJM model with
jump which we use restrictive condition of RS.
We investigate the restrictive condition of RS. In addition, we introduce the
Monte Carlo simulation. One of the many uses of Monte Carlo simulation by
ﬁnancial engineers is to place a value on ﬁnancial derivatives. Interest in use of
Monte Carlo simulation for bond pricing is increasing because of the ﬂexibility
of the methods in handling complex ﬁnancial institutions. One measure of the
sharpness of the point estimate of the mean is Mean Standard Error. Numerical
methods that are known as Monte Carlo methods can be loosely described as
statistical simulation methods, where statistical simulation is deﬁned in quite
general terms to be any method that utilizes sequences of random numbers to
perform the simulation.
The structure of the remainder of this paper is as follows. In the section 2, the
HJM model with jump are introduced. In the section 3, we calculate numerical
solutions using Monte Carlo simulation for the HJM model with jump. In the
section 4, we investigate the HJM model with the jump version of the extended
Vasicek and CIR models. This paper is ﬁnally concluded in section 5.

2

Heath-Jarrow-Merton(HJM) Model with Jump

The HJM consider forward rates rather than bond prices as their basic building
blocks. Although their model is not explicitly derived in an equilibrium model,
the HJM model is a model that explains the whole term structure dynamics
in a no-arbitrage model in the spirit of Harrison and Kreps[6], and it is fully
compatible with an equilibrium model. If there is one jump during the period
[t, t + dt] then dπ(t) = 1, and dπ(t) = 0 represents no jump during that period.
We will ignore taxes and transaction costs. We denote by V (r, r, T ) the price
at time t of a discount bond. It follows immediately that V (r, T, T ) = 1. We
consider the multi-factor HJM model with jump of term structure of interest
rate is the stochastic diﬀerential equation(SDE) for forward rate
n

df (t, T ) = μf (t, T )dt +

n

σfi (t, T )dWi (t) +
i=1

Ji dπi (t)
i=1

(1)

40

K. Park, M. Kim, and S. Kim

where, μf (t, T ) represents drift function; σ 2 fi (t, T ) is volatility coeﬃcients; Ji
is the magnitude of a jump with Ji ∼ N (θ, δ 2 ); in this stochastic process n
independent Wiener processes and Poisson processes determine the stochastic
ﬂuctuation of the entire forward rate curve starting from a ﬁxed initial curve.
The main contribution of the HJM model is the parameters μf (t, T ) and
σfi (t, T ) cannot be freely speciﬁed; drift of forward rates under the risk-neutral
probability are entirely determined by their volatility and by the market price
of risk. We introduce the no-arbitrage condition as follows:
n

μf (t, T ) = −

T

σfi (t, T )(λi (t) −

σfi (t, s)ds)

(2)

t

i=1

where, λi (t) represents the instantaneous market price of risk and that is independent of the maturity T . Furthermore, by an application of Girsanov’s theorem
the dependence on the market price of interest rate risk can be absorbed into an
equivalent martingale measure. Thus, the Wiener processes is
dW Q
i (t) = dW i (t) + λi (t)ds
We consider the one-factor HJM model with jump of the term structure of interest rate(that is, n = 1). Substituting the above the equation into no-arbitrage
condition(3), we represent the stochastic integral equation the following:
t

f (t, T ) − f (0, T ) =

T

σf (u, T )

σf (t, s)dsdu
t

0

π(t)

t

σf (s, T )dW Q (s) +

+
0

Jj

(3)

j=1

where, dW Q
i is the Wiener process generated by an equivalent martingale measure Q. The spot rate r(t) = f (t, t) is obtained by setting T = t in the equation
(5), so that
t

π(t)

t

σf (s, T )dW Q (s) +

μf (s, T )ds +

r(t) = f (0, t) +
0

0

Jj

(4)

j=1

T

where, μf (t, T ) = σf (t, T ) t σf (t, s)ds, and dW Q (t) is a standard Wiener
process generated by the risk-neutral measure Q. Under the corresponding riskneutral measure Q, the explicit dependence on the market price of risk can be
suppressed, and we obtain the diﬀerential form of (3) is given by
df (t, T ) = μf (t, T )dt + σf (t, T )dW Q (t) + Jdπ.

(5)

We know that the zero coupon bond prices are contained in the forward
rate informations, as bond prices can be written down by integrating over the
forward rate between t and T in terms of the risk-neutral process
T

V (t, T ) = exp −

f (t, s)ds .
t

(6)

On Monte Carlo Simulation for the HJM Model Based on Jump

41

From the equation (3), we derive the zero coupon bond prices as follow:
ÊT

V (t, T ) = e− t f (t,s)ds
ÊT
V (0, T ) −(Ê t Ê T μf (u,s)dsdu+Ê t Ê T σf (u,s)dsdW Q (u)+Èπ(t)
j=1 Jj t ds) (7)
0 t
e 0 t
=
V (0, t)
Êt

ÊT

where, we deﬁne as V (0, t) = e− 0 f (0,s)ds , V (0, T ) = e− 0 f (0,s)ds , and
T
μf (t, T ) = σf (t, T ) t σf (t, s)ds.
The most models of forward rates evolution in the HJM framework result in
non-Markovian models of the short term interest rate evolution. As above the
equation (7), these integral terms depend on the entire history of the process
up to time t. But, numerical methods for Markovian models are usually more
eﬃcient than those necessary for non-Markovian models.
We examines the one-factor HJM model with jump which we use restrictive condition of RS[9]. RS have extended Carverhill results showing that if the
volatilities of forward rates were diﬀerential with respect to maturity date, for
any given initial term structure, if and only if for the prices of all interest rate
contingent claims to be completely determined by a two-state Markov process is
that the volatility of forward rate is of the form
T

σf (t, T ) = σr (t) exp −

a(s)ds

(8)

t

where, σr and a are deterministic functions. For the volatility of forward rate is
of the form (8), the following formula for the discount bond price V (t, T ) was
obtained in restrictive condition of RS.
Theorem 1. Let σf (t, T ) be as given in (8), then discount bond price V (t, T )
is given by the formula
V (t, T ) =
⎧
⎪
⎨ ϕ(t, T ) =
where,

φ(t)
⎪
⎩
ξ(t)

1
V (0, T )
exp − ϕ2 (t, T )φ(t) + ϕ(t, T )ξ(t)]
V (0, t)
2

T
t
exp − u a(s)ds
t
t
σ 2 (s, t)ds
0 f

(9)

du

=
= [f (0, t) − r(t)]

As we mentioned already, a given model in the HJM model with jump will
result in a particular behavior for the short term interest rate. We introduce
relation between the short rate process and the forward rate process as follows.
In this study, we jump-diﬀusion version of Hull and White model to reﬂect this
restriction condition. We know the following model for the interest rate r;
β

dr(t) = a(t)[θ(t)/a(t) − r(t)]dt + σr (t)r(t) dW Q (t) + Jdπ(t),

(10)

where, θ(t) is a time-dependent drift; σr (t) is the volatility factor; a(t) is the
reversion rate. We will investigate the β = 0 case is an extension of Vasicek’s
jump diﬀusion model; the β = 0.5 case is an extension of CIR jump diﬀusion
model.

42

K. Park, M. Kim, and S. Kim

Theorem 2. Let be the jump-diﬀusion process in short rate r(t) is the equation
(10). Let be the volatility form is
r(t))β η(t, T )

σf (t, T ) = σr (t)(

(11)

T

with η(t, T ) = exp − t a(s)ds is deterministic functions. We know the jumpdiﬀusion process in short rate model and the ”corresponding” compatible HJM
model with jump
df (t, T ) = μf (t, T )dt + σf (t, T )dW Q (t) + Jdπ(t)
T
t

where μf (t, T ) = σf (t, T )

(12)

σf (t, s)ds. Then we obtain the equivalent model is
T

f (0, T ) = r(0)η(0, T ) +
−

θ(t)η(s, T )ds
0

T

T

2

σr2 (s)(r(s) )β η(s, T )

(η(s, u)du)ds

(13)

s

0

that is, all forward rates are normally distributed. Note that we know that β = 0
case is an extension of Vasicek’s jump diﬀusion model; the β = 0.5 case is an
extension of CIR jump diﬀusion model.
Note that the forward rates are normally distributed, which means that the bond
prices are log-normally distributed. Both the short term rate and the forward
rates can become negative. As above, we obtain the bond price from the theorem
1. By the theorem 2, we drive the relation between the short rate and forward
rate.
Corollary 1. Let be the HJM model with jump of the term structure of interest
rate is the stochastic diﬀerential equation for forward rate f (t, T ) is given by
T

σf (t, s)dsdt + σf (t, T )dW Q (t) + Jdπ(t)

df (t, T ) = σf (t, T )

(14)

t

where, dW Q
i is the Wiener process generated by an equivalent martingale measure
T

Q and σf (t, T ) = σr (t)( r(t))β exp − t a(s)ds .
Then the discount bond price V (t, T ) for the forward rate is given by the formula
1
V (0, T )
exp{−
V (t, T ) =
V (0, t)
2
−

T
t

σf (t, s)ds
σf (t, T )

2

t

σf2 (s, t)ds
0

T
t

σf (t, s)ds
[f (0, t) − r(t)]}
σf (t, T )

with the equation (13).
Note that we know that β = 0 case is an extension of Vasicek’s jump diﬀusion
model; the β = 0.5 case is an extension of CIR jump diﬀusion model.

On Monte Carlo Simulation for the HJM Model Based on Jump

3

43

Monte Carlo Simulation of the HJM Model with Jump

Recent methods of bond pricing do not necessarily exploit partial diﬀerential
equations(PDEs) implied by risk-neutral portfolios. They rest on converting
prices of such assets into martingales. This is done through transforming the
underlying probability distribution using the tools provided by the Girsanov’s
theorem. A risk-neutral measure is any probability measure, equivalent to
the market measure P , which makes all discounted bond prices martingales.
We now move on to discuss Monte Carlo simulation. A Monte Carlo simulation of a stochastic process is a procedure for sampling random outcomes for
the process. This uses the risk-neutral valuation result. The bond price can be
expressed as:
V (t, T ) = EtQ e−

ÊT
t

f (t,s)ds

(15)

where, EtQ is the expectations operator with respect to the equivalent riskneutral measure. Under the equivalent risk-neutral measure, the local expectation hypothesis holds(that is, EtQ dV
V ). According to the local expectation
hypothesis, the term structure is driven by the investor’s expectations on future
short rates. To execute the Monte Carlo simulation, we discretized the equation (15). We divide the time interval [t, T ] into m equal time steps of length
−t
). For small time steps, we are entitled to use the
Δt each(that is, Δt = Tm
discretized version of the risk-adjusted stochastic diﬀerential equation (14):
T

fj = fj−1 + σf (t, T )

√
σf (t, s)dsdt Δt + σf (t, T )εj Δt + Jj NΔt

(16)

t

where, σf (t, T ) = σr (t)(

r(t))β exp −

T
t

a(s)ds , j = 1, 2, · · ·, m, εj is stan-

dard normal variable with εj ∼ N (0, 1), and NΔt is a Poisson random variable
with parameter hΔt. Note that we know that β = 0 case is an extension of
Vasicek’s jump diﬀusion model; the β = 0.5 case is an extension of CIR jump
diﬀusion model. We can investigate the value of the bond by sampling n spot rate
paths under the discrete process approximation of the risk-adjusted processes of
the equation (16). The bond price estimate is given by:

V (t, T ) =

1
n

n

i=1

⎛
exp ⎝−

m−1

⎞
fij Δt⎠ ,

(17)

j=0

where fij is the value of the forward rate under the discrete risk-adjusted process
within sample path i at time t+Δt. Numerical methods that are known as Monte
Carlo methods can be loosely described as statistical simulation methods, where
statistical simulation is deﬁned in quite general terms to be any method that utilizes sequences of random numbers to perform the simulation. The Monte Carlo
simulation is clearly less eﬃcient computationally than the numerical method.

44

K. Park, M. Kim, and S. Kim

The precision of the mean as a point estimate is often deﬁned as the half-width
of a 95% conﬁdence interval, which is calculated as
P recision = 1.96 × M SE.

(18)

√
where, M SE = ν/ n and ν 2 is the estimate of the variance of bond prices as
obtained from n sample paths of the short rate:
2

ν =

n
i=1

exp −

m−1
j=0

n−1

fij Δt − ν

.

(19)

Lower values of Precision in Equation(18) correspond to sharper estimates. Increasing the number of n is a brute force method of obtaining sharper estimates.
This reduces the MSE by increasing the value of n. However, highly precise estimates with the brute force method can take a long time to achieve. For the
purpose of simulation, we conduct three runs of 1,000 trials each and divide the
year into 365 time steps.

4

Experiments

In this section, we investigate the HJM model with the jump version of the
extended Vasicek and CIR models. In experiment 1, the parameter values are
assumed to be r = 0.05, a = 0.5, θ = 0.025, σr = 0.08, λ = −0.5, t = 0.05,
β = 0, and T = 20.

Fig. 1. Experiment 1: The relative error between the HJM model with the jump version
of the extended Vasicek and CIR models

Experiment 2, contrasts bond prices by Monte Carlo simulation. In experiment
2, the parameter values are assumed to be r[0] = 0.05, f [0, t] = 0.049875878,
a = 0.5, θ = 0.025, σr = 0.08, λ = −0.5, β = 0, Δt = (T − t)/m, m = 365,
n = 1000, t = 0.05, and T = 20.

On Monte Carlo Simulation for the HJM Model Based on Jump

45

Table 1. Experiment 2: Bond price estimated by the Monte Carlo simulation for the
HJM model with the extended Vasicek model, CIR model, the jump diﬀusion version
of the extended Vasicek model and CIR model.
HJME V HJME CIR Jump−HJME V Jump−HJME CIR
CFS
0.954902
0.95491
0.954902
0.95491
MCS
0.951451
0.951456
0.951722
0.950465
CFS−MCS 5.03495E-06 1.27659E-06 0.000319048
0.000289694
Variance 7.09574E-05 0.000112986
0.00178619
0.00170204
Precision 0.00676342 0.00676933
0.00623192
0.00871051

5

Conclusion

In this paper, we derive and perform the evaluation of the bond prices of the
HJM-Extended Vasicek and the HJM-CIR models with forward interest rates
instead of short rates using numerical methods. The results show that the values
obtained are very similar. Even though it is hard to achieve the value of bond
prices to term structure models when forward rates follow jump diﬀusions, we
have shown that bond prices in HJM jump-diﬀusion version models of the extended Vasicek and CIR models obtained by Monte Carlo simulation correspond
with the closed form solution. Lower values of precision in the HJM model with
jump of the extended Vasicek model correspond to sharper estimates.

References
1. C. Ahn and H. Thompson, “Jump-Diﬀusion Processes and the Term Structure of
Interest Rates,” Journal of Finance, vol. 43, pp. 155-174, 1998.
2. J. Baz and S. R. Das, “Analytical Approximations of the Term Structure for JumpDiﬀusion Processes: A Numerical Analysis,” Journal of Fixed Income, vol. 6(1), pp.
78-86, 1996.
3. J. C. Cox, J. Ingersoll, and S. Ross, “A Theory of the Term Structure of Interest
Rate,” Econometrica, vol. 53, pp. 385-407, 1985.
4. D. Health, R. Jarrow, and A. Morton, “Bond Pricing and the Term Structure of
Interest Rates,” Econometrica, vol. 60, no.1, pp. 77-105, 1992.
5. T. S. Ho and S. Lee, “Term Structure Movements and Pricing Interest Rate Contingent Claims,” Journal of Finance, vol. 41, pp. 1011-1028, 1986.
6. M. J. Harrison and D. M. Kreps, “Martingales and arbitrage in multiperiod securities markets,” Journal of Economic Theory, vol. 20. pp. 381-408, 1979.
7. J. Hull and A. White, “Pricing Interest Rate Derivative Securities,” Review of
Financial Studies, vol. 3, pp. 573-92, 1990.
8. M. J. Brennan and E. S. Schwartz, “A Continuous Time Approach to the Pricing
of Bonds,” Journal of Banking and Finance, vol. 3, pp. 133-155, 1979.
9. P. Ritchken and L. Sankarasubramanian, “Volatility Structures of Forward Rates
and the Dynamics of the Term Structure,” Mathematical Finance, vol. 5, pp. 55-72,
1995.
10. O. A. Vasicek, “An Equilibrium Characterization of the Term Structure,” Journal
of Financial Economics, vol. 5, pp. 177-88, 1977.

