Stochastic Simulation of Time Series by Using
the Spatial-Temporal Weierstrass Function
´
Ryszard Kutner and Filip Switala
Institute of Experimental Physics, Department of Physics, Warsaw University, Ho˙za
69, PL-00681 Warsaw, Poland

Abstract. We extend the recently considered toy model of Weierstrass
(or L´evy) walks with varying velocity of the walker [1,2] by introducing
a more realistic possibility that the walk can be occasionally intermitted by its momentary localization; the localizations themselves are again
described by the Weierstrass (or L´evy) process. The direct empirical motivation for developing this combined model is, for example, the dynamics of ﬁnancial high-frequency time series or meteorological ones. This
approach makes it possible to study by eﬃcient stochastic simulations
the whole spatial-temporal range. To describe empirical data, which are
collected at discrete time-steps, we used in the continuous-time series
produced by the model a discretization procedure. We observed that
such a procedure constitutes a basis for long-time autocorrelations (of
the variation of the walker single-step displacements) which appear to
be similar to those observed, e.g., in ﬁnancial time series [3,4,5,6,7,8],
although single steps of the walker within the continuous time are uncorrelated.

1

Introduction

The aim of this work is to develop a suﬃciently realistic model for the analysis of
empirical time-series (at any time horizon) reﬂecting both an active and passive
behavior of a complex system in continuous time. This type of time-series consists
of oblique intervals randomly intermitted by ﬂat ones. This model belongs to the
L´evy walks type charcterized by ﬁnite velocity of the walker displacement (where
the instantaneous ﬂights have a vanishing probability).
In this paper we used hierarchical spatial-temporal coupling (roughly justﬁed in section 1.1) to describe the combined physical picture exhibiting both
delocalized Weierstrass or L´evy random motions and localizations that are also
described by the Weierstrass or L´evy process. We developed complex but more
realistic version of the Weierstrass walks model. In the frame of this model
the walker moves continuously at constant velocity between consecutive turning
points where he can be occasionally and temporarily localized and then chooses
direction at random, walking in principle, with an other constant velocity till the
next turning point where again a localization event occurs with ﬁnite probability
(cf. Fig.1). This means that at each step there is a ﬁnite probability that the
P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2657, pp. 407–416, 2003.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

408

´
R. Kutner and F. Switala

walker be localized or delocalized; the walker doesn’t walk all the time and his
walking is randomly intermitted by periods of non-translatory motion. When
the probabilty of localized state occurring vanishes this model simply tends to
the L´evy walks with varying velocity one considered earlier [1].
This combined Weierstrass walks was developed in the framework of the
non-separable generalized continuous-time random walk (GCTRW) formalism
advanced recently [1,2]. This approach makes it possible to study by eﬃcient
stochastic simulations the whole spatial-temporal range while analytically we
can study only the initial, pre-asymptotic and asymptotic regions. The former
is possible since the Weierstrass walks is a geometric superposition of regular
random walks each of which can be simply treated by eﬃcient stochastic simulations.

MCS OF WEIERSTRASS WALKS INTERMITTED BY LOCALIZATIONS
α'=4/3, α=3/2, β=5/3; η =1.3, η =3.1; ∆t=10 [r.u.]
1
2

Stock price X [r.u.]

10

0

-10

-20

discretized time
continuous time

0

100

200

300

Trading time t [r.u.]
Fig. 1. Single realization by the stochastic simulation in continuous time of the Weierstrass random translatory motions (oblique intervals) occasionally intermitted by localizations (ﬂat intervals); its windowed representation for the discretization time-step
∆t = 10 [r.u.] is given by the dashed curve (our algorithm of the stochastic simulation
and the applied parameters are described elsewhere in the text).

As an application, we use the model to create by stochastic simulation (considered in section 2) single trajectories of the walker for any time. Next we
apply them to generate long-time autocorrelation of the absolute variation of

Stochastic Simulation of Time Series

409

the walker displacements which appears to be similar to those often observed in
diﬀerent time series, particularly in high-frequency ﬁnancial ones [4,5,6,7].
1.1

Basic Deﬁnitions and Quantities

In this paper we pay attention mainly to the statistics regarding single steps of
the walker, i.e. waiting-time distributions and sojourn probabilities for walking
and localization states; they constitute the foundation both of the generalized
continuous-time random walk (GCTRW) formalism and our stochastic simulation algorithm. Basing on the hierarchical structure of these quantities we deﬁne
the eﬀective algorithm for the stochastic simulation of the two-state (walking
and localization states) Weierstrass or L´evy walks. The stochastic hierarchical
structure is well seen, for example for the ﬁnancial market in the dynamics of
the absolute variation, |∆X|, of the Electrim company1 stock price shown in
Fig.2. Such a structure is an empirical justiﬁcation for developig basic quantities
of our model in the form of (quite general) hierarchical Weierstrass functions.

Stock price absolute variation |∆X| [PLN]

ELEKTRIM COMPANY 2001.04.02 - 2001.04.04
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

0

200

400

600

800

1000

Trading time t [min.]
Fig. 2. The absolute variation of the stock price, |∆X|, vs. trading time t obtained
from empirical high-frequency data for the Elektrim company for almost three sessions
in April 2001. The stochastic hierarchy of |∆X| is well seen.
1

Elektrim company is one of the greatest Polish telecommunication companies present
for the longest time on the Warsaw stock exchange.

´
R. Kutner and F. Switala

410

Walking state. In our recent series of papers [1] we considered in detail the
waiting-time distribution and sojourn probability (which are the basic ones), as
well as other relevant quantities for the walking state, where the walker moves
with a ﬁxed velocity between the turning points though, in general, this velocity
can vary its value from one turning point to another. We adopt for the walking
state this waiting-time distribution, which exhibits spatial-temporal coupling,
reﬂecting the hierarchical character of the fractional random walk,
ψwalk (x, t) =

1
2

∞

w(j)[δ(x − v0 v j t) + δ(x + v0 v j t)]

j=0

1
exp(−t/τ0 τ j ), (1)
τ0 τ j

where the weight w(j) is deﬁnd as follows,
w(j) = (1 −

1 1
)
, N > 1, j = 0, 1, 2, . . . ,
N Nj

(2)

∞

and obeys the normalization condition j=0 w(j) = 1.
As it is seen, the kinematics within the walking state is deﬁned by the timeindependent velocity v0 v j and the mean time τ0 τ j needed to perform the single
step (in the frame of the j th level of hierarchy); hence, the average distance
which the walker is able to pass within this step is given by b0 bj = v0 τ0 v j τ j .
We assumed that τ > 1 and b(= vτ ) > 1 which means that longer single steps
which last (on the average) longer are less probable. However, they can occur
both with (dimensionless) velocity v < 1 or v > 1. In the ﬁrst case, the smaller
velocity is less probable in contrast to the second case where less probable is the
larger velocity. Of course, the walker displacement x made during the current
time t is given by x = v0 v j t.
In an analogous way we can write the expression for the sojourn probability
where only the frequency 1/τ0 τ j under the sum over j is removed in (1) (cf. also
deﬁnitions in [1]).
Localized state. The waiting-time distribution for temporal localization of
the walker can be assumed in the form analogous to (1) by putting formally the
velocity v0 = 0,
ψloc (x, t) = δ(x)ψloc (t)

(3)

where
∞

w (j)

ψloc (t) =
j=0

1
exp(−t/τ0 (τ )j ),
τ0 (τ )j

(4)

while the weight w (j) is analogously deﬁned as w(j); the other parameters
N (> 1), τ0 , τ (> 1) can diﬀer, in general, from the corresponding prototypes of
the walking state.
Analogously, we can write the sojourn probability by removing the frequency
1/τ0 (τ )j under the sum over j in (4).

Stochastic Simulation of Time Series

411

Combined waiting-time distribution. Our model is based on (i) the total
waiting-time distribution which is a weighted sum of the above two conditional waiting-time distributions representing walking, ψwalk (x, t), and localized
ψloc (x, t) states
ψ(x, t) = pwalk ψwalk (x, t) + ploc ψloc (x, t),

(5)

as well as (ii) on the total sojourn probanility, which is again an analogous
weighted sum of two conditional sojourn probabilities representing the walking
and localized states; of course, the weights obey the normalization: pwalk +ploc =
1. In the extreme case pwalk = 1 the present model transforms to our previous
one [1]; the role of weights is considered in section 2.1.
Thanks to deﬁnitions (1) - (5) our algorithm makes it possible to construct
single stochastic trajectories of this hierarchical random walk for any time and
not only for the asymptotic one; within the asymptotic range of time we additionally dispose of the closed analytical representation of waiting-time distributions
and sojourn probabilities [2].

2

Hierarchical Stochastic Simulation

This algorithm is a straightforward generalization of our previous one [11] to a
more realistc and more spread situations. The initial step of our eﬃcient algorithm is the decision which state (localized or walking) the walker should occupy
in the current step; this is decided simply by drawing with the proper probability
ploc or pwalk .
If we have found the state, we can perform the next step by choosing index
j with probability p(j) given by
p(j) =

w(j), for walking state
w (j), for localized state.

More precisely, we simulate a probabilistic game of random tossing of a coin. We
deﬁne as a single success the situation where the coin falls to its obverse side
1
with probability M
, where parameter M is deﬁned as
M=

N, for walking state
N , for localized state.

1
As single defeat, occurring of course with probability 1 − M
, we deﬁne the
opposite situation when the coin falls to its reverse side. We always cast our coin
till the ﬁrst defeat; then the number j of successive successes is just our seeked
index. Thus τ0 τ j , v0 v j and b0 bj or τ0 (τ )j , are calculated (in all calculations we
assumed, for simplicity, τ0 = 1, τ0 = 1, v0 = 1, b0 = 1). This is an eﬃcient
procedure since no drawing step is lost and always some index j is found.
In the next step of our procedure we draw from the Poisson distribution
1
θ
1
θ
exp(−
τj
τ j ) or (τ )j exp(− (τ )j ) the elapsed time interval θ of the particle remaining in the drawn state j. This time is needed for the walker to pass the

412

´
R. Kutner and F. Switala

distance v0 v j θ or to remain inmobile over this time interval. Note that a very
long one-step walk or staying at a chosen state j could then occur.
The total performance consists of several repetitions of the above two basic steps and makes it possible to simulate time series coming from both nonstationary and stationary Weierstrass (or L´evy) walks intermitted by temporary
localizations again described by a Weierstrass (or L´evy) process.
For example, in Fig.1 a single realization of the Weierstrass random translatory motions (oblique intervals) occasionally intermitted by localizations (ﬂat
intervals) is performed by our stochastic Monte Carlo (MC) simulation in continuous time (solid curve); its windowed representation (dashed curve) for the
discretized time-step, e.g. ∆t = 10 [r.u.], is also shown. By assuming a much
shorter discretized time-step, ∆t = 1 [r.u.], the windowed representation was
obtained which (in this resolution of the plot) cannot be distinguished from the
trajectory of the corresponding continuous-time random walk process. The run
shown in Fig.1 can be considered as regarding a single session (or one trading
day) where the data extracted from the continuous-time process running in the
background, are recorded at every ten minute interval.
By our algorithm we are able to simulate statistical quantities needed for
analysis of the empirical time series, e.g., correlation functions.
2.1

Algebraically Decaying Correlations

We apply the above algorithm to calculate the time-dependent autocorrelation
of absolute variations of the stock price (or of the walker total displacement)
|∆X(0)||∆X(t)| within the Weierstrass walks intermitted by random localizations; here . . . denotes the standard moving-average, where the width of the
time-window equals 360 units (e.g. minutes, then it would be a single session or
a single trading day), while the whole data block is extended over 7200 units
(in the case of minutes it would equal four trading weeks). In the ﬁrst step we
record the discretized data (extracting them from the continuous-time process)
and next treat them analogously as purely empirical ones to which we apply just
the moving-average procedure.
Beside the result given in Fig.1 we performed calculations e.g., for another
point of the diﬀusion phase diagram (marked by full circle (•) in Tabs.1, 2 and 3)
belonging to another diﬀusion phase. For these two points the moment of total
displacement of arbitrary order is ﬁnite for ﬁnite time and they are characterized
by v < 1 which means that longer and more durable walks are slower. (Hence,
the sigle-step fractional moment of arbitrarily high order is also ﬁnite for these
cases [1].)
In these cases we have both temporal exponents 1 < α (= ln N / ln τ ), α(=
ln N/ ln τ ) < 2 and combined exponents η1 ≥ 1 and η2 ≥ 2 (which characterize
the asymptotic time-dependence of the mean-square displacement and of the
fourth moment of the walker displacement, respectively). Hence, for all cases
2
the mean times t walk , t loc are ﬁnite while the variances σwalk
(t) = t2 walk −
2
2
2
2
t walk and σloc (t) = t loc − t loc diverge. Note that in these cases we can
deﬁne the weights pwalk = t walk /( t walk + t loc ) and ploc = t loc /( t walk +

Stochastic Simulation of Time Series

413

Table 1. Exponents α , α, β, η1 and η2 chosen from diﬀerent places of the diﬀusion
phase diagram
Notation Exponent α Exponent α Exponent β Exponent η1 Exponent η2
•
◦

5/3
4/3

3/2
3/2

3.42
5/3

1.0
1.3

2.0
3.1

Table 2. Microscopic parameters N , τ , N, τ and b formating diﬀusion exponents
shown in Table 1
Notation Parameter N Parameter τ Parameter N Parameter τ Parameter b
•
◦

4
4

2.30
2.83

4
4

2.52
2.52

3/2
2.30

t loc ), cf. Tab.3. With the processes in continuous time which are asymptotically
non-Gaussian ones we have to deal for cases where η1 > 1 (otherwise they are
Gaussian ones).
Table 3. Weights pwalk and ploc
Notation Weight pwalk Weight ploc
•
◦

0.53
0.44

0.47
0.56

We calculated the time-dependent autocorrelation between the absolute variations of displacements |∆X(0)||∆X(t)| by applying the moving average procedure. We found algebraically decaying correlations controlled by exponent equals
(about) −0.28 (cf. Fig.3). This type of long-time correlations was also found,
for example, in high-frequency data for stock price dynamics of Elektrim company present on (arises) Warsaw stock exchange (cf. Fig.3, where comparison
with predictions of our model was performed). Besides, we found that no longtime autocorrelations are observed between the usual variations, ∆X, of the
walker single-step displacements for the Elektrim company and for our model.
We suppose that these long-time autocorrelations have a universal character,
since we found that they are (to some extend) independent of the width of
the time-discretization step; they are also present for almost all points of the
diﬀusion phase diagrams. These autocorrelations are slightly weaker (having a
higher value of the slope) when the velocity v0 v increases. We suppose that
reminiscences of these correlations are observed, e.g., on the ﬁnancial market in
stock returns dynamics [3,4,5,6,7,8]. These positive autocorrelations are prob-

414

´
R. Kutner and F. Switala

ably stimulated by the discretization procedure recording the data from the
continuous-time random walk process running in the background. Morover, the
autocorrelation of the absolute variation of the walker single-step displacements
of ﬁxed length calculated within the unbiased random walk is equivalent to the
usual autocorrelation of variation of the walker single-step displacements (of the
same length) calculated for the extreme case of the directed random walk, where
only the single walks along the positive direction are admissible. In this case only
forward correlations occur, which are anologous to the long-range domino eﬀect
(i.e., here we have to deal with the extreme case of the forward walk model with
no reversals [12]).

COMPARISON OF EMPIRICAL DATA FOR ELEKTRIM COMPANY
STORED WITHIN 2001.10.01 - 2001.10.31 WITH MCS

Autocorrelation of |∆X| [r.u.]

0.5
0.4

c

Fit function: y=a+b/x , a=0.088, b=0.048, c=0.277
Elektrim HF: empirical data stored within single month
WWIL: α'=5/3, α=3/2, β=3.42; η1=1, η2=2; ∆t=1 [min.]

0.3
0.2

0.1

1

10

100

Trading time t: single session [min.]
Fig. 3. Autorrelations of the absolute variation of the walker single-step displacements:
comparison between stochastic simulation data (black solid curve) and empirical ones,
e.g., for Elektrim company (red solid curve) shown in log − log scale. Well deﬁned
slopes are observed (as well as slight day activity increase for time range of about 360
min.).

3

Final Remarks

In this work we developed: (a) a theoretical foundation and hence (b) an eﬃcient
algorithm which makes possible to simulate in continuous-time quite realistic
time series reﬂecting both the active and passive behaviour of the system for

Stochastic Simulation of Time Series

415

any time-horizon which exhibits scaling phenomena. The approach depends on
several stochastic and kinematic parameters which can be detected by comparing
with empirical data after a time discretization procedure. For example, (c) we
applied this approach to study autocorrelations of the absolute variation of the
walker single-step displacements, which we found have a quite universal character
in distinction from the short-time autocorrelations of the usual variation of the
walker single-step displacements also present in the model. We suggest that
(i) long-time autocorrelations are stimulated by the discretization procedure
(used to obtain data ready for comparison with the corresponding empirical
ones), where the width of time-step is (most often) incommensurable with a
time interval necessary for the walker to pass a single-step distance. Besides, we
argue that (ii) in this case we have to deal with an extreme case of forward longtime autocorrelations as no reversal walker steps are performed. We suppose
that our approach can be applied, for example, to perform higher-order analysis
of the ﬁnancial time-series.

References
1. Kutner R.: Extreme events as foundation of L´evy walks with varying velocity.
Chem. Phys. 284 (2002) 481–505; Kutner R.: Stock market context of the L´evy
walks with varying velocity. Physica A 314 (2002) 201–210; Kutner R.: Hierarchical
spatio-temporal coupling in fractional wanderings. (I) Continuous-time Weierstrass
ﬂights. Physica A 264 (1999) 84–106; Kutner R., and Regulski M.: Hierarchical
spatio-temporal coupling in fractional wanderings. (II) Diﬀusion phase diagram for
Weierstrass walks. Physica A 264 (1999) 107–133
2. Kutner R.: Weierstrass walks with varying velocity randomly intermitted by Weierstrass localizations. Proceed of the Int. Conf. on Randomness and Complexity.
Physica A (to appear)
3. Liu Y., Cizeau P., Meyer M., and C.-K. Peng C.-K., and Stanley H.E.: Correlations
in economic time series. Physica A 245 (1997) 437–440
4. Grau-Carles P.: Empirical evidence of long-range correlations in stock returns.
Physica A 287 (2000) 396–404
5. Stanley H.E., Amaral L.A.N., Gabaix X. Gopikrishnan P., Plerou V.: Similarities
and diﬀerences between physics and economics. Physica A 299 (2001) 1–15
6. Bonanno G., Lillo F., and Mantegna R.N.: Levels of complexity in ﬁnancial markets. Physica A 299 (2001) 16–27
7. Giardina I., Bouchaud J.-P.: Microscopic models for long ranged volatility correlations. Physica A 299 (2001), 28–39
8. Weron R.: Estimating long-range dependence: ﬁnite sample properties and conﬁdence intervals. Physica A 312 (2002) 285–299
9. Stanley H.E.: Introduction to phase transitions and critical phenomena. Oxford
University Press, Oxford (1971); Niemeijer Th., van Leeuwen J.M.J.: Renormalization Theory for Ising-like Spin Systems. In: Doob C., Green M.S. (eds.): Phase
Transitions and Critical Phenomena, Vol. 6. Academic Press, London New York
San Francisco (1976) 425–505; Di Castro C., Jona-Lasinio G.: The Renormalization Group Approach to Critical Phenomena. In: Doob C., Green M.S. (eds.):
Phase Transitions and Critical Phenomena, Vol 6. Academic Press, London New
York San Francisco (1976) 507–558; Yeomans J.M.: Statistical Mechanics of Phase
Transitions. Clarendon Press, Oxford (1994)

416

´
R. Kutner and F. Switala

10. Metzler R., Klafter J.: The Random Walks Guide to Anomalous Diﬀusion: a Fractional Dynamics Approach. Phys. Rep. 339 (2000) 1–77
11. Kutner, R.: Higher order analysis within Weierstrass hierarchical walks. Comp.
Phys. Comm. 147 (2002) 565–569
12. Haus, J.W., Kehr, K.W.: Diﬀusion in Regular and Disordered Lattices. Phys. Rep.
150 (1987) 263–416

