Large Scale Three-Dimensional Boundary
Element Simulation of Subduction
Gabriele Morra1 , Philippe Chatelain2 ,
Paul Tackley1 , and Petros Koumoutsakos2
1

2

Geophysical Fluid Dynamics, ETH Zurich
Einsteinstr. 1, Zurich CH-80XX, Switzerland
http://www.gfd.ethz.ch
Computational Science and Engineering Laboratory, ETH Zurich
Universitaetstr. 6, Zurich CH-8092, Switzerland
http://www.cse-lab.ethz.ch

Abstract. We present a novel approach for modeling subduction using
a Multipole-accelerated Boundary Element Method (BEM). The present
approach allows large-scale modeling with a reduced number of elements
and scales linearly with the problem size. For the ﬁrst time the BEM
has been applied to a subduction model in a spherical planet with an
upper-lower mantle discontinuity, in conjunction with a free-surface mesh
algorithm.
Keywords: Boundary Elements, Subduction, Fluid Dynamics, Fast
Multipole, Global Earth Model.

1

Introduction

Geodynamics at the planetary scale is an inherently multiscale problem exhibiting very large variations in viscosity and spatial scales. In a nearly isoviscous
system, convection occurs through ﬁnger-like, cylindrically symmetric RayleighTaylor instabilities [1]. In contrast, highly viscous plates do not sink, but drift
laterally and sink asymmetrically at zones known as subduction zones. This
subduction process is the driving mechanism of plate tectonics. A self-consistent
model of plate tectonics involves ﬂows at planetary scales (the paciﬁc plate is over
10000km wide) strongly coupled to small scale dynamics, such as trench fault
lubrication (lithospheric shear-zones are thought to be 100m to 1km thick [2]).
Recent numerical results [3,4] have shown that the potential energy of the
sinking plate is mostly dissipated through the interaction of the plate and the
upper mantle. Accordingly a dynamic interaction between distinct slabs and the
sharp viscosity transition at 660km depth could be caused by mantle back ﬂow.
There is a debate as to whether, for example, these processes modify the kinematics, shape and stress state of the trenches of the ring of ﬁre around the Paciﬁc
plate, or whether each subduction system can be considered independently.
The present work introduces a novel numerical approach based on a Fast Multipole (FM) extension of the Boundary Element Method(BEM). The resulting
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part III, LNCS 4489, pp. 1122–1129, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Large Scale Three-Dimensional Boundary Element Simulation of Subduction

1123

technique is much more eﬃcient than the classical Finite Element (FE) or Finite Diﬀerence (FD) methods usually employed in geodynamics. We apply the
present method to the simulation of subduction at the planetary scale.
This paper is structured as follows. In Sect. 2, we summarize our approach
and present several resolution and scaling tests on a Beowulf cluster with up to
64 processors. In Sect. 3 then, we show how the Boundary Element Method for
the solution of viscous ﬂows can be adapted to subduction modeling. The results
of models at the global scale are shown in Sect. 4.

2

Simulation of Stokes Flow

2.1

Governing Equations

We consider the Stokes equation for a steady, highly viscous ﬂow
∇ · σ + ρb = 0

(1)

where σ = −∇P + μ∇2 u is the stress tensor; b, the body force; P , the pressure;
u, the velocity ﬁeld and μ, the dynamic viscosity.
The Stokes equation can be recast into a variety of integral equations. We
follow here the formulation of [5], to which we refer for further details. We
denote as D is the domain where (1) holds and we write
ui (xo ) =

1
8πμ

σik (x)nk Gij (x, xo )dS(x) +
D

1
8π

ui (x)nk Tijk (x, xo )dS(x)
D

(2)
where Gij and Tijk are the steady, Green’s functions for velocity and stress
respectively, also known as the Stokeslet and the Stresslet
xˆi xˆj
δij
ˆ = x − xo and r = |ˆ
+ 3 ; x
x|
r
r
ˆj x
ˆk
x
ˆi x
.
Tijk (x − xo ) = −6
5
r
Gij (x − xo ) =

(3)
(4)

In turn, (2) is cast into a form more appropriate for quasi-steady multiphase
ﬂows in the presence of a gravity ﬁeld. Hence for x ∈ Si we obtain
1 + λi
u(x) −
2

N

j

1 − λj
8π

PV

n · T · u dS = −
Sj

1
8πμ0

N

G · Δf dS ,
j

(5)

Sj

where P V denotes the principal value of the integral, μ0 is the viscosity of the
mantle, taken as a reference and λi = μi /μ0 andΔf is a normal stress jump that
accounts for gravity
Δf = Δρb · xn .

(6)

1124

2.2

G. Morra et al.

Numerical Method

The surfaces Si and the supported quantities u, Δf , . . . are discretized with
panels. The boundary integral equation (5) thus becomes a linear system
((1 + λ)/2 + T) U = F .

(7)

2
Many approaches rely to the construction of the matrix; this scales as Npanels
both memory- and computation time-wise though, making it impractical for
large systems.
We use a fast multipole method (FMM)[6,7,8] for the evaluation of the integrals in (5). The FMM scales as N log(N ), which is far more tractable and still
allows the use of a Generalized Minimized Residual method (GMRES) or any
Krylov space based method that does not rely on the storage of the full matrix.
A multipole method exploits the decay of the kernel to convolve and makes a
controlled approximation. More explicitly, let us compute

G(xo − x)ρ(x)dV (x) .

u(xo ) =

(8)

D

We consider the contribution from Di , a part of D that is far enough from our
evaluation point xo and proceed with a Taylor expansion of the kernel G about
xc ∈ Di
G(xo − x)ρ(x)dV (x)

u(xo ) =
Di

(G(xo − xc ) − ∇G(xo − xc ) · (xo − xc ) + . . .) ρ(x)dV (x)
Di

G(xo − xc )

ρ(x)dV (x)
Di

−∇G(xo − xc ) ·

(xo − xc )ρ(x)dV (x) + . . .

(9)

Di

We note that the equation involves successive moments of the ρ distribution in
Di . The FMM algorithm thus sorts the sources in a tree structure whose cells
contain the moment integrals–or multipoles– and carries out a ﬁeld evaluation
through a tree traversal. The reﬁnement of the interactions is determined by a
tree traversal stopping criterion based on a prescribed tolerance. The reader is
referred to [6,7,8] for further details.
The present FMM code can handle convolutions with the Green’s functions
for the Poisson equation, the Stokeslet or the Stresslet. It employs up to the
second order moments of the source distributions (quadrupoles).
2.3

Performances

The FMM-BEM drastically improves the computational cost of the method.
Figure 1(a) shows the computation time of a time step for a viscous sphere

Large Scale Three-Dimensional Boundary Element Simulation of Subduction

(a) Complexity

1125

(b) Parallel eﬃciency

Fig. 1. Fast Multipole Method: performance plots

under gravity for several tolerances and resolutions. For the coarse resolutions,
the method displays the nominal N 2 scaling of a direct interaction code. This is
attributed to the relatively few elements and tree cells. The scaling then quickly
approaches a nearly linear one (N log(N )) for the ﬁner resolutions.
The FMM-BEM has been parallelized using MPI. Figure 1(b) shows the parallel eﬃciency tested on a Opteron cluster with Quadrics connections. The scaling
is very good up to 64 CPUS, still keeping 90% of eﬃciency. In its current implementation the FMM-BEM uses a shared tree, thus reducing the communication
load at the expense of memory requirements.

3

Modeling Subduction with FMM-BEM

Subduction is the process through which a highly viscous (O (102 )μUM ) and
heavier plate (1 − 3%) enters into the earth. Analytical and numerical models
[9,10] have shown that the process is mainly controlled by the interaction of
the lithosphere with the surface and is one-sided, characterized by an unsubducted plate overlapping the subducting plate. We assume that three fundamental forces control the subduction process: the lithosphere-mantle-air/water
buoyancy diﬀerence, the viscous resistance of the mantle to the plate motion and
the resistance to bending and stretching of the lithosphere itself.
Buoyancy diﬀerence arises from the density diﬀerence between the bottom and
the top of the plate, of the mantle and air/water, respectively. This property is
critical in subduction as it prevents the unsubducted plate from sinking straight
down [11].
The drag force exerted by the less viscous (μUM ) mantle on the lithosphere
dissipates most of the energy [3,4] and controls the speed of the process. Consequently intraplate interaction might be mostly controlled by induced mantle
ﬂow.
The resistance to bending and stretching of the lithosphere itself is controlled
by its very diverse and complex inner rheology. Simpliﬁed models of the internal distribution of strength of an oceanic lithosphere display a peak at 30-40km

1126

G. Morra et al.

depth, triggering the concept of lithospheric strength controlled by a stiﬀ core
[12,2,3]. In this work, the overall resistance to bending and stretching will be
parameterized by an eﬀective uniform layer with a viscosity two orders of magnitude higher than the mantle and an eﬀective thickness of 80km.
In order to appropriately model subduction, we have implemented a novel
adaptive mesh algorithm which modiﬁes the shape of the earth surface directly
on top of the lithosphere. More explicitly, the algorithm adapts this free-surface
to the lithospheric topography up to to a depth of half of the lithospheric thickness. The results of Sect. 4 show that this method automatically creates a physically consistent buoyancy force. The density diﬀerence between the mantle and
ocean self-consistently sustains the unsubducted lithosphere as on the Earth but
lets the upper surface of the lithosphere free to deform in a full free surface setting. Numerically, the method requires only one parameter, the critical distance
hcrit between the boundary elements of the Earth surface and of the lithosphere
surface. If the distance is too low, instabilities arises during the computation and
if it is too high the uplifting force is not properly calculated. Tests have shown
that the critical distance hcrit has to be no less than half of the element size
of the Earth surface, but not more than 20% of the lithosphere thickness. The
method is therefore more eﬀective at a relatively high resolution, which is made
aﬀordable by the FMM-BEM.

4

Results

The simplest implementation of subduction at the global scale in a uniform Earth
is obtained using only two surfaces, one delimiting the Earth surface and the
second the lithosphere-mantle boundary. A slightly more sophisticated model,
employing three surfaces, allows modeling the interaction with the 660km discontinuity. We use the boundary integral form of (5), usually employed for solving the interaction between immersed distinct bodies, translating this setting to
a bounded problem by orienting the normal of the Planet surface inwards, as
sketched in Fig. 2.
The reference viscosity μ0 of (5) is the upper mantle eﬀective viscosity μUM ;
λ1 = μOcean /μUM is virtually null, being the ratio between the viscosities of

Fig. 2. Subduction model: geometry and parameters

Large Scale Three-Dimensional Boundary Element Simulation of Subduction

1127

Fig. 3. Left: subduction of a plate 20 times more viscous then the mantle. Right:
subduction of a plate 100 time more viscous then the mantle and interacting with a
sharp viscous discontinuity at 660km, arrows represent the velocity vector.

1128

G. Morra et al.

ocean (water) and the upper mantle; λ2 = μLitho /μUM is the ratio between the
lithosphere and upper mantle viscosities; λ3 = μLM /μUM is the ratio between
the lower and upper mantle viscosities. We deﬁne Δf on surfaces 1, 2 and 3 in the
same fashion; they are respectively equal to the diﬀerence between ocean (water)
and upper mantle densities, the diﬀerence between the lithosphere and upper
mantle densities and the diﬀerence between lower and upper mantle densities
Δf1 = (ρOcean − ρUM ) g r n
Δf2 = (ρLitho − ρUM ) g r n
Δf3 = (ρLM − ρUM ) g r n
where r is the length of x, g is the gravity acceleration (10m2 /s) and gravity is
assumed constant and radial b = −g x/r.
The solution of equation 5 with the parameters described above is shown in
Fig. 3. In the left column, four frames of the time evolution of subduction for a
lithosphere 3% heavier and 20 times more viscous than the mantle are shown.
Surface topography is ampliﬁed by a factor of 10 in order to better show the
eﬃciency of the adaptive mesh algorithm to embed the buyancy force and selfconsistently let the planetary surface deform. Buoyancy sustains the lithosphere
but allows the trench to freely migrate and the plate to freely move horizontally.
At the beginning a 45 degrees dip is set, then the model evolves toward an
almost vertical slab subduction, the dynamics accelerates, the trench retreat
diminishes and the horizontal migration of the plate accelerates. Other models
not shown here have been performed for two and more lithospheres just adding
a new surface for each of them to equation 5.
The right column of Fig. 3 shows four frames of the evolution of a lithosphere
100 times more viscous than the upper mantle subducting in an Earth with the
660km (UM-LM) discontinuity. As for the ﬁrst case, the plate is free to change
shape and migrate horizontally and the trench evolves freely. Conﬁrming results
of laboratory experiments, the higher viscosity ratio and the presence of the
upper-lower mantle discontinuity causes a lower subduction velocity but a much
larger trench retreat than the ﬁrst case. The arrows represent velocities, showing
a slight forward motion for the plate while wedge velocities are much stronger.
Finally, we note that the poloidal components of the velocities are dominant.

5

Conclusions

We have presented a novel computational approach for modeling subduction
using a fast multipole acceleration of the boundary elements method. We have
shown that the code scales linearly with the problem size for large sizes (more
than 103 elements) and shows a very good parallel behavior that is promising for
larger systems. An adaptive mesh algorithm has been developed for reproducing
the buoyancy force, within a free surface setting. Exploiting this innovation,
for the ﬁrst time FMM-BEM has been employed for modeling subduction at the
planetary scale. Finally, illustrative examples have been presented for subduction

Large Scale Three-Dimensional Boundary Element Simulation of Subduction

1129

in a viscously uniform Earth and in an Earth with the upper lower mantle
viscosity discontinuity. Future work includes a comprehensive investigation of
the roles played by the plate geometry, the lithosphere-mantle and upper-lower
mantle diﬀerential properties and the study of the interaction of subducting
plates.

References
1. Tackley, P.: Self-consistent generation of tectonic plates in time- dependent, threedimensional mantle convection simulations, 1. Pseudoplastic yielding. In: G3, Geochemistry Geophysics Geophysics (2000) Volume 1 Number 23
2. Regenauer-Lieb, K. and Yuen, D.A.: Modeling shear zones in geological and planetary sciences: solid- and ﬂuid-thermal-mechanical approaches. In: Earth-Science
Reviews (2003), Volume 63, 295-349
3. Capitanio, F.A., Morra G. and Goes, S.: Dynamic controls on subduction kinematics: The role of the downgoing lithosphere and passive mantle ﬂow In: Earth and
Planetary Science Letters, 2007 (now submitted)
4. Stegman, D.R., Freeman, J., Schellart, W. P., Moresi, L. and May, D.: Inﬂuence of
trench width on subduction hinge retreat rates in 3-D models of slab rollback.
5. Pozrikidis, C.: Boundary Integral and Singularity Methods for Linearized Viscous
Flow (1992).
6. Barnes, J. and Hut. P., A hierarchical O(N log N) force-calculation algorithm,
Nature (1986), 324
7. Greengard, L. and Rokhlin, V.: A Fast Algorithm for Particle Simulations. In:
Journal of Computational Physics A (1987), Volume 73, 325-348
8. Warren, M.S. and Salmon, J.K.: A parallel hashed Oct-Tree N-body algorithm. In:
Supercomputing, 1993, Pages 12-21
9. Jacoby W.R.: Model Experiment of Plate Movements. In: Nature-Physical Science
(1973), Volume 242, Number 122, 130-134
10. Christensen, U. R.: The inﬂuence of trench migration on slab penetration into the
lower mantle. In: Earth and Planetary Science Letters (1996), Volume 1996, 27-39
11. Funiciello, F., Morra, G., Regenauer-Lieb, K. and Giardini, D.: Dynamics of retreating slabs (part 1): Insights from 2-D numerical experiments. In: Journal of
Geophysical Research (2003), Volume 108(B4)
12. Regenauer-Lieb, K., Yuen, D. and Branlund, J.: The Initiation of Subduction:
Criticality by Addition of water? In: Science (2001), Volume 294, 578-580 In: G3,
Geochemistry Geophysics Geophysics (2006) Volume 7 Number 3

