Feasibility Study of Geo-spatial Analysis Using Grid
Computing
Yincui Hu1, Yong Xue1,2*, Jianqin Wang1, Xiaosong Sun1, Guoyin Cai1,
Jiakui Tang1, Ying Luo1, Shaobo Zhong1, Yanguang Wang1, and Aijun Zhang1
1

Laboratory of Remote Sensing Information Sciences, Institute of Remote Sensing
Applications, Chinese Academy of Sciences, P. Box 9718, Beijing 100101, China
2
Department of Computing, London Metropolitan University, 166-220 Holloway Road,
London N7 8DB, UK
{huyincui@163.com, y.xue@londonmet.ac.uk}

Abstract. Spatial applications will gain high complexity as the volume of
spatial data increases rapidly. A suitable data processing and computing
infrastructure for spatial applications needs to be established. Over the past
decade, grid has become a powerful computing environment for data intensive
and computing intensive applications. In this paper, we tested and analyzed the
feasibility of using Grid platform for spatial analysis functionalities in
Geographic Information System (GIS). We found that spatial interpolation,
buffers, and spatial query can be easily migrated to Grid platform. Polygon
overlay and transformation could achieve better results on Grid platform. To do
network analysis and spatial statistical analysis on Grid platform could be no
significant improvement of performance. The most un-suitable spatial analysis
on Grid platform is the spatial measurement.

1 Introduction
In numerous scientific disciplines, terabyte and petabyte-scale data collections are
emerging as critical community resources. A new class of "data grid" infrastructure is
required to support management, transport, distributed access to, and analysis of these
datasets by potentially thousands of users. Researchers who face this challenge
include the climate modeling community, which performs long-duration computations
accompanied by frequent output of very large files that must be further analyzed. The
number of applications that require parallel and high-performance computing
techniques has diminished in recent years due to the continuing increase in power of
PC, workstation and mono-processor systems. However, Geographic information
systems (GIS) still provide a resource-hungry application domain that can make good
use of parallel techniques. GIS applications are often run operationally as part of
decision support systems with both a human interactive component as well as large
scale batch or server-based components. Parallel computing technology embedded in
a distributed system therefore provides an ideal and practical solution for multi-site
organisations and especially government agencies who need to extract the best value
from bulk geographic data.

*

Corresponding author

M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3039, pp. 956–963, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

Feasibility Study of Geo-spatial Analysis Using Grid Computing

957

Spatial applications will gain high complexity as the volume of spatial data
increases rapidly. A suitable data processing and computing infrastructure for spatial
applications needs to be established. Over the past decade, grid has become a
powerful computing environment for data intensive and computing intensive
applications.
Parallel and Distributed Knowledge Discovery (PDKD) is emerging as a possible
killer application for clusters and grids of computers. The need to process large
volumes of data and the availability of parallel data mining algorithms, makes it
possible to exploit the increasing computational power of clusters at low costs. On the
other side, grid computing is an emerging "standard" to develop and deploy
distributed, high performance applications over geographic networks, in different
domains, and in particular for data intensive applications. Cannataro (2000) proposed
an approach to integrate cluster of computers within a grid infrastructure to use them,
enriched by specific data mining services, as the deployment platform for high
performance distributed data mining and knowledge discovery.
Integrating grid computing with spatial data processing technology, Pouchard et al.
(2003) described the increasing role of ontologies in the, context of Grid Computing
for obtaining, comparing and analyzing data. They presented ontology entities and a
declarative model that provide the outline for an ontology of scientific information.
Relationships between concepts were also given. The implementation of some
concepts described in this ontology was discussed within the context of the Earth
System Grid II (ESG).
In this paper, we tested and analyzed the feasibility of using Grid platform for
spatial analysis functionalities in Geographic Information System (GIS). First, we
listed the several basic spatial analysis functions used in GIS systems. Following the
definitions of criteria and basic principles for spatial analysis middleware
development for Grid platform, we analyzed the feasibilities of above basic spatial
analysis functions for Grid platform and give the suggestions on how to develop the
middleware for spatial analysis with Grid platform.

2 Spatial Analysis Functionalities Commonly Used in GIS
Spatial Analysis is a set of techniques whose results are dependent on the locations of
the objects being analyzed and requiring access both to the locations of objects and
also to their attributes (Goodchild 2001). GIS is designed to support a range of
different kinds of analysis of geographic information: techniques to examine and
explore data from a geographic perspective, to develop and test models, and to present
data in ways that lead to greater insight and understanding. All of these techniques fall
under the general umbrella of "spatial analysis". In general, it includes Query,
Analyses which are simple in nature but difficult to execute manually, such as overlay
(topological), map measurement, particularly area, and buffer zone generation,
Browsing/plotting independently of map boundaries and with zoom/scale-change
such as seamless database, need for automatic generalization and editing, and
Complex modeling/analysis (based on the above and extensions). We will focus on
the following spatial analysis functionalities: Query and reasoning: the identification

958

Y. Hu et al.

of objects and attributes either by their location or attribute query; Measurement:
simple geometric measurements associated with objects; Transformation; Buffers;
Spatial overlay; Spatial Interpolation; Network Analysis and Statistical Analysis.

3 Evaluation Criteria and Basic Principles
Two issues will be considered in use of Grid technology. One is the efficiency or high
performance, i.e. to get the solution in a very short time period or to solve more
complex problem in a same time period. Another is the high throughput computing to
reduce the cost, etc. We will only evaluate the performance of spatial analysis
algorithms on Grid platform and neglect the limitations of hardware and data storage.
To improve the efficiency of application algorithms is to enhance the parallel
processing. Normally, there are two ways to deal with it. One is to parallel the
processing algorithms and second is to parallel the data. We use 5 levels of criteria
factors: I – worse, II – poor, III – good, IV – better, V – Best. For the parallel of
algorithms, how many sub-jobs can a job be divided into? Table 1 shows the
explanation of all five levels. For the parallel of data, how many sub-areas can the
whole area be divided into? Table 2 explains the meaning of al five levels.
Table 1. The meanings of all five criteria levels of algorithm parallel.
Criteria
Level
Digital Score
(A)
Description

I

II

III

IV

V

1

3

5

7

9

There is
few
parallel.

Can
be
paralleled, but
half of sub-jobs
are
interassociated.

Can
be
paralleled, but
between 1/2 and
1/3 of sub-jobs
are
interassociated

Can
be
paralleled,
less
than
1/3 of subjobs
are
interassociated

Can
be
paralleled, no
sub-jobs are
interassociated

Table 2. The explanation of all five criteria levels for data parallel.
Criteria
Level
Digital
Score (D)
Description

I

II

III

IV

V

1

3

5

7

9

Data cannot be
divided
for
processing.

Data can be
divided
with
more than half of
redundancy.

Data can be
divided with half
of redundancy.

Data can be
divided with less
than
half
of
redundancy.

Data can be
divided
without
redundancy.

It is easier to realize the data parallel processing. Because of the higher efficiency for
data parallel processing than that for algorithm parallel processing, we define the
different weight factors for data and algorithm parallel processing. The overall
evaluation criteria score (E) will be

Feasibility Study of Geo-spatial Analysis Using Grid Computing

E = 0.6 * D + 0.4 * A

959

(1)

Where A is the score from Table 1 for algorithm parallel and D is the score from
Table 2 for data parallel. The final overall evaluation criteria will be in five levels as
shown in Table 3.

Table 3. The overall criteria levels for both data and algorithm parallel
Criteria Level
Score (E)
Description

I
1 < E ≤ 1.8
Worse

II
1.8 < E ≤ 3.6
Poor

III
3.6 < E ≤ 5.4
Good

IV
5.4 < E ≤ 7.2
Better

V
7.2 < E ≤ 9
Best

4 Performance of Spatial Analysis on Grid Platform
4.1 Spatial Query
Database query is probably one of the most important and most commonly used
application in Geographic Information Systems. Like any database, a GIS allows you
to access information held in a data file in a variety of ways. Information can be
grouped in categories, sorted, analyzed, printed, etc. The difference, once again, is
that GIS deals with spatially oriented data. This means that when querying a database
you cannot only see the data but its geographic location as well.
Database query simply asks to see already stored information. Basically there are
two types of query most general GIS allow: viz., Query by attribute and Query by
geometry. Map features can be retrieved on the basis of attributes. The attribute
database, in general, is stored in a table (relational database mode.) with a unique
code linked to the geometric data. This database can be searched with specific
characteristics. However, more complex queries can be made with the help of SQL.
GIS can carry out a number of geometric queries. The simplest application, for
example, is to show the attributes of displayed objects by identifying them with a
graphical cursor. There are five forms of primitive geometric query: viz., Query by
point, Query by rectangle, Query by circle, Query by line, and Query by polygon. A
more complex query still is one that uses both geometric and attributes search criteria
together. Many GIS force the separation of the two different types of query. However,
some GIS, using databases to store both geometric and attribute data, allow true
hybrid spatial queries.
For spatial query, the database can be divided in to several smaller databases and
searched in parallel. The score for criteria level of algorithm parallel is 1 and data
parallel is 9.

4.2 Spatial Measurements
GIS makes spatial measurements easy to perform. Spatial measurements can be the
distance between two points, the area of a polygon or the length of a line or boundary.

960

Y. Hu et al.

Calculations can be of a simple nature, such as measuring areas on one map, or more
complex, such as measuring overlapping areas on two or more maps. Distance
measurement refers to measuring straight-line distances between points or between
points and their nearest points or lines.
As spatial measurements are always simple and the delay of data communication is
much longer that processing, there is no need to use Grid computing technology. The
overall criteria score is 1.

4.3 Transformation
The point transformation includes the algebra functions such as addition, subtraction,
multiply and division and logical functions such as AND, OR, NOT, NOR, etc;
Comparison functions such as GREAT, LESS etc; and other mathematical functions.
Those are simple operations and the score for algorithm parallel is 1 and for data
parallel is 9.
DEM analysis is one of the most popular transformation operations. Roros and
Armstrong (1998) showed that three steps are needed: transect classification, cell
classification, and feature topology construction. The score for algorithm parallel is 1,
but the score for data parallel is 3 – 7.

4.4 Buffer Analysis
Buffer analysis is used for identifying areas surrounding geographic features. The
process involves generating a buffer around existing geographic features and then
identifying or selecting features based on whether they fall inside or outside the
boundary of the buffer. This kind of analysis is also called proximity analysis. The
buffer operation will generate polygon feature types irrespective of geographic
features and delineates spatial proximity. The data parallel is scored 9 and algorithm
parallel is scored 1.

4.5 Spatial Overlay
One basic way to create or identify spatial relationships is through the process of
spatial overlay. Spatial overlay is accomplished by joining and viewing together
separate data sets that share all or part of the same area. The result of this combination
is a new data set that identifies the spatial relationships. This allows the user to view
and analyze those portions of the various layers which cover the same place on the
Earth.
Spatial overlay could be done in parallel. The data parallel has a score of 9 of
criteria level and the algorithm parallel could be from 1 to 9 depending on the algebra
of map overlay.

Feasibility Study of Geo-spatial Analysis Using Grid Computing

961

4.6 Network Analysis
Network analysis is used for identifying the most efficient routes or paths for
allocation of services. This involves finding the shortest or least-cost manner in which
to visit a location or a set of locations in a network. The "cost" in a network analysis
is frequently distance or travel time. Network analysis can also be used to optimize
the allocation of resources.
For the case of shortest distance analysis, the algorithm has to be serial and the
criteria level’s score is 1. Data could be divided into several parts. But the size of each
part could be too small as the coordinating between each part takes much long time
(Lanthier and Nussbaurm 2003). The data parallel scores 7.

4.7 Spatial Interpolation
A GIS can be used to estimate the characteristics of terrain or ecological conditions
from a limited number of field measurements. Spatial interpolation is the procedure of
estimating the value of properties at unsampled sites within the area covered by
existing observations and in almost all cases the property must be interval or ratio
scaled. Spatial interpolation can be thought of as the reverse of the process used to
select the few points from a DEM which accurately represent the surface. Rationale
behind spatial interpolation is the observation that points close together in space are
more likely to have similar values than points far apart (Tobler's Law of Geography).
Spatial interpolation is a very important feature of many GISs. Spatial interpolation
may be used in GISs:
− to provide contours for displaying data graphically
− to calculate some property of the surface at a given point
− to change the unit of comparison when using different data structures in
different layers
− frequently is used as an aid in the spatial decision making process both in
physical and human geography and in related disciplines such as mineral
prospecting and hydrocarbon exploration
Many of the techniques of spatial interpolation are two- dimensional developments
of the one-dimensional methods originally developed for time series analysis. There
are several different ways to classify spatial interpolation procedures: Point
Interpolation/Areal Interpolation, Global/Local Interpolators, Exact/Approximate
Interpolators, Stochastic/Deterministic Interpolators and Gradual/Abrupt Interpolators
(Armstrong and Marciano, 1997, Wang and Armstrong 2003). In general, the data
parallel criteria level is 9 and algorithm parallel is 5 - 7.

4.8 Spatial Statistical Analysis
All data have a more-or-less precise spatial and temporal label associated with them.
Data that are close together in space (and time) are often more alike than those that
are far apart. A spatial statistical model incorporates this spatial variation into the
stochastic generating mechanism. Temporal information allows this mechanism to be

962

Y. Hu et al.

dynamic. Prediction of unobserveds from observeds and estimation of unknown
model parameters are the principal forms of statistical inference. The search for well
defined statistical criteria and a quantification of the variability inherent in the
(optimal) predictor or estimator are instrinsic to a statistical approach.
It is almost always true that the classical, non-spatial model is a special case of a
spatial model, and so the spatial model is more general (spatial-temporal models are
even more general). Whether one chooses to model the spatial variation through the
non-stochastic mean structure (sometimes called large-scale variation) or the
stochastic-dependence structure (sometimes called small-scale variation) depends on
the underlying scientific problem, and can be simply a trade-off between model fit
and parsimony of the model description.
There are two different categories of spatial statistical analysis: spatial selfcorrelation and spatial self-regression analysis (Li 1996, Roros and Armstrong 1996).
The score for data parallel is 5 and for algorithm is 3.
The summaries of above discussing are illustrated in Table 4. We found that spatial
interpolation, buffers, and spatial query can be easily migrated to Grid platform.
Polygon overlay and transformation could achieve better results on Grid platform. To
do network analysis and spatial statistical analysis on Grid platform could be no
significant improvement of performance. The most un-suitable spatial analysis on
Grid platform is the spatial measurement.
Table 4. Feasibilities of spatial analysis on Grid platform
Spatial Analysis
Functionalities
Spatial Query
Spatial
Measurement
Transformation
Buffers
Overlay Analysis
Network
Analysis
Spatial
Interpolation
Spatial statistical
Analysis

Algorithm Parallelity

Data Parallelity

Overall Score

1
1

9
1

5.8
1

Evaluation
Level
Better
Worse

1
1
1-9
1

3-9
9
7-9
7

2.2-5.8
5.8
4.6-9
4.6

Poor - Better
Better
Good – Best
Good

5-7

9

7.4-8.2

Best

5

3

3.8

Good

5 Conclusions
Grid computing has emerged as an important new field in the distributed computing
arena. It focuses on intensive resource sharing, innovative applications, and, in some
cases, high-performance orientation. Grid technology is very effective method for
spatial data analysis. It can give strong computing power in grid environment.
As our work was limited on the evaluation of performance of spatial analysis itself,
in reality, many other factors such as hardware environment, distribution of data, etc.
have to be considered. We are carrying on the research.

Feasibility Study of Geo-spatial Analysis Using Grid Computing

963

Acknowledgement. This publication is an output from the research projects "CAS
Hundred Talents Program", "Digital Earth" (KZCX2-312) funded by Chinese
Academy of Sciences and “Dynamic Monitoring of Beijing Olympic Environment
Using Remote Sensing” (2002BA904B07-2) funded by the Ministry of Science and
Technology, China.

References
1. Armstrong, M. P., and Marciano, R. J., 1997, Massively Parallel Strategies for Local
Spatial Interpolation. Computers & Geosciences. Vol.23, No.8，pp.859-867.
2. Cannataro, M., 2000, Clusters and grids for distributed and parallel knowledge discovery.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 1823, 708-716, 2000.
3. Goodchild, M. F., 2001, http://www.csiss.org/learning_resources/content/good_sa.
4. Lanthier, M., and Nussbaurm, D., 2003, Parallel implementation of geometric shortest path
algorithms. Parallel Computing, 29, 1445-1479.
5. Li, B., 1996, Implementing Spatial Statistics on Parallel Computers. In S. I. Arlinghaus, D.
A. Griffith, W. C. Arlinghaus, W. D. Drake, & J. D. Nystuen (Eds.), Practical Handbook of
Spatial Statistics, (New York:CRC Press) pp.107-148.
6. Pouchard, L; Cinquini, L; Drach, B; Middleton, D; Bernholdt, D; Chanchio, K; Foster, I;
Nefedova, V; Brown, D; Fox, P; Garcia, J; Strand, G; Williams, D; Chervenak, A;
Kesselman, C; Shoshani, A; Sim, A., 2003, An ontology for scientific information in a grid
environment: The Earth system grid. In Proceeding of CCGRID 2003: 3rd IEEE/ACM
International Symposium on Cluster Computing and the GRID held in Tokyo, Japan on
May 12-15, 2003, pp626-632.
7. Roros, D. -K. D. and Armstrong, M. P., 1996, Using Linda to Compute Spatial
Autocorrelation in Parallel. Computers & Geosciences.Vol.22, No.4, pp.425-432.
8. Roros, D. -K. D. and Armstrong, M. P., 1998, Experiments in the Identification of Terrain
Features Using a PC-Based Parallel Computer. Photogrammetric Engineering & Remote
Sensing.Vol.64, No.2, pp.135-142.
9. Wang, S. and Armstrong, M. P., 2003, A Quadtree Approach to Domain Decomposition for
Spatial Interpolation in Grid Computing Environments. Parallel Computing. 29, 1481-1504.

