A Hybrid Model of Sprouting Angiogenesis
Florian Milde, Michael Bergdorf, and Petros Koumoutsakos
Computational Science, ETH Z¨
urich, CH-8092, Switzerland
petros@ethz.ch

Abstract. We present a computational model of tumor induced sprouting angiogenesis that involves a novel coupling of particle-continuum descriptions. The present 3D model of sprouting angiogenesis accounts for
the eﬀect of the extracellular matrix on capillary growth and considers
both soluble and matrix-bound growth factors. The results of the simulations emphasize the role of the extracellular matrix and the diﬀerent
VEGF isoforms on branching behavior and the morphology of generated
vascular networks.
Keywords: Blood vessel growth, Sprouting angiogenesis, Computational
modeling, Particle-continuum coupling, 3D, Matrix-bound VEGF, Extracellular matrix, Branching.

1

Introduction

Sprouting angiogenesis, the process of new capillaries forming from existing vessels, can be observed in the human body under various conditions. In this work,
we focus on tumor-induced angiogenesis, where a tumor in hypoxic conditions,
secretes growth factors in order to establish its own vasculature to ensure nutrient and oxygen supply to the tumor cells leading to increased tumor cell
proliferation and enhanced tumor growth.
The process of tumor-induced angiogenesis is initiated by tumor cells in conditions of glucose deprivation and hypoxia, with the shortage of oxygen supply
triggering the release of angiogenic growth factors. Among the several growth
factors known to contribute to the process, Vascular Endothelial Growth Factors
(VEGF) have been identiﬁed as one of the key components. Upon release from
the tumor, VEGFs diﬀuse through the ExtraCellular Matrix (ECM) occupying
the space between tumor and existing vasculature and establish a chemical gradient. Once VEGF has reached a vessel, it binds to the receptors located on
Endothelial Cells (EC), which line the blood vessel walls. This binding sets oﬀ a
cascade of events triggering the outgrowth of new vessel sprouts at the existing
vasculature near the tumor. While endothelial cell proliferation is conﬁned to a
region located behind the sprout tip, endothelial tip cells located at the sprouting front migrate through the ECM thus deﬁning the morphology of the newly
formed vasculature. Migrating tip cells probe their environment by extending
ﬁlopodia and migrate along the VEGF gradient towards regions of higher concentration, a directed motion referred to as chemotaxis. In addition to the soluble
isoform of VEGF, the presence of other VEGF isoforms expressing binding sites
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2008, Part II, LNCS 5102, pp. 167–176, 2008.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

168

F. Milde, M. Bergdorf, and P. Koumoutsakos

for the ECM has been identiﬁed to signiﬁcantly inﬂuence morphology of capillary network formation [12,9]. These “matrix-bound” VEGF isoforms can be
cleaved from the ECM by Matrix MetalloProteinases (MMPs), expressed both
by tumors and migrating ECs.
Another component involved in the process of angiogenesis is ﬁbronectin, a
glycoprotein distributed in the ECM and at the same time released by migrating tip cells. Fibronectin binds to ﬁbers occupying about 30% of the ECM.
Through interaction with transmembrane receptors located on the EC membrane, ﬁbronectin establishes an adhesive gradient which servers as another migration cue for the ECs. This autocrine signaling pathway, promoting cell-cell
and cell-matrix adhesion, accounts for a movement referred to as haptotaxis. In
addition to the chemotactic and haptotactic cues, the ﬁbrous structures itself
present in the ECM inﬂuence cell migration by facilitating movement in ﬁber
direction.
After initial sprouts have extended into the EC for some distance, repeated
branching of the tips can be observed. Sprout tips approaching others may fuse
and form loops, a process called anastomosis. Along with anastomosis, the formation of lumen within the strands of endothelial cells establishes a network
that allows the circulation of blood. In a ﬁnal stage, the newly formed vessels
maturate, establishing a basal lamina and recruit pericytes and smooth muscle
cells to stabilize the vessel walls. An overview of the biological processes involved
in angiogenesis can be found in [8,10,11] and references therein.
In the following, we propose a mathematical model of sprouting angiogenesis
together with the computational methods that implement the equations in 3D.
Along with the model, simulation results are shown, underlining the eﬀect of
the ECM structure and matrix-bound growth factors on the generated network
morphology.
1.1

Computational Modeling of Angiogenesis

Computational models of tumor-induced angiogenesis address a limited number of the involved biological processes. The choice of the modeled processes is
dictated by the availability of biological data and by the understanding of the
underlying biological processes. In the presented model we consider the motion
of the ECs as aﬀected by chemical gradients induced by VEGF, haptotactic
gradients induced by ﬁbronectin and by the structure of the ECM. We note
that the present assumptions may be more pertinent to in-vitro angiogenesis
rather than in-vivo angiogenesis which is known to depend on the particular
microenvironment [15].
In the present work VEGF appears in soluble and matrix-bound isoforms.
The soluble VEGF is released from an implicit tumor source, and diﬀuses freely
through the ECM. The matrix-bound VEGF isoform is randomly distributed and
can be cleaved by MMPs released at the sprout tips. Diﬀerent VEGF isoforms
contribute equally to the migration cues of the ECs (see Fig. 1).
Fibronectin is released at sprout tips, establishing a haptotactic gradient for
the ECs. In addition, we model the binding of ﬁbronectin to the ECM which

A Hybrid Model of Sprouting Angiogenesis

169

localises the haptotactic cues. The ECM is explicitly modeled to consist of directed bundles of collagen ﬁbers randomly distributed throughout the domain.
A vector ﬁeld describing the ﬁber directions modulates the migration velocity of
the ECs in the presence of ﬁbers.
A summary of work done in the ﬁeld of modeling angiogenesis can be found
in [10]. More recent work includes the inﬂuence of blood ﬂow on the process
of angiogenesis by Chaplain et al. [6], the model proposed by Sun et al. [14]
considering the conductivity of the ECM and a cell based model of angiogenesis
by Bauer et al. [2].
The present model is the ﬁrst, to the best of our knowledge, to include a
cleaving mechanism and to present simulations in the presence of both VEGF
isoforms. The proposed 3D modeling approach combines the continuum representation [1,5,14] with a cell based approach conﬁned to the migrating tip cells
located at the sprouting front. We implement a hybrid approach to represent
molecular species by their concentration and migrating EC tip cells by particles.
The evolution of molecular species is governed by reaction-diﬀusion equations
that are discretized on the grid while a particle approach is employed in order
to model the migrating EC tip cells. The particle and grid descriptions are coupled as the ECs both serve as a source of ﬁbronectin and MMPs and as sink for
VEGF (binding to the cell surface receptors). As the tip cells migrate through
the ECM following up the chemotactic and haptotactic cues, they “depose” ECs
along their way leaving a trail of endothelial cell density on the grid that deﬁnes
the 3D vessel structure of the outgrowing sprouts. Filopodia are explicitly modeled to sense chemotactic and haptotactic migration cues, which determine the
sprout branching behavior. We report statistics on sprout section length, branching and anastomosis frequency, enabling a quantiﬁcation of diﬀerent parametric
models and paving the way for future comparisons with experimental works.

2

Vascular Endothelial Growth Factors

Matrix-bound VEGF (bVEGF, Ψb ) does not diﬀuse and it is assumed to be
locally distributed on the ﬁbers composing the ECM. The bVEGF can be cleaved
from the matrix by MMPs(χ) released from migrating ECs. Further, ECs express
surface receptors that bind VEGF molecules.
∂Ψb
= −C Ψb , χ − U Ψb ,
∂t

(1)

with the cleaving function:
C (Ψb , χ) = min (Ψb , υbV χΨb ) ,

(2)

and the cleaving rate υbV . The uptake function is given by
U [C] = min ([C], υV σ) ,

(3)

with the endothelial uptake rate of VEGF given by υV and the endothelial cell
density σ.

170

F. Milde, M. Bergdorf, and P. Koumoutsakos

Fig. 1. Left: Conceptual sketch of the diﬀerent VEGF isoforms present in the ECM.
Soluble and cleaved VEGF isoforms freely diﬀuse through the ECM, Matrix-bound
VEGF isoforms stick to the ﬁbrous structures composing the ECM and can be cleaved
by MMPs secreted by the sprout tips. Right: Conceptional x-z plane through the computational domain. Five sprout tips are initially placed on the y-z plane lower end of
the domain in x direction, a tumor source of soluble VEGF is modeled at the upper
end in x direction outside the computational domain.

Cleaved bVEGF (cVEGF,Ψc ) and solube VEGF(sVEGF, Ψs ) diﬀuse through
the ECM and are subject to natural decay. Endothelial cell uptake is modeled
by the uptake function U.
∂Ψc
= kV ∇2 Ψc + C Ψb , χ − U Ψc − dV Ψc .
∂t

(4)

sVEGF creation is implicitly modeled by dirichlet boundary conditions (Fig. 1).
∂Ψs
= kV ∇2 Ψs − U Ψs − dV Ψs .
∂t

3

(5)

Fibronectin

Fibronectin (Φ) is released by the migrating ECs depending on the local ﬁbronectin concentration. We consider ﬁbronectin released by ECs binding to
integrins located at the EC membrane and to matrix ﬁbers. Fibronectin diﬀuses
through the ECM when not bound to the matrix and is subject to natural decay.
∂Φ
= kF ∇2 Φ + γF G Fth , Φ Σ − υbF (bFth − Φ) − dF Φ,
∂t
with creation function

(6)

Cth − C
.
(7)
Cth
depending on the local ﬁbronectin concentration and the creation threshold level
Fth . The rate of ﬁbronection binding to the ECM is given by υbF and limited
by bFth to account for binding site saturation in the ECM.
G Cth , C =

A Hybrid Model of Sprouting Angiogenesis

171

Once ﬁbronectin binds to the ECM, further diﬀusion is inhibited. The matrixbound ﬁbronectin(Φb ) evolution is given by:
∂Φb
= υbF (bFth − Φ) − dbF Φb .
∂t
3.1

(8)

Matrix-MetalloProteinases

MMPs(χ) cleave the bVEGF isoforms from the binding sites in the ECM and
are assumed to be released at the migrating ECs depending on the local MMP
concentration. The speciﬁc release rate is given by γM and Σ describes the
endothelial tip cell density. MMP release is stopped when the local MMP level
approaches the threshold level Mth . Upon release by the ECs, MMPs are assumed
to diﬀuse through the ECM and are subject to natural decay.
∂χ
= kM ∇2 χ + γM G Mth , χ Σ − dM χ.
∂t

4

(9)

Endothelial Cells

The migration direction of endothelial tip cells is determined by chemotactic and
haptotactic cues in the matrix given by VEGF and ﬁbronectin gradients. As the
VEGF level increases, EC surface receptors become occupied, attenuating the
cells ability to sense the chemotactic cues. The attenuation is represented by a
function W. The sprout tip acceleration during migration is deﬁned as :
a = α (Eρ ) T (W (Ψ) ∇Ψ + wF ∇Φb ) ,
where

(10)

wV
,
1 + wv2 Ψ

(11)

Ψ = Ψs + Ψb + Ψc .

(12)

W (Ψ) =
and

The presence of ﬁbers (Eρ ) promote mesenchymal motion of the tip cells, thus
enhance the migration speed of ECs. In contrast, a very dense matrix slows down
the migration speed of the tip cells as characterized by the function:
α (Eρ ) = (E0 + Eρ ) (E1 − Eρ ) C1 ,

(13)

where the threshold E0 deﬁnes the migration factor in the absence of ﬁbers,
E1 the maximal ﬁber density and C1 the ECM migration constant . To model
the directional cues of the matrix ﬁbers, a tensor T is introduced acting on the
migration velocity.
{T}ij = (1 − β (Eχ )) {1}ij + β (Eχ ) Ki Kj ,

(14)

β (Eχ ) = βK Eχ ,

(15)

with

172

F. Milde, M. Bergdorf, and P. Koumoutsakos

the ECM strength βK and K being the vector ﬁeld the tensor is applied on. Tip
cell particle positions xp are updated according to:
xp
up
= up ,
= ap − λup ,
∂t
∂t

(16)

with drag coeﬃcient λ.
The matrix structure may promote diverging migration directions, leading to
branching of the endothelial tip cells and creation of new sprouts. In our model,
we locate regions of high anisotropy in the migration acceleration direction ﬁeld
by a curvature measure k as proposed in [16].
Branching occurs in locations where the local curvature k exceeds a threshold level aith . In order to determine the preferred branching direction in 3D, 6
satellite particles are distributed radially around the tip cell particle in a plane
perpendicular to the migration direction modeling the extension of ﬁlopodia.
The velocity ﬁeld is compared at opposing satellite positions and branching occurs into the directions that diverge the most. ECs are insensitive to branching
cues immediately after a branching event has occurred. In order to account for
this eﬀect, a sprout threshold age sath is introduced. Sprout tips of age smaller
than sath are not considered for branching. Anastomosis occurs when tip cells
fuse either with existing sprouts or with other tip cells.
In order to obtain the endothelial cell density deﬁning the capillary sprouts, at
every time step, we interpolate the sprout tip cell density Qp at xp onto the grid
using a 4th order B-spline kernel B4 and add the maximum of the interpolated
sprout tips and the σ ﬁeld onto the σ ﬁeld.
B4 (ih − xp ) B4 (jh − yp ) B4 (kh − zp ) Qp ,

n+1
n
σijk
= max σijk
,

(17)

p

with particle weight Qp , and mesh size h whereas n denotes the nth time step.

5

ECM

In the present work the ECM is modeled as a collection of ﬁber bundles randomly
distributed throughout the computational domain. The ECM is represented by
three grid-functions: (i) a vector ﬁeld K that describes the ﬁber orientations, (ii)
a smooth indicator function Eχ , which indicates the presence of ﬁbers at any
given point in space, and (iii) a ﬁber density ﬁeld Eρ , which is used to regulate
migration speed.
These ﬁelds are constructed in a straightforward manner by generating N
random ﬁbers with a given length fl which is constant for all ﬁbers. These ﬁbers
are then put on the grid much like lines are rasterized in computer graphics [4].
In the case of K the directions are rasterized onto the grid, and in the case of
Eχ we tag the grid points at the ﬁber locations with a value of 1, resulting in
randomly distributed ﬁbers.
The ﬁelds K and Eρ are ﬁltered with a Gaussian ﬁlter to achieve a smooth
matrix representation. In the case of Eχ this is not possible, so the ﬁeld is

A Hybrid Model of Sprouting Angiogenesis

173

constructed by using smoothed ﬁbers. In cases where ﬁbers overlap the maximum
value of the two ﬁbers is retained.

6

Methods

The time step constraint for diﬀusion on the molecular species is stricter than
for the reaction part. A fractional step algorithm is used to solve the system
eﬃciently. In this algorithm the non linear and linear reaction parts of the equations are solved simultaneously using explicit Euler steps, while linear diﬀusion is
solved implicitly. The systems can be safely decoupled, as EC cell migration occurs on a much smaller time scale than molecular diﬀusion and steady state can
be assumed for the source and sink of the diﬀerent proteins. VEGF, ﬁbronectin
and acceleration gradients for migration velocity and the curvature measure are
calculated on the grid using second order ﬁnite diﬀerences. In order to get the
acceleration and curvature on the particle location, Mesh-Particle interpolations
are done using the M4 kernel [3] while for the interpolation of the sprout tip
density onto the grid, Particle-Mesh interpolations employ 4th order B-spline
kernel.

7

Results

We present results demonstrating the eﬀect of the ECM density on the resulting
vessel networks. The computational domain is deﬁned as a cube of 1.53 mm
discretized with a 1283 uniform grid. The ECM was modeled using random ﬁber
ﬁelds, created with ﬁve diﬀerent matrix densities: 15,000 ﬁbers resulting in a
volume density of 6%, 30,000 ﬁbers (11%), 70,000 ﬁbers (26%), 100,000 ﬁbers
(38%), and 200,000 ﬁbers (75%)(see Fig. 2). The normalized volume density
is given by the sum of the ﬁber density Eρ over all grid points divided by the
number of grid points. For each density value we performed 128 simulations with
a diﬀerent random seed for the ﬁber placement.
Comparing the number of branches found in the computational domain at
simulation time T = 25.0 corresponding to 10.9 days in physical time, (Fig. 3)
we ﬁnd a logarithmic increase of the number of branches for linearly increasing
ﬁber density. Examples of the structure of the corresponding vessel networks
are depicted in Fig. 2: in very low density ECMs, hardly any branching occurs,
while in very dense ECMs the EC sprouts branch very often. In the 75% density
case the ﬁber density is high enough to impair the migration which leads to
shorter capillary networks (Fig. 2 E). In Fig. 4 we depict the evolution of the
vascular network in the presence of initially distributed pockets of bVEGF. The
bVEGF pockets are cleaved by MMPs (not shown) as the sprouts approach the
VEGF source at the far end of the domain. The vessels grow in diameter by
application of a post-processing vessel maturation method(not described in this
work).

174

A

F. Milde, M. Bergdorf, and P. Koumoutsakos

B

C

D

E

C

Fig. 2. Top: Slice of the ECM ﬁeld for ﬁve diﬀerent densities: A 6%, B 11%, C 26%, D
38%, and E 75%. Bottom: Capillary networks for the diﬀerent ECM densities.
70.0

number of branches [-]

60.0
50.0
40.0
30.0
20.0
10.0
0.0
0.01

0.1
ECM density [-]

1

Fig. 3. Inﬂuence of the matrix density on the number of branches of the vessel network
(error bars represent min/max of data)

Fig. 4. Capillary network evolution in the presence of bVEGF pockets. bVEGF is
cleaved by MMPs during the course of the simulation.

A Hybrid Model of Sprouting Angiogenesis

8

175

Conclusions

The present work describes the ﬁrst, to the best of our knowledge, simulations
of 3D sprouting angiogenesis that incorporate eﬀects of the extracellular matrix
structure on the vessel morphology and considers both soluble and matrix-bound
growth factor isoforms. The method is formulated as a generalized hybrid particle
method and is implemented in the context of a parallel framework (PPM) [13].
This aspect of the method renders it scalable to massively parallel computer
architectures, a crucial aspect for the study of angiogenesis at macroscopic scales
and integrative models of vascular tumor growth. Eﬃcient Particle to Mesh and
Mesh to Particle interpolation schemes provide a straightforward way of coupling
the two levels of representation.
The presented simulations of sprouting angiogenesis have shown that the
structure and density of the ECM has a direct eﬀect on the morphology, expansion speed and number of branches observed in computationally grown vessel
networks. The simulations reﬂect the inﬂuence of the extracellular matrix composition on endothelial cell migration and network formation corresponding to
observations made by [7].
With the number of branches depending on the matrix structure and the
presence and level of matrix-bound VEGF isoforms, this model may be easier to tune against experiments compared to branching probabilities that most
individual-based methods employ.
Limitations of the current model are related to the explicit deﬁnition of tip
cells restricting the formation of new sprout tips to predeﬁned locations on the
initial vasculature. Formulation of a tip cell selection method combined with
cell type speciﬁc migration and proliferation rules are the subject of current
work. The integration of the present framework in studies of tumor induced
angiogenesis is a subject of coordinated investigations with experimental groups.

References
1. Anderson, A.R.A., Chaplain, M.A.J.: Continuous and Discrete Mathematical Models of Tumor-Induced Angiogenesis. Bull. Math. Biol. 60(5), 857–899 (1998)
2. Bauer, A.L., Jackson, T.L., Jiang, Y.: A Cell-Based Model Exhibiting Branching
and Anastomosis During Tumor-Induced Angiogenesis. Biophys. J. 92, 3105–3121
(2007)
3. Bergdorf, M., Koumoutsakos, P.: A Lagrangian Particle-Wavelet Method. Multiscale Model. and Simul. 5(3), 980–995 (2006)
4. Bresenham, J.E.: Algorithm for Computer Control of a Digital Plotter. IBM Syst.
J. 4(1), 25–30 (1965)
5. Chaplain, M.A.: Mathematical Modelling of Angiogenesis. J. Neurooncol. 50(1-2),
37–51 (2000)
6. Chaplain, M.A.J., McDougall, S.R., Anderson, A.R.A.: Mathematical Modeling of
Tumor-Induced Angiogenesis. Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 8, 233–257 (2006)
7. Davis, E.G., Senger, D.R.: Endothelial Extracellular Matrix: Biosynthesis, Remodeling, and Functions During Vascular Morphogenesis and Neovessel Stabilization.
Circ. Res. 97(11), 1093–1107 (2005)

176

F. Milde, M. Bergdorf, and P. Koumoutsakos

8. Folkman, J.: Angiogenesis: an Organizing Principle for Drug Discovery? Nat. Rev.
Drug Discov. 6(4), 273–286 (2007)
9. Lee, S., Jilani, S.M., Nikolova, G.V., Carpizo, D., Iruela-Arispe, M.L.: Processing
of VEGF-A by Matrix Metalloproteinases Regulates Bioavailability and Vascular
Patterning in Tumors. J. Cell Biol. 169(4), 681–691 (2005)
10. Mantzaris, N., Webb, S., Othmer, H.: Mathematical Modeling of Tumor-Induced
Angiogenesis. J. Math. Biol. 49, 111–187 (2004)
11. Paweletz, N., Knierim, M.: Tumor-Related Angiogenesis. Crit. Rev. in Oncol.
Hematol. 9(3), 197–242 (1989)
12. Ruhrberg, C., Gerhardt, H., Golding, M., Watson, R., Ioannidou, S., Fujisawa,
H., Betsholtz, C., Shima, D.T.: Spatially Restricted Patterning Cues Provided by
Heparin-Binding VEGF-A Control Blood Vessel Branching Morphogenesis. Genes
Dev. 16(20), 1684–2698 (2002)
13. Sbalzarini, I.F., Walther, J.H., Bergdorf, M., Hieber, S.E., Kotsalis, E.M.,
Koumoutsakos, P.: PPM – a Highly Eﬃcient Parallel Particle-Mesh Library. J.
Comput. Phys. 215(2), 566–588 (2006)
14. Sun, S., Wheeler, M.F., Obeyesekere, M., Patrick Jr., C.W.: A Deterministic Model
of Growth Factor-Induced Angiogenesis. Bull. Math. Biol. 67, 313–337 (2005)
15. Sung, S.Y., Hsieh, C.L., Wu, D., Chung, L.W.K., Johnstone, P.A.S.: Tumor Microenvironment Promotes Cancer Progression, Metastasis, and Therapeutic Resistance. Curr.Prob. Cancer 31(2), 36–100 (2007)
16. Weinkauf, T., Theisel, H.: Curvature Measures of 3d Vector Fields and their Applications. J. WSCG. 10, 507–514 (2002)

