Heat Diffusion – Searching for the Accurate Modeling
Malgorzata Langer1, Janusz Wozny1, Malgorzata Jakubowska2, and Zbigniew Lisik1
1

Institute of Electronics, Technical University of Lodz,
90-924 Lodz, ul. Wolczanska 211/215, Poland
{malgorzata.langer, jwozny, zbigniew.lisik}@p.lodz.pl
2
Institute of Electronic Materials Technology, Wolczynska Str. 133
01-919 Warsaw, Poland
malgorzata.jakubowska@itme.edu.pl

Abstract. The authors study three approaches which allow to model the steady
state heat conduction in a 2D multiphase composite. The subject under
investigating is the thermal conductivity of a c-BN composite thick film with
possible inclusions of air bubbles. To define the thermal conductivity we have
utilized (i) a commercial program ANSYS, for which a random structure has
been externally generated, (ii) a cellular automata (CA) based model and (iii) a
modified cellular automata based model where we have taken into account a
thermal contact resistance between adjacent grains of c-BN.

1 Introduction
Up-to-now the whole electronics, that is based on silicon can work in the low
temperature regime (max. 473K), and yet one should be aware that it will be soon
when the device should meet the demand to take as huge power density, as 400
W/cm2 [1]. That is why there are intensive works kept on designing new and
improving known materials with extremely high heat conductivity to be capable
taking such values over. The good and verified thermal model for mixtures,
conglomerates and other composites becomes an issue. Such materials as cubic boron
nitride (c-BN), gallium nitride (GaN), silicon carbide (SiC), and some others are to
widen the temperature range for electronic devices. One hopes that the mentioned
materials may allow increasing the temperature range even up to about 900K. The
Table 1 introduces cubic boron nitride features among which the good heat
conductivity, electrical insulation capabilities, the resistance against high temperature
and chemical agents’ impact make one being interested in this material. As with CVD
(Chemical Vapor Deposition) or PVD (Physical Vapor Deposition) it is impossible
obtaining layers thicker than 3000 Å (they delaminate [2]) and yet, it is difficult to
obtain crystalline structure that is wanted in electronics, the conception of thick film
technology – screen printing was realized and the c-BN films, 20 – 150 µm thick,
with a high adhesion to the substrate were deposited.
The tested films were deposited on alumina (Al2O3 96%), with a screen printing
technique through 325 mesh screen, then fired in a thick film belt furnace in 8500C,
10 minutes. The printed thick film composition (‘electronic paste’), based on c-BN is
a dispersive mixture of inorganic powders in a solution of organic resins. It consists of
three basic components:
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part I, LNCS 3991, pp. 498 – 505, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

Heat Diffusion – Searching for the Accurate Modeling

499

− the active phase that determines the electrical and thermal properties of the
layer, i.e. the grains of cubic boron nitride, 2-5μm big, obtained with method
shown in [3];
− the auxiliary phase (bonding) – bismuth-boron-silicate glass;
− the organic vehicle
The obtained film consists of c-BN grains surrounded by glass, with closed and
open pores filled with air (Fig. 1)

Fig. 1. SEM image with inverted contrast; a sample of the c-BN composite (magnified 5000x)
Table 1. Components and material properties of a c-BN composite sample

Material
c-BN
glass
air

thermal conductivity
[W/m2K]
1300
12
0.00271

density
[g/cm3]
3.48
6.64
0.0013

volume fraction
[%]
85.67
4.32
10

It is obvious the mutual ratio of these phases influences the thermal conductivity of
the film. The measurements for the film 100 μm thick (made with the method
described in [4]) result with values in the range 100-200 W/mK, depending on the
c-BN grain fraction, the purity, and the volume of pores. Comparing this number to
the c-BN thermal conductivity, one can see that although the thermal conductivity of
c-BN is very high, the effective thermal conductivity of a composite film is much
lower due to the presence of the glass, air inclusions and the fact that there are grains
of c-BN only and not a continuous layer of a monocrystal. Since the gas pores are
very small, one can neglect the convection and treat them as a material of low thermal
conductivity. So the conductivity of the composite layer is affected by the size and the
shape of grains, their orientation and the volume of c-BN phase. Since the thickness
of a layer is a dozen of grains one should consider the shape, the size and the position
of every grain.
There is a lack of references, where thermal modeling of composites deals with
different sizes and irregular shapes of grains. For instance in [5] every particle with
the high thermal conductivity is considered as a circle or sphere of randomly varying
radius and position. In [6] and [7] every node represents an element with the high or

500

M. Langer et al.

low conductivity. No thermal resistance of contacts was considered between
neighboring elements. The effective thermal conductivity of the layer was governed
by the existence of percolation path, mainly. A (random) resistors network has been
generated first [5], [6], [7] and then the solution was obtained with the use of various
approaches.
We have gone one step lower where the heat conduction inside grains and between
them should be properly modeled to get accurate effective conductivity of the film.

2 The First Approach – FEM
The first idea is always using a commercial software, and we have done it to calculate
an effective thermal conductivity. The ANSYS software, based on the FEM (Finite
Element Method), was used. As the number of grains may be higher than few dozens
so we prepare a special file (we have done it using Scilab 3.0 [8], but it may be done
in any other programming language). This is the script that covers input data for
geometry: information about distribution function of the grain size, permissible angles
between adjacent edges of a grain and the final size of a composite sample. Thus, the
structure is completely stochastic. The basic assumption is that the grains cannot
overlap one another. Thus, after generating, any grain is to be placed in the structure
in such a location where it does not overlap with other grains and its position is as low
as possible (Fig. 2 shows an example how the geometry is constructed).

Fig. 2. A midstep of the geometry generation process. We have to place a grain in the lowest
possible location.

An example of such an input file’s result is presented in Fig. 3.

Fig. 3. The geometry used for defining the effective thermal conductivity of a composite layer

Heat Diffusion – Searching for the Accurate Modeling

501

Additional (grey) layers work as buffers between the film and the boundary
conditions and guarantee a space for a heat source. Setting boundary conditions as
presented in Fig. 3 assures that the entire heat flux must flow trough the composite
layer. The task for ANSYS is to mesh the domain, to solve it, and to export some
results Fig. 4

Fig. 4. The mesh and temperature distribution of the composite layer

Since one knows the dissipated power, dimensions of the film and average
temperatures on both sides of it, one can calculate its effective thermal conductivity.
For the film in Fig. 4 the volume fraction of c-BN was ca. 50% and no air was
considered. The effective thermal conductivity amounts to ca. 64 Wm-1K-1.
The mesh consists of 12⋅103 nodes. It took about 1 min (2800+ Athlon PC) to
obtain these results. So one can reasonably expect that also 3D simulation can be
performed.
Of course there are some issues that must be considered. First, the presented
method of generating geometry of the structure doesn’t allow getting high (ca. > 70%)
c-BN volume ratios. Then, if we get a large number of grains comparing to the glass
phase, the space between them can be very narrow which will cause problems with
mesh generation. Thus a case when two grains have a common edge should be also
taken into account. Summarizing, a “simple” problem of creating the composite
structure evolves into modeling of composite fabrication process, not discussed here.
However, the presented results show that it is possible to obtain the effective thermal
conductivity with this method.

3 Standard Cellular Automata (CA) Approach
To solve the steady-state heat diffusion differential equation there is no need to utilize
any sophisticated commercial software. One can use a cellular automata, which
allows to model behaviors of physical systems [9],[10], and also to mimic a diffusion
process. On a homogeneous 2D square lattice the temperature at a given node is
obtained as a mean value of temperatures at 4 neighboring nodes (1) [11]. This is
enough to mimic the diffusion. When the lattice is not uniform or the environment
is not homogeneous one has to use a weighted mean (1). Such a case is presented in

502

M. Langer et al.

Fig. 5. The space between nodes can be chosen freely as well as thermal conductivity
of each cell. Then, the only problem is to obtain the weights.

T(i, j) =

4

∑ p k Tk (i, j)

.

(1)

k =1

where T(i,j) is the temperature at (i,j) node and Tk(i,j) denotes k-th neighbour of (i,j)
node, pk is a proper weight. A sum of all pk’s is always one.
The weights can be obtained using finite difference representation of the
differential equation. The final result is (2) [11].:

[

Ti , j = p e Ti +1, j + p w Ti −1, j + p n Ti, j+1 + p s Ti −1, j+1 + S i, j HGEN

(

)

(

)

]1t
(

)

Δy
Δy
Δx
k i, j + k i, j−1 ; p w =
k i −1, j + k i −1, j−1 ; p n =
k i −1, j + k i , j ; .
2 Δx
2 Δx
2Δy
Δx
ps =
k i −1, j−1 + k i , j−1 ; t = p e + p w + p n + p s
2 Δy

pe =

(

(2)

)

where HGEN is a heat generation rate, and Si,j is the heat generation area.

Fig. 5. Every node has its own temperature which depends on temperatures of adjacent cells.
Such local relation is typical for cellular automata.

For the isothermal boundary condition (b.c.) we fix the temperature at the boundary
node. If the edge is adiabatic, an image of the node which is nearest to the edge is
placed, the other side of boundary is to obtain a reflective property of adiabatic b.c.
The structure and the temperature distributions are shown in Fig. 6. The structure
resolution is 100x100 pixels, and each pixel represents one cell. The shade indicates
material.
To calculate the steady-state distribution we needed ca. 10 minutes (Athlon XP,
2800+). The effective thermal conductivity was found about 90 Wm-1K-1.
The volume ratios were respectively: cBN - 83% , glass - 7%, air - 10%. This is
much closer to the values placed in Table 1, but also close to the measurements.
However the lower bound of glass phase is still limited by the size of one pixel. For
100 pixels we cannot decrease it below 1% if any. And each grain must be bounded
by the glass. To decrease the volume fraction of the glass one should have to increase
the resolution which would increase time of calculation. For 200x200 pixels 2 hours
(Athlon XP, 2800+) were necessary to find the final solution.

Heat Diffusion – Searching for the Accurate Modeling

503

Fig. 6. The 100x100 pixels structure, the temperature distribution and the temperature profile
along dashed line. The size of each pixel was assumed 1μm×1μm.

So we have to deal with two problems: we have to (i) decrease time of computation
by lowering the resolution (keeping in mind the accuracy), (ii) decrease the lower
limit of the glass volume .This can be done by a slight modification of the CA

4 Modified Cellular Automata Approach
Having in mind the temperature distribution (Fig. 6), and the temperature profile, one
can see that the temperature steps correspond to the glass regions and the profile
reminds a profile with contact thermal resistances. Thus one can eliminate pixels
which surround each grain by introducing contact resistances.
The formulas (2) were derived from the finite difference, but they can also be
obtained by connecting adjacent nodes by thermal resistors. Introducing thermal
contact resistances the resistances can be calculated from the conductivity and
dimensions of a cell Fig. 7.

Fig. 7. The way of introducing contact thermal resistance. dc – thickness of the contact. Please
note that here the node lies at the center of the cell.

The resistance of the contact is calculated as the resistance of a layer with the
thickness dc.
rw ,c =

dc
1
.
k c Δy ⋅ [1m]

(3)

504

M. Langer et al.

Assuming that the thickness of a glass layer is small and that its thermal
conductivity is much lower than the conductivity of c-BN one can assume that there is
no heat conduction along the joint layer and the resistance rw,1 is:
rw ,1 =

1
Δx
.
k i , j 2(Δy − d c ) ⋅ [1m]

(4)

Similarly we obtain other resistances and then proper weights. So the final recipe
for the diffusive CA has not changed, but the value of weights was modified.
Two temperature profiles in two composite films are presented in Fig 8 . The
composition of the films a) and b) is: c-BN – 91% and 88%, glass – 1% and 3%, air –
8% and 8% of volume ratio. The effective thermal impedance was about 773 Wm-1K-1
and 515 Wm-1K-1, respectively. We can see that for the b) structure the steps are much
higher since the thickness of the glass film is higher. Even a small change of glass
content may change the effective conductivity significantly. For this method of
modeling there is no bottom limit for glass fraction.

a)

b)

Tmax 1

Temperature

Tmax 2

Tmax 2 > Tmax 1

nodes
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

nodes
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

Fig. 8. Temperature profile along dashed line. The domain consists of 100x100 pixels of a size
1μm×1μm each. The thickness of contact layer was a) 0.1 and b) 0.3 of a cell size.

5 Discussion on Efficiency of Cellular Automata
The system which has been analyzed by means of CA can be also solved by forming a
system of linear equations:
(5)

A•X=B .
4

For the domain of 100x100 pixels X – is a vector of 10 unknown temperatures. A is a
104x104 sparse matrix. B is a 104 elements vector. When using CA we need at least
one 100x100 matrix where we store temperatures and four 100x100 matrices for
weights. So we do not need a 104x104 matrix. Even if it’s a sparse matrix we have to
remember indeces of non zero elements. The simplest iterative methods of solving (5)
are the Jacobi and Gauss-Seidel algorithms [12]. In both cases we have not obtained
shorter time of computation in comparison to CA algorithm. It doesn’t mean that CA
methods are fast enough. The speed is a problem, but a problem which can be solved.
First we can use a non-uniform grid: finer near grain boundaries and courser inside a

Heat Diffusion – Searching for the Accurate Modeling

505

grain. This will affect only weights. Moreover, different levels of mesh could be
introduced so an approximated solution could be found first, and next, using more
accurate mesh a detail solution would be obtained.

6 Conclusions
The purpose of this study was to investigate an efficient method of accurate modeling
of composites’ thermal properties. We have considered: (i) an approach which utilizes
ANSYS software, (ii) a cellular automata method.
Using the first approach, the result comes very fast but if we have the geometry
already prepared. And the basic problem is to generate the structure. We should
consider not only the position of each grain but also a possible sticking one grain to
another if we need to lower the glass fraction. So should be ready to face up a
problem of modeling fabrication process.
Of course this can be the case for CA approach. However we can use a scanned
and reviewed image of the composite layer as input data. Since a CA can easily deal
with complex boundaries we are not restricted to simple shapes which are necessary
for ANSYS. The CA is an easy approach and very intuitive.

References
1. J.L., German R.M., Hems K.F., Guiton Th.A., Injection Molding AlN for Thermal
Management Applications, Bull. Am. Ceram. Soc. 75[8], 1996, pp. 61-65.
2. Mirkarimi P.B., McCarty K.F., Medlin D.L., Review of Advances In Cubic Boron Nitride
Symthesis, Materials Science and Engineering, R21 (1997), pp. 47-100
3. Giellissee P. Niculescu H., Temblay J., Achmatowicz S., Jakubowska M., & others, High
Thermal Conductivity Cubic Boron Nitride Thick Films, Proc. of 2001 Int. Symp. on
Microelectronics, Oct. 9-11, 2001, Baltimore, pp.379-383.
4. Achmatowicz S., Zwierkowska E., Wyżkiewicz I., Łobodziński W., New Approach to
Thermal Conductivity of Thin Films Measurements by Means of Comparative Method,
Proc. of 35th Int. Symp. On Microel., 2003, pp. 655-660
5. Gerenrot D., Berlyand L., Philips J.: Random Network Model for Heat Transfer in High
Contrast Composite Materials, IEEE Trans. on Advanced Packaging, vol. 26, No. 4,
Nov. 2003, 410416
6. Devpura A., Prasher R. S.: Percolation Theory Applied to the Analysis of Thermal
Interface Materials in Flip-Chip Technology, Itherm 2000, May 24-26, 2000, Las Vegas,
NV, 21-28
7. Staggs J.E.J.: “Estimating the thermal conductivity of chars and porous residues using
thermal resistor networks” Fire Safety Journal 37 (2002) 107–119
8. http://scilabsoft.inria.fr/
9. Wolf-Gladrow D.: Lattice Gas Cellular Automata and Lattice Boltzmann Models: An
Introduction, Lecture notes in mathematics 1795, Springer-Verlag 2000
10. Wolfram S.: A new kind of science, Wolfram Media (May, 2002)
11. Haji-Sheikh A. Monte Carlo Methods in In Handbook of Numerical Heat Transfer, John
Wiley & Sons, New York, 1988, pp. 673-722
12. Jon H. Mathews, Kurtis D. Fink Numerical Methods Using Matlab 3rd ed., Prentice Hall ‘99

