Collaborative Teleradiology
Krzysztof ZieliĔski1, Jacek Caáa1, àukasz Czekierda1, Sáawomir ZieliĔski1
1

Dept. of Computer Science, AGH – University of Science and Technology,
al. A. Mickiewicza 30, 30-059 Kraków, Poland
{kz,cala,luke,slawek}@cs.agh.edu.pl
http://www.cs.agh.edu.pl

Abstract. The paper introduces a notion of collaborative teleradiology as a
novel organisation of information exchange during a remote radiological
consultation. A general interaction pattern between medical experts taking part
in a collaborative teleradiology session has been defined. This session has been
compared to interaction typically performed in WWW centric teleradiology
systems. Next technical implication of a proposed information exchange
paradigm has been elaborated. Finally two prototype tools TeleNegatoscope
and TeleDICOM that supporting of the collaborative teleradiology working
environment have been described in more details.

1 Introduction
Most of the existing teleradiology [1] and PACS systems [2] nowadays are oriented
on asynchronous communication between a radiology expert and other medical staff.
The applied communication pattern assumes communication via a central database
where results of radiology investigations are stored. These radiology data could be
accessed either locally or remotely via computer network by radiology experts in
order to make diagnoses which are stored back into the database and can be further
accessible for authorized medical personnel. This co-operation pattern has been
recently enhanced with WWW technology application that provides standardised
uniform platform for remote access from any computer attached to a computer
network to the data stored in the database. The application of WWW technology does
not remove two important characteristic features of the discussed pattern i.e. lack of
real-time interactivity between a radiology expert and other doctors, and sensitivity to
computer network quality of service (QoS) parameters.
Progress in distributed computer system architectures and software technologies
[3,4,5] offers possibility of developing new communication patterns suitable for
teleradiology applications which do not suffer from the pointed out deficiencies.
These patterns make it possible to achieve on-line communication between experts in
a medical reference centre and doctors in a peripheral hospital and collaborative
synchronous work on the same radiology data.
This paper introduces a notion of collaborative teleradiology, which assumes that a
group of medical experts located in different clinics or hospitals work synchronously
on the same radiology data sharing access to them and exchanging comments by
using computer network. In that sense it brings a teleworking environment in
medicine on higher, more advanced, level. Collaborative teleradiology addresses not
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3039, pp. 1172−1179, 2004.
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

Collaborative Teleradiology 1173

only telediagnosis but also teleconsultancy issues by providing tools and mechanisms
enabling on-line exchange of opinions. The key challenge from the technical point of
view is how to implement a collaborative distributed system efficiently in context of
constrained communication and computational resources along with high demands of
medical applications.
The structure of the paper is as follows. First, the collaborative teleradiology
system architecture requirements are presented and discussed in details. Features of
this system are then compared to the web centric approach. Particular attention has
been put to network QoS requirements, which result from different large data set
sharing models. Next, synchronization techniques, which are essential to any
collaborative distributed system, are presented. Finally, an example collaborative
teleradiology application called TeleDICOM is presented. The system is under
development and will be introduced to a medical practice in Krakow Center of
Telemedicine. The paper ends with conclusions.

2 Web-Centric Approach vs. Collaborative Systems
Collaborative teleradiology could be understood as a new radiology medical datasharing pattern for telemedicine. To understand better what collaborative work means
is it necessary to refer to the definition of collaborative computing systems [6] and
compare it to a web centric approach.
In the context of teleradiology, collaborative computing means application sharing
[7] that allows:
x
x
x
x

taking an existing single user application and making it shareable,
broadcasting graphics, mouse movements, and edits to all participants,
usage of telepointer and “Master” pointer,
integration with audio, video and text chat connections.

A single-user application that could be made shareable over a network could be,
for instance, a DICOM images viewer commonly used in any digital radiology
system. This simple concept requires construction of highly interactive, collaborative
environment, which should provide abstraction of a session (i.e., a group of objects
associated with some common communication pattern), and support full-duplex
multi-point communication among arbitrary number of connected application entities.
The primary functionality provided by the collaborative teleradiology application
is to send digital images to all of the participants within a communication session.
Each of the images is represented as a shared byte array, so that any modification
made by a session member is automatically reported to all of the session members.
This ability should be enhanced with synchronization facilities, e.g. possibility to
ensure mutually exclusive modification of the shared images. In teleradiology
application, such a modification of image could be understood as e.g.: zooming,
making adjustments to Hounsfield scale window, marking regions of interest etc.

´
1174 K. Zielinski
et al.

The idea of a collaborative teleradiology application is depicted in Fig.1. It is
possible to identify four basic steps of its activity:
1. The same radiology image is retrieved from a database and distributed over the
teleradiogy session members’ computers.
2. The image is displayed on every computer screen of teleradiology session
members when teleradiogy session is started.
3. All session members are notified about modification of the image made by one of
them, so that the state of consulted data is synchronised.
4. Results of the teleradiology session (e.g. its recording) are stored back in a
database to be accessed when necessary.

2
3

1
Medica image
Medical
is got from database
distributed
to all session members

Computer
Network
4

Medical
Images
Database

Recorded session
is stored back

Fig. 1. Collaborative teleradiology application model

Such a scenario, with possibility of audio and video communication between the
session members, would follow our definition of collaborative teleradiology.
Collaborative teleradiology could be easy compared with the web centric approach.
Basic steps of the web-centric teleradiology application are depicted in Fig.2 and
could be described as follows:
1. A selected radiology image is fetched from a database by dedicated software
installed on a web server and sent to a user’s web browser.
2. A radiology expert analyses the image.
3. A diagnosis in form of comments and added annotations is posted back to web
server and stored in the database.
4. The diagnosis is read by other medical personnel when needed.
The basic difference between the collaborative and web centric approaches is that the
latter does not provide interactivity, and comments could not be exchanged on-line
between medical experts. This makes the analysis difficult and less efficient.

Collaborative Teleradiology 1175

The presented general model of collaborative teleradiology applications could be
further refined by defining many simple subcases. Such subcases would be taking into
account QoS constrains and scalability of the system. We will continue this
considerations in the following sections.

2
1

Computer
Network

4
Diagnose
is got from
www server

Medical image
is fetched
from www Server

3
Diagnose is posted back

Medical
Images
Database

Server WWW
Fig. 2. Web-centric teleradiology

3 Models of Data Sharing
Radiology images are commonly represented according to DICOM standard [8]. The
size of files containing radiology data stored in that format ranges from a few
megabytes up to many tenths of megabytes. This is why high-speed broadband
computer networks are required for fast on-line access to DICOM images. When
using ISDN lines, the transfer of a DICOM file could take from a few minutes up to
half an hour or even more. This is a real constraint of teleradiology application in the
area where modern and expensive network infrastructure is not present. In that sense
teleradiology application is network QoS (Quality of Service) dependent.
The solution to this problem is to reduce the amount of data transmitted during
teleradiology sessions. For that purpose in Web centric applications the DICOM
images are annotated by smaller in size JPEG pictures used for preview of radiology
data. Doctors are using JPEG pictures to select interesting DICOM files, which have
to be transmitted from a database to a DICOM viewer application or a web browser
with DICOM viewer plug-in present on client machine. Unfortunately, the
transmission of the selected DICOM files still takes a lot of time when it is performed
over slow computer network. The discussed technique is used in commercially
available radiology software e.g. ACOMWEB [9].
The network throughput constraint is even more serious for collaborative
teleradiology applications, when on-line DICOM files transmission is assumed. The
solution is to separate the collaborative teleradiology session into two phases:

´
1176 K. Zielinski
et al.

1. Distribution of DICOM images to the computers of the teleradiology session
members. This operation could be made off-line, e.g. at night.
2. Collaborative processing of DICOM images, which concerns the points 2,3 and 4
of collective teleradiology model disscused in Section 2.
Separation of these two phases makes sense, because the second phase is not as data
transfer intensive as the first one. Transmission of synchronization and control
information needed to implement collaborative processing of DICOM images
generates data stream that could be transmitted even over ISDN lines.
The complexity of collaborative teleradiology applications is substantially
dependent on the number of session members. From that point of view, two scenarios
could be identified:
1. Dual-party teleradiology session, when only one radiology expert in a reference
center and one doctor in a remote hospital are involved in collaboration.
2. Multi-party teleradiology session, with more than two members involved.
The effectiveness of the implementation of a multi-party teleradiology session
depends on multicast communication support provided by the network infrastructure.
The availability of reliable multicast communication has a great influence on the
scalability of implementation of synchronization mechanisms and will be elaborated
further in the following section.

4 Synchronisation of States of Multiple Distributed
Teleconsultation Applications
One of the features that a user would expect from a teleconsultation application is
synchronization of the state of remote machines. From a user point of view, the
applications must ensure that any actions performed by one of cooperating parties will
be noticed immediately by all the others. To make the matter more complex, the users
of the applications do not frequently have the same privileges. As an example,
consider a scenario when a real life teleconsultation is observed by many remotely
taught students, who definitely would not have rights to modify the diagnosis. In such
case, the teleconsultation system would need to implement some access restrictions1.
Another issue, which seems to be important, is permitting the priviledged users to
gain a lock on selected objects. In such case, the network of collected applications
should for a while perform a „one-to-many” transmission scenario, with one source of
messages and many sinks2. Therefore, the system needs a powerful middleware
platform to send messages between its entities.
In today’s highly distributed systems, two general forms of message-oriented
middleware are commonly found: point-to-point and publish-subscribe. The first,
often called message queuing, is used to move data between its source and
destination, where the messages wait in a queue for application to pick them up. The
1
2

Another important issue is the confidentiality of consulted patient’s personal data.
Moreover, the system should provide a fault recovery procedure in case when a client holding
locks fails.

Collaborative Teleradiology 1177

second kind is generally used when a data item needs to be sent to multiple clients. It
can occur either if there is one or more sources of data.
The CORBA architecture, which is an industry standard, defines two ways of
decoupled, event-driven communication, realised by Event and Notification Services,
respectively. The OMG Event Service supports asynchronous exchange of event
messages between objects. It introduces the following concepts:
x event channels, which function as brokers of event messages,
x event suppliers, which supply event messages, and
x event consumers, consuming i.e. receiving event messages.
The OMG Notification Service extends OMG Event Service by supporting a few
important additional capabilities, e.g. filtering events the client wants to receive and
possibility to specify various quality of service properties.
The Java Shared Data Toolkit software allows developers to add collaboration
features to applets and applications written in the Java programming language. By
implementing a multipoint data delivery service the toolkit can aid implementing
network-centric applications, such as shared whiteboards or chat environments. The
area of usage the JSDT includes also networking multimedia applications.
The Java Message Service (JMS) is a standardised set of programming interfaces
to middleware. The middleware packages differ not only in their implementation
details, but also in their interfaces. Since numerous middleware vendors include
support for JMS in their products3, it has become a way to escape from the vendor
„lock-in” that many distributed systems are suffering from. In a way, it bridges the
communication between wide variety of different software components (both servers
and clients), e.g. firewalls, mail servers, application servers and so forth, which are
standard entities for most of today’s distributed systems. JMS supports both message
queuing and publish-subscribe communication patterns.
In general, JMS could be useful for communication between different, loosely
coupled system entities that make use of asynchronous communication. JMS supports
one-to-one, one-to-many and many-to-many configurations.
The medical teleconsultation systems described later in this paper fall into the first
and third category, respectively, so it seems that they could be served by JMS well.
However, a teleconsultation application needs to be highly interactive. This feature is
expected from the system even in the case of low-bandwidth connection between
peripheral and referential hospital. Since that, one of the most important things to do
during the design and implementation phases is to reduce any transmission overhead.

5 TeleDICOM System
The applications used in the Krakow Centre of Telemedicine formerly gave only the
possibility to send digitised patients’ data to the consulting centre and view it
independently with no interaction. The only connection between the both sides was a
3

This popularity of JMS is partly a result of a requirement of JMS compliance, which needs to
be fulfilled by any software component in order to get a J2EE certification.

´
1178 K. Zielinski
et al.

voice (or sometimes also video) channel, often realised via separate technical
solutions (e.g. telephone line). The experience drawn from the TeleNegatoscope
application allowed designing a more advanced environment.
TeleDICOM is going to offer many more advanced features introduced by the
collaborative teleradiology paradigm. The most important of them is that it will
operate on DICOM images offering fully diagnostic quality and precise textual
description. DICOM format is de facto standard in the modern medical world; the
images are very often created directly by medical equipment, e.g. a computer
topography. The idea of the TeleDICOM environment originates from whiteboardlike applications where many participants share the same area making changes in its
appearance or just observing modifications performed by the others. In TeleDICOM,
a DICOM image delivered to all participants early enough will form the background.
Operations performed on the image by one of the participants will be propagated to
all the others. The available operations are supposed to be helpful during a
consultation allowing users e.g. to mark fragments of the image (by placing different
shapes there). The operations will also include actions typical for DICOM data, e.g.
modifying the Hounsfield scale window parameters, zooming the image or running
animation mode if the image is a multi-sliced one (e.g. coronarography examination).
The application has also an educational role allowing medicine students to
participate in real consultations.
One of the most important design issues was how to organise flow of data in a
multiparty scenario effectively. Taking into consideration the problems with multicast
routing and reliable multicast, the decision was to use a centralised star topology with
so called rendez-vous points to which all participants would direct their requests, and
which would notify all participants about actions performed by the others. The whole
communication is accomplished by using unicast transmission. Such a rendez-vous
point, called session server, can be integrated into one of the applications participating
in the consultation, or be run independently. The former solution is preferred in small,
dual-party sessions and the latter in the multi-party ones. The logical placement of the
session server in such case should be determined taking into account the location of
all participants and aiming at ensuring them nearly equal distance to the central node
of the star architecture in terms of available bandwidth and transmission delay. The
concept of the session server in a session containing several participants is depicted in
Fig. 3.
Security of medical information cannot be forgotten and the authors of
TeleDICOM kept this in mind. All centres using the application have to get
certificates used for authentication. The medical data (DICOM files and diagnoses)
are encrypted by using SSL while being sent. The tests performed by authors proved
that encryption of control data during consultation phase, severely influences its
interactivity making it suffer from unacceptable delays, unless very fast computers are
used. It must be however emphasised that with no knowledge about medical data
itself, information intercepted by an eavesdropper is practically useless. In cases when
a very strong security is required transmission can be led via Virtual Private Networks
(VPNs) with fast encryption mechanisms provided on lower layers.

Collaborative Teleradiology 1179

A

B

D
C

A participant creating session
B other participants

B

E

C rendez-vous point
D images for session

F
B

E synchronous requests
F notification

Fig. 3. The concept of rendez-vous point (session server) in multiuser session

6 Conclusions
The collaborative teleradiology opens a new, very challenging, field of
multidisciplinary research in the area of telemedicine. The progress in this domain is
possible due to the application open standards in distributed computing, which create
a solid foundation for not only experimental, but also commercial, fully distributed,
applications. Collaborative telemedicine put applied distributed software engineering
in the context of very demanding applications in terms of required QoS, security and
synchronised visualization techniques.
There is also open area for ergonomical and sociological studies to understand the
requirements of the user interface design for group communication and on-line data
sharing better. This research needs construction and deployment of a whole family of
software tools supporting the proposed collaborative model and collecting
experiences from the pilot systems introduced to the clinical practice.

References
1. NetRAAD system, University Health Care Company, http://www.uhc.com.pl
2. Web PACS, Universal PACS Inc., http://www.unipacs.com/webpacs.html
3. CORBAservices: Common Objects Services Specification, OMG, 1998
4. Remote Method Invocation Specification, Sun Microsystems, 1997
5. Enterprise Java Beans Specification, version 2.1, Sun Microsystems, 2002
6. Collaborative computing, Collab Worx Inc., http://www.collabworx.com/Support/resources
7. Java Shared Data Toolkit, Sun Microsystems, http://java.sun.com/products/java-media/jsdt/
8. The DICOM Standard, National Electrical Manufacturers Association.
9. Acom.WEB, Universitätsklinikum Essen, http://www.uni-essen.de/cardio/acomweb/
acomweb_info.html

