State Estimation of Congested TCP Traffic Networks
Atulya Nagar, Ghulam Abbas, and Hissam Tawfik
Intelligent and Distributed Systems Laboratory, Deanery of Business and Computer Sciences,
Liverpool Hope University, Liverpool, L16 9JD. UK.
{nagara, tawfikh}@hope.ac.uk

Abstract. State Estimation is an intrinsic element of many network management systems, like Power Distribution Networks and Water Distribution
Networks, where its implementation not only facilitates real-time online
monitoring with better observability, but it also enables an advanced control
with improved system security. This paper presents a new technique based on
State Estimation to address some general shortcomings of the current Active
Queue Management schemes such as RED and discusses potential issues in
TCP networks in order to achieve better performance.

1 Introduction
Congestion typically refers to a situation when a TCP service either fails to fulfill a
request to transfer a bulk of data, or it ends up with extensive service delays.
Furthermore, data packets may also be lost in an attempt to complete the request. If
the congestions are not dealt with appropriately, the packet loss rate becomes high
enough, giving rise to retransmissions of lost packets and consequently cause further
service delays. The Transmission control protocol (TCP) has been designed
exclusively to offer a reliable service in terms of data delivery. Early
implementations of TCP led to, what was known as “congestion-collapse”, in which
a network failed to respond altogether. This situation was soon overcome by more
reliable TCP implementations [2]. However, the rapid increase in users around the
globe, with a consequent increase in data requirements, has offered many threats to
this reliability. These limitations are studied and remedied in this paper, by applying
State Estimation mainly due to the following reasons. At first, no mathematical
model is perfect and therefore may not capture all behavioral aspects of the actual
physical state of the system. Numerous effects of the underlying system are
deliberately left un-modeled, while the assumptions of the modeled effects are not
correct under all circumstances. As such, there may be many uncertainties present in
any mathematical model. Moreover, the underlying systems are driven not only by
the control inputs but are often driven by disturbances or noises which cannot be
modeled deterministically. The State Estimation technique proposed in this paper
uses the Kalman filtering approach to try to address the general problems of RED
models. We have used the discrete time model proposed in [1], as a case study in this
paper, to compare the results from our State Estimator to the Simulation results of this
model.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part I, LNCS 3991, pp. 802 – 805, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

State Estimation of Congested TCP Traffic Networks

803

2 TCP Traffic State Estimator
The general TCP traffic flow State Estimation problem can be posed in a similar way
as formulated in the Power and Water systems [6,4]. To have a more concrete
description of the problem, consider the following. Let xk be a given signal at time
step k and E be the noise. Considering that only the sum of signal and the noise can
be observed, it can be generally represented as,

Z = HX + ε

(1)

Where, Z is the measurement vector which is updated at each scan. X is the State
vector, H is as Identity matrix ( m x n, m ≥ n ) relates state to measurement Z , and ε
is the Vector of measurement errors. The error ε can arise due to a number of
situations, e.g., inaccuracy of network model, measurement noise and inaccuracy of
RED. The mathematical model may serve its purpose well in most cases but the
assumptions of the mathematical model are not correct in all circumstances, for
example, presence of a very large number of network nodes and packet-flows may
affect the calculations up to a fractional level which can accumulate into a high level
of measurement uncertainty when the results are used as feedback control. Moreover,
an RED that operates on a router at some congested link and uses the exponentiallyweighted-average-queue-length to predict packet losses and impose flow control may
use wrong parameters (weights) and can consequently lead to uncertainties. A
Kalman filter State Estimator is used here for this purpose. The expressions for the
time and measurement updates of the Kalman filter, in order to devise a State
Estimation algorithm, can be derived based on the treatment given in [1,5].

3 Results and Discussions
The derived Kalman algorithm for the queue length q , average queue length X and
congestion window W is implemented in MATLAB. The following section presents
comparison of the results from the Simulator [1] and the Estimator using the dumbbell
and Y-shape topologies [3], the configurations of the congested connection listed in
table 1.
According to the law of flow conservation [3] the flow into a congested link
depends on the number of packets being injected by a sender into a link and as such,
the accuracy of congestion window size is of significant importance. The congestion
avoidance model [1] used in this paper, increments congestion window by 1/W after
the receipt of each acknowledgment. While this could work well for a small number
of senders, it can lead to uncertainties in the presence of a large number of senders
simultaneous transmitting through a link. As the acknowledgement is modeled to
arrive in one round-trip time ( T p + q / B ), which depends on the queue length q
(queuing delay, q /B ), the estimation assumes the round trip time to be corrupted by a
small fraction (0.0005s). This fractional change is certain to occur when there is some
background traffic present i.e. the congested router is also serving some other flows
arriving from other nodes (note that the model assumed no background traffic). This

804

A. Nagar, G. Abbas, and H. Tawfik

fractional inaccuracy in the round-trip time can accumulate into large inaccuracy and
consequently, the congestion window measurement becomes noisy after a few round
trip times. For example, assuming 30 senders simultaneously transmitting through a
queue and then calculating the round-trip time, the noise robustness becomes 0.02
packets in congestion window of each sender. The noise robustness increases at the
start of the congestion soon after the first packet drop between 2nd and 3rd second.
This is because the sender waits for a relatively longer round trip time during the
recovery phase (note the horizontal increase of the noisy measurements). Noise
robustness also increases with the increased number of senders.
Table 1. Network parameters

Variable

Description

Value

qmin
qmax
Tp
B
pmax
Weight

RED parameter
RED parameter
Propagation delay
Bandwidth of bottleneck link
RED parameter
RED parameter

150
300
0.1s
1Mbps
0.1
0.001

The results of estimated queue length were also compared to the results of
simulated queue length [1] in the presence of certain noise. As the measurement of the
queue length depends on the congestion window size of each sender transmitting
through this queue q = 1 / W , the estimator assumes five senders transmitting
simultaneously, and the value of each W to be corrupted by 0.02 packets. The flow
q = ∑1 / W can produce the following effects on the queue size.

Table 2 lists mean queue-length of each sender observed for 10 seconds. In the
presence of noise the measurement of the simulated queue length reflects wrong
values. It means that, some of the buffer space at the router’s queue remains
unutilized due to the noisy measurements, and the packets are dropped by the router
(when queue reaches its capacity) whereas, in reality, there still remain some
unoccupied space. The results from the estimator match closely with the results of
Table 2. Noise Robustness

No. of
Senders

1
2
3
4
5

Simulated mean
Queue-length
(without noise)
69.5827
116.6457
131.3254
137.8840
141.0444

Noise Robustness
Simulated mean
Queue-length
(with noise)
70.5673
119.3910
137.9962
150.1776
160.0377

Estimated mean
Queue-Length
(with noise)
69.5714
116.6333
131.3130
137.8696
141.0266

State Estimation of Congested TCP Traffic Networks

805

simulator which assumes no noise, i.e. the estimation is capable of removing the
measurement noise and reflecting correct mean queue-length.
Moreover, it is also clear from the results that the measurement inaccuracy
increases with the increased number of senders, consequently more packet drops will
occur which in turn will lead to increased level of congestion. The accuracy of the
measurements of average queue length X are of significant importance in terms of
systems control, as a router using RED will drop packets as soon as X reaches qmin .
As the measurement of the average queue depends on the actual queue length q , the
noisy measurements of q can in turn affect the measurement of X resulting in early
packet-drops prior to buffer filling.

4 Concluding Remarks
A State Estimation coupled with RED algorithm can provide a better control and
management of the system, and security benefits.

References
1. Frommer, I., Harder, E., Hunt, B., Lance, R., Ott, E. and Yorke, J.: Two Models for the

2.
3.

4.

5.
6.

Study of Congested Internet Connections. Int. Conference on Communications and
Computer Networks, (CCN 04). (2004).
Jacobson, V.: Modified TCP Congestion Avoidance Algorithm, Technical Report, Network
Research Group LBL (1990).
Mathis, M. and Mahdavi, J.: Forward Acknowledgements: Refining TCP Congestion
Control., in proceedings of the Int. Conf. on Applications, architectures, and protocols for
computer communications, California, United States, 28-30 August (1996), Vol. 26, no. 4,
p. 281-291
Nagar, A.K., Powell, R.S.: LFT/SDP Based Approach to the Uncertainty Analysis for State
Estimation of Water Distribution Systems, IEE Journal of Control Theory and Applications,
(2002) pp. 137-142, Vol. 149, issue 2.
Welch, G. and Bishiop, G.: An Introduction to the Kalman Filter, Technichal Report,
SIGGRAPH 2001, Los Angeles Conventional Contre, (2001) 12-21.
Wu, F. F.: Power System State Estimation: A Survey, International Journal of EPES,
Electric Power & Energy Systems, (1990), p. 80-87.

