Personalized Recommendation Service System in
E-Learning Using Web Intelligence
Xinye Li1, Qi Luo2,3, and Jinsha Yuan1
1

Department of Electronic and Communication Engineering,North China Electric
Power University, Baoding 071003, China
2
Information Engineering school,
Wuhan University of Science and Technology and Zhongnan Branch,
Wuhan 430223, China
3
College of Engineering and Technology, Southwest University,
Chongqing 400715, China
yljh654@sina.com, ccnu_luo2008@yahoo.com.cn

Abstract. Personalized education is a very hot topic in distant research. To realize personalized E-learning, a personalized recommendation service system was
proposed and realized. Web technologies of personality and adaptive filtering
were applied in the system. The structure of system, workflow and key technologies of realizing feature selection module, user interest module, personalized teaching resources filtering module were introduced in the paper.
Keywords: E-Learning, Data Mining, Web Intelligence, Personality.

1 Introduction
Nowadays, personalized education is a very hot topic in E-learning research. The
importance of E-Learning has been transferred from how to solve the limitation of
space-time problem in traditional teaching to build up the personalized learning environment, and offer a kind of personalized service based on modern pedagogy and
psychology theories[1]. The learners are different in age level, sex, and social role,
their culture, education background, attention, interest hobby are also exist a great
difference. Giving corresponding learning contents and tactics to realize teaching
according to learners’ needs is very difficult [2]. The investigation indicates that personalized service system for E-Learning is imperfect. The validity and accuracy of
providing information are low, which makes learners feel unconfident and suspicious
in E-learning. If E-learning wants to attract more learners, the idea of personalized
design should be needed. It means that the personalized knowledge and information
service should be provided according to learners’ needs. The key of personalized
design is how to recommend teaching resources based on their interests by using web
intelligence technology.
Web intelligence has been recognized as a new direction for scientific research
and development to explore the fundamental roles as well as practical impacts of
artificial intelligence and advanced information technology on the next generation of
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part III, LNCS 4489, pp. 531–538, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

532

X. Li, Q. Luo, and J. Yuan

web-empowered products, systems, services, and activities. It is one of the most
important as well as promising IT research fields in the era of web and agent intelligence [3].
Basing on it, web technologies of personality and adaptive filtering are applied in
the paper [4], while the model of personalized E-learning recommendation service
system (PERSS) is proposed.

2 System Structure
Personalized E-learning recommendation service system (PERSS) is showed in Fig.1

Fig. 1. Personalized recommendation service system

The main function of PERSS is to help users to find out teaching resources quickly
and accurately according to their interests.
Feature selecting module selects users’ interested teaching resources information
according to browsing and feedback of teaching resources. Then, the information is
stored in user personality characteristics storehouse that is tracked and updated
promptly.
User personality characteristics storehouse saves user personality information such
as name, age, occupation, purchasing interest, hobby and so on. It tracks users’ interests dynamically. The key words of user personality characteristics are selected and
recorded; it can also provide user characteristics for constructing the module of user
interest model.

Personalized Recommendation Service System in E-Learning Using Web Intelligence

533

The module of user interest model selects key words from user personality characteristics storehouse and constructs user interest model.
The filtering module of personality teaching resources filters teaching resource according to user model.
Personality recommendation module realizes automatic recommendation and request recommendation. Request recommendation is realized by calling the management module of teaching resources and the filtering module of teaching resources.
Personality searching module accepts user requests. Personality searching result is
obtained through filtering module.
Personality cooperation module makes user get help immediately and accurately
when they have problems of learning.
The work process of model is as follows: firstly, user interest feature information
of teaching resources is selected by feature selecting module. The information is
saved in user personality characteristics storehouse. Personality characteristics storehouse is tracked and updated promptly. Then, user interest model is constructed by
user personality characteristics information. Furthermore, teaching resources are filtered by filtering module of personality teaching resources according to user model.
Finally, personality searching service, personality recommendation service and personality cooperation service are realized by the module of personality searching, personality recommendation and personality cooperation, which according to the filtering results.

3 Key Technologies
3.1 User Interest Model
The process of establishing user interest model is the process of knowledge acquisition. There are two ways of knowledge acquisition such as user obvious feedback and
user hiding feedback [5].
In order to fully utilize the advantages of the two ways, user interest initial model
is established according to user register information and user interest model is updated according to web server log. A web server log records user's IP address, visiting
time, visiting page, visiting way, requested the document URL ,HTTP version, return
codes, transmission byte, protocol, wrong codes and so on.
3.1.1 Establishing User Interest Model
User initial interest model is established according to user register information. User
register information is submitted to the system server though Web inputting. When
user register, the Web may let the user reply some questions such as research orientation, interests and so on. Different people’ answers are formed different personalized
vectors which express user interests.
Supposed user interest model vector is Qi , the number of interest feature item is n,
and the interest number is m, then user initial interest model U may be represented as
a vector matrix U = (Q1 , Q2 ," Qm ) , interest vectors Qi = (qi1 , qi 2 ," qin ) .

534

X. Li, Q. Luo, and J. Yuan

3.1.2 Updating User Interest Model
Because user interest is variable, user interest model is updated through observing
user's behavior in web server log. When website has been visited one time, log database increases corresponding records; these records are arranged from visiting time.
Mining these log documents may discover what the user has browsed and how long
the user has browsed the page.
Generally speaking, the user may visit interesting pages, if the user browses the
page repeatedly, then it shows that user is interested in this page. Therefore, mining
this page could find out user interests and interest degree. Q1 , Q2 ," Qm represent all

interest vectors in user interest model, supposed vectors X 1 , X 2 " X d represent all
content pages that user has visited. If page X j approaches to user interest
Qi namely, Qi X j / X j is bigger than the thresholds a, then page X j vector is add to

the user interest Qi
Qi = Qi +

m 2 X j XJ ( j )T ( j )
m

m

k =1

k =1

∑ XJ (k )∑ T (k )

(1)

XJ ( j ) represents the frequency of visiting the page, T ( j ) represents the time of
visiting the page, j = 1, 2," m .
If page X j does not approach to user's any interest Qi , then X j is regarded as user
new interest. But the category of user interest increases massively, then we must establish the thresholds b, if the mold of user interest vector is smaller than b, pushing
correlative pages don’t consider this interest.
Page browsing also is random and regular. If user is interested in the page, then the
user will consume more time when browsing it, simultaneously also visit this page
repeatedly. The following formula 2 is used to calculate user interest degree.

F =(

n
t k
+ )
N T K

(2)

Where F is interest degree of visiting the node, n is the number of times in visiting the
node, N is the total number of times in this visit, t is the consuming time in visiting
the node, T is the total time in visiting website, k is number of node in this visit, K is
the total number of node in visiting website.
3.2 Filtering Module for Teaching Resources

Adaptive filtering algorithm for teaching resources based on vector space model is
composed of three steps such as training, adaptive filtering and modifying thresholds
adaptively.
Step1: training phase. According to assigned training texts, initial filtering profiles
and thresholds are generated [6].
Step2: adaptive filtering phase. For each text in teaching resources, we judge whether
it is related with initial filtering profiles or not.

Personalized Recommendation Service System in E-Learning Using Web Intelligence

535

Step3: modifying thresholds adaptively. Users’ feedback is utilized to modify the
profiles and thresholds adaptively.
3.2.1 Training
Fig.2 is the flow of training algorithm. Firstly, topics are converted to vector forms.
Then feature vectors are separately obtained from user interest model, positive samples and pseudo positive samples. So, initial profiles vectors are composed of positive
samples vectors, pseudo positive samples vectors, user interest vectors and topic vectors. Then the similarity between initial profiles vectors and all training samples is
computed, so we can obtain the best initial thresholds.

Fig. 2. The flow of training algorithm

3.2.2 Adaptive Filtering
After Initial filtering profiles are set up and initial thresholds are selected, the process
of filtering is to modify filtering profiles and thresholds adaptively. It is just the process of machine learning that improves filtering performance. Fig.3 is the flow of adaptive filtering algorithm. For each text in the teaching resources, the similarity between
it and profiles vectors is computed. If the similarity is bigger than the thresholds, then
it is regarded as the related texts. Whether the texts are really related to the topics or
not is judged by users. Profiles and thresholds are modified according to user’ results.
3.2.3 Modifying Thresholds Adaptively
The proportion of related texts in teaching resources is very low, so it is necessary to
modify thresholds adaptively. The goal of elevating thresholds is to filter less positive
samples and increase precision. The goal of lowering thresholds is to filter more positive samples. Probability density distribution is proposed in the paper. If probability
density distribution of positive samples currently surpasses the expectation of distribution scope, then the thresholds would be elevated. Otherwise, thresholds would be
lowed.

536

X. Li, Q. Luo, and J. Yuan

Fig. 3. The flow of training algorithm

Definition 1. n is the serial number of filtering texts in teaching resources. D is the
expectation of positive samples distribution density.
Definition 2. S (n) is the number of total documents which the documents’ serial number is up to n.
Definition 3. SR (n) is positive samples which the documents’ serial number is up to n
Definition 4. O (n) is thresholds which the documents’ serial number is up to n.
Definition 5. DR (n t , n t+1 ) is probability density distributing of previous thresholds.
DR(nt , nt +1 ) =

SR(t + 1) − SR (t )
S (t + 1) − S (t )

(3)

Thresholds adjusting algorithm is as follows:
(1) If DR(n t ,n t+1 )> max(D,0.3) and SR(n) <0.3 S(n),then O(n+1)= O(n)*1.3.If
precision is lower excessively and the number of filtering texts is not too few,
then thresholds are elevated rapidly.
(2) If DR (n t , n t+1 )>D, then O (n+1) = O (n)*1.2. If the number of filtering texts is
more than what we need, then thresholds are elevated.
(3) If DR (n t , n t+1 ) < D, then O (n+1) = O (n)*0.8 .If the number of filtering texts is
less than what we need, then thresholds are lowered.

4 Conclusion
Based on the above research, the author constructs a system website recommending
personalized courses service .In order to obtain the contrast experimental results,

Personalized Recommendation Service System in E-Learning Using Web Intelligence

537

Fig. 4. Contrast system

feature selection module, user interest module, personalized teaching resources filtering module are removed from PERSS, and the contrast system is formed. The contrast
system is Fig.4.
Evaluation metrics as follows [7]:
Pr ecision =
Re call =

number of inf ormation correctly filtered
number of inf ormation filtered

(4)

number of inf ormation correctly filtered
number of inf ormation

Fβ =

(5)

(β 2 + 1)× Precision× Re call
Precision + Re call

(6)

There are 150 people register in this system. 150 personality characteristics storehouse are established. The interest group is 41; there are 341 texts in teaching resources.12 texts that have the biggest correlation in teaching resources are provided to
the corresponding user. Through the experiment, table 1 shows the results:
Table 1. The experiment results

System

Avg.Precision

Avg.Recall

Fβ

PERSS

0.34

0.23

0.28

Contrast
System

0.13

0.11

0.12

From the table1, we discover that the filtering average precision of PERSS is
higher than the contrast system.

538

X. Li, Q. Luo, and J. Yuan

In summary, the model of personalized E-learning recommendation service system
using web intelligence is proposed and realized in the paper. Web intelligence of
adaptive filtering algorithm is also used in personalized E-learning recommendation
service system.

References
1. Luo Q.: Research on Application of Association Rule Mining Algorithm in Learning Community. Proceedings of CAAI-11, Wuhan, 2005, 1458-1462.
2. Yanwen W. and Zhonghong W..:Knowledge Adaptive Presentation Strategy in E-Learning.
Proceedings of Second International Conference on Knowledge Economy and Development
of Science and Technology, Beijing, 2004, pp.6-9.
3. Feng Shicong.: Research of personalization technologies based on web mining.Computer
Engineering and Design.No.1, 2004.
4. Yu Li, Liu Lu.:Comparison and Analysis on E-Commence Recommendation Method in
china. System Engineering Theory and Application, 2004(8), 96-98.
5. Nie Xin.:Take about the Digital Individualized Information Service of Library. Information
Science Journal, vol.23, 2005, 1-5.
6. Robertson S, Hull DA.:The TREC-9 filtering track final report. Proceedings of the 9th Text
Retrieval Conference. Gaithersburg, 2001, 25-40.
7. Hu Tian, Xia Yingju and Huang Xuanjing.:A Web-based Chinese Information Filtering
System Base on VSM. Computer engineering, Beijing, vol.29, 2003, 25-27.

