FITTING: A Portal to Fit Potential Energy
Functionals to ab initio Points
Leonardo Paciﬁci2 , Leonardo Arteconi1 , and Antonio Lagan`
a1
1

2

Department of Chemistry, University of Perugia,
via Elce di Sotto, 8 06123 Perugia, Italy
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Perugia
via Vanvitelli, 1 06123 Perugia, Italy
xleo,bodynet,lag@dyn.unipg.it

Abstract. The design and the implementation in a Grid environment
of an Internet portal devoted to best ﬁtting potential energy functionals
to ab initio data for few body systems is discussed. The case study of a
generalized LEPS functional suited to ﬁt reactive three body systems is
discussed with an application to the NO2 system.
Keywords: webportal, ﬁtting, ab initio calculations, potential energy
surfaces, multiscale simulations.

1

Introduction

Thanks to recent progress in computing technologies and network infrastructures it has become possible to assemble realistic accurate molecular simulators
on the Grid. This has allowed us to develop a Grid Enabled Molecular Simulator (GEMS) [1,2,3,4] by exploiting the potentialities of the Grid infrastructure
of EGEE [5]. The usual preliminary step of molecular approaches to chemical
problems is the construction of a suitable potential energy surface (PES) out of
the already available theoretical and experimental information on the electronic
structure of the system considered. In the ﬁrst prototype production implementation of GEMS, GEMS.0 [6], it is assumed that available information on the
electronic structure of the system considered is formulated as a LEPS [7] PES.
Unfortunately, extended use in dynamics studies have singled out the scarce
ﬂexibility of the LEPS functional in describing potential energy surfaces having
bent (non collinear) minimum energy paths to reaction.
To progress beyond the limits of GEMS.0 an obvious choice was, therefore,
not only to derive the value of the LEPS parameters from ab initio estimates of
the electronic energies but also to add further ﬂexibility to the LEPS functional
form. For the former goal an Internet portal, SUPSIM, has been assembled as
already discussed in the literature [8]. In the present paper we discuss the latter
goal of making more general the LEPS functional. The paper deals in section 2
with a generalization of the functional representation of the LEPS and in section
3 with the assemblage of an Internet portal, called FITTING, devoted to the
ﬁtting of the LEPS to ab initio data. Finally, in section 4 the case study of the
N + O2 system is discussed.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part I, LNCS 4487, pp. 358–365, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

FITTING: A Portal to Fit Potential Energy Functionals to ab initio Points

2

359

A Generalization of the LEPS Potential

Most often molecular potentials are expressed as a sum of the various terms of
a many body expansion [9,10]. In the case of three-atom systems such a sum is
made by three one-body, three two-body and one three-body terms as follows:
(1)

(1)

(1)

V (rAB , rBC , rAC ) = VA + VB + VC +
(2)

(2)

(2)

VAB (rAB ) + VBC (rBC ) + VAC (rAC ) +
(3)

VABC (rAB , rBC , rAC )

(1)

where the V (1) terms are the one-body ones (taken to be zero for atoms in ground
state) while V (2) and V (3) terms are the two- and three-body ones and are
usually expressed as polynomials in the related internuclear distances rAB , rBC
and rAC . These polynomials are damped by proper exponential-like functions of
the related internuclear distances in order to vanish at inﬁnity. More recently, use
has been also made of Bond Order (BO) variables [11,12]. The nij BO variable
is related to the internuclear distance rij of the ij diatom as follows:
nij = exp [−βij (rij − reij )]

(2)

In Eq. 2 βij and reij are adjustable parameters (together with Dij ) of the best
ﬁt procedure trying to reproduce theoretical and experimental information of
the ij diatomic molecule using the model potential
(2)

Vij (rij ) = Dij P (nij )

(3)

where P (nij ) is a polynomial in nij . The LEPS functional can be also written
as a sum of two and three body BO terms. The usual LEPS can be written, in
fact, as
V (rAB , rBC , rAC ) =1 EAB +1 EBC +1 EAC − JAB − JBC − JAC
−

2 + J2 + J2 − J
JAB
AB JBC − JAB JAC − JBC JAC
BC
AC

(4)

where the Jij terms are formulated as:
Jij =

1 1
( Eij − aij 3 Ei )
2

(5)

with aij being an adjustable parameter (often expressed as (1 − Sij )/(1 + Sij ),
where Sij is the Sato parameter) and 1 E and 3 E being second order BO polynomials of the Morse
1
Eij = Dij nij (nij − 2)
(6)
and antiMorse
3

Eij =

Dij
nij (nij + 2)
2

(7)

360

L. Paciﬁci, L. Arteconi, and A. Lagan`
a

Fig. 1. A pictorial view of an atom-diatom system

type, respectively. Because of the choice of truncating the polynomial of Eq. 3
to the second order, βij , reij and Dij correspond to the force constant, the
equilibrium distance and the dissociation energy of the ij diatom, respectively.
The two-body terms correspond therefore to the three 1 Eij Morse potentials.
The three body component V (3) of the potential is then worked out by subtracting the three diatomic terms to the ab initio data. The resulting values
of the three body term are then ﬁtted by optimizing the value of the aij parameters which are taken to be constant in the usual LEPS functional. In our
generalization, as proposed some years ago by Takayanagi and Sato [13] and
by Brown et al. [14], the Sato variables Sij are made depend on the angle opposed to the bond considered (respectively γ, α and β as sketched in Fig. 1) to
bear a kind of three body connotation. Accordingly, the aij coeﬃcients of eq.
5 can be formulated as depending from the angle opposite to the ij diatom as
follows:
aab = cγ1 + cγ2 cosγ + cγ3 cos2 γ + cγ4 cos3 γ + cγ5 cos4 γ
2

3

3

4

(8)

abc = cα1 + cα2 cosα + cα3 cos α + cα4 cos α + cα5 cos α

(9)

aac = cβ1 + cβ2 cosβ + cβ3 cos2 β + cβ4 cos3 β + cβ5 cos4 β

(10)

The Internet Portal Structure

To handle the ﬁtting procedure in an eﬃcient way we developed a web interface
(called FITTING) acting as an Internet portal and ensuring the advantages typical of a Grid based environment. This choice was motivated by the wish of being
independent from the operating system available on the user side and therefore
being able to modify and upgrade the software without the participation of the
user. Other motivations were the user friendliness and the ubiquitous usability of the web graphical interfaces. For this purpose we created a cross-browser
site using only server-side technologies. Accordingly, the end-user can utilize the
FITTING web GUI (Graphical User Interface) by making use only of a W3Compliant web browser [15]. The related Web Environment was implemented
using the following elements:

FITTING: A Portal to Fit Potential Energy Functionals to ab initio Points

361

1. A dynamic web server, based on the Apache Web [16] server containing the
PHP4 module [17].
2. An RDBMS (MySQL [18] in our case) that handles the user data and supports the authentication phase.
The Portal was developed and tested using GPL Software and FreeSoftware
(namely the Apache Web Server 1.3.32 and MySQL 4.1.3 powered by FreeBSD
5.4).
Because of the complexity of the workﬂow of FITTING, we produced a set of
dynamically generated pages according to the following scheme:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

registration of the user
selection of the atoms and the functional form
speciﬁcation of the ab initio data
speciﬁcation of additional ab initio data
generation of the best-ﬁt parameters

These pages take care of managing the execution of the computational procedure
by the Web server and help the user to deﬁne the input parameters of the ﬁtting
calculation through the GUI.

Fig. 2. Screenshot of a System conﬁguration page of FITTING

As a ﬁrst step the user registers through the GUI when ﬁrst accessing the
portal. After the veriﬁcation of the identity, the user is assigned an account and
the associated login and password. At this point the user can access the portal
and run the ﬁtting procedure. Because of the multiuser environment adopted,
multiple requests to the web server are dealt using the Session support (enabled
in PHP by default).
In the second step, the user selects, using the same GUI, the atoms composing
the triatomic system considered and the ﬁtting functional form to be used (see
Fig. 2). In the third step, the server creates a dynamic web page which prompts
the user to supply the name of the ﬁle of the ab initio data to be used during the

362

L. Paciﬁci, L. Arteconi, and A. Lagan`
a

Fig. 3. Screenshot of a System conﬁguration page of FITTING

calculation. In the fourth step, the same page allows the user to insert new ab
initio data. The page asks the ﬁles of diatomic ab initio data (from one to three
depending on the symmetry of the investigated system), as illustrated in Fig. 3.
These ﬁles contain the ab initio values arranged in a two column format (the ﬁrst
column contains the value of the internuclear distance while the second column
contains the corresponding value of the diatomic ab initio potential energy). The
page prompts also the request for a ﬁle containing the ab initio triatomic data.
This ﬁle contains in the ﬁrst three columns the value of the three internuclear
distances and in the fourth column the value of the corresponding triatomic ab
initio potential energy. It is possible also to introduce other potential energy
values to enforce some speciﬁc features of the potential or to constrain some
input parameters. These choices depend on the functional form adopted for the
ﬁtting.
Finally, the best ﬁt is carried out using the LMDER routine of MINPACK [20]
which is based on an improved version of the Levemberg-Marquardt method [21]
which solves non linear least squares problems. The calculated best-ﬁt values
are inserted, together with the already determined diatomic parameters, in the
automatically generated source of the corresponding Fortran routine.

4

The N + O2 Case Study

As already mentioned, in order to test the developed procedure, we considered
the N + O2 system for which a large set of accurate ab initio electronic energy
values (calculated at both CASSCF and MR-SDCI level) are available from the
literature [22]. CASSCF calculations were performed at various ﬁxed values of
ˆ β attack angle (β= 135◦, 110◦ , 90◦ , 70◦ , 45◦ ). For each value of β, a mathe NOO
trix of geometries corresponding to regularly spaced values of ρβ = n2N O + n2OO

FITTING: A Portal to Fit Potential Energy Functionals to ab initio Points

363

Fig. 4. Isoenergetic contours, plotted as a function of the nNO (y axis) and nOO (x
axis) BO variables at β= 135◦ . Energy contours are drawn every 3 Kcal/mol.

Fig. 5. Minimum energy paths of the generalized LEPS calculated at β= 135◦ , 110◦ ,
90◦ , 70◦ and 45◦ plotted as a function of θβ

(the radius of the polar version of the BO coordinates) and of the associated
θβ =sin−1 (nNO /ρβ ) angle were considered for the ab initio calculations. Calculated CASSCF values were scaled to the MR-CI energies at the minimum of the
ﬁxed θβ cut of the ab initio values.
Following the above mentioned procedure the asymptotic cuts of the ab initio
points were ﬁtted ﬁrst to Morse diatomic potentials and the best-ﬁt values of the
parameters were used to compute the three body component of the potential.
The computed three body component was then ﬁtted using both three constant

364

L. Paciﬁci, L. Arteconi, and A. Lagan`
a

Sato parameters (as in the usual extended LEPS functional) and the ﬁfteen
coeﬃcients of our generalized angular dependent LEPS given in eqs. 8-10. Due
also to the particular structure of the NO2 PES we found the extended LEPS
based on three constant Sato parameters to be scarcely ﬂexible and to lead to a
root mean square deviation of about 3.0 eV. Moreover, the isoenergetic contour
plots in general poorly reproduce the ab initio values and have a wrong topology.
A much better reproduction of the ab initio data was obtained when using the
generalized LEPS (the one which has angle dependent Sato parameters) which
gave a root mean square deviation half that of the extended LEPS. This result,
though still preliminary, can be considered highly satisfactory due to the fact
that a non negligible fraction of the deviation is due to the already mentioned
particular structure of the NO2 PES whose two body component is not well
reproduced by a Morse functional. The deﬁnitely better quality of the ﬁtting
carried out using the generalized LEPS functional can also be appreciated by
inspecting the isoenergetic contours drawn at diﬀerent ﬁxed values of β and
comparing them with the ab initio values. In particular, they not only always
reproduce the topology of the ﬁxed angle ab initio values (see for example the
contours calculated at β= 135◦ shown in Fig. 4) but they also reproduce in
a quasi quantitative fashion the corresponding minimum energy paths (MEP).
MEP plots (see Fig. 5) show, in fact, the large variability of the MEP and the
peculiar double barrier structure of the MEP at some values of the approaching
angle. Moreover, in agreement with the structure of the ab initio data we found
also that when moving from large β values to 110◦ the barrier lowers to rise
again in going from β=110◦ to β= 70◦ .

5

Conclusions

In this paper the use of angle dependent LEPS functionals is proposed out
and the development of an Internet portal called FITTING, aimed at inserting
its ﬁtting to ab initio data as part of the Grid Enabled Molecular Simulator
(GEMS) implemented within EGEE, is illustrated. Using FITTING it is now
possible to perform ab initio simulations starting from the generation of the
potential energy values (for which the portal SUPSIM is already available) and
continuing with their representation by a proper functional form to be used in
dynamical calculations. This completes the workﬂow of GEMS for establishing
a service of validation of LEPS potentials. Future work will be concerned with a
further generalization of the angle dependent LEPS for its use as a three body
component of force ﬁelds used in molecular dynamics.

References
1. Gervasi, O., Lagan`
a, A., Cicoria, D., Baraglia, R.: Animazione e Calcolo Parallelo
per lo Studio delle Reazioni Chimiche Elementari, Pixel 10 (1994) 19-26.
2. Bolloni, A.: Tesi di Laurea, Universit`
a di Perugia (1997).

FITTING: A Portal to Fit Potential Energy Functionals to ab initio Points

365

3. Gervasi, O., Lagan`
a, A., Lobbiani, M.: Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 2331
(2002) 956-964.
4. Gervasi, O., Dittamo, C., Lagan`
a, A. A Grid Molecular Simulator for E-Science,
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 3470 (2005) 16-22
5. The Enabling Grids for E-sciencE (EGEE) project (http://public.eu-egee.org)
6. EGEE review Conference, Geneva, February 2005.
http://indico.cern.ch/conferenceDisplay.py?confId=a043803
7. Polanyi, J.C., Schreiber, J.L.: The Dynamics of Bimolecular Reactions in Physical
Chemistry an Advanced Treatise, Vol. VI, Kinetics of Gas Reactions, Eyring, H.,
Jost, W., Henderson, D. Ed. (Academic Press, New York, 1974) p. 383.
8. Storchi, L., Tarantelli, F., Lagan`
a, A.: Computing Molecular Energy surfaces on a
Grid, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 3980, 675-683, (2006).
9. Sorbie, K.S., Murrell, J.N., Mol. Phys. 29 (1975) 1387-1403.
10. Murrell, J.N., Carter, S., Farantos, S.C., Huxley, P., Varandas, A.J.C.: Molecular
potential energy functions (Wiley, Chichester, 1984).
11. Lagan`
a, A., Garc´ıa, E., Mol. Phys., 56 (1985) 621-628.
12. Lagan`
a, A., Garc´ıa, E., Mol. Phys. 56 (1985) 629-641.
13. Takayanagi, T. and Sato, S., Chem. Phys. Lett., 144 (1988) 191-193
14. Brown, F.B., Steckler, R., Schwenke, D.W., Thrular, D.G. and Garrett, B.C., J.
Chem. Phys., 82 (1985), 188.
15. World Wide Web Consortium (http://www.w3.org)
16. The Apache Software Foundation (http://www.apache.org)
17. PHP: Hypertext Preprocessor (http://www.php.net)
18. Popular Open Source Database (http://www.mysql.com)
19. Borgia, D.: Tesi di Laurea, Universit`
a di Perugia (2006)
20. Mor`e, J. J., Garbow, B. S., Hillstrom, K. E.: Argonne National Laboratory, (1980);
MINPACK package can be obtained from http://www.netlib.org/minpack.
21. Mor`e, J. J., in Numerical Analysis, Lecture Notes in Mathematics, 630 (1977),
105.
22. G. Suzzi Valli, R. Orr`
u, E. Clementi, A. Lagan`
a, S. Crocchianti, J. Chem. Phys.,
102 (1995) 2825.

