Evaluation of the Fundamental Physical
Constants in Mathematica
Andrey S. Siver
Institute of High Energy Physics, Protvino, Russia

Abstract. We present PAREVAL package consisting of a number of
Mathematica modules used to re-evaluate basic CODATA:1998 recommended fundamental physical constants (FPC). Package can be found at
http://sirius.ihep.su/∼siver. Values of the basic FPC-1998 with the positive deﬁned correlation matrix and a number of functions for the FPC
usage can be found therein. Among other PAREVAL functions there
are functions for energy levels of hydrogen and deuterium, electron and
muon magnetic moment anomaly and muonium ground-state hyperﬁne
splitting.

1

Introduction

Hopes for the discovery of new physics at present time are frequently connected
with high-precision experiments combined with corresponding high-precision calculations. These calculations usually involve values of the FPC and should also
use their uncertainties and correlation matrix. But none of the available resources provides the last one (correlation coeﬃcients presented on the oﬃcial site [3]
are incorrect because they are rounded to three decimal ﬁgures).
Design of PAREVAL package has been mostly motivated by two facts:
– Methodological doubt about validity of CODATA recommended FPC-1998
[1]. This doubt arises due to the non-positive semi deﬁniteness of the correlation matrix of the input experimental data presented in [1]. More information
can be found in [4];
– Absence of powerful IT resources for scientiﬁc activities in FPC studies.
Critical notes about several resources can be found in [4]
Our FPC-1998 re-evaluation has been generally based on review [1]. We have
checked the values of the basic FPC and got their correlation matrix. The rest
(derived) FPC can be expressed as a functions of the basic ones and thus be
calculated.

2

Package Structure

PAREVAL consists of a number of Mathematica [2] modules which can be ranged
as followings:
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3039, pp. 358–363, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

Evaluation of the Fundamental Physical Constants

359

1. Modules for FPC usage. Contains data and functions for the FPC usage in
high-precision calculations;
2. Modules with physical formulae collection. Contains functions designed to
calculate energy levels of hydrogen and deuterium, electron and muon magnetic moment anomaly, muonium ground-state hyperﬁne splitting and some
other functions;
3. Modules for experimental data processing. Contains functions transforming
experimental data between input and internal forms;
4. Module for parameters evaluation. Contains Mathematica functions for evaluation of parameters based on least-squares method;
5. Modules for results presentation. Contains functions used to present results
of parameters evaluation in LATEX system.
The package has general public license (GPL) [5] and can be found at
http://sirius.ihep.su/∼siver. Values of the basic FPC-1998 with the positive deﬁned correlation matrix, a number of useful functions for the FPC usage, Mathematica notebook in which calculations have been carried out can be found
therein.
Most important modules are in a nutshell described below.
2.1

Modules for FPC Usage

The ﬁrst module contains several Mathematica variables which can be used in
calculations. The second one contains a function for the calculation of the FPC
uncertainties propagation with FPC covariance matrix.
Module Function Input
fpc-usage-1 prop
f(z)

Output
u[f(z)]

Example Description of the symbols
Fig.1 Calculates propagation of the
uncertainties of the FPC for
f(z) according to the law:
u[f (z1 , ..., zn )] =
N
∂f
∂f
i,j=1 ∂zi cov[zi , zj ] ∂zj

fpc-usage-1

2.2

info

const name, unit,
symbTeX

Fig.1

name — ‘const’s name; unit
— ‘const’s unit; symbTeX —
‘const’s TeX symbol

Modules with Physical Formulae Collection

These modules contain some realization of several physical functions used in
FPC-1998 evaluations.
Description
Function name Mathem. symbol
E1tot
EX (n, L, j)
Energy levels of hydrogen and deuterium[1]
ae
ae
Electron magnetic moment anomaly [1]
aµ
Muon magnetic moment anomaly[1]
aµ
∆νM u
∆νM u
Muonium ground-state hyperﬁne splitting [1]
ν
ν
Function conjugated to muonium
ground-state hyperﬁne splitting([1], p.387)

360

A.S. Siver

Description of the symbols
Module Func. Input Example
cod-15-3 E1tot X, n, L, j Fig. 2 X=(1 or 2), X=1 for hydrogen and
X=2 for deuterium; n — principal
quantum number; L — nonrelativistic
orbital angular momentum;
j — angular momentum quantum
number;
alpha — ﬁne structure constant;
formulae-2 ae
alpha,
dae — value of theoretical uncertainty
dae
for ae (see [1], p.476).
formulae-2 aµ
alpha,
alpha — ﬁne structure constant;
damu
damu - value of theoretical uncertainty
for aµ (see [1], p.479).
formulae-2 ∆νM u mE, mM, Fig.3 alpha — ﬁne structure constant;
aMU,
mE — electron mass; mM — muon
alpha, R
mass; R — Rydberg constant.
aMU — Muon magnetic moment
anomaly

Fig. 1. Example of the usage of modules for calculations with the FPC

Evaluation of the Fundamental Physical Constants

361

Fig. 2. Lamb shift. Example of the usage of the ‘E1tot’ function. Unfortunately, it’s
impossible to show the expression for classical Lamb shift in a reasonable form obtained
as Mathematica output. So we make extra substitutions for me , mp , mµ and c using
the values of FPC-1998.

3

Further Work. Discussion

A long time ago it was realized that evaluation of the FPC gave two important
results: (i) values of the FPC and (ii) test for modern theories on agreement
with each other and with experiments [1].
The ﬁrst task can be solved with the help of PAREVAL package. But in
order to solve the second one a system for monitoring the values of FPC should
be created. This system should include:
– Collection of methods for adjustment of parameters of the theories;
– A database of all measured experimental data which can be used in parameters evaluation;
– A database of all self-consistent modern theoretical formulae, relevant to
the experimental database. Besides, the database of the formulae should be
connected to calculation media;
– Collection of methods that could test statistical hypotheses and seek possible
systematical errors or uncertainties of calculation methods and programming
“bugs”;
– Subsystem for the presentation of results;

362

A.S. Siver

Fig. 3. Example of the usage of the ‘∆νM u ’ function - muonium ground-state hyperﬁne
splitting

– Subsystem for automatical or semi-automatical search for scientiﬁc information (old, modern and which just have appeared), which can be helpful to
researcher.

As far as we know, none of such systems actually exists. PAREVAL package
can be considered as a prototype of such system.
At last we would like to note that our working experience in Mathematica
tells us that this computer algebra system is powerful enough to realize a system
for monitoring values of fundamental physical constants.

Evaluation of the Fundamental Physical Constants

363

References
1. P. J. Mohr and B. N. Taylor, “CODATA recommended values of the fundamental
physical constants: 1998”, Rev. Mod. Phys. 72 (2000) 351.
2. Mathematica, http://www.wolfram.com
3. Fundamental Physical Constants from NIST,
http://physics.nist.gov/cuu/Constants/
4. Siver A.S., Ezhela V.V., “On the CODATA recommended values of the fundamental physical constants: V3.2(1998)&V4.0(2002)”, IHEP Preprint 2003-34, Protvino, 2003; arXiv:physics/0401064
5. For General Public License (GPL) note see http://www.gnu.org

