Overlapped Detection Via Approximate Entropy
Estimation Against Flooding Attack in Mobile Sensor
Networks∗
Mihui Kim and Kijoon Chae
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Ewha Womans University, Korea
mihui@ewhain.net, kjchae@ewha.ac.kr

Abstract. To achieve security in sensor networks, it is important to be able to
defend against flooding attack recently considered as an extremely threatening
attack. In this paper, we propose a flooding attack detection method as the first
defense step, through approximate entropy estimation reflecting resource
constraints of sensors. Each detector performs both basic estimation for its own
region and overlapped estimation for its own and neighbor regions, against the
mobility of attack node. Also, in order to enhance the accuracy of detection
even in the various deployments of attack agents, we deploy hierarchically
detectors according to network topology. This detector by entropy estimation is
simplified by only multiplication calculation instead of logarithm, in addition to
providing higher estimation precision of entropy compared to the conventional
entropy estimation. Our simulation results indicate that this hierarchical defense
is a feasible method, being especially promising for accurate decision through
overlapped detection even in frequent handoffs of mobile attack agents.

1 Introduction
Wireless sensor networks (WSNs) are rapidly growing in their importance and
relevance to both the research community and the public at large. Their promising
applications are expected to help protect and monitor critical military, environmental,
safety-critical, or domestic infrastructures and resources. To date, researches for
security in sensor networks have laid disproportionate emphasis on basic security
mechanisms, such as authentication or key management. Due to wireless
characteristic or easy physical compromise of sensor nodes, these basic security
services are indispensable. However, defense against possible attacks is also essential
in order not to negate much of the promise sensor networks hold, because attacks can
still be performed even if the network communication provides confidentiality and
authenticity. Especially, threat against flooding attack, one of Denial of Service (DoS)
attacks considered as the most threatening attacks in the wired network is not an
exception even on sensor networks. In addition to, flooding attacks may permit real
world damage to the health and safety of people, exceeding simple damages such as
loss of sensory data or energy exhaustion of nodes. Although the operations of
∗

This research was supported by the MIC, Korea, under the ITRC(Information Technology
Research Center) support program supervised by the IITA.

V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part II, LNCS 3992, pp. 1024 – 1032, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

Overlapped Detection Via Approximate Entropy Estimation Against Flooding Attack

1025

sensors are simplified due to their low cost and overhead, the vulnerabilities of each
layer on sensors exist for different flooding attacks, like jamming, exhaustion, or
flooding on transport layer. A.D. Wood et al. [1] presented the basic defenses like
spread-spectrum or authentication against these attacks, but only these straightforward
defenses are not sufficient for protecting the availabilities of sensor networks.
As one of defense mechanisms against attack on sensor networks, Serdar Sancak et
al. [2] proposed two rough detection methods against spam attacks that generate
dummy packets to deplete the energy of relaying nodes. Even though the second
method using the frequencies of messages sent by the sensors in the same region is a
little similar with our detection using entropy for distribution estimation of messages,
a sink in [2] should count packets per each sensor, that is not scalable for many units,
and they roughly mentioned that this detection method regarded a sensor node that
generated δ times more packets as an anti-node. Anthony D.Wood et al. [3] designed
a defense method against jamming attack on link layer by unwanted and disruptive
radio propagation. Heuristically, it detects the attack if communication channel drops
below a certain threshold, and then maps collaboratively a jammed region by
modifying MAC, sending a brief, high-priority, un-acknowledge broadcast message.
Fan Ye et al. [4] proposed SEF (Statistical En-route Filtering) in order to detect and
drop false reports through validating by multiple keyed message codes (MACs).
Moreover, there has been an increasing interest to study and build the mobile nodes
as well as static nodes in wireless sensor networks [5]. The mobile nodes in the
network will enhance its capabilities, for example, they could be used to physically
collect and transport data or to recharge and repair the static nodes in the network.
However, in the view of security service, the mobility of nodes makes the solving
problems more complicate and difficult. There are three types of mobility: node
mobility, sink mobility, and event mobility [6]. First case is a general mobility of
mobile sensor network, and is important to reorganize itself frequently enough to be
able to function correctly. Second mobility is a special case of node mobility, for
example, a human user requested information via a PDA while walking in an
intelligent building. Last mobility is a case that the cause of events or objects to be
tracked can be mobile. We assume the first general node mobility whether sensor
nodes attached to livestock or human are mobile or nodes themselves can be mobile.
The structures of sensor networks are various according to their application, the
flat structure by random deployment and the hierarchical structure centering nodes on
a sink are representative. In this paper, we will explain our detection method based on
the hierarchical sensor network consisting of sink (SINK), aggregate nodes (AN), and
sensor nodes (SN). However, this detection might be easily applied to flat sensor
network considered as a specific case of hierarchical network, one-layer network.
In this paper, we focus on flooding DoS attacks on mobile sensor environment. As
the first proactive defense, we propose a flooding detection through practical entropy
estimation. Entropy is a representative algorithm used for decision tree, one of the
most popular classification algorithms in current use in data mining and machine
learning, and has frequently used for differentiating the abnormal situation from the
normal on the wired networks [7]. However, the original entropy calculation by
logarithm could be a burden to limited ability of nodes. Thus, we pursue three goals
for flooding attack detection on mobile sensor networks like following.

1026

M. Kim and K. Chae

High detection accuracy and scalability through distributed detection with
a few samples for various deployments of attack agents
z Detection possibility through overlapped detection even at frequent handoffs
of mobile attack agents
z Low processing considering the limited ability of nodes
This paper is divided into five sections. In Section 2, we explain the basic of used
approximate entropy method, as background. We introduce in Section 3 the proposed
detection in detail. Next, we simulate our mechanism and explain our analysis of the
simulation results, and a brief conclusion is finally presented.
z

2 Approximate Entropy Estimator for a Discrete Random
Variable
To discriminate between attack and normal, we use the approximate entropy
estimation by key information attached to all messages, based on our key mechanism
[8]. In [8], the key management nodes calculate a key using key information provided
by the holder of the key. Thus, we can imagine that if several compromised nodes
would generate lots of DoS traffic, the distribution for used keys might be changed. If
our key mechanism would not be used, this approximate entropy estimator could be
used with the other information of message such as source identification, location
information, or sensory data themselves for distinguishing unusual events. We
pursued to simplify the entropy estimation considering limited capacity of nodes and
result in accurate estimation, thus we used an approximate method for Bayesian
entropy estimation [9].
Entropy estimation is one of statistical approaches used for distribution comparison
where the measurements involved are discrete values. M-ary entropy function H for a
discrete random variable X which takes M sorts of values {a1,…,aM} with
M
probabilities {r1,...,rM} is − r log r . Thus, in conventional entropy estimation,

∑

i

i =1

2 i

occurrence probabilities r of values a are estimated by the maximal likelihood
estimation method, i.e., ř = n/N, in which values a are assumed to be included
respectively for n ≡ (n1,...,nM) in the observed sample set of size N. However,
unfortunately, the conventional entropy estimator is not optimum in the meaning of
least square error [9].
Thus, we use basically the approximated Bayesian entropy estimator [9] as shown
in equation (1), instead of the conventional estimator. In the equation (1), the previous
work of [9] revealed that si=0.5 (i=1,...,M), as center, and K=20 were sufficient from
the viewpoint of approximation precision, and numerical experiments of [9]
demonstrated that the proposed entropy estimation improved the estimation precision
of entropy remarkably in comparison to conventional entropy estimation.
Equation (1) is seen a little complicatedly for our sensor network, but the only ni is
changed in the entropy computation of each sample, and our simplified estimator will
be explained in detail at next section.
∧

M

H Bayes = ∑ si −
i =1

1
N +M

M

∑ (1 + log s )(n
i

i =1

i

k
M
⎛ k ⎞ ( N + M − 1)!
1
− j +1 ( ni + j )!
j
∑
⎜⎜ j ⎟⎟ ( N + M + j − 1)! ⋅ (−1) ∑ si
−
k
k
(
1
)
ni !
k =2
j =0 ⎝ ⎠
i =1
K

+ 1) − ∑

(1)

Overlapped Detection Via Approximate Entropy Estimation Against Flooding Attack

1027

3 Overlapped Detecting Approach
3.1 Basic Concept
Our detection based on entropy estimation could use the source identification or
location information if it is attached to message, sensory data that could be regularly
changed as time, like temperature or light, or key information attached to message.
We explain our detection based on our key management on hierarchical mobile sensor
networks. However, this detection might be easily applied to flat sensor network
considered as a specific case of hierarchical network, one-layer network.
The key idea of detection is that detector nodes such as SINK, aggregator, or
cluster head, compute entropy on a sample of consecutive messages generated in each
region. That is, at the previous work [8], sensor nodes or aggregators attach the
information for a key used for authentication or encryption to messages, and the
attached information consists of {key space number, key information}. Because every
key is randomly distributed, the distribution for used key spaces would have a specific
form normally. Thus, as a flooding attack detection method, we use entropy
estimation on the key space number for a key used at messages. Respective entropy
values of the normal case and the attack case that floods lots of messages, are very
different [7].
For each detector node, simplifying equation (1), we result in equation (2) as our
estimator for attack detection. M can be the total number of key spaces in the key
pool, or the subset number of key spaces. Value α and β are constant by N and M that
are fixed when this estimator is used (α=0.5·M, β=N+M-1). Also, (−2) j (j=1,...,20) is
made to constants over temporary memory. Thus, the only ni changes in the entropy
computation of each sample, and moreover any ni (i=1,...,M) are not changed if we
calculate the entropy through a sliding window of fixed width δ (<N) for consecutive
messages as shown in figure 1. In conclusion, this estimator for flooding DoS
detection is calculated with only multiplication operation.
k
M
⎛ k ⎞ β!
(n + j )!
1
⎜⎜ ⎟⎟
⋅ (−2) j / 2∑ i
∑
j
+
(
1
)
(
β
j
)!
ni !
k
k
−
k =2
j =0 ⎝ ⎠
i =1

20
~
H Bayes = α − ∑

(2)

For speedy detection, detectors use δ sliding window for arrival packets. That is,
each detection node updates each ni with the new arriving δ (1 ≤ δ ≤ N ) packets like
~
figure 1, recalculates H~ Bayes
′ , and compares it with the previous H Bayes . If the gap
between them is higher than a threshold, which could be chosen with the average and
standard deviation of normally estimated entropy, the detection node notifies it to
other detection node on higher layer (detection nodes toward a sink). If the sink
judges the attack with estimation results of aggregators and itself, it performs followup measures in order to localize the damage as soon as possible. For the value of δ , a
trade-off between the speed of detection and the calculation overhead of entropy
exists. Therefore, this value could be determined as the capacity of detection nodes.
Also, for the value of N, the sample size for approximate entropy calculation, there is
a trade-off between the accuracy of detection and the calculation overhead of entropy,

1028

M. Kim and K. Chae

N packets

…

arrival packets

δ new arrival packets
N packets
time
~
′
• Op1: Calculation of H~ Bayes • Op1 :Calculation~of H Bayes
~
′
|> Threshold
• Op2 :Check of | H Bayes − H Bayes
Fig. 1. Calculation and decision process on detection nodes

thus it also should be decided as the general generation speed of messages and the
capacity of each detection node.
3.2 Overlapped Detection on Hierarchical Mobile Sensor Network
We assume that the subset of ANs and SINK perform two approximate entropy
calculations for detection, a basic detection for its own management region and a
overlapped detection for the region including a detection node’s own region and its
neighbors. Also, this subset of ANs could be changed as the control of SINK
considering their residual energy and their covering region. Even if an AN does not
perform the detection, the neighbor detection node can cover the region of the AN
through overlapped detection. The reason why ANs perform the basic detection is to
localize the damage by fast detection, and overlapped detection is for detecting
moving attack agents. Also, SINK could synthesize the detection decision with
estimation results of each region, aginst the various deployments of attack nodes.
Overlapped detection is that a detector calculates the approximate entropy for
attack detection with the total traffic from sensor nodes of both its own region and
neighbor regions, from where mobile sensor nodes could be moved to its own region.
The goal of overlapped detection is to minimize the decrease of the detection
performance by relatively reduction of attack traffic affecting a region though the
mobility of attack node. The worst case could be that the handoff of an attack node
would occurs frequently, thus it might be not disclosed by detectors. That is, the
mobility of an attack node makes even the severe attack reduce to the stealthy attack
of a region. If the mobility is considered, the centralized detection is better than the
distributed method, but it is not scale to many sensor nodes.
Neighbor regions for overlapped detection are different according to network
structure. For example, in the case of hexagonal grid-based network, there are 6
neighbor regions per a detector, and in the case of hierarchical sensor network, they
are variable according to the partition of each layer. Neighbor regions of A3 in figure
2 are regions of SINK/A2/A4/A9/A10, and the information for neighbor regions on
the same layer, such as A2/A4, could be conveyed as the combined information of
higher detector, SINK, for overlapped detection, because the higher detector also
periodically received the information of A2 and A4 regions.
We assume that the detectors are loosely time-synchronized, thus they periodically
send their ni to detectors of neighbor regions through a high-priority message, and
calculates the approximate entropy for the summation of ni. If the detector does not
receive ni from some regions, it requests the ni to them again. If the detector suspects
the attack through overlapped detection process, it notifies the detection fact to

Overlapped Detection Via Approximate Entropy Estimation Against Flooding Attack

1029

neighbor detectors for the follow-up measure. Also, if the detector judges the attack
through basic detection process, it sends its own ni to neighbor detectors for proactive
detection against mobile attack agents.

4 Evaluation
To analyze the performance of our detection, we configured the simulation network
and scenario like figure 2. This network consists of a SINK, 12 ANs covering
respectively 50 SNs, and 650 SNs. The SINK has 5 key spaces, including especially a
distributing key space 5 for newly deployed nodes, each AN at the first and second
layer has the information for 3 and 2 key spaces respectively, and each SN has 3
randomly selected key sets coming under key spaces of higher AN. Even though the
original key pre-distribution is performed randomly with the same probability for
each key space, we intentionally distributes the key sets with probability (0.1, 0.2, 0.3,
0.1, 0.3) for each key space. However, normally each SN generates the sensory data
by the same probability with randomly selected key among its own key sets, thus the
intended traffic generation probability for each key space is (0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.1, 0.3).
A5

S SINK

A7

A1

A AN

SN

A2
s21

A6

A8

S
A4

A3

A11

A9
A12

A10

A1

1
2
5
1
5

s51 s100
…

A5
s251

2
3
5
2
5

A6

2
5

A2

3
4
5

s101 s150

A7

1

S

…

3
5

A8

3
5

2

(a) A sample network for simulation

…

…

…

4

A3

5

s151 s200

…

A9

s300 s301 s350 s351 s400 s401 s450 s451 s500

…

Key Space#

3

…

4
5

A10

3
4
5
3
5

…

A4

s1
s50
s201 s250
4

…

A11

5

A12

s501 s550 s551 s600 s601 s650

…

…

…

(b) Simplified model including SNs for (a)

Fig. 2. A sample network for simulation

4.1 Detection Accuracy and Scalability
At first, in order to estimate the possibility of our DoS detection based on
approximate entropy, we intent to mount DoS attack during the specific period. As a
result, we get a variation of estimated approximate entropy on SINK and true entropy
by probability as shown in figure 3. The x-axis of this figure is estimate round as time
goes on. For the calculation of approximate entropy H~ Bayes , we use si=0.5 and K=20 as
recommended in [9], M=5 due to 5 key spaces and N=100 or N=500. At each estimate
round, the calculation of H~ Bayes is performed with the new 100 or 500 packets, that is

δ = N as the worst case in the view of detection speed. During estimate period from
101 to 120, we generate DoS attack traffic from SN s51, s52, s53 and s54 comprising
10% or 30%(Pattack in figure 3) of all packets. Thus, the true entropy by probability
(0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.1, 0.3) is 1.504788 as shown in figure 3, and approximate entropy is
also around the true entropy normally. But, during the simulated DoS attack period,
the most approximate entropies increase considerably enough to easily detect the
attack. Especially the bigger sample size N and the severer attack exist, the more
conspicuous entropy difference between normal and attack is.

1030

M. Kim and K. Chae

This estimation for DoS detection is distributed to ANs as well as SINK. Also, as
the more nodes under the charge of a management node are, the more capacity the
management node has, each AN as a detection node may not be a big burden to the
detection load which is proportional to the received traffic from nodes under its
charge. In comparison with [2] that a SINK should count packets per each sensor, we
support scalability for many sensor nodes, because our SINK or higher layer ANs as a
detection node deal with the only aggregated messages, and estimation is distributed.

Fig. 3. Estimated approximate entropy and true entropy by probability

4.2 Detection Possibility on Frequent Handoffs
As the second simulation, we mount the DoS attack with 2 deployments of attack
agents, concentrated attack and distributed attack. The attack agents in the former
swarm around an AN, that are SN s51, s52, s53, and s54 of figure 2. In the latter case,
they are distributed to different ANs, which are SN s51, s101, s151, and s201. Like
the first simulation, we mount a DoS attack during estimate period from 101 to 120,
and we estimate approximate entropy H~ Bayes for the DoS detection at SINK and AN1
respectively. Figure 4 shows the conspicuous increment of entropy at SINK in the
concentrated attack case, but the entropy of AN1 is not changed nearly because the
key spaces of 4 attack agents might cover all key spaces of AN1. On the other hand,
in the distributed attack case of figure 4, the entropy increment at AN1 is more
remarkable than at SINK because the attack traffic from only one attack agent makes
the skew distribution of used key space number of AN1. Moreover, the uniformed
distribution of attack agents in the view of SINK causes the less increment of entropy
than their concentrated distribution. In conclusion, against various deployments of
attack agents on hierarchical sensor networks, the synthetic decision needs for the
accurate DoS detection.

Overlapped Detection Via Approximate Entropy Estimation Against Flooding Attack

Fig. 4. Estimated entropy in two attack deployments

1031

Fig. 5. Basic and overlapped entropy on
A2 and A3 in attack of mobile nodes

As the last simulation result, figure 5 shows that basic and overlapped entropy in
attack case of mobile agents. The mobile attack agents, from SN s101 to s104 mount
stealthy attack during estimate period from 101 to 120, comprising 15% attack traffic
of all packets, and they wander over the regions of A2 and A3. In result, basic entropy
on each region does not change due to less attack traffic by mobility, but overlapped
entropy at A3 indicates the difference between normal and attack. Thus, the
overlapped detection is important especially for the stealthy attack of mobile agents.
4.3 Low Processing
Our estimator is calculated with only multiplication, instead of logarithm operation of
traditional entropy estimator. In the view of operation complexity, the multiplication
is much simpler and needs less cycle on the CPU board than logarithm. It could
diminish the burden for detection load to each detection node.

5 Conclusion
In this paper, we have suggested a detection method against flooding attack on mobile
sensor networks using the approximate entropy estimation. This approximate entropy
estimator is calculated with only multiplication operation instead of logarithm, thus it
fits for nodes with limited resources. we localized the detection function to each
subgroup of sensors as resources is permissible, and SINK synthesizes localized
reports to detect the attacks even at various deployments of attack agents. Moreover,
the detector estimates the overlapped entropy for mobile attack agents. We have also
simulated our mechanism, in order to analyze the possibility of detection via the
entropy estimation and the accuracy of detection even at handoffs of mobile attack
agents. Finally, we obtained a prominent result even though the attack agents are
concentrated or distributed, or they move.

References
1. Anthony Wood and John A. Stankovic, “Denial of Service in Sensor Networks,” IEEE
Computer, 35(10), pp.54-62, October 2002.
2. Serdar Sancak, Erdal Cayirci, Vedat Coskun and Albert Levi, “Sensor wars: Detecting and
defending against spam attacks in wireless sensor networks,” ICC 2004 - IEEE International
Conference on Communications, vol. 27, no. 1, pp.3668-3672, June 2004.

1032

M. Kim and K. Chae

3. Anthony D. Wood, John A. Stankovic and Sang H. Son, “Jammed-Area Mapping Service
for Sensor Networks,” 24th IEEE International Real-Time Systems Symposium, December
2003.
4. Fan Ye, Haiyun Luo, Songwu Lu and Lixia Zhang, “Statistical En-route Filtering of Injected
False Data,” IEEE Infocom’04, March 2004.
5. Schmidt, S., Krahn, H., Fischer, S., Watjen, D., “A Security Architecture for Mobile
Wireless Sensor Networks,” ESAS’04, LNCS3313 (2005), pp.166-177.
6. Karl, H., Wilig, A. “Protocols and Architectures for Wireless Sensor Networks,” John Wiley
& Sons, Ltd., 2005, pp.62-63.
7. Laura Feinstein, et al., “Statistical Approaches to DDoS AttackDetection and Response,”
Proc. of the DARPA Information Survivability Conference and Exposition, 2003.
8. Mihui Kim and Kijoon Chae, “A Hierarchical Key Management based on Multiple
Regression in Mobile Sensor Networks,” Submitted to a Conference.
9. Yasunari Yokota, “An Approximate Method for Bayesian Entropy Estimation for a Discrete
Random Variable,” Proc. of the 26th IEEE EMBS, September 2004.

