Stable Neighbor Based Adaptive Replica Allocation
in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks*
Zheng Jing, Su Jinshu, Yang Kan, and Wang Yijie
School of Computer Science, National University of Defense Technology,
Changsha 410073, Hunan,China
zhengjing621@hotmail.com

Abstract. In mobile ad hoc networks (MANET), nodes move freely and the
replica allocation in such a dynamic environment is a significant challenge. In
this paper, a dynamic adaptive replica allocation algorithm that can adapt to the
nodes motion is proposed to minimize the communication cost of the object
access. When changes occur in the access requests of the object or the network
topology, each replica node collects access requests from its neighbors and
makes decisions locally to expand the replica to neighbors or to relinquish the
replica. This algorithm dynamically adjusts the replica allocation scheme
towards a local optimal one. To reduce the oscillation of replica allocation, a
statistical method based on history information is utilized to choose stable
neighbors and to expand the replica to relatively stable nodes. Simulation
results show that our algorithms efficiently reduce the communication cost of
object access in MANET environment.

1 Introduction
MANET (Mobile Ad hoc Network) is a collection of wireless autonomous mobile
nodes without any fixed backbone infrastructure, in which nodes are free to move.
MANET can be used in many situations where temporary network connectivity is
required, for example in battlefields and in the disaster recovery. Such a dynamic
environment brings about significant challenges to the replica allocation mechanism,
which is one of the key technologies to improve accessibility, reliability and
performance of the system. The replica allocation algorithm proposed in this paper
addresses the issue of the performance of the data access in the MANET environment.
Replica allocation for performance improvement in the field of fixed networks has
been an extensive research topic. In many researches, the communication cost is used
as cost function. However, because these researches are for fixed networks, they don’t
consider the effect on the data replication caused by the nodes mobility. In [1], a
minimum- spanning- tree (MST) write policy is introduced. However, this cost model
is not suitable for the MANET environment because the communication cost and the
algorithm complexity of building a spanning tree are very high in MANET. In [2],
nodes forward read requests to the nearest replica node and write requests to all
* This research was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.
90104001).
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3036, pp. 373–380, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

374

Z. Jing et al.

replica nodes along the shortest path. However, this scheme requires that every node
should maintain information of all replica nodes. When a replica node changes, every
node must be notified. Thus it isn’t suitable for the mobile environment as well.
Several strategies [3,4,5] for replicating or caching data have been proposed in
traditional wireless mobile networks. These data replication strategies emphasize
reducing the one hop wireless communication cost induced by keeping consistency
between the data in a base station and their replicas in mobile nodes. However, these
strategies are completely different from our approach which is designed for the multihop MANET network without base stations.
Only a few replica allocation algorithms have been proposed for the MANET
environment recently. In [6], much information needs to be exchanged among nodes,
especially when the topology of network changes rapidly. In [7], an algorithm is
proposed to predict the network partitioning and to allocate replicas to ensure the
service availability. It is know, all these algorithms [6,7] only focus on improving the
data accessibility during the network partitioning.
In this paper, a distributed dynamic adaptive replica allocation algorithm is
proposed for the MANET environment. The communication cost is used as the cost
function in the algorithm because the communication cost becomes the most
important factor which influences the performance of data access in this environment.
Our algorithm can dynamically adjust the replica allocation scheme towards a local
optimal one according to the access requests distribution and topology changes. The
concept of “ stable neighbor” is proposed in our algorithm and the access requests are
collected only from stable neighbors while replica nodes expanding or relinquishing
the replica. Thereby the replicas are stored on relatively stable nodes and the
oscillation of replica allocation is reduced while nodes move rapidly.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: in section 2 the cost model is defined;
in section 3 a new distributed dynamic adaptive replica allocation algorithm is
presented in detail; in section 4 the simulation results are given demonstrated; and
finally in section 5, the summary and some future work are presented.

2 The Cost Model
In our research, hops is used as the metric of the communication cost of data access.
In the MANET environment, the communication cost between two nodes includes the
wireless bandwidth cost, energy consumption, the delay of the communication and so
on. All these factors are related to hops, so we use the hops between two nodes to
measure the communication costs between these two nodes.
We suppose that the access request for an object is sent to the closest replica in the
network. The read request is served by the closest replica node, and the write request
is propagated from the closest replica to all other replicas along the shortest path.
Therefore the information of replication allocation just needs to be maintained on the
replica nodes. The ROWA (READ-ONE-WRITE- ALL) policy is used to ensure the
consistency of the replicas, and we assume that each individual access is independent.
Definition 1:The replica allocation scheme of an object O, denoted by F, is the set
of nodes at which O is replicated.

Stable Neighbor Based Adaptive Replica Allocation in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks

375

The set of mobile nodes is denoted by V. For i, j ∈ V, d(i, j) is the least hops between
i and j. Thus the cost of a single read request by node i is d(i, F) = mind(i, j) . The cost of
j∈F

a single write request by node i is d (i, F) + ∑d ( j, k) . Where j is the node which satisfies
k∈F

d(i,j) =d(i,F). Therefore during the interval t, the total communication cost of F,
denoted by cost(F), can be computed as below:
cost(F) =

∑W(i)d(i, F) + ∑∑W (s)d(s, j) + ∑R(i)d(i, F)
re

i∈V

s∈F j∈F

i∈V

=costWforward(F)+costWup(F)+costR(F)

(1)

In this equation, W(i), Wre(i), and R(i) are statistical values acquired during the
interval t. R(i) and W(i) are the number of the read and write requests to O issued by i,
Wre(i) is the total number of the write requests to O that i receives from itself or its
non-replica neighbors. costWforward(F)= W(i)d (i, F) , is the cost of forwarding write

∑
i∈V

requests to replica nodes; costWup(F)=

∑∑W (s)d(s, j) ,
re

represents the cost of

s∈F j∈F

propagating write requests among replica nodes; costR(F)=

∑R(i)d(i, F) , refers to
i∈V

the total access cost of read requests.
Definition 2: The read-write pattern for an object O is the number of reads and
writes to O issued by each node.
For general static networks, the problem of finding an optimal replica allocation
scheme has been proved to be NP-complete for different cost model [8, 2]. As for the
cost model defined by (1), this problem is also proved to be NP-complete in [10]. As
for the MANET environment, it is more difficult to find the optimal replica allocation.
Thus a distributed adaptive replica allocation algorithm is proposed to find the nearoptimal replica allocation scheme.

3 Adaptive Replica Allocation Algorithms
3.1 The Adaptive Replica Allocation Algorithm
In the fixed networks, the optimal replica allocation scheme of an object depends on
the read-write pattern, but in the MANET environment it depends not only on the
read-write pattern but also on the nodes motion. The ARAM (the Adaptive Replica
Allocation Algorithm In MANET) algorithm has been proposed in [10]. In the ARAM
algorithm, each replica node collects access requests from its neighbors and makes
decisions locally to update the replica allocation scheme. Thus the ARAM algorithm
adapts to the dynamic MANET environment.
The algorithm is executed at each replica node periodically and independently. The
duration of the period t is a uniform system parameter. The period tends to be shorter
with more frequent topological changes and read-write pattern changes.

376

Z. Jing et al.

The ARAM algorithm is executed on each replica node s at the end of each interval t
and is shown in Table1.
Table 1. The ARAM algorithm
execute Expansion_test for each non-replica neighbor u of s
if exist node u*, u* satisfies the condition of expansion
then expand replica to u*, F=F ∪ { u*}, return 1
endif
execute Switch_test for each non-replica neighbor u of s
if exist node u*, u* satisfies the condition of switch
then switch replica from s to u*, F= F-{s}+{ u*}, return 2
endif
execute Relinquishment_test on s
if the condition of the relinquishment is satisfied then
relinquish s, F=F-{s}, return 3
endif
return 0

The Expansion_test, Relinquishment_ test, and Switch_test operation in the ARAM
algorithm will be discussed as below.
1. Expansion_test. For the neighbor u of the replica node s and u ∉ F, if the replica is
expanded to u, one hop will be decreased for some nodes to access the replica, but
the cost will increase for propagating write requests to the new replica node u. If
the condition of expansion is satisfied (which means that when a replica is
expanded to u, the decrease of the access cost is greater than the increase of the
update cost, thus the total communication cost declines.), a replica is expanded to
u* and F'=F ∪ {u*}.
2. Relinquishment_ test. If the number of update request received by replica node s
from other replicas is larger than that of the read and write requests received by s
from itself and those non-replica nodes, then s requires to relinquish the replica.
3. Switch_test. The switch test will allocate the replica to the neighbor node which
receives more read and write requests. Then u* becomes a replica node while s
isn’t a replica node any more.
THEOREM 1. For a static network, suppose that the read-write pattern doesn’t
change and the ARAM algorithm is executed at the ends of every interval. Then the
communication cost of object access will decrease once any operation of
Expansion_test, Relinquishment_ test, and Switch_test succeeds until the replica
allocation scheme reaches a local optimal one. The details of the proof are
manifested in [10].
In the ARAM algorithm, information of all access paths is collected, which makes
the algorithm complex. Meanwhile, in the ARAM the replica expansion and
relinquishment operation are executed only when the strict conditions are satisfied.
Such a policy can ensure the communication cost decreasing each time, but the
chances to achieve a more optimal result are lost. Therefore, an improved algorithm
based on ARAM—EARAM is proposed [10]. The EARAM (The Enhanced ARAM
Algorithm) algorithm ignores the changes of the access path caused by the changes in
replica allocation scheme. Thus the replica expansion condition can be simplified as
below:

Stable Neighbor Based Adaptive Replica Allocation in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks

Rfrom(u) >Wre(s) −Wfrom(u) +

∑W (i)d(i,s)
re

377

(2)

i∈F

Similarly, the relinquishment condition can be simplified as below:

∑W (i)d(i, s) > (R (s) +W (s))d(s, F −{s})
re

re

re

(3)

i∈F

The switch condition is achieved as below:
Rfrom(u)+Wfrom(u)>1/2(Rre(s)+Wre(s))

(4)

Where Rre(s) is the read requests received by s from itself and other nodes; Rfrom(u)
and Wfrom(u) are read and write requests received by s from u respectively.
The EARAM algorithm is the same as the ARAM algorithm except that the
expansion, relinquishment, and switch conditions in the ARAM algorithm are replaced
by the condition (2), (3) and (4) respectively. The information collected by the
EARAM algorithm is not enough to ensure that the communication cost of data access
decreases once the EARAM algorithm is executed, and replica may be mistakenly
expanded or relinquished. But the total communication cost tends to decline.
3.2 The EARAM_SN Algorithm
In the MANET environment, the changes of network topology caused by nodes
motion may cause the replica allocation scheme to be oscillated. The main idea of the
EARAM_SN(The EARAM Algorithm Based On The Stable Neighbor) algorithm is to
find the relatively stable neighbors of replica nodes in a distributed way and to
expand replicas only to stable neighbors. Also in the EARAM_SN algorithm the access
requests are collected only from stable neighbors while expanding or relinquishing the
replica. The algorithm enables the replicas to be stored on relatively stable nodes, thus
the oscillation of replica allocation is reduced while nodes move rapidly.
Now the details of this algorithm are discussed. The distance between two
neighbors is used to measure the neighborhood stability of them (the distance
between neighbors can be achieved by GPS). Suppose that the effective wireless
communication area of the mobile node h is a circle with the center h and the radius r,
and the area is divided into n sub-areas, i.e. n cirques H1, H2, H3…Hn, according to
their distance from h (H1 is the furthest from h and Hn is the nearest to h).
Definition 3: Neighbor g’s vicinity on node h, denoted by Rd(h,g). If node g is the
neighbor of h and g is in area Hi of h, then Rd(h,g)=i; else if node g isn’t the neighbor
of h, then Rd(h, g)=-n.
For each neighbor g of node h, g’s vicinity on h can be estimated by its history
information. Denoting rk(h,g) as the estimated value of g’s vicinity at the k interval,
and Rdk-1(h,g) as the actual value of g’s vicinity at the k-1 interval, we can get the
value of rk(h,g) from the estimated value and the actual value at the k-1 interval,
shown as below:
rk ( h , g ) =

rk −1 ( h , g )α + Rd k −1 ( h , g )
α +1

, r1 (h,g) = Rd1(h,g);

378

Z. Jing et al.

~ ~
In this equation, a is a smooth factor and a>0. If r k (h,g) > C ( C is a threshold), g
can be regarded as the stable neighbor of node h. S(h) is denoted as the stable
~
neighbor set of h, i.e., S(h)={g| r n (h,g) > C }.
Definition 4. Stable Path, the path Path(i, j) which is comprised of nodes i, c1,c2…ck ,
j (k ≥ 0) is called a stable path when i ∈ S(c1), c1 ∈ S(c2)…ck ∈ S(j).
Definition 5. Stable neighbor group, the set T(h) is a stable neighbor group of node
h if for each i ∈ T, there is at least a stable path between h and i.
The EARAM_SN algorithm improves the EARAM algorithm by replacing the
neighbor set with the stable neighbor set while every node selects the stable path as its
access path if there is a stable path to the replica node. In the EARAM_SN algorithm,
all the replica nodes and their stable neighbor groups form a relatively stable
topology. Only the access requests issued by nodes in the stable path can have impact
on the replica allocation scheme and hence the oscillation of replica allocation caused
by nodes motion can be reduced.

4 Simulation and Analysis
In this section, simulation results are shown to evaluate the performance of our
algorithms. The program is written by C++ with event-driven method.
The simulation parameters are presented as follows: area of motion is
1000m≅1000m; the number of mobile nodes is 100; the velocity of motion is 0 m/s 10 m/s; the range of motion director is 0 - 2 π ; the communication radius of nodes is
200m; the number of object to be replicated is 1; the interval of algorithm executed is
0.1s; the initial number of replica is 10; the ratio between reads and writes is 5:1. The
mobile nodes move in Random Waypoint Mobility Model [9]. Each experiment is
performed 10 times to acquire the average values.
Firstly, we compare the performance of algorithms in static networks. In this
experiment, our main concern is the effect of read-write pattern on algorithms. We
compare four algorithms: the ARAM, the EARAM, the ADR_G [1], and the Static
Replica Allocation algorithm (i.e. SRA, replicas are distributed on m nodes, and the
replica allocation scheme doesn’t change during the whole process of simulation). In
the simulation, the read-write pattern doesn’t change during each 10 intervals. The
simulation result is presented in Fig.1.
Fig.1 shows that when the read-write pattern is fixed, the communication cost of
object access keeps decreasing until reaches a stable value in the ARAM and the
ADR_G algorithm. When the read-write pattern changes, because the current readwrite patterns of nodes cannot be estimated by the statistical values of write and read
requests in the last interval, the communication cost increases rapidly. However, in
the following 10 intervals, the similar process is repeated. This result validates the
conclusion of Theorem 1. From Fig.1, it is inferred that the mean communication
costs in the ADR_G is the lowest. The reason is that the write requests are propagated
among replica nodes along the MST in the ADR_G algorithm and the communication
cost is |F|-1.
Secondly, we compare the performance of algorithms in the MANET environment.
We compare the ARAM, the EARAM, the EARAM_SN, and the ADR_G algorithms
with the SRA algorithm. Now our main concern is the effect of nodes mobility on

Stable Neighbor Based Adaptive Replica Allocation in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks

379

algorithms. In the simulation, the read request issued by every node conforms to the
random distribution and is fixed during the whole process. In the EARAM_SN
~
algorithm, n=10, a=0.5, and C =0.25*10.
900

SRA
ADR-G
ARAM
EARAM

1600
1400

mean : 422
mean : 433
mean : 332
mean : 322
mean : 298

800

Read-Write Pattern Changes

1200

700

SRA
ADR-G
ARAM
EARAM
EARAM-SN

600

mean : 1151

1000

mean : 711

500
400

800
mean : 698

600

300

mean : 602

400
200

T o t a l C o m m u n ic a t io n C o s t (h o p )

T o t a l C o m m u n ic a t io n C o s t ( h o p )

1800

0

100

200

300

400

500

600
Time (s)

Fig. 1. Performance in Static Networks

200
100

0

100

200

300

400

500

600
Time (s)

Fig. 2. Performance in MANET

Fig.2 shows that compared with the ADR_G algorithm, the mean cost is 23% less in
the ARAM algorithm, 25% less in the EARAM algorithm and is 31% less in the
EARAM_SN algorithm. The reason is that in the ADR_G algorithm, the write requests
are propagated among replica nodes along the MST of the replicas and the resulting
optimal configuration tends to locate replicas in nodes adjacent to each other. While
nodes move and the network topology changes, the replica nodes are no longer
adjacent physically. Therefore the data access communication cost in the ADR_G
algorithm increases rapidly when the network topology changes. From Fig.2 we know
that the communication cost of object access in the MANET environment is greatly
reduced in our algorithms. The simulation result also indicates that the
communication cost is the most stable in the EARAM_SN algorithm among that in
other algorithms.
Table 2. Changes of Replica Allocation Scheme
No.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

cost(F)
266
329
442
341
411
360
398
398

EARAM
F（No.of node）
0 81
0 81
0 81
0 9 81
0 9 26
9 19 26
9 26 37
9 26 33

cost(F)
371
367
372
333
361
385
412
384

EARAM_SN
F（No. of node）
2 81 23 30
2 77 23 30
2 5 7 30
5 77 9 30
2 77 9 30
77 9 11 30
77 9 11 15 30
77 9 11 13 30

Table 2. presents 8 sequential replica allocation schemes generated by the EARAM
algorithm and the EARAM_SN algorithm respectively in one experiment.
Table 2. indicates that the replica allocation scheme generated by the EARAM_SN
algorithm is more stable than that generated by the EARAM algorithm. The number of

380

Z. Jing et al.

nodes that are expanded to be replica node in one interval and relinquish replica in the
next interval is reduced. Therefore the oscillation of replica allocation is cut down in
the EARAM_SN algorithm.

5 Conclusion
In this paper, a new distributed dynamic adaptive replica allocation algorithm for the
MANET environments is proposed. The algorithm aims at reducing communication
cost and improving system performance. Also it can adaptively adjust replica
allocation scheme according to node mobility and the read-write pattern. The
simulation results show that the communication cost of object access in the MANET
environment is reduced efficiently in our algorithms. As a part of our future work,
these algorithms should be improved to deal with replica conflict resolution and
reconciliation problem during network partitioning in the MANET environment. The
replica consistency protocol should also be investigated.

References
1.

O. Wolfson, S. Jajodia, and Y.Huang, “An Adaptive Data Replication Algorithm”, ACM
Transactions on Database System, vol. 22, no. 4, 1997, pp. 255-314.
2. S.A Cook, J.K Pachl, and I.S Pressman, “The Optimal Location of Replicas in A Network
Using A Read-One-Write-All Policy”, Distribute Computing, vol.15, no.1, 2002, pp. 7-17.
3. D Barbara, T.Imielinski, “Sleeper and Workholics: Caching Strategies in Mobile
Environment”, in: Proceedings of ACM SIGMOD’94,1994, pp. 1-12.
4. J Cay, K.L Tan, B.C.Ooi, “ On Incremental Cache Coherency Schemes in Mobile
Computing Environments”, In Proceeding of IEEE ICDE’97, 1977, pp. 114-123.
5. Y Huang, S.Pistla, and O. Wolfson, “Data Replication for Mobile Computer”, In
Proceedings of ACM SIGMOD’94,1994, pp.13-24.
6. T.Hare, “Replica Allocation in Ad hoc Networks with Periodic Data Update”, In
Proceedings of Int’l Conference on Mobile Data Management(MDM 2002), 2002, pp.7986.
7. K Wang, B.Li, “Efficient and Guaranteed Service Coverage in Partitionable Mobile Adhoc Networks”, In IEEE Joint Conference of Computer and Communication Societies
(INFOCOM'02) , New York City, New York, 2002, June 23-27, pp.1089-1098.
8. O.Wolfson, A.Milo, “The Mulicast Policy and Its Relationship to Replicated Data
Placement”, ACM Transaction on Database System, vol.16, no.1, 1991, pp.181-205.
9. T Camp, J Boleng, v.Davies, “A Survey of Mobility Models for Ad Hoc Network
Research,” Wireless Communication & Mobile Computing (WCMC): Special Issue On
Mobile Ad Hoc Networking: Reach, Tends and Applications, vol.2, no.5, September 2002,
pp. 483- 502.
10. Zhengjing, et al., “An Adaptive Replica Allocation Algorithm in MANET Environment,”
Tech. Rep. PDD-2003-9, School of computer, National University of Defense Technology,
2003.

