The Criticality of Spare Parts Evaluating Model Using
Artificial Neural Network Approach
Lin Wang1, Yurong Zeng2, Jinlong Zhang1, Wei Huang 3, and Yukun Bao1
1

School of Management, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
Wuhan, 430074, China
{wanglin, jlzhang, yukunbao}@hust.edu.cn
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Hubei University of Economics,
Wuhan, 430205, China
zengyurong@sohu.com
3
School of Management, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
Wuhan, 430074, China
whuang@amss.ac.cn

Abstract. This paper presents artificial neural networks (ANNs) for the
criticality evaluating of spare parts in a power plant. Two learning methods
were utilized in the ANNs, namely back propagation and genetic algorithms.
The reliability of the models was tested by comparing their classification ability
with a hold-out sample and an external data set. The results showed that both
ANN models had high predictive accuracy. The results also indicate that there
was no significant difference between the two learning methods. The proposed
ANNs was successful in decreasing inventories holding costs significantly by
modifying the unreasonable target service level setting which is confirmed by
the corresponding criticality class in the organization.

1 Introduction
Inventory control of spare parts (SPs) plays an increasingly important role in modern
operations management. The trade-off is clear: on one hand a large number of spare
parts ties up a large amount capital, while on the other hand too little inventory
inevitably results in poor supply service level or extremely costly emergency actions
[1]. There are about 5,000 SPs that are vital for safely production in a nuclear power
plant in China. This plant is one of the most successful commercial power plants and
the main technologies are gained from France. In addition, most of them are nonstandard and purchased from France with a lead-time ranging from 8 to 20 weeks.
The company is usually obliged to carry inventories consisting of over 110 millions
dollars of SPs ready for maintenance.
A key distinguishing feature of the SPs inventory system is the need to specify the
criticality of the items. The criticality of an item is a very important factor associated
with the service level that can be defined as the probability of no shortage per
replenishment from shelf. Then, we can identify the optimal control parameters
according to all kinds of constrain condition. Factors such as costs of SPs,
availability, storage considerations, probability of requirement of a SP, machine
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part I, LNCS 3991, pp. 728 – 735, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

The Criticality of Spare Parts Evaluating Model Using ANN Approach

729

downtime costs, etc., are generally considered while managing SPs inventories. Many
analytical models of different inventory control systems have been discussed [23].However, there is no evidence that any of the works have attempted to raise the
question of evaluating the criticality of SPs using systematic and well-structured
procedures. Moreover, the various models described in the literature feature many
assumptions that remain violated in real life. Simple and straightforward procedure
such as ABC classification approach and the analytic hierarchy process (AHP)
analysis have been used in practice for specifying inventory control polices and for
fixing inventory review periods [4]. But the index considered, named lead time, type
of spare and stock out implication, is so simple and may results in inaccuracy result.
A better way to manage an inventory is thorough the development of better technique
for identifying the criticality class (H, M or L) of a SP, which can also be regard as a
classification problem, and management inventories from the point of view of their
necessity in maintenance operation. However, the criticality of SPs needs to be
evaluated and this is a difficult task which is often accomplished using subjective
judgments. Therefore, identifying criticality class for a new SP in an accurate and
efficient way becomes a challenge for inventory management.
Artificial neural network (ANN) is an artificial intelligence based technique, which
is applicable to the classification process. The ANN can simulate a manager's
utilization of perceived relationships for both quantitative and qualitative cues that
provide important intermediate steps towards reaching the decision maker's final
judgment. These networks have at least two potential strengths over the more
traditional model-fitting techniques [5]. First, ANNs are capable of detecting and
extracting nonlinear relationships and interactions among predictor variables. Second,
the inferred patterns and associated estimates of the precision of the ANN do not
depend on the various assumptions about the distribution of variables. The purpose of
this study is to examine the classification accuracy of ANN as an aid to facilitate the
decision making process of identifying the criticality of SPs. More specifically two
types of learning methods, namely back propagation (BP) and genetic algorithms
(GA) are used to examine the ANNs classification ability. The rest of this paper is
organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the concepts of ANN. This is followed by the
research methodology, and the evaluation of the classifier models. The paper
concludes with summary of the findings and directions for future research.

2 Artificial Neural Networks
Like their biological counterpart, ANNs are designed to emulate the human pattern
recognition function by the parallel processing of multiple inputs, and can capture the
causal relationships between the independent and dependent variables in any given
data set, i.e. ANNs have the ability to scan data for patterns which can be used to
construct nonlinear models [6].
An ANN consists of a number of neurons, which are distributed in a number of
hierarchical layers. One of the most widely implemented neural network architecture
is the multilayer perceptions (MLP) model. A typical MLP used in this paper is
shown in Fig. 1. This network has a three-layer, feed forward, hierarchical structure.
The total number of neurons, number of neurons on each layer, as well as the number

730

L. Wang et al.

of layers determines the accuracy of the network model. The neurons in the input
layer represent the attributes or stimuli in a data set. These inputs (x1, x2, …, xn)
initiate the activations into the network.

Fig. 1. Structure of the MLP ANN

As illustrated in Fig.1, these inputs are combined in the lower portion of the
neuron. The upper portion of the neuron takes this sum and calculates the degree to
which the sum is important using a transfer function (f); producing an individual
output,
n

f (∑ wi xi )
i =1

where, w is weight vector w=[w1, w2,…,wn]; and x is the input vector x =[x1, x2, …,xn];
for a specific neuron. The transfer function serves as a dimmer switch for turning on
and off, depending on the input into the neurons. The selection of the transfer function
typically depends on the nature of the output of the network. In this regard, there are a
number of alternatives, including the step function, sigmoid function, hyperbolic
tangent function, and linear function among others. Because the output of this study is
continuous in nature and ranges from 0 to 1, this study uses the sigmoid transfer
function f ( w′x ) = 1/(1 + e( − w′x )) as recommended by Zahedi [7].
Since the criticality evaluating of SPs problems are inherently non-linear in nature,
it is important to create an ANN, which can approximate complex non-linear
functions. This is achieved by adding hidden layers (i.e. several layers of sigmoid
functions), which consist of neurons that receive inputs from the preceding cells and
pass on outputs to subsequent cell layers. Although in theory a single hidden layer is

The Criticality of Spare Parts Evaluating Model Using ANN Approach

731

sufficient to solve any function approximation problem, some problems may be easier
to solve using more than a single hidden layer [8]. A commonly used learning method
in ANN is the BP algorithm.
2.1 Back Propagation Algorithm Based Learning
The essence of the BP learning algorithm is to load the input/output relations within
the MLP topologies so that it is trained adequately about the past to generalize the
future [9]. The steps of the BP algorithm are given below:
Step 1: initialize weights to connections [wjk] and [vij] with random weights.
Step 2: input Xi (i=1…n) receives an input signal and passes the signal to the
hidden units Zj.
Step 3: each of the hidden units Zj (i=1,…,n) sums the weighted input signals net
input to

Z j = θ j + ∑ i =1 xi vij and applies the activation function to compute the
n

output signal, where

θ k =Bias on hidden unit j.

Step 4: each of the output units Yk (k=1,…,n) sums the weighted input signals net
input to

Yk = θ k + ∑ j =1 z j w jk and applies the activation function to compute the
n

output signal, uk = Bias on output unit k.
Step 5: each of the output units compares its computed activation with a target to
determine association error ek = yk -tk: Based on ek, errors at output unit Yk is
calculated as follows:
n

δ k = ekθ k + ∑ z j w jk
j =1

and sent to all neurons in the previous layers.
Step 6: when the training converges and the system error decreases below an
acceptable threshold, the ANN is considered to be trained and then applied over the
testing data set.
The BP algorithm however, may not provide the most efficient way to train neural
networks and has in many instances resulted in inconsistent performance [10].In other
words, obtaining a global solution is often dependent on the choice of starting values.
An alternate approach to learning is selections, i.e. a complete behavior system is
generated, by evolutionary process. Evolutionary development has been shown to be
an extremely important source for generating more complexity in systems.
Evolutionary development has been studied in great depth from a mathematical point
of view, for instance [11].A common variant for classifying systems is called GA.
This learning technique is discussed below.
2.2 Genetic Algorithm Based Learning
GA is a stochastic heuristic optimization search technique designed following the
natural selection process in biological evolution, i.e. it models the nature of sexual
reproduction in which the genes of two parents combine to form those of their

732

L. Wang et al.

children. When this technique is applied to problem solving, the basic premise is that
an initial population of individuals representing possible solutions to a problem is
created. Each of these individuals has certain characteristics that make them more or
less fit as members of the population. The most fit members will have a higher
probability of mating than lesser fit members, to produce progeny that have a
significant chance of retaining the desirable attributes of their parents [12]. This
method is very effective at finding optimal or near optimal solutions to a wide variety
of problems, because it does not impose many of the limitations required by
traditional methods [13-14]. It is an elegant generate-and-test strategy that can
identify and exploit regularities in the environment, and converges on solutions that
are globally optimal or nearly so. The GA consists of four steps, namely:
initialization, reproduction, selection and convergence.
2.3 Easy-Use Subsystem
From what discussed above, we can see that this is a rather complex process.
However, easy operating is an important measurement rule of any software system.
So, we develop this easy-use subsystem to identify the criticality class of SPs. The
main user interface of this subsystem, which is built using the Matlab software
produced by Mathworks Laboratory Corporation, is shown in Fig. 2.

Fig. 2. The user interface of subsystem

3 Research Methodology
The empirical investigation was carried out using real-world data obtained from a
nuclear power plant in China. A sample of 160 data sets (omitted) was used to design
the network. Each data set represented a spare part and contained four types of
information: predictability of failure (easy, difficult or impossible), lead time (days,
ranging from 8-25 weeks), availability of spare part suppliers (easy or difficult),
specificity of a spare part (standard, nor-standard). These criteria were selected based
on their importance, as indicated by power plant managers through personal
interviews. A five-step procedure was used to design the ANN, as discussed below.

The Criticality of Spare Parts Evaluating Model Using ANN Approach

733

(1) Representing spare parts in the ANN model
This study represented the identifying the criticality classes of spare parts with
regard to four attributes: lead-time, predictability of failure, availability of spare part
suppliers and specificity. The first criterion for judging a spare part is lead-time,
which is the elapsed time between placing an order with a vendor and when that order
arrives. Predictability of failure and specificity of a part is also important for
criticality class. At the same time, we know that the criticality class may not be
treated as “H” when the suppliers are easy to find. Inventory managers use ad hoc
techniques to integrate the above criteria for criticality class classifications.
(2) Developing the neural network identifying models
Each of the networks consisted of 4 input neurons (one for each spare part
characteristic), 16 hidden neurons, and 3 output neurons (namely, criticality class: H,
M or L). The momentum learning parameter was chosen for its simplicity and
efficiency with respect to the standard gradient. The value of the learning parameters
and the threshold function were kept constant, since the purpose of this study was to
evaluate the performance of the ANN topologies.
(3) Training the neural network identifying models
To assess the predictive accuracy of the ANN models the experimental sample was
split into two distinct groups, namely, a training group (100 items) and a holdout data
(60 items). Using the former, the network models were trained. This process is used to
determine the best set of weights for the network, which allow the ANN to classify
the input vectors with a satisfactory level of accuracy.
(4) Validating the ANN identifying models
After the network was trained, the holdout data (consisting of the 60 data sets) was
entered into the system, and the trained ANN was used to test the selection accuracy
of the network for the 60 testing data sets. This is where the predictive accuracy of the
machine learning techniques compared against the criticality classes as defined by the
experienced inventory managers is measured.
(5) Further validation of the classification models
To validation model’s ability to classify data, another data set from another power
plant was obtained; this “out of population” i.e. external data set consisting 100 spare
parts was input into the predictive model only for purpose of model validation.

4 Result Analysis and Its Applications
The results of their classification for 160 randomly selected items are collected. All
variables were significantly different for all the groups at α=0.01 level, indicating that
the three groups represented different populations.
In order to study the effectiveness of the ANN based classifiers, we must test the
prediction accuracy by reference to expertise’s judgment. As shown in Table 1, some
classification errors may be inevitably and have a negative impact on replenishment
decision making. So, it is necessary for managers check the classification result
before using them. In practice, we can specify different target service level according
to the kinds of criticality class. For example, the desire target service level that is
measured by the expected shortage per replenishment cycle is specified as 99.95% for
a SP with the criticality class of “H”. In the same way, a certain target service level of
97% (95%) is conformed for criticality class of “M’ (“L”) according to the practical
maintenance requirement.

734

L. Wang et al.
Table 1. Prediction accuracy of ANNs (significant at 0.01)
ANN (BP) (%)

ANN (GA) (%)

Overall training sample
Holding sample
Overall classification
Item H
Item M
Item L

84.5

85.8

82.4
81.9
82.6
85.2

86.9
82.1
84.2
89.6

External sample
Overall classification
Item H
Item M
Item L

86.0
100
84.2
82.8

86.3
100
85.2
83.9

5 Conclusions
This paper presents an ANN approach for criticality class evaluation of various SPs.
Specifically, two learning methods were utilized in the ANNs, namely, BP and GA.
The reliability of the models was tested by comparing their classification ability with
a holdout data and an external data set. The results indicate that the ANN classifier
models have a relative high predictive accuracy and acceptable. In addition, the
results also indicate that there was no significant difference between the two learning
methods. The use of the ANN model can prove to be a persuasive analytical tool in
deciding whether the criticality class of an SP should be classified as a category H, M,
or L item. By deploying this neural network based model, the unreasonable target
service level setting which is confirmed by the corresponding criticality class are
modified and the inventory at DaYa Bay Nuclear Power Plant in China consisting of
over 100 billion dollars worth of SPs can be reduced by 6.86% while maintaining the
reasonable target service level. However, although these classification models have
several advantages, they also have their limitations. For example, the numbers of
variables that can be input into these models are limited and many new important
qualitative variables may be difficult to incorporate into the models. So, the model
should not entirely replace professional judgment.

Acknowledgement
This research is partially supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China
(No.70571025 and No.70401015), Chinese Postdoctoral Science Foundation
(No.2005037680) and the Key Research Institute of Humanities and Social Sciences
in Hubei Province-Research Center of Modern Information Management. The authors
are grateful for the constructive comments of the referees.

The Criticality of Spare Parts Evaluating Model Using ANN Approach

735

References
1. Aronis, K.P., Magou, I., Dekker, R., Tagaras, G.: Inventory control of spare parts using a
Bayesian approach: a case study. European Journal of Operations Research,
154(2004)730-739
2. Chang, P.L., Chou, Y.C., Huang, M.G.: A (r, r, Q) inventory model for spare parts
involving equipment criticality. International Journal of Production Economics, 97(2005)
66-74
3. Kennedy, W.J., Patterson, J.W.: An overview of recent literature on spare parts
inventories. International Journal of Production Economics, 75(2002) 201-215
4. Gajpal, P.P., Ganesh, L.S., Rajendran, C.: Criticality analysis of spare parts using the
analytic hierarchy process. International Journal of Production Economics, 35(1994)293-297
5. Bishop, C.M.: Neural networks for pattern recognition. New York: Oxford University
Press (1995)
6. Cai, K., Xia, J.T., Li, L.T, Gui, Z.L.: Analysis of the electrical properties of PZT by a BP
artificial neural network. Computational Materials Science, 34 (2005) 166-172
7. Zahedi, F.: Intelligent systems for business: expert systems and neural networks,
California: Wadsworth Publishing (1994)
8. Partovi, F.Y., Anandarajan, M.: Classifying inventory using an artificial neural network
approach. Computer & Industrial Engineering, 40(2002) 389-404
9. Bansal, K., Vadhavkar, S., Gupta, A.: Neural networks based forecasting techniques for
inventory control applications. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 2(1998) 97-102
10. Lenard, M., Alam, P., Madey, G.: The applications of neural networks and a qualitative
response model to the auditors going concern uncertainty decision. Decision Sciences, 26
(2) (1995) 209-227
11. Varetto, F.: Genetic algorithms applications in the analysis of insolvency risk. Journal of
Banking and Finance, 22 (10-11) (1998) 1421-1429
12. Ferentinos, K.P.: Biological engineering applications of feed forward neural networks
designed and parameterized by genetic algorithms. Neural Networks, 18(7) (2005)934-950
13. Sexton R.S., Dorsey, R.E., Johnson, J.D.: Toward global optimization of neural networks:
a comparison of the genetic algorithm and back propagation. Decision Support Systems,
22 (2) (1998) 171-185
14. Kuo, R.J., Chen J.A.: A decision support system for order selection in electronic
commerce based on fuzzy neural network supported by real-coded genetic algorithm.
Expert Systems with Applications, 26(2) (2004)141-154

