Computational Modelling of Multi-ﬁeld Ionic
Continuum Systems
John Michopoulos
Special Projects Group, Code 6303, Naval Research Laboratory, U.S.A.
john.michopoulos@nrl.navy.mil

Abstract. The present paper presents a methodology for modelling the
behavior of continua under multi-ﬁeld inﬂuence, along with the architecture of its computational implementation. It is being applied for the
special case of modelling multi-ﬁeld ionic conductive material systems.
Its computational implementation addresses generation and solution of
both the constitutive and the ﬁeld evolution equations. An application
of this methodology for the case of electric multi-hygrothermoelasticity
generates a model for materials participating in artiﬁcial muscle applications. The corresponding system of nonlinear governing partial diﬀerential equations describing the state evolution of large deﬂection plates
made from such materials is derived as an example. Finally, initial numerical solution examples of these electro-hygro-thermally generalized
Von-Karman equations are presented.

1

Introduction

The present paper reports on the developmental startup of a computational and
algorithmic infrastructure that attempts not to ignore any coupled ﬁeld and/or
transport eﬀects nor it makes any geometric simpliﬁcations while it captures the
behavioral modelling of associated continuum systems.
The computational implementation and application examples on ionic artiﬁcial muscle materials are part of a validation eﬀort at the sub-component level of
a more general data-driven environment for multiphysics applications (DDEMA)
that has been preliminarily described elsewhere [1,2,3].
Recent progress on processing and development of various multi-ﬁeld activated materials such as electro-active polymers (EAP) and ionic polymer conductive composites (IPCC) for artiﬁcial muscle applications has underlined the
general need for a rigorous, complete and preferably automated modelling of
their behavior from a continuum coupled multi-ﬁeld perspective.
There are various generalized approaches for deriving multi-ﬁeld theories [4,
5,6,7] in the 4D space-time domain. Furthermore, mass transport considerations were combined with continuum theories based on continuous thermodynamics [8,9]. In the continuum mechanics context, the governing partial diﬀerential
equations (PDEs) can be produced when all constitutive equations have been
eliminated through term rewriting of the conservation laws.
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3039, pp. 621–628, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

622

J. Michopoulos

Arguably, the goal of developing a general methodology to utilize computational technologies for automating the process of generating and utilizing multiﬁeld theories for demanding applications, has not been reached. The plethora of
analytic approaches as well as the pluralism, the quick evolution, and the heterogeneity of the available software and hardware infrastructure was a signiﬁcant
set of reasons that is contributing to this failure.
The novelty of this paper is that it attempts to address these diﬃculties by
presenting both an analytical activity workﬂow along with an architecture of a
computational infrastructure to derive and solve the equational system representing the behavior of multi-ﬁeld ionic systems.
The paper presents the abstract algorithmic context of the general modelling
process in Section 2, from the perspective of continuous multi-ﬁeld constitutive
theories (CFTs). Section 3 presents the general activity workﬂow of this process
along with a computational architecture of a computational infrastructure that
implements this workﬂow. Application of this methodology produced the generalized Von-Karman partial diﬀerential equations (PDEs) presented in Section
4 along with a solution example. Conclusions provide the closure of the paper.

2

Multi-ﬁeld Model Derivation

Every deformable continuum under multi-ﬁeld generalized loading including reactive substance and charge diﬀusion can be considered as a system that can
be described in space and time by the evolution of its state variables. Some of
these variables can be thought of as dependent or output parameters and some
as independent or input parameters. A systemic abstraction of such a medium
is presented in Fig. (1a) and its corresponding continuum one in Fig. (1b). The
systemic abstraction diﬀerentiates between the bulk material state behavior and
the structural state behavior, while the continuum mechanics traditional approach never makes this diﬀerentiation. Constitutive behavior refers to the bulk
material state behavior (in the sense of the representative volume element behavior), while systemic behavior is the composition of both the bulk material state
behavior with the structural material state behavior.
The bulk behavior of such a system is usually described as a set of relational
restrictions F˜ among the state variables selected by the modeler as the ones
pertinent to the situation at hand, given by
˜ p˜) = 0,
F˜ (˜
q , ξ,

(1)

˜
where p˜, ξand
q˜ represent the input state variables, the internal state variables
and the output state variables respectively. For those cases that these relations
can be solved with respect to the output variables they are called constitutive
relations of the form
˜ p) .
˜ ξ,˜
q˜ = C(
(2)
Functionals C˜ in equation (2) represent an a-priori deﬁnable multi-functional
˜

˜
C

˜
mapping of the form Rdim(p)
× Rdim(ξ) −→ Rdim(˜q) . In most path-history independent state spaces these functionals can be recovered by diﬀerentiation of

Computational Modelling of Multi-ﬁeld Ionic Continuum Systems

623

Fig. 1. Systemic (a) and continuum-based (b) descriptions of multi-ﬁeld systems

˜ p), with respect of the input
an also a-priori deﬁnable potential function Ξ(ξ,˜
(independent) state variables. This potential function has to be constructed as a
function of the input and the internal state variables and should it be necessary
any time derivatives of them. This can be expressed by,
˜ p, p˜,tn , ξ˜,tn )
q˜ = ∇p˜ Ξ(ξ,˜

(3)

This formalism imposes a conjugation between input and output state variables
in a way that allows us to form ”cause-eﬀect” pairs {qi , pi } that have the property
that their product has unit dimensionality of energy density per unit of volume
or mass. Various researchers have suggested various choices for the potential
function required for the constitutive relations. The most practicable and well
known among them are those of internal energy, enthalpy, Helmholtz free energy
and Gibbs free energy.
In the context of continuous multiphysics, system behavior in terms of state
evolution in most continuum systems, is expressed in terms of solutions of partial
diﬀerential equations (PDEs) that enforce special topological form on the ﬁelds
described by the spatial and time distributions of the state variables and further
restrict the potential values these variables can take, i.e.
ℵi (∇n q˜, q˜,tm , ...) = 0

(4)

The traditional sources of such equations are the so-called ”conservation” or
”balance” laws of physics. These are the thermomechanical laws of conservation
of mass, momentum, moment of momentum, energy, entropy ﬂaw and the electrodynamic laws of conservation of electric displacement (Gauss-Faraday law),
magnetic ﬂux, electric charge, rotation of electric intensity (Faraday’s law), magnetic intensity (Ampere’s law). These are the axioms of continuous physics
(ACP) that are not (formally) provable (in their most general form) but rather
they are beliefs that we a priori accept to be true. Unfortunately they are not
always enough for completely determining the state variable ﬁeld evolution. For
this reason the constitutive functionals are used to provide algebraic closure.
Introducing the constitutive equations (2) or (3) into (4) and eliminating the

624

J. Michopoulos

independent variables or more generally half of the conjugate variables, yields a
complete set of PDEs that constitute the so-called ﬁeld equations of the system.
They are of the form,
℘i (˜
p, p˜,tm , ...) = 0
(5)
The ACP have been historically expressed in either their global (integral),
(
V

φ∂v),t =

∂V

τ {φ}∂a +

g{φ}∂v

(6)

V

or the local (diﬀerential) form of a generalized divergence theorem [11] transformed via the Gauss-Ostrogratsky theorem,
φ,t + ∇ · (vφ) = ∇ · τ {φ} + g{φ},

(7)

where φ is the ﬁeld in a volume V , τ {φ} is the inﬂux of φ through the surface
∂V , and g{φ}is the amount of φ produced in the body (source term). Further
simpliﬁcations on the form of the ACP can be obtained by applying some or all of
the additional axiomatic and meta-axiomatic restrictions that are traditionally
called the axioms of constitutive theory [7].

3

Computational Workﬂow and Infrastructure

The general process of simulating the behavior of continuum system usually
involves the solution of the PDEs describing its space and time evolution via
application of discrimination method over the domain of their applicability and
the subsequent solution of a set of ordinary diﬀerential and eventually algebraic
equations. However, as our ability to produce new material systems has outpaced
our ability to model them, the need for automating the process of deriving
these PDEs as well as the prerequisite sub-models and technologies has become
apparent. In attempting to address this need we have developed a conceptual
model of the workﬂow involved for developing a system of governing multi-ﬁeld
coupled PDEs. Figure 2 shows the activities and their interconnection along with
the computational context they are embedded.
The essential features of this diagram capture the outline of the methodology
described in the previous section. A crucial aim of the present eﬀort is to extend
the symbolic computing context as much to the left as possible and seamlessly
integrate all contexts with each-other.
The current state of evolution of a continuously evolving computational infrastructure that implements the workﬂow of Fig. 2 is shown schematically in
Fig. 3.
Lack of space does not allow detailed description of all modules and relation
involved. However, the reader can easily follow the logic involved and recognize
the programming languages involved. It is essential to underscore that J/Link is
the Mathematica [10] to Java and Java to Mathematica application programming
interface. MathTensor [11] and Theorema [12] are packages developed to run
under Mathematica, addressing the tensor manipulation and theorem proving
needs of deriving the constitutive and ﬁeld equations of the model at hand.

Computational Modelling of Multi-ﬁeld Ionic Continuum Systems

625

Fig. 2. Workﬂow diagram of activities and their interconnectivity along with their
computational embedding for the process of developing multi-ﬁeld models of continua

Fig. 3. Abstract architecture of computational infrastructure for implementing the
workﬂow of Fig. 2

4

Multi-component Hygro-Thermo-Electro-Elastic Plates

Ionic material and structural systems that can be used as artiﬁcial muscles are
falling within the category of multi-ﬁeld systems. Limited electromechanical modelling of such systems has been already attempted for simple membrane and
one dimensional systems and never considered the global continuous multi-ﬁeld
perspective of more than two simultaneously acting ﬁelds.
Application of the general process as described in the previous sections for
the case of homogeneous mechanically isotropic system generated a set of nine

626

J. Michopoulos

ﬁeld governing coupled PDEs and associated constitutive relations that have
been originally derived elsewhere [13,14] manually.
Introduction of Lagrange strains to account for large deformations along
with insigniﬁcant ionic currents and chemical reactivity for multi-component
diﬀusion, electric potential, temperature and mechanical deformation generalized
loading yields the following set of modiﬁed Von-Karman nonlinear PDEs [16,17]:
∇2 X k =

∇2 ∇2 w + (1 + ν)
k

h q
( + F,22 w,11 − 2F,12 w,12 + F,11 w,22 ),
N h

∇2 X k = E[(w,12 )2 − w,11 w,22 ],

∇2 ∇ 2 F + E

(8)
(9)

k

1−ν 2
(10)
(∇ δij − ∂i ∂j )F δij + ∇2 X k = 0.
2E
Here w, F, X k are the deﬂection, the Airy stress function and the additional
generalized ﬁeld state variables and δij , ν, E, h, N, q are Kronecker’s delta, Poisson’s ratio, the modulus of elasticity, the plate thickness, the ﬂexural rigidity
and the distributed load respectively.
Equation (10) provides the closure of the system of equations (8) and (9)
governs the balance of the generalized additional scalar ﬁelds X k [13,14](and
appears in its expected divergent theorem form).
Since there is no known closed form solution of the generalized Von-Karman
equations an approximate solution based on Finite Element Analysis (FEA) can
be utilized. The general purpose code ﬂexPDE [15]was used for this task.
Although we solved various cases of boundary conditions due to the space
limitations here, we will only present the case of a simply supported plate along
all the edges with no lateral mechanical load. The value of X k = T emp at the
boundary varies sinusoidally in time.
Figure 4 shows the distribution of deﬂection over the entire domain for increment 36 (4a) near the beginning of the cycle, and increment 121 (4b) on the
end of the complete cycle. Clearly these two distributions verify the reversible
actions of the applied ﬁeld since the plate evolves from an all-negative to an
all-positive deﬂection ﬁeld.
Much is already known about how deﬂection and Airy function relate to
each other from the traditional large deﬂection Von-Karman plate analysis [16,
17]. All other ﬁelds and ﬂuxes can be trivially computed by exploitation of the
constitutive and ﬂux deﬁnition relations given elsewhere [13,14] and are not
provided here due to lack of space. The intension of this section is not to detail
the derivation and solution methodologies for the corresponding PDEs but rather
to provide evidence that is possible.

5

Conclusions

In this eﬀort, we have described an abstract framework for multi-ﬁeld modelling
of material systems with emphasis to ionic materials used for artiﬁcial muscle

Computational Modelling of Multi-ﬁeld Ionic Continuum Systems

627

Fig. 4. Two instances of the deﬂection solution of a non-linear generalized Von-Karman
system of PDEs governing a rectangular plate made from an ionic material

applications. Furthermore an abstract workﬂow of activities has been created to
employ this framework. The current status of a computational infrastructure that
attempts to instantiate this workﬂow is also brieﬂy described. Application of this
methodology and workﬂow has been utilized for deriving the generalized VonKarman equations for multi-ﬁeld activation of large deﬂection plates. Finally an
example of numerically solving the derived system is presented.
The approach followed still leaves open the issue of determination of the
required constants participating in this formulation. Subsequent work in addition
to evolving the computational infrastructure, will focus on this task.
Acknowledgement. The author acknowledges the support by the National
Science Foundation under grant ITR-0205663 and professor M. Shahinpoor from
the University of New Mexico, for his donation of ionic polymer composite material samples.

References
1. Michopoulos, J., Tsompanopoulou, P., Houstis, E., Rice, J., Farhat, C., Lesoinne,
M., Lechenault, F., DDEMA: A Data Driven Environment for Multiphysics Applications,in: Proceedings of International Conference of Computational Science ICCS’03, Sloot, P.M.A., et al. (Eds.) Melbourne Australia, June 2-4, LNCS 2660,
Part IV, Springer-Verlag, Haidelberg, (2003) 309-318.
2. Michopoulos, J., Tsompanopoulou, P., Houstis, E., Rice, J., Farhat, C., Lesoinne,
M., Lechenault, F., Design Architecture of a Data Driven Environment for Multiphysics Applications, in: Proceedings of DETC’03, ASME DETC2003/CIE Chicago IL, Sept. 2-6 2003, Paper No DETC2003/CIE-48268, (2003).
3. Michopoulos, J., Tsompanopoulou, P., Houstis, E., Farhat, C., Lesoinne, M., Rice,
J., Joshi, A., On a Data Driven Environment for Multiphysics Applications, Future
Generation Computer Systems, in-print (2004).
4. Truesdell, C., Toupin, R., 1960, “The Classical Field Theories”, in Handbuch der
Physik ( Herausgegeben con S. Flugge) III/1, Springer-Verlag, Berlin.

628

J. Michopoulos

5. Truesdell, C., Noll, W., 1965, “The Non-Linear Field Theories of Mechanics”,
Handbuch der Physik ( Herausgegeben con S. Flugge) Bd. III/3, Springer-Verlag,
Berlin.
6. Green, A. E., Naghdi, P. M., 1995, ”A uniﬁed procedure for construction of theories
of deformable media. I. Classical continuum physics”, Proc. Roy. Soc. London Ser.
A 448 /1934, pp. 335—356.
7. Eringen, A.C., Maugin., G.A., 1990, “Electrodynamics of Continua I. Foundations
and Solid Media.” Springer-Verlag, New York.
8. Sih, G.C., Michopoulos, J.G., Chou S.C., 1986, “Hygrothermoelasticity”, Martinus
Nijhoﬀ Publishers (now Kluwer Academic).
9. Michopoulos, J.G., Sih, G.C., 1984, “Coupled Theory of Temperature Moisture Deformation and Electromagnetic Fields”, Institute of Fracture and Solid Mechanics
report IFSM-84-123, Lehigh University.
10. Wolfram, S.,1999,“The Mathematica Book”, 4th Edition, Wolfram Media, Cahmpaign and Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
11. Parker, L., Christensen, S. M., 1994, ”MathTensor: A System for Doing Tensor
Analysis by Computer”, Addison-Wesley, Reading.
12. Buchberger B. 1998, “Theorema: Computer-Supported Mathematical Proving”,
in proc. of Annual Meeting of the Mathematics Department of the University of
Wales, Gregynod.
13. Michopoulos, J.G., Shahinpoor, M., 2002, “Towards a Multiphysics Formulation
of Electroactive Large Deﬂection Plates Made from Ionic Polymeric Artiﬁcial Muscles”, Proceedings of First World Congress on Biomimetics and Artiﬁcial Muscles,
9-11 December 2002, Albuquerque NM
14. Michopoulos, J., 2003, “Numerical Solution of the Multiphysics Generalized
Von-Karman Equations for Large Deﬂection Ionic Polymer Plates”, in: Proc.
of DETC’03, ASME DETC2003/CIE Chicago IL, Sept. 2-6 2003, Paper No
DETC2003/CIE-48207.
15. PDE Solutions Inc., “FlexPDE 3 Reference manual”, PDE Solutions Inc., (2001).
16. vonKarman, T., 1910, “Festifkeitsprobleme im Maschinebau”, Encyk. der Math.
Wiss., pp. 349.
17. Levy, S., 1942, “Bending of Rectangular Plates with Large Deﬂections”, NACA
Technical Report No. 737.

