Studying the Acceptance or Rejection of Newcomers in
Virtual Environments
Pilar Herrero, Angélica de Antonio, and Javier Segovia
Facultad de Informática. Universidad Politécnica de Madrid.
Campus de Montegancedo S/N.
28.660 Boadilla del Monte. Madrid. Spain
{pherrero,angelica,fsegovia}@fi.upm.es

Abstract. In this paper, we present an experiment, called the “Old Man
Experiment” carried out at the Universidad Politécnica de Madrid. This
experiment pursued three objectives: to study the acceptance or rejection of
newcomers, to study the field of “mixed reality” in more depth and to
investigate perception. The “Old Man Experiment” was conducted as part of the
Amusement Esprit Project 25197.

1 The Old Man Experiment
This is an interactive experiment, in which any spectator can take part. The
experiment is based on a huge screen on which an avatar representing an Old Man
will show up. The screen, large enough to represent the Old Man in full size (we used
a 3m x 2m screen), must be located in a public space, and people must be allowed to
get close to it. The system includes a hidden camera with two angles of vision (72º
and 180º), to detect people moving and approaching. Our experiment was designed as
it is showed in the Figure 1.

Fig. 1. The Old Man experiment

The Old Man was designed with Alias Power Animator on Silicon Graphics O/2
stations, and the software was developed using Direct3D and Microsoft Visual C++
tools. A Frame Grabber SDK and a Data Translation DT3153 card were used to
capture and observe the images.
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3038, pp. 1004–1007, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

Studying the Acceptance or Rejection of Newcomers in Virtual Environments

1005

This is a two-scenario experiment. The first scenario shows the Old Man going for
a walk around a beautiful green park near the Amusement Centre on a glorious
evening, and the second scenario takes place in a square of the Amusement Centre. In
both scenarios, the Old Man sits down on a bench and quietly starts to read a
newspaper while a bird flutters by. It is then, while the Old Man is sitting on the
bench (see Figure 2), that he starts to interact with his audience.
When people approach the bench, the Old Man will react. He is programmed to
attract people or reject people depending on the situation. If anyone approaches the
Old Man while he is reading his newspaper and gets too close, the Old Man could get
a fright and drop the newspaper, shield himself with the newspaper or show some
interest in the person. Some of the above-mentioned Old Man’s gestures are
illustrated in the Figure 2.

Fig. 2. The Old Man reactions

The behaviour of the Old Man is governed by an algorithm that contains two
different situations. The first one, called attract situation, happens when the Old Man
tries to catch the user’s attention. In this scenario, the Old Man looks at the spectator
and the application generates pre-programmed animations and gestures to catch the
spectator’s attention. In the second one, called rebuff situation, the Old Man rebuffs
the spectator, trying to make him go away.
For the attract situation, we have defined different areas of reaction, as shown in
Figure 3 and Table 1 bellow:
Table 1. Intervals in "Attract Situation"

Area
Range
The Old Man’s Reaction
A (x1, x2), (x5, x6)
Looks at the spectator
B
(x2, x3), (x4, x5) Tries to catch spectator’s attention
C
(x3, x4)
Watches the spectator’s reaction
Where the values of the variables x1, x2, x3, x4, x5 and x6 depend on the angle of
vision of the camera with which we are working. In this experiment, we located the
origin of co-ordinates at the camera’s position, the user’s y-co-ordinate was a fixed
value (y1=1 metre) and the user’s x-co-ordinate was x1=-1, x2=-0.75, x3=-0.5, x4=0.5,
x5=0.75 and x6=1.

1006

P. Herrero, A. de Antonio, and J. Segovia
y0 = 0

A

C

B

B

A

y1
x1

x2

x3

x4

x5

x6

X0 = 0

Fig. 3. Intervals in "Attract Situation"
Nobody

Spectator
moves into
area C

Spectator
moves into
area C

Waiting

Watching

Freeze
Spectator
moves into
area A

Spectator
moves into
area B

Movement
Spectator
moves into
area B

Spectator
moves into
area B

Staring

Gesturing

Freeze

Freeze

Fig. 4. State diagram in "Attract Situation"
Movement

t<1.5

t<5
Nobody
Somebody
Expecting

Freeze
Watching

Gesturing

Movement

Nobody

Movement
t=5

t=1.5

Bustle
Rebuff

Fig. 5. State diagram in "Rebuff Situation"

According to the state diagram in the attract situation (Figure 4), the Old Man
waits reading his newspaper until he perceives the presence of a spectator. Then, if
the person is in area A, the Old Man looks at the spectator, if the person is in area B,
the application issues gestures of attraction, and if the person is in area C, the Old

Studying the Acceptance or Rejection of Newcomers in Virtual Environments

1007

Man watches where the spectator goes. If the Old Man is watching the spectator and
the spectator stops, the Old Man looks at him for a while. However, if he moves
again, the Old Man will start to watch where he goes. If the Old Man is watching
where the spectator is going and the spectator moves into area B, the application
issues gestures of attraction. If the program issues gestures of attraction and the
person stops, the Old Man will look at the spectator for a while.
As for the rebuff situation, the Old Man reacts according to the state diagram
showed at the Figure 5. He waits reading his newspaper until he perceives the
presence of a spectator. Then, the Old Man watches where the spectator is going for a
while, after which the program issues a gesture of rejection. If the Old Man is
watching the spectator and the spectator stops, the Old Man will look at him for a
while. However, if the spectator stays still, the application will issue another gesture
of rebuff. If the spectator moves while the program is in this state, the Old Man will
again watch where the spectator goes until the spectator moves off.

2 Conclusions
In this paper we have presented an experiment, called the “Old Man Experiment”
carried out at the Universidad Politécnica de Madrid. This experiment pursued three
objectives: to study the acceptance or rejection of newcomers, to study the field of
“mixed reality” in more depth and to investigate perception. This experiment was
conducted as part of the Amusement Esprit Project 25197 [1,3] and it was running in
parallel to another experiment, called Run & Freeze [2], which was also part of the
Amusement project and which used the same system of perception for different
purposes [4].
As a conclusion of this experiment, we realised the relevance of introducing a
significant set of reactions to newcomers, how important the lateral area of perception
is, and how user intentions and the Old Man’s reactions are different in different
areas. The “Old Man” was a very simple agent furnished with a simple model of
perception - the camera’s focus- and endowed with a very simple behaviour.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.

Herrero P., De Antonio A., Segovia J. The Old Man Experiment. I3net Annual Conference
(I3AC’98). Nyborg. Dinamarca, 1998.
Herrero P., De Antonio A., Segovia J. Run and Freeze. I3net Annual Conference
(I3AC’98). Nyborg. Dinamarca, Jun. 1998.
Herrero P. Awareness of interaction and of other participants. Technical Report.
Amusement Esprit Project 25197, 1999
Herrero P. A Human-Like Perceptual Model for Intelligent Virtual Agents PhD Thesis.
Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, June 2003.

