Parameterization of Quadrilateral Meshes
Li Liu 1, CaiMing Zhang 1,2, and Frank Cheng3
1

2

School of Computer Science and Technology, Shandong University, Jinan, China
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Shandong Economic University, Jinan,
China
3
Department of Computer Science, College of Engineering, University of Kentucky,
America
liuli_790209@163.com

Abstract. Low-distortion parameterization of 3D meshes is a fundamental
problem in computer graphics. Several widely used approaches have been
presented for triangular meshes. But no direct parameterization techniques are
available for quadrilateral meshes yet. In this paper, we present a
parameterization technique for non-closed quadrilateral meshes based on mesh
simplification. The parameterization is done through a simplify-project-embed
process, and minimizes both the local and global distortion of the quadrilateral
meshes. The new algorithm is very suitable for computer graphics applications
that require parameterization with low geometric distortion.
Keywords: Parameterization, mesh simplification, Gaussian curvature,
optimization.

1 Introduction
Parameterization is an important problem in Computer Graphics and has applications
in many areas, including texture mapping [1], scattered data and surface fitting [2],
multi-resolution modeling [3], remeshing [4], morphing [5], etc. Due to its importance
in mesh applications, the subject of mesh parameterization has been well studied.
Parameterization of a polygonal mesh in 3D space is the process of constructing a
one-to-one mapping between the given mesh and a suitable 2D domain. Two major
paradigms used in mesh parameterization are energy functional minimization and the
convex combination approach. Maillot proposed a method to minimize the norm of
the Green-Lagrange deformation tensor based on elasticity theory [6]. The harmonic
embedding used by Eck minimizes the metric dispersion instead of elasticity [3].
Lévy proposed an energy functional minimization method based on orthogonality and
homogeneous spacing [7]. Non-deformation criterion is introduced in [8] with
extrapolation capabilities. Floater [9] proposed shape-preserving parameterization,
where the coefficients are determined by using conformal mapping and barycentric
coordinates. The harmonic embedding [3,10] is also a special case of this approach,
except that the coefficients may be negative.
However, these techniques are developed mainly for triangular mesh
parameterization. Parameterization of quadrilateral meshes, on the other hand, is
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part II, LNCS 4488, pp. 17–24, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

18

L. Liu, C. Zhang , and F. Cheng

actually a more critical problem because quadrilateral meshes, with their good
properties, are preferred in finite element analysis than triangular meshes.
Parameterization techniques developed for triangle meshes are not suitable for
quadrilateral meshes because of different connectivity structures.
In this paper, we present a parameterization technique for non-closed quadrilateral
meshes through a simplify-project-embed process. The algorithm has the following
advantages:(1) the method provably produces good parameterization results for any
non-closed quadrilateral mesh that can be mapped to the 2D plane; (2) the method
minimizes the distortion of both angle and area caused by parameterization; (3) the
solution does not place any restrictions on the boundary shape; (4) since the
quadrilateral meshes are simplified, the method is fast and efficient.
The remaining part of this paper is organized as follows. The new model and the
algorithm are presented in detail in Section 2. Test results of the new algorithm are
shown in Section 3. Concluding remarks are given in Section 4.

2 Parameterization
Given a non-closed quadrilateral mesh, the parameterization process consists of four
steps. The first step is to get a simplified version of the mesh by keeping the boundary
and interior vertices with high Gaussian curvature, but deleting interior vertices with
low Gaussian curvature. The second step is to map the simplified mesh onto a 2D
domain through a global parameterization process. The third step is to embed the
deleted interior vertices onto the 2D domain through a weighted discrete mapping.
This mapping preserves angles and areas and, consequently, minimizes angle and area
distortion. The last step is to perform an optimization process of the parameterization
process to eliminate overlapping. Details of these steps are described in the
subsequent sections.
For a given vertex v in a quadrilateral mesh, the one-ring neighbouring vertices of
the vertex v are the vertices that share a common face with v . A one-ring
neighboring vertex of the vertex v is called an immediate neighboring vertex if this
vertex shares a common edge with v . Otherwise, it is called a diagonally neighboring
vertex.
2.1 Simplification Algorithm
The computation process, as well as the distortion, may be too large if the entire
quadrilateral mesh is projected onto the plane. To speed up the parameterization and
minimize the distortion, we simplify the mesh structure by reducing the number of
interior vertices but try to retain a good approximation of the original shape and
appearance. The discrete curvature is one of the good criteria of simplification while
preserving the shape of an original model.
In spite of the extensive use of quadrilateral meshes in geometric modeling and
computer graphics, there is no agreement on the most appropriate way to estimate
geometric attributes such as curvature on discrete surfaces. By thinking of a

Parameterization of Quadrilateral Meshes

19

quadrilateral mesh as a piecewise linear approximation of an unknown smooth
surface, we can try to estimate the curvature of a vertex using only the information
that is given by the quadrilateral mesh itself, such as the edge and angles. The
estimation does not have to be precise. To speed up the computation, we ignore the
effect of diagonally neighboring vertices, and use only immediate neighboring
vertices to estimate the Gaussian curvature of a vertex, as shown in Fig.1-(a). We
define the integral Gaussian curvature K = K v with respect to the area
S = S v attributed to v by

∫

K = K = 2π −
s

n

∑θ

i

.

(1)

i =1

where θ i is the angle between two successive edges. To derive the curvature from the
integral values, we assume the curvature to be uniformly distributed around the vertex
and simply normalized by the area

K=

K
.
S

(2)

where S is the sum of the areas of adjacent faces around the vertex v . Different
ways of defining the area S result in different curvature values. We use the Voronoi
area, which sums up the areas of vertex v ’s local Voronoi cells. To determine the
areas of the local Voronoi cells restricted to a triangle, we distinguish obtuse and nonobtuse triangles as shown in Fig. 1. In the latter case they are given by

SA =

1
( vi v k
8

2

cot(γ i ) + v i v j

2

cot(δ i )) .

(3)

For obtuse triangles,

SB =

1
vi v k
8

2

tan(γ i ), S C =

1
vi v j
8

2

tan(δ i ), S A = S − S B − S C .

(4)

A vertex deletion means the deletion of a vertex with low Gaussian curvature and
the incident edges. During the simplification process, we can adjust the tolerance
value to control the number of vertices reduced.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 1. Voronoi area. (a) Voronoi cells around a vertex; (b) Non-obtus angle; (c) Obtus angle.

20

L. Liu, C. Zhang , and F. Cheng

2.2 Global Parameterization

Parameterizing a polygonal mesh amounts to computing a correspondence between
the 3D mesh and an isomorphic planar mesh through a piecewise linear mapping. For
the simplified mesh M obtained in the first step, the goal here is to construct a
2

mapping between M and an isomorphic planar mesh U in R that best preserves
the intrinsic characteristics of the mesh M . We denote by vi the 3D position of the ith vertex in the mesh M , and by ui the 2D position (parameterized value) of the
corresponding vertex in the 2D mesh U .
The simplified polygonal mesh M approximates the original quadrilateral mesh,
but the angles and areas of M are different from the original mesh. We take the edges
of the mesh M as springs and project vertices of the mesh onto the parameterization
domain by minimizing the following edge-based energy function

∑

1
1
2 {i , j}∈Edge v − v
i
j

2

r

ui − u j , r ≥ 0 .

(5)

where Edge is the edge set of the simplified mesh. The coefficients can be chosen in
different ways by adjusting r . This global parameterization process is performed on a
simplified mesh (with less vertices), so it is different from the global parameterization
and the fixed-boundary parameterization of triangular meshes.
2.3 Local Parameterization

After the boundary and interior vertices with high Gaussian curvature are mapped
onto a 2D plane, those vertices with low curvature, are embedded back onto the
parametrization plane. This process has great impact on the result of the
parametrization. Hence, it should preserve as many of the intrinsic qualities of a mesh
as possible. We need to define what it means by intrinsic qualities for a discrete mesh.
In the following, the minimal distortion means best preservation of these qualities.
2.3.1 Discrete Conformal Mapping
Conformal parameterization preserves angular structure, and is intrinsic to the
geometry and stable with respect to small deformations. To flatten a mesh onto a twodimensional plane so that it minimizes the relative distortion of the planar angles with
respect to their counterparts in the 3D space, we introduce an angle-based energy
function as follows

EA =

∑

j∈N (i )

(cot

α ij
4

+ cot

β ij
4

) ui − u j

2

.

(6)

where N (i ) is the set of immediate one-ring neighbouring vertices, and α ij , β ij are

the left and opposite angles of vi , as shown in Fig. 2-(a). The coefficients in the

Parameterization of Quadrilateral Meshes

21

formula (6) are always positive, which reduces the overlapping in the 2D mesh. To
minimize the discrete conformal energy, we get a discrete quadratic energy in the
parameterization and it depends only on the angles of the original surface.
2.3.2 Discrete Authalic Mapping
Authalic mapping preserves the area as much as possible. A quadrilateral mesh in 3D
space usually is not flat, so we cannot get an exact area of each quadrilateral patch. To
minimize the area distortion, we divide each quadrilateral patch into four triangular
parts and preserve the areas of these triangles respectively. For instance, in Fig. 2-(b)
the quadrilateral mesh vi v j v k v j +1 is divided into triangular meshes Δv i v j v j +1 ,

Δvi v j v k , Δvi vk v j +1 and Δv j vk v j +1 respectively. This changes the problem of
quadrilateral area preserving into that of triangular area preserving.
The mapping resulted from the energy minimization process has the property of
preserving the area of each vertex's one-ring neighbourhood in the mesh, and can be
written as follows

Ex =

∑

j∈N (i )

(cot

γ ij
2

+ cot

vi − v j

2

δ ij
2

)

ui − u j

2

.

(7)

where γ ij , δ ij are corresponding angles of the edge (vi , v j ) as shown in Fig. 2-(c).
The parameterization deriving from E x is easily obtained, and the way to solve this
system is similar to that of the discrete conformal mapping, but the linear coefficients
now are functions of local areas of the 3D mesh.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 2. Edge and angles. (a) Edge and opposite left angles in the conformal mapping; (b)
Quadrilateral mesh divided into four triangles; (c) Edge and angles in the authalic mapping.

2.3.3 Weighted Discrete Parameterization
Discrete conformal mapping can be seen as an angle preserving mapping which
minimizes the angle distortion for the interior vertices. The resulting mapping will
preserve the shape but not the area of the original mesh. Discrete authalic mapping is
area preserving which minimizes the area distortion. Although the area of the original

22

L. Liu, C. Zhang , and F. Cheng

mesh would locally be preserved, the shape tends to be distorted since the mapping
from 3D to 2D will in general generate twisted distortion.
To minimize the distortion and get better parameterization results, we define linear
combinations of the area and the angle distortions as the distortion measures. It turns
out that the family of admissible, simple distortion measures is reduced to linear
combinations of the two discrete distortion measures defined above. A general
distortion measure can thus always be written as

E = qE A + (1 − q) E X .

(8)

where q is a real number between 0 and 1. By adjusting the scaling factor q ,
parameterizations appropriate for special applications can be obtained.
2.4 Mesh Optimization

The above parameterization process does not impose restriction, such as convexity, on
the given quadrilateral mesh. Consequently, overlapping might occur in the projection
process. To eliminate overlapping, we optimize the parameterization mesh by
adjusting vertex location without changing the topology. Mesh optimization is a local
iterative process. Each vertex is optimized for a new location in a number of
iterations.
q

Let ui be the q times iteration location of the parameterization value

ui . The

optimisation process to find the new location in iterations is the following formula
n

u j q −1 − ui q −1

i =1

n

ui q = ui q −1λi ∑ (

n

) + λ2 ∑ (
i =1

uk q −1 − ui q −1
),0 < λ1 + λ2 < 1 . (9)
n

where u j , uk are the parameterization values of the immediate and diagonal
neighbouring vertices respectively. It is found that vertex optimization in the order of
"worst first" is very helpful. We define the priority of the vertex follows
n

u j q −1 − ui q −1

i =1

n

σ = λi ∑ (

uk q −1 − ui q −1
) + λ2 ∑ (
).
n
i =1
n

(10)

The priority is simply computed based on shape metrics of each parameterization
vertex. For a vertex with the worst quality, the highest priority is assigned. Through
experiments, we find that more iterations are needed if vertices are not overlapped in
an order of "first come first serve". Besides, we must point out that the optimization
process is local and we only optimize overlapping vertices and its one-ring vertices,
which will minimize the distortion and preserve the parameterization results better.

3 Examples
To evaluate the visual quality of a parameterization we use the checkerboard texture
shown in Fig. 3, where the effect of the scaling factor q in Eq. (8) can be found. In

Parameterization of Quadrilateral Meshes

23

fact, while q is equal to 0 or 1, the weighted discrete mapping is discrete conformal
mapping and authalic mapping separately. We can find few parameterization methods
of quadrilateral meshes, so the weighted discrete mapping is compared with discrete
conformal mapping and authalic mapping of quadrilateral meshes with q = 0 and
q = 1 in Eq. (8) separately.
Fig. 3-(a) and (e) show the sampled quadrilateral meshes. Fig. 3-(b) and (f) show
the models with a checkerboard texture map using discrete conformal mapping with
q = 0 . Fig.3-(c) and (g) show the models with a checkerboard texture map using
weighted discrete mapping with q = 0.5 . Fig. 3-(d) and (h) show the models with a
checkerboard texture map using discrete authalic mapping with q = 1 . It is seen that
the results using weighted discrete mapping is much better than the ones using
discrete conformal mapping and discrete authalic mapping.

(a)

(e)

(b)

(f)

(c)

(g)

(d)

(h)

Fig. 3. Texture mapping. (a) and (e) Models; (b) and (f) Discrete conformal mapping , q=0; (c)
and (g) Weighted discrete mapping , q=0.5; (d) and (h) Discrete Authalic mapping , q=1.

The results demonstrate that the medium value (about 0.5) can get smoother
parameterization and minimal distortion energy of the parameterization. And the
closer q to value 0 or 1, the larger the angle and area distortions are.

4 Conclusions
A parameterization technique for quadrilateral meshes is based on mesh
simplification and weighted discrete mapping is presented. Mesh simplification

24

L. Liu, C. Zhang , and F. Cheng

reduces computation, and the weighted discrete mapping minimizes angle and area
distortion. The scaling factor q of the weighted discrete mapping provides users with
the flexibility of getting appropriate parameterisations according to special
applications, and establishes different smoothness and distortion.
The major drawback in our current implementation is that the proposed approach
may contain concave quadrangles in the planar embedding. It is difficult to make all
of the planar quadrilateral meshes convex, even though we change the triangular
meshes into quadrilateral meshes by deleting edges. In the future work, we will focus
on using a better objective function to obtain better solutions and developing a good
solver that can keep the convexity of the planar meshes.

References
1. Levy, B.: Constrained texture mapping for polygonal meshes. In: Fiume E, (ed.):
Proceedings of Computer Graphics. ACM SIGGRAPH, New York (2001) 417-424
2. Alexa, M.: Merging polyhedron shapes with scattered features. The Visual Computer. 16
(2000): 26-37
3. Eck, M., DeRose, T., Duchamp, T., Hoppe, H., Lounsbery, M., Stuetzle, W.:
Multiresolution analysis of arbitrary meshes. In: Mair, S.G., Cook, R.(eds.): Proceedings
of Computer Graphics. ACM SIGGRAPH, Los Angeles (1995) 173-182
4. Alliez, P., Meyer, M., Desbrun, M.: Interactive geometry remeshing. In: Proceedings of
Computer Graphics.ACM SIGGRAPH, San Antonio (2002) 347-354
5. Alexa, M.: Recent advances in mesh morphing. Computer Graphics Forum. 21(2002)
173-196
6. Maillot, J., Yahia, H., Verroust, A.: Interactive texture mapping. In: Proceedings of
Computer Graphics, ACM SIGGRAPH, Anaheim (1993) 27-34
7. Levy, B., Mallet, J.: Non-distorted texture mapping for sheared triangulated meshes. In:
Proceedings of Computer Graphics, ACM SIGGRAPH, Orlando (1998) 343-352
8. Jin, M., Wang, Y., Yau, S.T., Gu. X.: Optimal global conformal surface parameterization.
In: Proceedings of Visualization, Austin (2004) 267-274
9. Floater, M.S.: Parameterization and smooth approximation of surface triangulations.
Computer Aided Geometric Design.14(1997) 231-250
10. Lee, Y., Kim, H.S., Lee, S.: Mesh parameterization with a virtual boundary. Computer &
Graphics. 26 (2006) 677-686

