Development of Multi Agent Resource Conversion
Processes Model and Simulation System
Konstantin A. Aksyonov1, Elena F. Smoliy1,
Natalia V. Goncharova1, Alexey A. Khrenov1, and Anastasia A. Baronikhina2
1

The Ural State Technical University, box 305 “To Aksyonov”,
620078 Ekaterinburg, Russia
wiper99@mail.ru
2
The Ural State Technical University, Ekaterinburg, Russia
nastya_baro@mail.ru

Abstract. The mathematical model of multi agent resource conversion
processes (RCP) is developed by the means of discrete-event simulation
systems and expert systems. Within the framework of mathematical model RCP
are defined: production system of the RCP structure, that taking into account
conflicts origin. The discrete-event simulation system "BPsim" is developed on
the basis of the multi agent RCP mathematical model. The “BPsim” system is
inculcated on the firms in Ural region (Russia).

1 Introduction
One of the perspective directions of simulation and modeling (SM) tool development
is the problem-orientation, which allows to reduce the requirements that presented to
a knowledge level of end users in the programming area essentially. In the given work
the results of creation and application of the resources conversion processes theory
and SM system “BPsim”, created on the basis of that theory, are described.

2 Mathematical Model of the Multi Agent Resources Conversion
Process (RCP)
In this research, we shall understand the resources conversion process as the process
of an input conversion (resources necessary for process execution) in an output
(products - outcomes of process execution).
The tasks of problem area RCP are: new RCP designing and existing RCP
perfecting, the forecast of resources and conversion device state, the estimation of the
process time and cost characteristics, the resources costs estimate and mechanisms
usage time.
To the basic disadvantages of the visual problem-oriented SM tools such as Arena,
ARIS, ReThink (G2), with reference to the RCP, it is possible to attribute the
complexity of the RCP description and carrying out of computing experiments, weak
modeling means of the conflicts arising with the general resources and tools, absence
of Russian language support. In this paper we examine mathematical model of the
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part III, LNCS 3993, pp. 879 – 882, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

880

K.A. Aksyonov et al.

RCP and SM system “BPsim”, which is substantially free from the above mentioned
disadvantages.
Creation of the RCP mathematical apparatus is based on the widespread
mathematical schemas of dynamic processes description (Petri networks [1], queuing
system [1, 2], models of system dynamics [1, 2, 3]). However, with the help of the
specified models it is difficult enough to present all the features of the RCP.
The main objects of discrete Multi Agent RCP are (Fig. 1): operations (Op),
resources (Res), control commands (U), conversion devices (Mech), processes (PR),
sources (Sender) and resource receivers (Receiver), crossroads (Junction), parameters
(P), agents (Agent). The process parameters are set by the object characteristics
function. The relations between resources and conversion device are set by the link
object (Relation). The agents existence resumes availability of the situations
(Situation) and decisions (action plan) (Decision).
U1, U2,
U3, U4

Sender1
Res1,
Res2

PR1

P1, P2
Res6,
Res7,
Res8

Receiver1

А1
(АГЕНТ)
Res1

Ca3

Ca2
U1

Ca_J1

U2

Op2
Res2

Res3

А2
Mech
1

Mech

2

Mech
3

Junction1

U3

R5

Op3

Messa
ge1

Mech
4

Ca4
Messa
ge2

Res6

U4

Op4

Res7

Res8
Mech
5

Fig. 1. Hierarchical Multi Agent RCP. PR1 process works out in constituents Op2, Op3,

Op4, Junction1 and corresponding resources and tools; agents A1 and A2 control
different RCP levels
Agents operate the RCP objects. For every agent there is a model of the person
taking a decision. An agent executes the following actions: 1) analyzes the
environment (current situation); 2) diagnosis the situation, apply to the
knowledgebase. In the case of determine any corresponding (exceptional) situation an
agent try to find a decision (action scenario) in the knowledgebase or work out it
himself; 3) works out (take) a decision; 4) determines (remolds) the goals; 5) controls
goals achievement; 6) delegate the goals to his own or somebody else's RCP objects,
and also to another agents. 7) exchanges messages.
The RCP elements take part in message exchange and realize their converter
functions on the base of their behavioral models (state graphs) following the incoming
messages. The frames are selected as an agent’s knowledge representation language.
The possibility of the use of typical process description models for the creation of
the mathematical model of the RCP is examined; the typical process description

Development of Multi Agent RCP Model and Simulation System

881

models are: the augmented Petri networks; the queuing systems. It’s shown that given
models don’t allow making an adequate representation of the RCP. There are some
disadvantages revealed for the Petri networks: absence of timing; absence of the
concurrent activities conflicts; the lack of the division of mark types (resources
types); models of real processes described in the terms of Petri networks are bulky
and badly readable. Owing to the fact that the change of the NE – schemas has only
two positions, there is no ability of process interrupt modeling. The conceptual
apparatus of the Q-schemas are not corresponding with the problem area of the RCP,
Q-schemas are oriented on the modeling instruments activity, and in the RCP there
are modeling of the consecution and parameters of the conversion processes.
The apparatus production rules are used for building a kernel of simulation system
[4, 5]. The structure of the production rules of the RCP system is defined as:
PS = < Rps, Bps, Ips > .

(1)

In equation (1) Rps={RES(t)}∪{MECH(t)} is the current state of resources and
conversion devices (operative storage); Bps is a set of resources transformation rules
(knowledge base); Ips is an inference engine.
The operation algorithm of the inference engine consists of the following main
stages: 1) definition of a current instant SysTime = min Tj, j∈{RULE} (standard
algorithm of the discrete-event simulation (DES)); 2) agent’s actions processing
(current situation diagnosis, executive instruction working-out); 3) queueing of
transformation rules; 4) execution of transformation rules and operative storage state
transition. Imitator applies to the expert system module for the current situation
diagnosis and executive instruction working-out.

3 Multi Agent Simulation System “BPsim”
The problem-oriented SM system is developed on the basis of surveyed model. SM
package of the RCP “BPsim” is worked out on the basis of the following means:

Fig. 2. A fragment of the industrial process model which is worked out for the “Urals Industrial
Group” enterprise and made with the help of the simulation system “BPsim”. For every graph
node in the form view there is an operation or RCP, for every connection between the nodes
there is a resources flow, for every agent there is a model of the director of operations.

882

K.A. Aksyonov et al.

Borland Delphi 7 and database control system MS SQL Server. The SM system
“BPsim” provides execution of the following functions: the creation of dynamic
model RCP [6]; the simulation (Fig. 2); the analysis of the simulation experiment
results; obtaining reports on the results; export of the experimental results in MS
Excel and MS Project formats.

4 The “BPsim” System Application
Some tasks of the evaporator machine-building production process which count 420
technological operations was solved for the large chemical engineering Urals plant
“URALKHIMMASH”: planning of the operations schedule; estimation of equipment
loading; estimation of man power loading. The dynamic model of activity with the
“BPsim” was designed for “The Ural industrial group”. The use of the designed
system allows defining the optimum schedule of windows delivery and mounting
links operation; the optimum quantity of mounting links depending on seasonal
demand (volumes of orders); and also it allows reducing the periods of execution of
orders from 14 days to 11, that helps to increase profits of the firm by 21 %.

5 Summary
The mathematical model of the multi agent RCP is developed on the basis of the
means of dynamic expert systems. Within the framework of mathematical model
multi agent RCP are defined: production system of the RCP structure.
The package of multi agent simulation modeling “BPsim” is developed and
inculcated on the firms in Ural region and in the Ural State Technical University.
The multi-agent method application to the dynamic model of the RCP helps to
increase its intellectuality owing to expert and simulation fusion.

References
1. Avramchuk E.F., Vavilov A.A., Emelianov S.V. etc.: Technology of system simulation,
M.: machine construction industry; Berlin: Techniques, 520 p, under edition (1988)
2. Pritsker, A. A. B.: Introduction to simulation and SLAM II, System Publishing
Corporation., West Lafayette (1984)
3. Jay Forrester: Industrial Dynamics. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press (1961)
4. Peter Jackson.: Introduction to Expert Systems, West Group, Rochester, NY, AddisonWesley (1998)
5. A. Newell: Production systems: models of control structures // Visual information
processing, New York: Academic Press (1973) 463-526
6. K. Aksyonov, B. Klebanov, A.Khrenov; Computer-aided design system of simulation
business process model, Proceedings of the 4th IMACS Symposium on Mathematical
Modeling, ARGESIM Report no. 24. – Austria, Vieena University of Technology (2003)
1414-1420.

