Cognitive computer graphics for interpretation of
information in real time decision support systems
Yu.I. Nechaev, A.B. Degtyarev, A.V. Boukhanovsky
Institute for High Performance Computing and Data Bases, St. Petersburg, Russia
St. Petersburg, 198005, Fontanka 120.
E–mail: {int deg avb}@fn.csa.ru

1.

Introduction

Cognitive computer graphics (CCG) is connected to development of representation
of symbolical and graphic objects, which are operated with geometrical thinking. The
scientific bases of CCG are incorporated by A. Zenkin and D. Pospelov. These ideas
have received development in papers [1,2,4,7,8]. Despite of the large number of
publications devoted to a problem of CCG, the practical application of the received
theoretical solutions in onboard real time decision support systems (DSS) are rather
not numerous, e.g. [2,8]. It is explained by complexity of cognitive modeling of
dynamical object (DO) interaction with environment, and also absence the advanced
toolkit for the synthesis of cognitive images in dynamics.
Cognitive paradigm promotes to effective dialogue between the operator and
computer. It is important approach to knowledge formalization in various DSS,
stimulating a finding of the original technical decisions and generation of new
knowledge. CCG is especially advanced for the analysis and interpretation of extreme
situations in real time DSS. The reliable estimation of a situation and acceptance of
the proved decisions in such systems substantially depends on, as far as the problem
of situation identification is effectively solved. In below mentioned examples the
identification of ship movement regimes in a rough sea are considered. The formal
models of data transformation for organization of knowledge base is under
construction on the basis of a rational combination of logic, linguistic and
mathematical models of the certain subject domain.
The problems of CCG are connected to the solution of the following problems [7]:
• development of knowledge models representation ensuring uniform
representation of both algebraic and geometrical thinking objects;
• visualization of knowledge, for which is complicate to present the textual
descriptions;
• search of transition ways from observable images to the formulation of a
hypothesis about latent dynamics mechanisms and processes.
From positions of artificial intelligence problems the knowledge inducing by CCG
represents the intellectual interface focused on dialogue of the man with essence of a
nature, display on the screen of the display of its objective laws.
Development of methods, physiology of recognition of the videoinformation, its
analysis and synthesis by CCG are connected to integration of results in the field of
the theory of discrete mathematical conceptual models for formalization and
representation of knowledge. The identification and decoding of cognitive structures

is carried out as at a stage of development of the formalized system of knowledge at
synthesis DSS, and at realization of its testing by methods of imitating modeling.
In the present paper some aspects of the applications of CCG methods in real time
onboard DSS are considered. Developed cognitive images are used for the analysis of
dynamics of environment and interpretation of complex situations in fields of safety
of navigation and landing of aircrafts in sea conditions, and also for "compression" of
the information necessary for training artificial neural networks (ANN) for
identification of extreme situations.

2.

General Approach

In real time onboard DSS the methodology of CCG images generation is connected
to specificity of the considered initial information. On the one hand, for the majority
of environmental processes the probabilistic measure may be considered. From other
hand, for processes connected to reaction of man (driver, pilot, navigator et al.) such
measure may be fuzzy. The solution of CCG problem in terms of probabilistic
measure is traditional for multivariate statistics [3,5,6]. In terms of random value
(RV) and multivariate random value (MRV) models this methodology was already
developed well, however application of such methods for random function (RF) or
time series model (that characteristic for real time DSS) demands updating of these
procedures.
In the paper the basic approaches to identification and construction of cognitive
structures are presented in terms of RV, MRV and RF models. In the fig. 1 shown the
structure of used models and corresponded techniques.

Fig. 1. Models of the data and techniques of cognitive images generation.

The techniques from fig.1 are generally considered in papers [3]. The one set of
them (biplots, polyplots, affine transform, spiral diagram) bases on the idea of special
functional transformation of initial data to easily recognized image (e.g. – straight
line). Other (second) set contains all the methods (quantile boxes, orthogonal
decompositions, phase portraits) bases on the elimination of low–informative
variables. The third set of methods (scatterplots, starplots) results the plane
representation of non–planal (multivariate) images.

3.

Applications

3.1. Cognitive structures for visual monitoring of DO–enviromental interaction
in a sea
The basic external factors determining behavior of DO (e.g. ship) under operating
conditions are the wind and sea waves. Let’s consider features of interpretation of
these characteristics with the help of CCG images. The initial information about
variability of wind and wave excitations is formed on the basis of the dynamic
measurements data and it is used in models of inducing rules for a logic conclusion in
DSS. Together with the numerical information on the display screen the results of
imitating modeling of complex dynamic images of interaction and various fragments
of a CCG images generated with the help of specially developed algorithms are
represented.
Wind waves representation. Wind waves has a complicated spatial structure.
Geometrical characteristics of the waves are determined by spatial spectral density
Eζ(u,v), or correlation surface:
K ς (r , θ ) = Dς exp(−α(θ)r 1 + ε )cos(β(θ )r ) .
(1)
Here r = x 2 + y 2 , θ = arctan( y / x ) , Dζ - variance of waves, α(θ) - decrement
of decay, β(θ) - fluctuation frequency in direction θ, ε - small constant.
Specific wave size in direction θ is:
π
λ (θ ) =
.
(2)
β(θ)
Here value λ(0) is equal to the traditional definition of wave length. So, the cyclic
spatial structure of wave field may be described by curve in polar coordinates, as the
geometrical place of points {θ,λ(θ)}. In simple case (for visualizing purpose) let us
consider the rotated ellipse with semiaxes {λ(0),λ(π/2)}.
One of the dangerous situations of ship operations is ship movement in general
direction of waves with the speed, closed to phase speed of waves. The length of
dangerous wave is close to length of the ship. So, for visualizing of such scenario, let
us suporposite the above mentioned ellipse of wave “hump” and stylistic ship image.
Orthogonal axes of the plot means module of ship speed V and cosine of ship
direction angle X (in geographical coordinates), see fig. 2. From the fig 2(a) seen, that
the length of the ship is close to dimension of wave humps, and situation must be
considered as dangerous.
Resonant regimes of ship motion. Identification of ship motion resonant regimes
is based on the condition (e.g. only for rolling):

ω−

v 2
ω cos χ − knΘ < ε .
g

(3)

Here nΘ – natural frequency of main rolling resonant), k – coefficient of overtones,
, v – ship speed, ε – small constant for comparison. After transformation u=vcosχ we
obtain:
ω − knΘ m ε
(4)
uv =
g.
ω2
Equation (4) defines two hyperbolic domains, where resonance condition (3) is
valid. The width value ε of these domains is approximatively depends from sea state:
−1 / 2

ε = 0.43h s
,
(5)
where hs – significant wave height.
If in (4) we fix ω=ωm (where ωm is peak spectra frequency), than the two
“dangerous” domains are observes in plane (u,v), and, after the functional
transformation, in plane (V,cos(X)) . In the fig 2(b) the dangerous resonant situation
in quartering directions is shown.

(a)
(b)
Fig. 2. Environmental influence on a ship.
(a) – danger of broaching (on quartering waves), (b) – danger of main resonance.
3.2. Cognitive structures for landing of sea–based aircraft
Landing of aircraft in sea conditions - one of the complex extreme situations
connected to a safety of flights. The features of landing in complicate
hydrometeorological conditions are connected not only to ship navigation to the
certain direction – direction of wind, but also with a choice of an optimum direction
of flight of aircraft(helicopter), in which variability of a wind would be least (Dmin).
This direction usually essentially differs from a direction of a vector of mean wind
speed. As component method of the wind speed analysis does not allow to determine
the specified value, we shall take advantage of a vector algebraic method of the
analysis of vector processes.
r
Let V - planar vector of wind speed with components Vx and Vy on a parallel and
meridian accordingly. Then mathematical expectation
 Vx 
r
m vr = M 
(6)
 Vy 

is planar vector too, and correlation function
 K v x , K vxvy 

K Vr = 
 K v v ,K v 
y 
 y x

(7)

is dyadic tensor with the components KViVj. Variance D vr = K vr (•) when • = 0.
Hence, the variability of wind speed is defined by the set of five values: module
r
| m vr | and direction • of mean wind speed, and invariants •1, •2, • of variance tensor:
m2 v x + m2v y ,

(8)

Vx
,
Vy

(9)

•1,2 = 0.5(I1 ± I 21 − 4I 2 ) ,

(10)

m Vr |=

• = arctg

 2D VxVy 
.
(11)
• = 0.5arctg 
 D Vy − D Vx 


Here I1, I2 are linear and quadratic invariants of tensor (7).
r
For the characterization of intensity of V in different directions, tensor (7) is
conveniently represented as ellipse with semiaxes λ1,λ2. The orientation of largest
semiaxis is α±1800 . For example in the fig. 3 the wind field parameterization in
cyclone on the Mediterranean is shown. Mean wind speed vectors are plotted as
arrows, and standard deviations – as ellipses.
It is obvious, that Dmin=λ2, and optimal landing direction is α ± 900. Thus, for
acceptance of the decision for a choice of an optimum direction and ship speed for
helicopter landing to a platform located on the ship-carrier the stylistic graphic image
of ship and mean wind speed vector, and also helicopter and standard deviation
ellipse (fig. 4) are offered to operator of landing.
Other way of CCG images using at aircraft landing is described in paper [5]. The
approach is developed on the basis of the patent of Yu. Nechaev, ensuring the
situation analysis and acceptance of the decisions during realization of landing
operations in sea conditions. The analysis is connected to allocation wave field
structure features and behavior of a landing platform for various character of external
excitations. The developed algorithm allows to allocate regimes of ship motion and to
recognize "a window of safe landing" at formation of command to pilot about the
beginning and end of operation. The management of the display is provided with the
computer program, which in real time carries out all necessary operations on
processing the information, acting from gauges, estimation of a situation and
distribution of the practical recommendations.

Fig. 3. Cognitive images of wind speed field. Cyclone on Mediterranean, 1.12.1969

r
Fig. 4. Cognitive image for ship navigation to direction of wind speed V , with
account of minimal atmospheric turbulence.

3.3. Cognitive structures for training of Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) for
identification of extreme situations.
In onboard DSS the CCG structures are used not only in analysis and interpretation
of extreme situations. Also they find a use in processing of the measuring information
for representation of input signals for ANN. The effect of CCG images using is
reduced to "compression" of the information, simplification of ANN configuration
and reduction of its training time. This approach is especially advanced for a problem
of damaged ship state identification connected to flooding.
The solution of recognition problem by means of CCG was carried out by
transformation of the information in terms of formally logic description. The search
of concrete model of image was carried out with the help of cognitive spiral allowing
"to compress" the initial information about nonlinear ship rolling with stochastic
variability of the periods. The construction of cognitive spiral on stochastic function
results in "alignment" of the periods and affine transformation them to one value.
Cognitive spiral as the alternative to a phase portrait carries in itself more that
information, which it is possible to allocate visually, were guided on structure of an
image. To such information it is possible to attribute width of strips in a spiral, their
saturation by color and frequency of change of a strip of one color by a strip of other
color. The important role is paid also by asymmetry of the top and bottom parts of
cognitive spiral and distribution of color on corners close to 0 and 180 degrees.
The considered problem of recognition is connected to classification of typical
cases of flooding among five classical situations determined for damaged ship. The
first case is trivial enough: absence of a static heel at symmetric flooding and positive
initial metacentric height. In other damage condition the ship always has a heel on
any board. It allows easily to allocate the first case without use of complex
procedures of a logic conclusion. As if to the fifth case, it is usually considered as a
subset fourth one, for which the close images of ship movement are characteristic.
The analysis of CCG structures allows to allocate the information for recognition.
The rational decision of this problem is received by allocation the characteristic
sections in cognitive spiral in separate corners. In result the basic purpose of use CCG
is use not of realizations of the measured time series, but above mentioned CCG
images for ANN training. This information allows to identify constant number of
entrance neurons, to simplify structure of ANN and to receive freedom in a choice of
length of initial time series are result of DSS reliability. In the fig. 5 shown the
cognitive image of training of ANN on the base of two–layer map of Kohonen.

1.5

1

0.5

0

-0.5
10
10
8

5

6
4
2
0

0

Fig. 5 Cognitive image of ANN training. Two–layer map of Kohonen
(10x10 neurons)

4.

Conclusions

The carried out investigations testifies to the large opportunities of CCG methods
using in problems of data interpretation in onboard real time DSS. The methods of
CCG promote increase of efficiency of recognizing and analysis of the latent
structures and lows describing interaction of environment and DO in a sea in various
external excitations. Especially important use of CCG images is for the analysis and
forecast of extreme situations connected to a safety of navigation and landing of
aircraft in sea conditions. "Compressed" and easily interpretive cognitive
representations of dynamics stimulates the image thinking and allows to operate with
representational objects of an abstract nature.

Acknowledgment
This work is supported by Russian Fund for Basic Research, grant N 00-07-90227.

5.
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.
6.
7.
8.

References
Albu V.A., Choroshevsky V.F. COG–system of cognitive graphics. Developing,
realization, application. Izv. AS USSR, Technical cybernetics, 1990, 5, 37–43 (in
Russian).
Bashlykov A.A., Pavlova E.B. Intellectual user interface of system SPRINT–RV
on the base of cognitive graphics. Proc. of V Int. Conf. KII–96, Kazan, Russia,
1996, 3, 385–386. (in Russian)
Chamber J.M., Cleveland W.S., Kleiner B, Tukey P.A. Graphical methods for
data analysis. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 1983.
DegtyarevA.B., Dmitriev S.A., Nechaev Yu.I. Methods of cognitive computer
graphics for analysis of dynamical object behavior. Proc of II Int. Conf
MORINTECH–97, St.Petersburg, Russia, 1997, 6, 83–87 (in Russian)
Johnson R.A., Wichern D.W. Applied multivariate statistical analysis. PrenticeHall Internalional, Inc., London, 1992, 642 pp.
Mardia K.V. Kent J.T., Bibby J.M. Multivariate analysis. London, Academia
Press Inc., 1979
Zenkin A.A. Cognitive computer graphics. M., Science, 1991 (in Russian)
Zenkin A.A. Cognitive computer graphics – application to decision support
systems. Proc of II Int. Conf MORINTECH–97, St.Petersburg, Russia, 1997, 8,
197–203 (in Russian)

