Implementation of Next Generation Mobile
Service: The Context-Aware Follow-Me Service
Jungsook Bae1 , Seungwan Ryu2, , JaeYong Lee3 , and ByungChul Kim3
1

2

Mobile Telecom. Research Division, ETRI, Taejon, Korea
Department of Information Systems, Chung-Ang University, Korea
3
School of Computer & Communications Engineering,
Chungnam National University, Korea
jsbae@etri.re.kr, rush2384@cau.ac.kr,
{jylee, bckim}@datacom.cnu.ac.kr

Abstract. With the advent of mobile communication technologies, next
generation mobile service is evolving toward user-centric services, in that
each user can get a personalized mobile service based on his/her needs.
In this paper, we propose the context-aware follow me (CAF) service
as a prototype next generation user-centric mobile service. The CAF
service is designed to provide optimized service based on various context
information such as user’s location and preference, capability of devices
located around a user and characteristics of services in use. We also
present an example CAF service scenario, an overall system architecture,
a test-bed system and a sample CAF service ﬂows.

1

Introduction

The next-generation (NG) mobile communication is expected to be a system
capable to provide a variety of multimedia services such as multimedia moving
pictures, movies, and television broadcasts with high-speed and high quality via
the converged network of wireless and wired infrastructures [1]. In particular,
with the advent of next generation mobile communication technologies such as
a high-speed data rate, converged network infrastructure, appearance of new
digital devices having embedded sensing capabilities and appearance of next
generation mobile terminal having higher computing capabilities, advanced mobile services will be realized over whole spheres of our everyday life. Therefore,
in accordance with above technological advances, next generation mobile service
is evolving toward user-centric services, in that each user can get a personalized
mobile service based on his/her needs [2].
In order to provide the user-centric mobile services, a best suitable service
should be generated and provided to a user based on his/her current situation
by collecting context information around him without restrictions on his location or time. In other words, to provide various user-centric mobile services, next
generation mobile services should be able to support various advanced service
Corresponding author.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part II, LNCS 3992, pp. 1033–1040, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

1034

J. Bae et al.

functions such as context-awareness for providing a user best suitable services
based on context information around him, personalization for providing optimized services based on user’s preference and needs, service mobility for providing seamless services without restrictions on location, time, device and network,
and service adaptation for providing a best suitable type of service adaptively
to the change of situation around a user [3].
In this paper, we propose the context-aware follow me (CAF) service as a
prototype next generation user-centric mobile service that can supports above
functions. The CAF service is designed to provide optimized service based on
various context information such as user’s location and preference, capability
of devices located around a user and characteristics of services in use. In this
service, users can enjoy the seamless call service and the video on demand (VOD)
service anywhere and anytime via best suitable device.
This paper is consisted as follows. In next section, concepts, paradigms and
key features of next generation mobile service are introduced. In section 3, design
concepts and features of user-centric CAF services are proposed with example
service scenarios and an overall system architecture. In section 4, a prototype
test-bed system and example service ﬂow of the CAF service is presented. Finally
we conclude this paper.

2

Next Generation Mobile Services

With the progress of mobile communication technologies, mobile services are
evolving to provide a variety of advanced services to guarantee people happiness
of life [2]. The key feature of such evolutional trend of next generation mobile
service is the concept of user-centric service which means that a best suitable
service is provided for a user by analyzing user’s needs and situational information. The concept of user-centric service is considered as a kernel paradigm of
next generation mobile services and its enabling technologies are currently exploited by next generation mobile service research organizations such as Wireless
World Research Forum (WWRF) [3] and Wireless World Initiative (WWI) [4].
In particular, after setting up “I” as a subject of mobile service, WWRF is trying to establish the concept of I-centric service and its enabling technologies
with focusing on service requirements of “I” to support personalization, ambient
awareness and adaptability. In the I-centric service environment, a personalized
mobile service is provided to a user after service selection and adaptation process
based on user’s service requirements and context information.
In order to provide user-centric services, a best suitable service should be provided to a user after service selection and adaptation processes based on his/her
current situation by collecting context information around him without restrictions on his location or time. The user-centric service should be able to provide
various service features in terms of cost, data rate, maturity and application
areas as follow [2].

Implementation of Next Generation Mobile Service

1035

– Low cost service: diverse and convenient services at low price
– High speed service: transmission of large amount of multimedia data with
high data rate
– Context-Aware service: a best suitable service based on context information
and situation of a user.
– Seamless service: service capable to overcome user’s movement and/or changes
of network environments
– Converged service: various services provided by connecting or combining mobile services with other services such as broadcasting and other information
technologies.
– Personalized service: a tailored service to the user’s expectation in accordance with diverse demand and desire and personalized life style.
– Virtual reality service: services that are true to nature provided by various
user friendly interfacing methods.
– Safety service: services for keeping security and privacy.
In order to fulﬁll user-centric services having above service features, functions
of context-awareness, personalization, service mobility and adaptation should be
supported.

3
3.1

The Context Aware Follow-Me Service
Concepts and Features

A number of context-aware computing and communication concepts and applications have been proposed by research organizations and companies [5, 6].
However, most of such context-aware services were not suggested as mobile services in next generation [7]. For example, [6] introduces recent research and
development activities on context-aware communications with focusing on how
changes on individual context initiate and facilitate people’s interaction with one
another.
In this paper, we propose the context aware follow-me (CAF) service developed as a prototype next generation user-centric context-aware mobile service.
CAF service is designed for providing optimal services using best suitable devices based on user’s location and preference, capability of available devices and
characteristics of services in use.
Key features of the CAF service are
– Context awareness: inference of current service availability using collected
context information such as user’s location, device availability and capability
of devices exist in close proximity of a user.
– Service mobility: seamless transfer of on-going service from a device to other
selected device based on service environment where a user is located and
user’s device preference.
– Service personalization: provisioning of service environment user prefer using context information such as user proﬁle, user’s preferences, and other
environmental information.

1036

J. Bae et al.

Tom is driving a car on the way home. He takes French lesson using the mobile
foreign language lesson service. Since he is driving, he takes lesson only in audio
sound mode. After arriving home, Tom gets out of the car, but the lesson is
continued via his mobile terminal with giving audio and video mode services
simultaneously. As soon as he enters living room the lesson service is shifted to
a TV. After ﬁnishing French lesson, Tom begins taking a bath. When he is in
bath room, Jain calls him, and the call is forwarded to a smart mirror equipped
in bath room only with voice mode. When the bath is over, the call is shifted to
his mobile terminal with giving voice and video mode simultaneously.
Fig. 1. An example CAF service scenario

– Service adaptation: adaptation of service data format and quality according
to capability of the selected device and network.
A possible service scenario of the CAF service is given below.
3.2

System Architecture

As a prototype service of next generation context-aware service, the CAF service is provided within a local domain via interfacing with other remote domains.
Each domain is consisting of several elements such as a domain server, a session control server, a location server, location management systems, a media
adaptation server and smart devices. Functions of each system elements are.
– A domain server identiﬁes and authorizes a user, collects context information of a user, gathers information related to other devices, and controls
session mobility. Examples are the home server, the oﬃce server, the car
server.
– A session management server manages session connections or hands over
a session connection to a selected intelligent device.
– A location management system detects the user’s current location.
– A location server identiﬁes user’s current location.
– A media adaptation server trans-codes media to be suitable to the selected intelligent device and, vise versa.
– A smart device has communication capability with system elements in
domain and multimedia service support capability.
– A mobile terminal can support multi radio access technologies such as
CDMA, WLAN and WPAN.
The overall system architecture for the CAF service is given in ﬁgure 2.
Generic operational rules and sequences of the CAF service under the given
architecture are as follow.
1. A user enters a new domain such as a car, a house or an oﬃce.
2. A (local) domain server collects device related information device such as
location, device capability and availability periodically using the device discovery protocol.

Implementation of Next Generation Mobile Service

1037

Domain Server
MT supporting
multi access mode
Media Adaptation
Server

Session
Management
Server

Domain 1
Location Server

Domain 2

...

Domain n

Smart Device 1

Domain Network
Smart Device 2
...

Location
Management
System

...
Smart Device N

IP-based Network

Fig. 2. An overall system architecture for CAF service

3. The domain server identiﬁes and authorizes the user.
4. Location management systems and a location server keep track of location
of the authorized user.
5. The domain server collects users current context information such as user
location, using service, user proﬁle and user preferences.
6. When the user is under calling with someone or getting media streaming service, the domain server selects the best suitable device based on users current
location, users preferences, device information and service characteristics.
7. The domain server manages session control server to transfer the user’s current session connections to the selected device
8. The domain server manages the media adaptation server which transforms
media code to be suitable for the selected device.
3.3

The Test-Bed System for CAF Service

In order to investigate feasibility of the CAF service, especially for the example
CAF scenario presented in ﬁgure 1, we developed a test-bed system. As shown in
ﬁgure 3, the test-bed system consists of two domains, a car domain and a home
domain, in addition to a mobile terminal that can roam those two domains. The
car domain is consisting of a car server, location systems, a location server, a
media adaptation server and a car A/V system which has communication and
computing capability. All devices in the car domain are assumed to be connected
via short-range communications. In this test-bed, we use WLAN for communications among devices. The home domain is consisting of a home server, location
systems, a location server, a media adaptation server and smart devices such as
an intelligent TV, audio and smart mirror are assumed to have communication
and computing capability. In addition, such devices are also assumed to be connected via WLAN similar to the devices in the car domain. The home domain

1038

J. Bae et al.

Fig. 3. Test bed system for CAF service

is divided into two sub-regions, the living room region and the bath room region. For tracking and recognition of user location, a passive type RFID tag is
attached on a user, and 915Mhz RFID readers are installed in several parts of
each domain. In this test-bed, the service mobility across a range of devices in
various domains is supported by the session initiation protocol (SIP).
3.4

Service Flow in Test-Bed System

Because of page limitation, we give readers a sample CAF service ﬂows for a
speciﬁc situation instead of giving a complete set of CAF service ﬂow for the
example CAF service scenario shown in ﬁgure 1. In detail, we choose a speciﬁc
situation when the user gets oﬀ the car and enters home, and show how the CAF
service is provided in this situation. We describe service ﬂows among service
elements such as a mobile terminal (MT), a home server (HS), a location server
(LS), a media adaptation server (MAS), a media streaming server (MSS), a

Implementation of Next Generation Mobile Service

CP

MSS

MT

HS

MAS
DEV_INFO_REGIST

LS
(location,

capability,

DEV_INFO_REGIST

SHTS

1039

SM

avialability)

(location,

capability,

avialability)

CONTEXT_REQ
CONTEXT_RSP
(service, user profile,
user preference)

L O C_ T RA CK IN G _ RE Q

CP
MSS
MT
HS
MAS
LS
SHTS
SM

Correspondent
Media Streaming Server
Mobile Terminal
Home Server
Media Adaptation Server
Location Server
Smart Home Theater System
Smart Mirror

LOC_TRACKING_RSP

User location tracking and
identification
USER_LOC_IND(location

= living room)

Selection of best suitable device
SERVICE_READY_REQ(service

SERVICE_STOP
_REQ
SERVICE_STOP_RSP

information)

SERVICE_READY_RSP
TRANCODE_REQ
(VOD service
information, selected
device information)
TRANCODE_RSP

Sess ion Setu p b y SIP sig n alling

Sess io n R elease b y SIP s ign allin g
RTP A/V stream

VOD service stop
request
VOD service request
Media Stream

Transcoded

media stream
Transcoded
Media Stream

Fig. 4. CAF Service Flow in test bed system

smart home theater system (SHTS), and a correspondent (CP) who is a person
connected with the user’s terminal through SIP protocol. In the chosen situation,
we assume that the user enters a home domain while using both of VoIP call
service and the VOD service via his mobile terminal. Figure 4 describes how
service ﬂows are implemented among service elements in the test-bed system to
maintain the CAF service seamlessly in this situation.
Each domain server collects device related information such as device location, device capability and availability from service devices exist in the same
domain. When a new user is identiﬁed, a domain server (the home server (HS)
in this case) requests context information of the identiﬁed user stored in the
former domain server (the mobile terminal (MT) of the user or the car server
in this case). Upon receiving such request from HS, the mobile terminal delivers
context information such as services in use, user proﬁle and preferences, and
other context information. At the same time, HS requests location tracking information of the identiﬁed user to the location server (LS). Since LS detects the
user enters living room, it informs the current location and location tracking information of the user to HS. Then, based on collected context information such
as user’s current location, user’s proﬁle and preference, device information and
service information, HS selects the smart home theater system (SHTS) as the

1040

J. Bae et al.

best suitable service device. Then, HS delivers service information to SHTS to
make it ready for service. Consequently, HS requests MT to suspend services in
use. At the same time, HS delivers information about service and selected device
as well as requests for streaming media code transformation to the media adaptation server (MAS) to give SHTS optimal service environment. SHTS sets up a
session with correspondent (CP) via SIP signaling, and MT releases the session
with correspondent by SIP signaling and requests the media streaming server
(MSS) to stop VOD service. At the same time, MAS requests MSS to resume of
VOD service to SHTS. Finally, SHTS begins to serve the identiﬁed user.

4

Conclusion

In this paper, we investigate evolutional trend, concepts and key features of
next generation mobile services. We then introduce the context-aware follow me
(CAF) service designed to support context awareness, service mobility, service
personalization, service adaptation. Finally, we give readers an example CAF
service scenario, an overall system architecture, a test-bed system and a sample
service ﬂows. We hope that our research activities and results on next generation mobile services, especially the CAF service presented in this paper, will
play important role in developing core technologies of next generation mobile
communication systems.

References
1. S. Ryu and D. Oh and G. Shin and K. Han and S. Hwang and S. Park: “Research
Activities on the Next Generation Mobile Communications and Services in Korea,”
IEEE Communicaions Magazine, 43(9), pp. 122–131, September, 2005.
2. Next Generation Mobile Communication Forum: “Rainbow Vision,”
http://www.ngmcforum.org/ngmc2/main.html.
3. S. Arbanowski and P. Ballon and K. David and O. Droegehorn and H. Eertink
and W. Kellerer and H. Kranenburg and K. Raatikainen and R. Popescu-Zeletin:
“I-centric Communications: Personalization, Ambient Awareness, and Adaptability
for Future Mobile Services,” IEEE Communicaions Magazine, 42(10), pp. 63–69,
September, 2004.
4. Wireless world initiative: “Mobi Life: Life goes on,” http://www.wireless-worldinitiative.org/.
5. G. Chen and D. Kotza: “A survey of context-aware mobile computing research,”
Technical Report, TR2000-381, Department of Computer Science, Dartmouth College, May, 2000.
6. B. Schilit and D. Hilbert and J. Trevor: “Context-Aware Communication,” IEEE
Wireless Communicaions Magazine, 9(5), pp. 2–10, October, 2002.
7. J. Kim and J. Bae and S. Yoon and J. Ha and G. Sihn: “Evolution of ContextAware Services in Next Generation Mobile Communication,” WG contributions of
13th WWRF Meeting, March, 2005.

