An Eﬀective Modeling of Single Cores
Prostheses Using Geometric Techniques
Kwan-Hee Yoo1 and Jong Sung Ha2
1

2

Dept. of Computer Education and Dept. of Information Industrial Engineering,
Chungbuk National University, 48 San Gaesin-Dong Heungduk-Gu Cheongju
Chungbuk 361-763 Republic of Korea
khyoo@cbucc.chungbuk.ac.kr
Dept. of Computer Engineering, Woosuk University, 490 Hujongri, Samrae-Up
Wanju-Kun Chonbuk 565-701 Republic of Korea
jsha@woosuk.ac.kr

Abstract. There has been a great demand for the artiﬁcial teeth
prostheses that are made of materials sintered at 1500o C, such as Zirconia ceramic. It is, however, very diﬃcult for dental technicians to manually fabricate the prostheses with such materials since their degree of
strength is very high. For that reason, the prostheses of strong materials have been fabricated by using CNC (computer numerical control)
machines. The most important subject in the CNC fabrication is how
accurately the prostheses can be modeled in three-dimensional space according to dentists’ requirements. In this paper, we propose eﬀective
methods for modeling single cores, such as single caps and Conus cores,
which are the principal ones of the artiﬁcial teeth prostheses. Our approach employs the 2D Minkowski sum, a developed ZMap algorithm,
and other geometric techniques such as the tiling of contours. We also
present and analyze the 3D visual examples of the single cores modeled
by the proposed methods.

1

Introduction

Computers have been diversely applied to the area of dental surgery. Some examples are the digitalization of dental data, the 3D visualization of dental information, the automatic fabrication of artiﬁcial teeth using the CAD/CAM, and
the measurement of accuracy during impression or die castings [2,3,5,9,10,14,15].
The reconstruction of artiﬁcial teeth prostheses is one of the most important processes in dental treatment. Most of the prostheses are still fabricated manually
by dental technicians, but the manual labor causes various problems. The accuracy of the prostheses depends on the skills of dental technicians. Sometimes the
prostheses cannot be fabricated within a limited time since the manual fabrication takes long time. Furthermore, there has lately been an increasing demand
for prostheses that are made of materials sintered at 1500o C, such as Zirconia
ceramic, which cannot be handled by human hands. In order to resolve these
problems, CAD/CAM techniques began to be applied to the fabrication systems
of the prostheses [5,15].
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3039, pp. 131–138, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

132

K.-H. Yoo and J.S. Ha

In general, the fabrication of artiﬁcial teeth prostheses is composed of four
successive processes. First, a plaster cast is fabricated to make a pattern for a
patient’s teeth. This process is the same as the one that has been performed in
the previous dental surgery, while the following other processes can be performed
by using CAD/CAM techniques. Second, the 3D surface of the teeth is modeled
by scanning the fabricated plaster cast with 3D scanners. Third, exploiting the
3D information of the teeth model, they design the 3D models that exactly correspond to the prostheses satisfying dentists’ requirements. Finally, the designed
models of prostheses can be fabricated by cutting ceramic materials with milling
machines. When artiﬁcial teeth prostheses are fabricated, the most important
subject is how accurately the prostheses can be modeled according to dentists’
requirements. For the accurate modeling of the prostheses, we may be able to use
the existing 3D modeling tools such as 3DMax, Maya, CATIA, and SolidWorks.
But it may be impossible or it takes too long to model the prostheses with the
existing tools so that the required conditions can be satisﬁed. Hence, we need to
develop a dedicated 3D modeling tool for the eﬃcient and accurate modeling of
the prostheses.
Artiﬁcial teeth prostheses are composed of core prostheses and crown prostheses [13]. The crown prostheses are visible when the artiﬁcial teeth prostheses are
put in. On the other hand, the core prostheses directly touch the original teeth
ground by dentists, and the important function of them is to increase the adhesive strength between the original teeth and the crown prostheses. A single core
means the prosthesis that is composed of one piece, and the typical examples
are single caps and single Conus cores. In this paper, we ﬁrst analyze the requirements that are necessary for modeling the prostheses of single cores, and then
propose the methods for eﬀectively modeling the single cores using geometric
techniques [1,8] such as 2D Minkowski Sum, a developed ZMap algorithm, and
the tiling of contours. We also provide and analyze the practical examples of the
single cores modeled by using our techniques.

2

Requirements Analysis

If there are any problems with a tooth due to decay, non-vitality, etc., a dentist
grinds the original tooth, designs artiﬁcial tooth prostheses, and then fabricates
the prosthesis put in above the ground tooth called the abutment. When a
dentist grinds the original tooth, she/he makes the shape of an abutment so that
the artiﬁcial teeth prosthesis can normally be mounted on it. The prosthesis
is modeled after the coping design so that it is secure and it adheres to the
abutment. A result of the coping design is just the single cap. The surfaces in
both sides of the single cap adhere to the abutment and the crown, respectively.
The surface adhering to the abutment is called the inner surface, while the
surface adhering to the crown is called the outer surface.
With the sectional diagrams of a single cap, we explain the requirements for
single caps in the area of prosthodontics. Fig. 1(a) illustrates the values that are
required for guaranteeing the adhesive strength of the inner surface of the single

An Eﬀective Modeling of Single Cores Prostheses

133

cap. The inner surface is determined by expanding the surface of the abutment;
the one part within a ﬁxed height ih from the margin is expanded as much
as a particular value e1 , while the other part is expanded as much as another
particular value e2 . Fig. 1(b) illustrates the values that are required for the outer
surface of the single cap. The outer surface is determined by expanding a part
of the inner surface; the part above a ﬁxed height oh from the margin is also
expanded as much as a particular value e. The space between abutments may
be wide when a large number of teeth are lost and only a few original teeth
survive. The wide space causes the surviving original tooth to sustain a great
load and the abutments are easily damaged. An alternative plan for resolving
the problem was proposed by Korber [6], which is a method of dental treatment
using the new prosthesis called the Conus. The Conus is designed to avoid the
damage to the abutments and to sustain the load additionally with the mucosa
of the mouth. The Conus core has an inner surface and an outer surface, as
a single cap has the two surfaces. The inner surface should well adhere to the
abutments. Hence, the inner surfaces of the Conus cores can be modeled by
expanding the surface of the abutment the same as those of single caps were
done: the one part within a ﬁxed height h from the margin and the other parts
expanded as much as particular values respectively. The outer surface of a single
Conus core should be able to control the power sustaining the crown, and it
has to be completely ﬁxed at the time of the Conus’s function. It also should
be able to make the surviving teeth almost never get the stress. The values for
satisfying these requirements are illustrated in Fig. 1(c), which is the sectional
diagram of a Conus core. For determining the outer surface, the one part of the
abutment within a ﬁxed height h1 from the margin is increasingly expanded to
a particular value e1 , and then another part between the heights h1 and h2 from
the margin is modeled as a conic type. The conic angle θ of the conic type is
very important due to separation and adhesion between Conus cores and crown,
which is recommended as 4o , 6o , and 9o in the area of prosthodontics [13]. These
two parts are deﬁned as the body part, while the remaining part above the body
part is deﬁned as the top part. The outer surface corresponding to the top part
is also determined by expanding the inner surface as much as a particular value
e2 similarly to the one of a single cap.

3
3.1

Modeling of Single Cores and Its Examples
The Inner Surface of Single Cores

For designing the inner surface of the single core for a given abutment, we have
to ﬁrst scan the given abutment impression, and then extract the tooth model
lying above the margin from the scanned 3D data. The 3D scanners of the
touch type were used for the scanning, and we choose a small value 0.05mm
as input intervals on X- and Y -axes for guaranteeing the accuracy of the 3D
data. In general, the tooth model has the same characteristics as a terrain model
has since the abutment is scanned by the 3D scanner of touch type. Hence,
the modeling of the inner surfaces of single cores can be transformed into the

134

K.-H. Yoo and J.S. Ha

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 1. Designing requirements (a) the inner surfaces of a single core (b) the outer
surfaces of a single cap (c) the outer surfaces of a single Conus cap

problem of expanding terrain models as much as given ﬁxed values. In other
words, the modeling can be formulated as the problem of Minkowski sum [1] in
the plane.
MinkowskiSum(T , e) = {¯
v+w
¯ v¯ ∈ T , w
¯ ∈ S}, where S is an arbitrary
sphere with radius e, whose center exists on the surface of T . In our case of
modeling the inner surfaces of a single core, e1 is assigned to e if the height
value for a point v is less than a given value h. Otherwise, we assign e2 to e.
The Minkowski sum of a general model in 3D space can be solved by applying
the results of Lozano-Perez [7] or Ghosh [4]. Lozano-Perez decomposes an original
object into convex objects, and computes convex Minkowski sums for each pair of
the convex objects. As a result, the original problem is represented with the union
of all the convex Minkowski sums, but it is diﬃcult to accurately implement
the decomposition and union operations for this method. Assuming that the
intersection of line/line, plane/line, and plane/plane can be exactly computed,
Ghosh proposed an algorithm for computing the Minkowski sum of a general
model by using the unions of face/face, face/edge, face/vertex and edge/edge
Minkowski sums. This method is numerically error-prone when ﬂoating point
arithmetic is used as well as it takes heavy load in the union operations.
In order to make the problems simpler, we review the characteristics of the
tooth model and its inner surface in detail. In short, let M and TM represent a
detected margin and an extracted tooth model lying above the margin respectively. For increasing the adhesive strength of a single core to be designed, its
inner surface is determined by expanding the one part of TM within the height
0.5mm from M as much as 0.0120mm, and expanding the other part as much
as 0.0125mm. From the observation that the expanding values are much smaller
than the input interval 0.05mm on X- and Y -axes, we are going to solve the
problem of modeling the inner surface by transforming it into the problem of 2D
Minkowski sum [1]. Without the loss of generality, a given TM can be regarded
as a terrain located at XY plane of the 3-axis coordinate system. After determining the minimum and maximum values of Y coordinates of TM, we construct
the 2D polygonal lines that have the X and Z coordinate values sequentially

An Eﬀective Modeling of Single Cores Prostheses

135

in the input interval 0.05mm on Y -axis. Geometrically speaking, the polygonal
lines are the intersection of the tooth surface and the planes that are parallel
with XZ plane. Clearly, the end points of the 2D polygonal lines are on M.
Before applying the Minkowski sum to the constructed polygonal lines, a particular contour C of TM has to be computed to lie at a ﬁxed height h from M.
We can obtain C by simultaneously traversing the edges and vertices of M and
TM. Then TM can be divided into two parts with C, which are expanded by e1
and e2 respectively, as discussed in Sect. 2. For eﬃciency, we determine where
the vertices of TM lie between the two parts of TM during computing C. After
completing the vertex marking, we process the Minkowski sum operation with
respect to the constructed polygonal lines.
3.2

The Outer Surfaces of a Single Cap

The outer surface of a single cap is modeled by expanding a part of TM above
a ﬁxed height h as much as a particular value e. If we apply the techniques in
Sect. 3.1 to this model, the expansion does not occur in the points that have
the minimum and maximum values of Y -coordinate. This is because the outer
surface to be modeled includes the part of TM above the height h. Furthermore,
since the expansion value 0.4mm is relatively large with respect to the input
interval 0.05mm on X- and Y -axes, the polygonal lines obtained by applying
the 2D Minkowski sum may be composed of the vertices that have the intervals
greater than 0.05mm.
For avoiding the limitation caused by a large expansion value, we develop
a ZMap algorithm that can be applied to the part of TM above the height h.
Our ZMap algorithm performs a geometric transformation for the set V tx of all
original vertices of TM above the height h. For each vertex v¯ = (x, y, z) ∈ V tx,
it builds the sphere with the origin v¯ and the radius e, and then it ﬁnds the
v ) of vertices that are contained in the sphere. For each vertex v¯n =
set V txn (¯
n n n
v ), we calculate the Z coordinate value zz such that the
(x , y , z ) ∈ V txn (¯
point (xn , y n , zz) is on the sphere. Comparing the value z n with the calculated
value zz, it is replaced with the value zz if only z n < zz.
Fig. 2(a) shows a set of polygonal lines of the tooth model lying above the
margin that was detected by Yoo’s algorithm [12]. Fig. 2(b) is the inner surface
and the outer surface obtained from the given model, where the ﬁxed height is
0.5mm, and the expansion values below and above the height are 0.012mm and
0.0125mm respectively. Since a tooth model has the characteristics of a terrain, it
is clear that the intersection takes the shape of a polygon called a cross-sectional
polygon. Fig. 2(c) presents the cross-sectional polygon of the single cap modeled
like Fig. 2(b) and the XZ-plane containing the center of the margin.
3.3

The Outer Surfaces of a Single Conus Core

The outer surface of a single Conus core was divided into the top part and
body part as deﬁned in Sect. 2. The top part can be modeled by employing the
ZMap algorithm in Sect. 3.2, but the body part has to be modeled carefully

136

K.-H. Yoo and J.S. Ha

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 2. An example of modeling a single cap (a) an original tooth model above a
detected margin (b) a single cap model with the height 0.5mm and the two expansion
values 0.012/0.0125mm below/above the height respectively (c) the visualization of a
cross-sectional polygon

for satisfying the condition of a given conic angle. We develop a method for
constructing the surface of the body part with 3D contours, which is known as
the tiling problem. Fig. 3(a) shows the techniques of treating the body part for a
given conic angle θ. First we determine the center c¯ = (xc , y c , z c ) of M, and the
vertical line V LN passing the point c¯. Next we extract the 3D contours of TM
at the points of the ﬁxed heights h1 and h2 . The extracted contours are denoted
by C l and C h which are called the low region and the high region of the body part
respectively. The two contours C l and C h are, respectively, expanded as much
as the values that dentists recommend, which were represented as e1 and e2 in
Fig.3(a). After deﬁning the plane P LN deﬁned by c¯, V LN , and a vertex on M,
we ﬁnd the intersection point p¯l (¯
ph ) between P LN and the expansion of C l
h
v
(C ). Let p¯ be the point that has X/Y coordinates of p¯l and Z coordinate of
p¯h . Then, the line determining the conic angle θ from p¯l will intersect the line
segment between p¯v and p¯h . This intersection point is represented as p¯c in Fig.
3(a), and the intersection is iteratively computed around 360o by rotating P LN
with a ﬁxed angle about the axis of V LN . Finally, we can describe an algorithm
for modeling the body part by triangulating the line segments that connect all
the found points p¯l , p¯c , and p¯h .
If we apply the modeling techniques in the above with the same conic angle
to every region of TM, however, the thickness of the modeled Conus will not be
uniform since the inclined angle of TM is varied. In this paper, we divide the
surface of an abutment into four regions by considering separation and adhesion
between Conus cores and crown. The four conic angles which may be diﬀerent
from each other are assigned to each of the four regions. The assignment of
diﬀerent conic angles may cause another problem in the surface of the modeled Conus. A folding phenomenon may occur in the polygonal lines connecting
the set {¯
pci } of intersection points that are obtained with diﬀerent conic angles.
Hence, this phenomenon will occur also on the surface of the body part that
is formed with the point sets {¯
pli }, {¯
pci }, and {¯
phi }. In order to resolve the folding phenomenon, we employ the B-Spine approximating curve algorithm to the

An Eﬀective Modeling of Single Cores Prostheses

137

consecutive points pci for all i = 1, · · · , n. The B-Spline approximating curve is
iteratively generated until the folding phenomenon disappears [8,11].
Fig. 3(b) illustrates the single Conus core modeled for an abutment, where
the ﬁxed height is 0.3mm, the conic angles in four regions are 10o , 2o , 2o and
4o , and the height of the high region of the body part is 0.6mm. Fig. 3(c) shows
the cross-sectional polygon generated by intersecting the modeled single Conus
core with the XZ-plane containing the center of the margin.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 3. An example of modeling a single Conus core (a) the body part of a single
Conus core (b) the single Conus model with two height values 0.3/0.6mm and four
conic angles 10o /2o /2o /4o (c) the visualization of a cross-sectional polygon

4

Conclusion

This paper analyzed the requirements for modeling single caps and single Conus
cores, which are the mostly used artiﬁcial teeth prostheses. Based on the analyzed requirements, we developed geometric algorithms for eﬀectively modeling
the prostheses. We adopted 2D Minkowski sum to modeling the inner surfaces
of single cores, while a ZMap algorithm was developed for modeling the outer
surfaces of single caps. The outer surfaces of single Conus cores were modeled
by using the combination of the Minkowski sum of contours and the tiling of the
expanded contours. We also presented the examples of the single cores modeled
through simple interactions. In the future, it is required to develop more techniques for the eﬃcient modeling of other prostheses such as bridge cores, single
crowns, bridge crowns, etc.

References
1. Berg M.D., Kreveld W.V., Overmars M., Schwarzkopf O., Computational Geometry - Algorithms and Applications, Springer-Verlag, (1997).
2. Besimo C., Jeger C., Guggenheim R., Marginal Adaptation of Titanium Frameworks produced by CAD/CAM Techniques, The International Journal of Prosthodontics 10, 6, (1997), 541-546.

138

K.-H. Yoo and J.S. Ha

3. Duret F., Blouin J.L., Duret B., CAD/CAM in dentistry, Jorunal Am. Dent. Assoc.117, 11, (1988), 715-720.
4. Ghosh P., A Uniﬁed Computational Framework for Minkowski Operations, Computer and Graphics 17, 4, (1993), 357-378.
5. Gurke S., Generation of Tooth Models for Ceramic Dental Restorations, The 4th
International Conference on Computer Integrated Manufacturing, Singapore, (Oct
1997).
6. Korber K.H., Konuskronen, Das rationelle Teleskopsystem, Einfuhrung Inklinik
und Technik, Auﬂage, Huthig, Heidel-berg, (1983).
7. Lozano-Perez T., Spatial Planning: A Conﬁguration Space Approach, IEEE Transaction on Computers 32, 2, (1983), 108-120.
8. Meyers D., Skinner S., and Sloan K., Surfaces from Contours, ACM Transactions
on Graphics 11, 3, (1992), 228-258.
9. Rekow D. E., The Minnesota CAD/CAM System DentiCAD, Technical report,
University of Minnesota, (1989).
10. Rekow D. E., CAD/CAM in Dentistry:Critical Analysis of Systems, In Computers
in Clinical Dentistry, Quintessence Co. Inc., (1991), 172-185.
11. Yamagichi F., Curves and Surfaces in Computer Aided Geometric Design, SpringerVerlag, (1988).
12. Yoo K.H., An Eﬃcient Algorithm for Extracting the Margin of a Tooth, Manuscript, (2003).
13. Yoon C.G., Kang D.W., Chung S.M., State-of-arts in Fixed Prosthodontics, Jongii
Press, Korea, (1999).
14. Willer J., Rossbach A., and Weber H., Computer Assisted Milling of Dental Restorations using a new CAD/CAM Data Acquisition System, The International
Journal of Prosthodontics 80, 3, (1988) 346-353.
15. Jef M. van der Zel, Ceramic-fused-to-metak Restorations with a new CAD/CAM
system, Quintessence International 24, 11, (1993) 769-778.

