Spatial Relations Analysis by Using Fuzzy
Operators
Nadeem Salamat and El-hadi Zahzah
Université de La Rochelle
Laboratoire de Mathématiques, Images et Applications
Avenue M Crépeau La Rochelle 17042, France
{nsalam01,ezahzah}@univ-lr.fr
nadeemsalamat@hotmail.com

Abstract. Spatial relations play important role in computer vision,
scene analysis, geographic information systems (GIS) and content based
image retrieval. Analyzing spatial relations by Force histogram was introduced by Miyajima et al [1] and largely developed by Matsakis [2]
who used a quantitative representation of relative position between 2D
objects. Fuzzy Allen relations are used to deﬁne the fuzzy topological relations between diﬀerent objects and to detect object positions in images.
Concept for combined extraction of topological and directional relations
by using histogram was developed by J.Malki and E.Zahzah [3], and further improved by Matsakis [4]. This algorithm has high computational
and temporal complexity due to its limitations of object approximations.
In this paper fuzzy aggregation operators are used for information integration along with polygonal approximation of objects. This approach
gives anew, with low temporal and computational complexity of algorithm for the extraction of topological and directional relations.
Keywords: Spatial Relations, Force Histogram, Polygonal Approximation, Temporal Complexity, Fuzzy aggregation operators.

1

Introduction

Space relations has a remarkable importance in computer vision and image analysis as in content based image retrieval, similarity based image retrieval, identify forms, manage data bases, support spatial data in artiﬁcial intelligence (AI),
cognitive science, perceptual psychology, geography particularly geo-information
system (GIS), indexation and comparing objects scene and model are major applications of space relations. Diﬀerent approaches for ﬁnding spatial and topological relations have been developed according to the need for applications and
object representations. Qualitative methods for directional and topological relations includes Max J. Egenhofer’s method of four and 9 intersections [5,6]. These
methods are considered most important in GIS community. Directional relations
are deﬁned on relative frame of reference and absolute frame of reference. In relative frame of reference position of a simple object is made with respect to an
G. Allen et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2009, Part II, LNCS 5545, pp. 395–404, 2009.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

396

N. Salamat and E.-h. Zahzah

oriented line or an ordered set forming a vector to some intrinsic properties
of reference object. Methods like angle histogram introduced by K.Miyajima
and A.Ralescu [1] and statistical method developed by MinDeng.Zalimli [7],
R − histogram [8] depends upon relative reference frame. Matsakis [2] introduced 1D representation of 2d objects by the union of longitudinal sections which
is the extension of angle histogram. The derivation of cobined topological and
directional relations by using force histogram [4] was ﬁrst introduced by J.Malki
and E.Zahzah [3], then Matsakis raised some problems regarding fuzziness of
some relations like meet and meet_by and some others which exist at segmentation level. In case of longitudinal section fuzziﬁcation process introduced by
Matsakis [4] restricts the object approximation which increases the temporal
and computational complexity of algorithm.
Approximating the object by its boundary, length of longitudinal sections can
be computed as distance between the intersecting points of oriented line and object boundary. The degree of fuzzy membership function depends upon three values x, y and z. In tuple (x, y, z), the pair (x, z) are the lengths of longitudinal
sections and y is the diﬀerence between maximum value of intersecting points of
object B and minimum value of object A, i.e. y ∈ R or y ∈ Z. By
√ this approach
of object approximation, temporal complexity decreases from n n to N log(N )
where n is number of pixels of objects under consideration and N is the number
of vertex of object polygons. Temporal complexity for the said algorithm is not
given but in general temporal complexity of force histograms is discussed in [9]
for diﬀerent object types. We assume same temporal complexity for objects because segmentation level problems raised by Matsakis forced the object as raster
data and in addition to this algorithm for fuzziﬁcation of longitudinal sections increases temporal and computational complexity. These problems no more exist
if we consider objects by their boundary, then need for Matsakis’s algorithm remain for objects having disconnected boundaries. Each segment is separated by
a certain distance. This internal distance has a signiﬁcant impact on directional
and topological relations. Fuzzy disjunctive operators are used. These fuzzy operators have been developed to summarize information distributed in diﬀerent sets
by grades of fuzzy membership values. This paper is structured as follows. First
of all we describe Allen relations in space. In section 2 we describe diﬀerent fuzzy
Allen relations deﬁned by Matsakis and changes in mathematical formulation of
fuzzy histogram of Allen relations due to object approximation. In section 3 we
discuss diﬀerent fuzzy operators, section 4 describes experimental results. In section 5 temporal complexity is calculated and section 6 concludes the paper.

2

Allen Relations in Space

Allen [10], introduced the well known 13 mutually exclusive exhaustive interval
relations based on temporal interval algebra. These relations are arranged as A =
{<, m, o, s, f, d, eq, di , fi , si , oi , mi , >}. where {<, m, o, s, f, d, } ({di , fi , si , oi ,
mi , >}) are the relation bef ore, meet, overlap, start, f inish, during (resp the
inverse relations of the cited ones). The relation eq is the equality spatial relation.

Spatial Relations Analysis by Using Fuzzy Operators

397

Fig. 1. Black segment represents the reference object and gray segment represents
argument object. ﬁgure extracted from [2].

Fig. 2. Histogram of Allen in direction θ ( dark gray area represents histogram of fuzzy
Allen relations, ﬁgure extracted from [2])

All the Allen relations in space are conceptually illustrated in ﬁgure 2. These relations have a rich support for the topological and directional relations.

3

Fuzzy Histogram of Allen Relations

In real applications, small errors in crisp values can change the entire result
when gradual changes of topological relations occur over time. To cope these
problems fuzziﬁcation was introduced, it comprises the process of transforming
crisp values into grades of membership for linguistic terms of fuzzy sets. Fuzziﬁcation process of Allen relations do not depend upon particular choice of fuzzy
membership function, trapezoidal membership function is used due to ﬂexibility in shape change. Let r(I, J) is Allen relation between segments I and J
where I ∈ A(argument object) and J ∈ B (reference object), r is the distance
between r(I, J) and its conceptional neighborhood. We consider a fuzzy membership function μ : r −→ [0, 1]. The diﬀerent fuzzy Allen relations deﬁned by
Matsakis [4] are
fb (I, J) = μ(−∞,−∞,−b−3a/2,−b−a) (y)
fm (I, J) = μ(−b−3a/2,−b−a,−b−a,−b−a/2) (y)
ff (I, J) = min(μ(−(b+a)/2,−a,−a,+∞) (y), μ(−3a/2,−a,−a,−a/2) (y), μ(−∞,−∞,z/2,z) (x))
ff i (I, J) = min(μ−b−a/2,−b,−b,−b+a/2 (y), μ(−∞,−∞,−(b+a)/2) (y), μ(z,2z,+∞,+∞) (x))
fd (I, J) = min(μ(−b,−b+a/2,−3a/2,−a) (y), μ(−∞,−∞,z/2,z) (x))
fdi (I, J) = min(μ(−b,−b+a/2,−3a/2,−a) (y), μ(z,2z,+∞,+∞) (x))

398

N. Salamat and E.-h. Zahzah

where a = min(x, z), b = max(x, z), x is the length of longitudinal section of
argument object A, and z is the length of longitudinal section of reference object
B. Most of relations are deﬁned by one membership function and some of them
by the minimum value of more than one membership functions like d(during),
di (during_by), f (f inish), fi (f inished_by). In fuzzy set theory, sum of all
the relations is one, this gives the deﬁnition for fuzzy relation equal. Histogram
of fuzzy Allen relations stated by Matsakis [4] is "Histogram of fuzzy Allen
relations represents the total area of subregions of A and B that are facing each
other in given direction θ".
In this new approach, fuzzy Allen relations are computed for each segment.
Fuzzy Allen relation for each segment is a fuzzy set and fuzzy aggregation operators are used to combine diﬀerent values of fuzzy grades. This results the change
in above deﬁnition of fuzzy histogram of Allen relations. Mathematically this
becomes
+∞
−∞

n

(

Fr (q, Aq (v), Bq (v))dv = (x + z)
r A

r(Ik , Jk )

(1)

k=1

where z is the area of reference object and x is area of augmented object in
direction θ, n is total number of segments treated and r(Ik , Jk ) is an Allen
relation for segmentsIk , Jk .

4

Fuzzy Operators and Treatment of Longitudinal
Sections

During the decomposition process of an object into segments, there can be multiple segments depending on object shape and boundary which is called longitudinal section. Diﬀerent segments of a longitudinal section are at a certain distance
and these distances might eﬀect end results. After polygon object approximation,
we need for the fuzziﬁcation algorithm when object has disconnected boundary.
In this case there exist number of 1D segments of concave object or object having disconnected boundary. Each segment and its distance from other segment
has its own impact on fuzzy Allen relations of whole object. To cope with this,
fuzzy operators are used. In literature of fuzzy set theory there exist variety of
operators such as fuzzy T − norms, T − conorms and so on, which can be used
for fuzzy integration of available information. Some mostly used operators for
data integration in [11]are:
μ(OR) (u) = max(μ(A) (u), μ(B) (u)); μ(AN D) (u) = min(μ(A) (u), μ(B) (u));
2
μ(SUM) (u) = 1 − Πi=1
(μ(i) (u)),
When fuzzy operator OR (respectively AN D) is used, only one fuzzy value
contributes for the resultant value which is maximum (respectively minimum).
For other operators both values contribute. In this case each Allen relation has
a fuzzy grade objective is to accumulate the best available information. In case
of longitudinal section, there exist number of segments and each segment has

Spatial Relations Analysis by Using Fuzzy Operators

399

a fuzzy Allen relation with segment of other object. Suppose that longitudinal
section of object B has two segments such that z = z1 + z2 where z1 is the
length of ﬁrst segment and z2 is the length of second segment and z is length of
longitudinal section. Let μ1 (y1 ) deﬁnes the value of fuzzy Allen relations with
the ﬁrst segment and μ2 (y2 ) represents value of fuzzy Allen relations with the
second segment where y1 and y2 are the distances between object A and two
segments of B. Now Fuzzy OR operator is used to get consequent information
obtained from two sets of fuzzy Allen relations.

5

Experiments and Interpretation

For the experiment purpose 360 directions are considered (angle increment is
1 degree) and lines are drawn by 2d Bresenham digital line algorithm. Instead
of considering all the v values, only those lines are considered which passes
through vertex of polygon. segments are computed and fuzzy Allen relations
are computed for each segment, if there exit longitudinal section then fuzzy
aggregation operator is applied to obtain the resultant fuzzy Allen relation of
whole object. Each relation is associated with the gray scale value like bef ore
with black and white represents af ter. Same notations as Matsakis are used
except changing the boundary color of a relation for better visualization of relations. Opposite relations have the same boundary color such as m(meet) and
(meet_by) relations have the yellow boundary. Object A has the light gray color
while object B is represented by dark gray. The thirteen histograms that represent directional and topological relations are represented in the layers and each
vertical layer represents total area of objects in that direction. Here histograms
are not normalized. All relations are symmetric in nature except d(during) and
di(during_by).
AB
AB
AB
(θ) = fm
(θ + π), foi
(θ) = foAB (θ + π),
fbAB (θ) = faAB (θ + π), fmi
AB
AB
AB
AB
fsi (θ) = ff i (θ + π), ff (θ) = fs (θ + π) and for d(during), di(during_by)
BA
(θ).
it will be fdAB (θ) = fdi

In ﬁg.3(a) explains the representation of fuzzy Allen histograms.In ﬁg.3(b) Shows
the representation of histograms and explains that each relation is represented
by a layer and each layer have a diﬀerent gray level color associated with a relation, boundary color is not represented here. Same colors association with a
relation is used only boundary colors are changed. In ﬁg.3(c) represents object
position where A is light gray object and object B is represented by dark gray
color. Fig.3(c) represents histogram associated with objects pair, where y axis
represents total area of objects having diﬀerent relations and directions are represented along x axis. At a certain value f represents area under the f inish
relation and d represents area having during relation and total area is sum of
both areas. Diﬀerent set of examples are considered, in ﬁrst case both the objects are convex and second case argument object A is convex and reference

400

N. Salamat and E.-h. Zahzah

(a)

(b)

(c)
Fig. 3. (a)Explanation of gray level value associated with a relation( source:
(b)Object pair representation. (c) Corresponding histogram.

[4])

object B is concave. In this experiment Fig.4(a) Pair of objects under consideration are at enough distance. Fig.4(b) represents the corresponding fuzzy
histogram of Allen relations, at this stage only af ter and bef ore fuzzy relations exist. Fig 4(e) object A moves to words center of object B and it overlaps B. Fig.4(d) represents its histogram at this almost all the relations exist.
Fig.4(e) position of object A is at center of object B. Fig.4(f) represents its
histogram during relation exist, There exist af ter and bef ore relation near the
diagonal direction. Which is due to zigzag of lines in digital space. In this set
of examples objects are taken at diﬀerent distances to show that the relations
are sensitive to distance between them and their sensitivity also depends upon
relative size.
Now for second set of examples. In this example rectangular objects are considered. Object A ﬁrstly for away from the U shaped object B. Fuzzy Allen
relations are calculated separately for each segment then fuzzy operator is used.
Main objective of this example is to show that each segment of longitudinal
section has its own impact on fuzzy Allen relation and each segment may have
same, opposite neither opposite nor same Allen relations as in case of ﬁg.5(a)to
ﬁg.5(c). In Fig.5(a) object A is at a certain distance to object B. Fig.5(b) only
af ter and bef ore relation exists because both parts of object B has the same
relation. Finally in ﬁg.5(c) when object A is between two parts of object B,

Spatial Relations Analysis by Using Fuzzy Operators

(a)

401

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Fig. 4. Pairs of convex objects (where along x-axis angle is zero degree ) and their
corresponding fuzzy histogram of Allen relations

both segments have opposite relations bef ore and af ter meanwhile there exist
relation during which is due to zigzag phenomena of digital space and line
algorithm.

6

Temporal Complexity

Finding the exact temporal complexity is a tough job, major aim of this study
is to ﬁnd time length required by the algorithm. To expresse the computational
time as a function of N a language is required which grows on the order of N .
Five symbols for comparing rates are used such as o, O, θ, Ω and ∼. In fact
asymptomatically equality is an formalism of idea to ﬁnd the conditions that
two functions have same growth rate.i.e. limitn→∞ ( abnn ) = 1 and an = O(bn ) if
| abnn |is bounded. Asymptotic analysis algorithm is used. For this purpose a function which represents upper bound of function used to represent the algorithm
complexity is found. In this case time constraint depends upon length of line,

402

N. Salamat and E.-h. Zahzah

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 5. Convex and concave pair of objects (where along x-axis angle is zero degree )
and their corresponding fuzzy histogram of Allen relations

contour length and number of polygon vertexes. Time (round in seconds) for
all 360 directions is used when line length is ﬁxed to 1000, 1200, 1400 pixels.
Following tables represent diﬀerent computations where L is length of line and
N represents number of polygon vertexes. There is a symmetry between the different values of cost function (Time function) in table 1 and table 2 and the
number of polygons vertexes. By observing the graphical representation of data,
(graph ﬁg.6(a) ) in table 1 and graph ﬁg.6(b) of data in table 2) each time graph
for a ﬁxed length of line and given objects sizes (length of contours). It seems
that graph is displaced by a constant value of T and its growth rate is less than
nlog(n) hence function f (n) = nlog(n)) representation the upper bound of our
graphs. (Graphes given in ﬁgure.6) So histogram of fuzzy Allen relations are of
order O(N log(N ))
Table 1. Contour of 1300 pixels
N L
24
25
26
27
28

1000
63
66.5
68
72
73.20

1200
67.14
73
74.3
79
82

1400
74
78
80
84.34
86.20

Table 2. Contour 3300 of pixels
N L
25
26
27
28
29
30

1000
97.5
102
109
113
120
124

1200
103
107
115.5
119
125
129

1400
113.5
115.5
123
126
129.4
135

Spatial Relations Analysis by Using Fuzzy Operators

(a)

403

(b)

Fig. 6. (a)Graph of some known functions, (b)Graphs of data given in table
No.1(c)Graphs of data given in table No.2 where time is rounded oﬀ in seconds

7

Conclusion

It is shown that histogram of fuzzy Allen relations associated with pair of objects carry a lot of information. To deal with concave objects or objects having
disconnected boundaries, fuzzy operators are used. Use of these operators is simple so polygonal approximation of objects and application of fuzzy aggregation
operator simpliﬁes the algorithm given by Matsakis [4]. This approach decrease
its temporal and computational complexity due to avoiding the fuzziﬁcation
process developed by Matsakis. Certainly this approach of using fuzzy operator will open new ﬁelds of applications for fuzzy aggregation operators. Here
we calculated all the directions for experimental purpose, in practice we performed only limited number of directions according to the requirement of application. Allen relations are used for describing the relative object position in image
understanding.

404

N. Salamat and E.-h. Zahzah

References
1. Miyajima, K., Ralescu, A.: Spatial Organization in 2D Images, Fuzzy Systems. In:
IEEE World Congress on Computational Intelligence, vol. 1, pp. 100–105 (1994)
2. Matsakis, P., Laurent Wendling, J.D.: Représentation de La Position Relative d’
Objets 2D au Moyen D Un Histogramme de Forces. Traitement du Signal 15, 25–38
(1998)
3. Malki, J., Zahzah, E., Nikitenko, D.: Indexation et Recherche d’ Image Fondées Sur
Les Relations Spatiales Entre Objets. Traitement du Signal 19(4), 235–250 (2002)
4. Matsakis, P.: Combined Extraction of Directional and Topological Relationship
Information from 2D Concave Objects, in fuzzy modeling with spatial informations
for geographic problems, New York, pp. 15–40 (2005)
5. Egenhofer, M.J., Franzosa, R.D.: Point Set Topological Relations. International
Journal of Geographical Information Systems 5(2), 161–174 (1991)
6. Egenhofer, M.J., Sharma, J., Mark, D.M.: A Critical Comparison of The 4Intersection and 9-Intersection Models for Spatial Relations: Formal Analysis.
Auto-Carto 11, 1–12 (1993)
7. Li, M.D.: A Statistical Model for Directional Relations Between Spatial Objects.
GeoInformatica 12(2), 193–217 (2008)
8. Wang, Y., Makedon, F.: R-histogram:quantitative representation of spatial relations for similarity-based image retrieval. In: MULTIMEDIA 2003, pp. 323–326.
ACM, New York (2003)
9. Pascal Matsakis, D.N.: Applying Soft Computing in Deﬁning Spatial Relations,
Understanding the Spatial Organization of Image Regions by Means of Force Histograms A Guided Tour, pp. 99–122. Springer, New York (2002)
10. Allen, J.F.: Maintaining Knowledge about Temporal Intervals. Communications of
the ACM 26(11), 832–843 (1983)
11. Chi, K.-H., No-Wook Park, C.J.C.: Fuzzy Logic Intergration for Landslide Hazard
Mapping using Spatial Data from Boeun, Korea. In: Symposium on geospatial
theory, processing and application, ottawa

