Pattern Recognition for MCNs Using Fuzzy
Linear Programming
Jing He1,3 , Wuyi Yue2 , and Yong Shi3
1

3

Institute of Intelligent Information and Communication Technology,
Konan University, Kobe 658-8501 Japan
hejing@gucas.ac.cn
2
Department of Information Science and Systems Engineering,
Konan University, Kobe 658-8501 Japan
yue@konan-u.ac.jp
Chinese Academy of Sciences Research Center on Data Technology,
and Knowledge Economy, Beijing 100080 P.R. China
yshi@gucas.ac.cn

Abstract. This paper presents a data mining system of performance
evaluation for multimedia communication networks (MCNs). Two important performance evaluation problems for the MCNs are considered
in this paper. They are: (1) the optimization problem for construction
of the data mining system of performance evaluation; (2) the problem
of categorizing real-time data corresponding to the data mining system
by means of dividing the performance data into usual and unusual categories. An algorithm is employed to identify performance data such
as throughput capacity, package forwarding rate, and response time. A
software named PEDM2.0 (Performance Evaluation Data Miner) is proposed to improve the accuracy and the eﬀectiveness of the fuzzy linear
programming (FLP) method compared with decision tree, neural network, and multiple criteria linear programming methods.

1

Introduction

Performance evaluation and network planning are the key tools in a reliable multimedia communication operation. Multimedia communication networks (MCNs)
to support several diﬀerent traﬃc types have become so complex that intuition
alone is not suﬃcient to evaluate their performance. Mathematical models of performance systems range from relatively simple ones, whose solution can be obtained analytically, to very complex ones that must be simulated [1].
An important challenge for identiﬁcation mining in MCNs is the identiﬁcation
speed that can forward the exponentially increasing volume of traﬃc. The data
mining system can provide the new identiﬁcation service that is needed by nextgeneration MCNs.
Research of linear programming (LP) approaches for classiﬁcation problems
was initiated by [3]-[5]. [6] and [7] applied the compromise solution of multiple
criteria linear programming (MCLP) to deal with the same identiﬁcation mining
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part IV, LNCS 3994, pp. 509–516, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

510

J. He, W. Yue, and Y. Shi

question. [8] presented an analysis for fuzzy linear programming in classiﬁcation
of credit card holder behavior. In [9] the identiﬁcation mining of unusual patterns
for MCNs based on FLP is put forward for the ﬁrst time. In this paper, we present
some new research work.
The unusual pattern mining process can be described as follows: given a set
of n performance evaluation data, there will be K objects that are considerably
dissimilar, exceptional, or inconsistent with the remaining data.
In Section 2, we describe a data mining system for performance evaluation.
The subsystems for an identiﬁcation mining engine based on fuzzy linear programming are presented in Section 3. In Section 4, the results of data experiments
are listed out. Finally, we conclude with a brief summary in Section 5.

2

Data Mining System for Performance Evaluation

Generally, the methods to calculate network performance include analytical,
numerical and simulation methods. Nowadays, emulation is the main method
for performance evaluation systems for MCNs.
A data mining system for performance evaluation can be constructed with the
above three methods of analytical, numerical and simulation method.
Fig. 1 shows the architecture of the data mining system for performance evaluation that we present in this paper.
These components are explained in detail as follows:
Graphical user interface
This module communicates between the users and the data mining system, allowing the user to interact with the system by specifying a performance evaluation
query or task, and providing information to help focus the search.
Index system for performance evaluation
The main idea of this index system comes from [1]. The details of the index can
be found from the following multi-dimensional data warehouse module.
Pattern evaluation
The process of this module is shown in Fig. 2.
An index system is acceptable if (1) it is easily understood by humans, (2) it
is valid on new or test data with some degree of certainty, (3) it is potentially
useful, and (4) it is novel [2].
Multi-dimensional data warehouse
Before we use our on-line analytical processing (OLAP) tools, the multidimensional data warehouse for performance evaluation must be constructed.
The snowﬂake schema is a variant of the star schema, where some dimension
tables are normalized thereby further splitting the data into additional tables.
The snowﬂake schema of data warehouse is shown in Fig. 3.
Pre-computation and summarization
This module, which involves data integration and data cleaning, can be viewed
as an important preprocessing step for data mining. Data from operational

Pattern Recognition for MCNs Using Fuzzy Linear Programming

511

Graphical user interface
Index system for performance
evaluation of MCNs

Pattern evaluation
External sources

Multi-dimensional
data warehouse

Operational database

Pre-computation and summarization
Data mining engine

Knowledge base

Pattern evaluation
Graphical user interface
Others

Analysis

Query or report

Fig. 1. Architecture of data mining system for performance evaluation

Fig. 2. Pattern evaluation process

databases and external sources (such as performance information provided by
external sensors) are extracted using application program interfaces known as
gateways.

3

Identiﬁcation Mining Model

A basic framework of the identiﬁcation mining model of unusual patterns can
be presented as follows:
Given a set of r attributes about a MCN, let Ai =(Ai1 , ..., Air ), i = 1, 2, ..., n
be training set data for the variables of every MCN, where Ai is the attributes set

512

J. He, W. Yue, and Y. Shi

Fig. 3. Snowﬂake schema of data warehouse

of the ith training set, and n is the sample size. We want to determine the best
T
coeﬃcients of the variables X = (X1 , X2 , ..., Xr ) , where Xj is the coeﬃcient
of the variable Aij , i = 1, 2, ..., n, j = 1, 2, ..., r. A boundary value b (a scalar) to
separate the two classes: N (normal patterns) and M (unusual patterns), is as
follows:
Ai X ≤ b, Ai ∈ M,
Ai X ≥ b, Ai ∈ N.

(1)

To measure the separation of usual and unusual patterns, we deﬁne that αi is
the overlapping of a two-class boundary for case Aij (external measurement), i =
1, 2, ..., n, j = 1, 2, ..., r. α is the maximum overlapping of a two-class boundary
for case Aij , αi < α.
We deﬁne βi to be the distance from case Aij to their adjusted boundaries
(internal measurement), i = 1, 2, ..., n, and β to be the minimum distance from
case Aij to their adjusted boundaries, βi > β.
A model that seeks MSD (the minimal sum of the deviations of the observations from the critical value) can be written as follows:
n

(M1)

Minimize

αi ,
i=1

Pattern Recognition for MCNs Using Fuzzy Linear Programming

Ai X ≤ b + αi ,

Ai ∈ M,

Ai X ≥ b − αi ,

Ai ∈ N

513

(2)

where Ai is given, X and b are unrestricted, and αi ≥ 0, i = 1, 2, ..., n.
The alternative of the above model is to ﬁnd MMD (the minimal distances of
observations from the critical value are maximized). It can be written by
n

(M2)

Maximize

βi ,
i=1

Ai X ≥ b − βi ,
Ai X ≤ b + βi ,

Ai ∈ M,
Ai ∈ N

(3)

where Ai is given, X and b are unrestricted, and βi ≥ 0, i = 1, 2, ..., n.
In a linear discriminate model, the misclassiﬁcation of data separation can
be described by two objects: MSD and MMD. Therefore, the main research aim
in the identiﬁcation of unusual patterns of MCNs is to seek the method that
produces the higher detection accuracy.
Let y1L be MSD and y2U be MMD, the maximum value of ni=1 αi is y1U and
n
the minimum value of i=1 βi is y2L . To explore this possibility, we propose a
heuristic identiﬁcation of the unusual pattern method by using the fuzzy linear
programming for discovering the unusual patterns in MCNs as follows:
(M3)

Maximize ξ,
αi − y1L
,
ξ≤
y1U − y1L
βi − y2L
,
ξ≤
y2U − y2L
Ai X = b + αi − βi ,

Ai ∈ M,

Ai X = b − αi + βi ,

Ai ∈ N

(4)

where Ai , y1L , y1U , y2L , y2U are known, X and b are unrestricted, and αi , βi ,
ξ ≥ 0, i = 1, 2, ..., n.
Method
(1) Create data warehouse for the performance evaluation of every MCN at
every selected time spot.
(2) Generate a set of relevant attributes from the data warehouse, transform
the scales of the data warehouse into the same numerical measurement, determine the two classes of usual and unusual patterns, as well as the classiﬁcation threshold τ that is selected by the user, and the training set and the
verifying set.
(3) Give a class boundary value b and use models (M1 ), (M2 ), and (M3 ) to
learn and compute the overall scores Ai X (i = 1, 2, ..., n) of the relevant
attributes or dimensions over all observations repeatedly.
(4) If (M1 ) exceeds the threshold τ , go to (7), otherwise go to (5).

514

J. He, W. Yue, and Y. Shi

(5) If (M2 ) exceeds the threshold τ , go to (7), otherwise go to (6).
(6) If (M3 ) exceeds the threshold τ , go to (7), otherwise go to (3) to consider
to give another b.
(7) Apply the ﬁnal learned scores X ∗ to predict the unknown data in the verifying set.
(8) Find the unusual patterns of the MCNs.
The FLP approach proposed in this paper is simpler and easier to get the
meaningful results. For example, this FLP approach can get more meaningful
solutions than the common classiﬁcation approaches in the multiple criteria linear programming.
Real-time CNs data can be used to test our data mining system. Based on the
above analysis, we have developed a software named performance evaluation data
miner (PEDM2.0) [10]. This miner is an OLAP miner integrated with an OLAP
whose mining is in relational databases. The development language is the C++
syntax based on Linux. This miner also combines with the algorithm of linear &
non-linear programming in those softwares named Lingo9.0 and Lindo8.0 [11].
The FLP approach is not the only module in identiﬁcation mining of the
PEDM2.0. Statistics, decision tree, linear programming, multiple criteria linear programming, neutral networks are also used. The output results in the
PEDM2.0 are the synthesis integration results based on diﬀerent methods. A
comparison study in terms of computational eﬃciency implementation will be
discussed in the next section.

4

Data Experiments

Given a set of attributes, such as throughput capacity, package forwarding rate,
response time, connection attempts, delay time, transfer rate and the criteria
for “unusual” patterns, the purpose of pattern recognition for the MCNs is to
ﬁnd the better classiﬁer through a training set and use the classiﬁer to predict
all other aspects of the performance of MCNs.
The frequently used pattern recognition in the telecommunication industry is
still two-class separation technique. The key of two-class separation is to separate the “unusual” patterns called fraudulent activity from the “usual” patterns
called normal activity and identify as many MCNs as possible. This is also known
as the method of “detecting fraudulent list”.
In this section, a real-time performance data mart with 65 derived attributes
and 1000 records of a major CHINA TELECOM MCN database is ﬁrst used to
train the diﬀerent classiﬁers [12]. Then, the training solution is employed to predict the performance of another 5000 records of MCNs. Finally, the classiﬁcation
results are compared with the decision tree, neural network and MCLP.
The results are shown in Table 1. Three known classiﬁcation techniques have
been used to run and test the 5000 records of the CHINA TELECOM MCN
database. These results are compared with the FLP approach shown in Table 1.
The software of the decision tree is the commercial version called C5.0 [13], while

Pattern Recognition for MCNs Using Fuzzy Linear Programming

515

Table 1. Identiﬁcation rate comparisons on balanced 5000 records
Approaches Identiﬁcation rate Time (second)
Decision Tree
79.39%
0.335
Neural Network
64.20%
0.201
MCLP
80.03%
0.936
FLP
81.74%
0.284

the software for both MCLP and FLP were developed at Chinese Academy of
Science in China and Konan University in Japan [10].
Note that in Table 1 the column identiﬁcation rate represents the rate of
identifying the right unusual patterns in respective models as: Identiﬁcation
Rate = (Number of identiﬁed unusual patterns exactly) / (Number of unusual
patterns) ×100%.
The identiﬁcation time is calculated using diﬀerent models. Because this data
mining system is special for the MCNs, the FLP model is not the model with
the fastest calculation speed, but it does have a higher calculation speed and
higher identiﬁcation rate.
The greater the identiﬁcation rate is, the better the result is. As we see, the
model that predicts best is the FLP with 81.74%. The second best model is the
MCLP with 80.03%. The decision tree model has the third best prediction rate
with 79.39% while the neural network is the worst one with 64.20%.
The shorter the identiﬁcation time is, the better the result is. The fastest
model on the identiﬁcation time is the neural network with 0.201 seconds. The
second is FLP with 0.284. Decision tree has the third fastest time with 0.335
seconds while MCLP is the slowest one with 0.936 seconds.
Both short identiﬁcation time and high identiﬁcation rate are important in
identiﬁcation mining calculations of MCNs. Therefore, if the data set is balanced, it is meaningful to implement FLP algorithm proposed in this paper.
This conclusion, however, may not be true for all kinds of data sets because of
the diﬀerent data structure and data feature.
Many decision makers in MCNs often get a better result through an FLP
approach. It has been recognized that in many decision making problems, instead
of ﬁnding the exist “optimal solution” (a goal value), decision makers often
approach a “satisfying solution” between upper and lower aspiration levels that
can be represented by the upper and lower bounds of acceptability for objective
payoﬀs. The model proposed in this paper also can be used in bioinformatics,
antibody and antigen.

5

Conclusions

In this paper, an identiﬁcation mining model of unusual patterns for MCNs
has been presented. The construction ﬂow of data mining systems of MCNs
for performance evaluation, the snowﬂake schema of a data warehouse, and the
algorithm of fuzzy linear programming were shown in detail. The data experi-

516

J. He, W. Yue, and Y. Shi

ments proved that the fuzzy linear programming (FLP) approach we proposed
in this paper has excellent accuracy and eﬀectiveness compared with decision
tree, neural network, multiple criteria linear programming methods.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by GRANT-IN-AID FOR SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH (No. 16560350) and MEXT.ORC (2004-2008), Japan and in part by
NSFC (No. 70472074, No. 70531040), 973 Project (No. 2004CB720103), Postdoctoral Science Foundation, China and BHP Billion Co., Australia.

References
1. Yue, W., Gu, J., Tang, X.: Performance evaluation index system for multimedia
communication networks and forecasting for web-based network traﬃc. Journal of
System Science and System Engineering 13 (1994) 44–50
2. Han, J., Kamber, M.: Data Mining: Concepts and Techniques. Morgan Kaufmann
Publishers (2003)
3. Freed, N., Glover, F.: Simple but powerful goal programming models for discriminant problems. European Journal of Operation Research 7 (1981) 44–60
4. Freed, N., Glover, F.: Evaluating alternative linear programming models to solve
the two-group discriminant problem. Journal of Decision Science 17 (1986) 151–162
5. Glover, F.: Improve linear programming models for discriminate analysis. Journal
of Decision Science 21 (1990) 771–785
6. Kou, G., Liu, X., Peng, Y., Shi, Y., Wise, M., Xu, W.: Multiple criteria linear
programming approach to data mining: models, algorithm designs and software
development. Journal of Operation Methods and Software 18 (2003) 453–473
7. Kou, G., Shi, Y.: LINUX based Multiple Linear Programming Classiﬁcation Program: Version 1.0. College of Information Science and Technology, University of
Nebraska-Omaha (2002)
8. Shi, Y., He, J., Wang, L., Fan, W.: Computer-based algorithms for multiple criteria and multiple constraint level integer linear programming. Computers and
Mathematics with Applications 49 (2005) 903–921
9. He, J., Yue W., Shi, Y.: Identiﬁcation mining of unusual patterns for multimedia communication networks by using fuzzy linear programming. IEICE Technical
Report DE2005-17 (2005) 11–17
10. He, J., Shi Y.: Performance Evaluation Data Miner 2.0, CAS Research Center on
Data Technology and Knowledge Economy (2005)
11. http://www.lindo.com/
12. http://www.chinatelecom.com.cn/
13. http://www.rulequest.com/see5-info.html/

