Multi-agent Environment for Dynamic Transport
Planning and Scheduling
1,2

1

1

Jaroslaw Kozlak , Jean-Charles Créput , Vincent Hilaire , and Abder Koukam

1

1

UTBM Systems and Transportation Laboratory,
University of Technology of Belfort-Montbéliard, Belfort, France
2
Department of Computer Science, AGH University of Science and Technology,
Al. Mickiewicza 30, Kraków, Poland
kozlak@agh.edu.pl,
{Jean-Charles.Creput,Vincent.Hilaire,Abder.Koukam}@utbm.fr

Abstract. Nowadays, transport requests of the society are becoming more and
more common and important. Computer systems may be a useful tool for
transport companies. This paper is aimed at presenting a system which
simulates the functioning of a transport company. The theoretical problem,
which needs to be solved, is a dynamic Pickup and Delivery Problem with Time
Windows and capacity constraints (PDPTW). The nature of the problem, its
distribution and the possibility of using a lot of autonomous planning modules,
predestines to apply a multi-agent approach. Multi-agent approach facilitates
the introduction of elements which do not appear in classical PDPTW as
company organisation, different strategies of requests acceptation by different
vehicles or communication among vehicles.
Keywords: Multi-agent systems, dynamic transport planning and scheduling.

1 Introduction
Nowadays, the importance and commonness of transport requests in the society
increases. The transport services offered are more and more advanced and better
designed to meet the needs of users. Important parts of costs of many goods are
transport costs. The size of the market of transport services and the sales volume and
derived profits intensify a competition. Therefore, a reduction of costs, better
adaptation of strategy to the demand as well as better planning and scheduling of the
use of available resources are important for transport companies. Computer systems
may be a useful tool for transport companies. On the one hand, they may support a
rapid creation of effective transport plans and schedules. On the other, they enable
simulation research leading to the correct selection of company organization, and
their resources like vehicles, their capacities, and their location on the depots. We
present a type of transport problem which have important practical applications: the
Dynamic Pickup and Delivery Problem with Time Windows (PDPTW).
Each request is described by two locations: one for pickup and one for delivery and
two time windows: the time window when a pickup operation can be started and the
one when a delivery operation may be started. Both the request points: pickup and
delivery places should be visited by the same vehicle in proper order. There is also a
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3038, pp. 638–645, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

Multi-agent Environment for Dynamic Transport Planning and Scheduling

639

possibility of introducing an additional capacity constraint: each request is
characterised by a load, and each vehicle has a maximum capacity which cannot be
exceeded by the total load.
PDPTW is worth exploring because of its practical applications, like the transport
of elderly and handicapped people, shared taxi or microbus company, sealift and
airlift, school bus routing and scheduling. Additionally, PDPTW is a problem
relatively weakly explored, especially in comparison to VRPTW.
The goal of this paper is to present a system which simulates the functioning of a
transport company. The basic problem, which needs to be solved, is a dynamic
version pf Pickup and Delivery problem with Time Windows and capacity
constraints, where requests arrive during system running. The nature of the problems their distribution and possibility of applying a lot of autonomous planning modules predestines to use a multi-agent approach. Multi-agent approach facilitates to consider
aspects which do not appear in classical PDPTW as company organisation, different
strategies of requests acceptation by different vehicles or communication among
vehicles.
The structure of the paper is as follows: Section 2 contains research overview, we
put the emphasis on the heuristic methods to solve pickup and delivery problem and
description of multi-agent systems for transport planning and scheduling. In Section
3, main features and advantages of our approach are given. In Section 4, the model of
our system is described. Section 5 presents goals and configurations of performed
experiences as well as obtained results. Section 6 concludes and presents plans of
future works.

2 Research Overview
2.1 Heuristic Methods of Plan and Schedule Construction
An overview of optimal and heuristic methods of pickup and delivery problem
solving may be found in [3, 4, 14]. An optimal, strict solution - because of its
calculation complexity - is possible to obtain only for small size problems. Heuristic
solutions for PDPTW are performed using methods like tabu search [10, 11, 15]
simulated annealing [11], squeaky wheel optimization with local search [12].
Very few papers focus on dynamic aspects of PDPTW problem. Usually, the
algorithms are similar to the ones used for static problems, and it is assumed that
incoming of new requests interrupts the optimization function which is then restarted
with a new set of requests. In [7], the authors describe a method for determining times
of requests generation on the basis on Poisson distribution. Space is divided into
regions, and each of them has its own probability that requests pickup or delivery
points will be located on it. Basing upon these parameters, the points of pickup and
delivery are determined. Times in the time windows are calculated in a way to make
possible that the vehicle returns to depot before the end of the simulation time. For
that purpose, the times of driving between pickup and delivery points and between
delivery points and a depot are taken into consideration. In [13] authors describe
REBUS system, which solves real-time dynamic PDPTW. The system was designed
for transporting elderly or disabled persons in Copenhagen.

640

J. Kozlak et al.

2.2 Multi-agent Systems
Multi-agent approach to transport problems enables the analysis of complex,
heterogeneous and dynamic systems, and focuses mostly on complex cargo shipping
problems (sometimes taking into consideration transshipments and transport multimodality [2]) but some systems are also targeted at transport on demand problem [8].
In [1], a method of simulated trading was presented and applied for solving vehicle
routing problem. Several processes are executed concurrently and each of them
represents one route. There is also one process which manages the stock of unattached
requests. The idea is based on buying and selling requests by processes representing
routes. The process tries to sell requests which have bad influence especially on its
cost function, and to buy these which do not increase it appreciably. A graph,
representing the flow of requests between routes, is built and serves for the creation of
feasible and efficient plans (trading matching).
MARS [6] is a system realized to simulate planning and scheduling for a society of
shipping companies using multi-agent approach. The agents represent transportation
companies and trucks. Protocol Contract Net [17] is used to assign requests to
particular vehicles (company is a manager and truck-contractor). Simulated trading
procedure is used for dynamic re-planning (if because of unexpected events – the
traffic jams – the vehicle is not able to realize a request) or for optimization of the
current solution by searching to a better one.
On the basis of experience, gathered using simulated trading and MARS, a
distributed multi-agent system for shipping company planning and scheduling TeleTruck [2] was realized and practically tested. The architecture of TeleTruck is
based on the concept of holonic agents. In this system, there exists different kinds of
agent-components (driver, truck, trailer, container), which possesses and manages
specific type of resources. This approach gives a possibility of considering different
aspects of transport problem (storing, transportation, management of cargos, drivers,
trucks etc.).

3 System Aims and Methodology
Our goal is to create a system which makes possible the simulation of transport
company. Transport requests, realized by a company, should suit dynamic PDPTW
with capacity constraints. It is assumed that only feasible requests are accepted for
performance. If the company is not able to realize a request respecting all constraints
needed, such a request should be rejected. Besides, the system should simulate the
network of communication connections (routes) and manage the features of
scheduling process for each vehicle. A vehicle should have its own conditions of
acceptance and estimation of a request.
Agent approach makes possible the development of systems consisting of many
autonomous elements which are able to create plans, choose actions for realisation in
a certain way, to perform its goals. Because of different locations of vehicles and of
the many independent decisions they have to take, the transport planning and
scheduling problem may be considered as an example of a problem with a distributed
domain, which is very suitable for multi-agent approach [5].

Multi-agent Environment for Dynamic Transport Planning and Scheduling

641

Agent approach makes possible to take into consideration autonomous , goaldriven agents, which represent a company and vehicles. Each agent-vehicle manages
its route. An agent estimates a request taking into consideration if it is feasible, which
payment it will obtain and what expenses it will bear. A transport network may be
represented as a directed graph. Agents may be equipped with message
communication modules which gives a possibility of direct interactions between
vehicles and drivers.

4 System Model
A model of multi-agent system for transport planning is composed of the following
elements:
• environment: it represents a transport network and it is implemented through a
graph describing communication connections,
• several kinds of agents: customer agent - responsible for the generation of
transport requests, agent-company - representing a transport company and agentvehicle - representing a vehicle of transport company, like mini-bus, bus, taxi etc.
4.1 Specification of System Organisation
We base our work on the RIO framework previously defined in [9]. This framework
is based on three interrelated concepts : role, interaction and organization. Roles are
generic behaviors. These behaviors can interact mutually according to interaction
pattern. Such a pattern with groups generic behaviors and their interactions constitutes
an organization. Organizations are thus descriptions of coordinated structures.
Coordination occurs between roles as and when interaction takes place.
In this context, an agent is only specified as an active communicative entity which
plays roles. In fact agents instantiate an organization (roles and interactions) when
they exhibit behaviors defined by the organization's roles and when they interact
following the organization interactions. An agent may instantiate dynamically one or
more roles and a role may be instantiated by one or more agents.
The organization of the MAS is described in Fig. 1. There are two organizations:
one specifying the Contract Net protocol and one specifying the interactions between
clients and pick-up and delivery service providers. The latter organization specifies

Fig. 1. System organization

642

J. Kozlak et al.

two roles : Provider and Client. The Client role represents virtual clients that send
request of pick-up and delivery to a virtual Provider that accept these requests and
answer with offers. The Provider role is played by the Company agent. The former
organization is composed of two roles : Manager and Worker. This organization
specifies a contract net based negotiation between a Manager which propose pick-up
and delivery requests and some Worker which are able to realize these requests. The
Manager role is played by the Company agent and Worker role are played by Vehicle
agents.
4.2 Model Elements Description
Environment. The transport network is represented as a directed graph TN(N, E),
where N is a set of nodes and E is a set of arcs, respectively. Nodes represent the
locations. They may be either a start or destination point of the goods transfer. With
each node Vi are associated the following parameters: a pair (xi, yi), where xi, and yi are
coordinates on the map, numerical value describing the probability that this node will
appear in the transport request as pickup or delivery point (wi), list of requests waiting
for pickup from this node (pli). Each arc Ei is described by time period tpi, which
informs how much time the vehicle needs to traverse it. Value tpi expresses also the
cost of travel carried out by a vehicle.
The following types of agents exist in the system: agent-customer, agent-vehicle,
agent-company.
Agent-customer. Agent-customer is responsible for generation of random events.
The methods of events generation is inspired by [7]. Agent Customer sends them later
to agent-company. Agent Customer AC is described by a list of periods of requests
generations (prgi), each period is characterized by: γi - coefficient of Poisson
distribution describing the frequency of request generation, βi - probability that time
window of pickup starts just after request arrival, δ – an expected size of time
windows.
Agent-company. Agent-company – is responsible for request reception from agentcustomer and its scheduling to agent-vehicles. Agent-company ACi is represented as a
tuple (g, c, s, f, RL), where: g – gains (incomes-costs), c – costs, s – an average level
of satisfaction of clients, which should be guaranteed, f – a function of choice of
agent-vehicle, which will perform the request, RL – a list of received requests with
information concerning the state of their realization (received, rejected, scheduled to
agent, pickup performed, delivery performed).
Agent-vehicle. Agent-vehicle represents vehicle. It moves among nodes in the
transport network and possesses plans of its routes and schedules of request
realization. To obtain realization of request, it sends offers to agent-company. An
Agent-vehicle AVi is defined as a tuple (loci, gi, ci, capi, passi, LRNi, Ri, LOi), where:
loci - current location (node, direction, percentage of traversed arc), gi - current gain, ci
- current costs, capi - maximal capacity, passi - number of passengers, LRNi - list of
request nodes, Ri - list of nodes (route), LOi - list of embarked orders (after pickup and
before delivery).

Multi-agent Environment for Dynamic Transport Planning and Scheduling

643

Agents-vehicles plan their routes so as to visit all nodes of accepted transport
requests. Each agents-vehicle uses two forms of route representation: list of request
nodes and list of nodes. The list of request nodes is composed of pickup and delivery
points for each accepted request ordered according to vehicle time of visit (thus each
request is represented in the list by two points. On the basis of request nodes, the
route composed of all traversed nodes (list of nodes) is constructed

5 Experiments

100
80
60
40
20
0

3

4
#vehicles

a)

5
Capacity=50
Capacity=100

% performed requests

% performed requests

The goal of performed experiments is the choice of optimum company features
(number of vehicles, capacity of vehicles) for the given topology of communication
network as well as the quantity and features of requests. In particular, we will
examine configurations with different time windows size and request frequencies.
In the experiments performed, the transport network consisting of 25 nodes and 60
arcs were used. Average length of arc is 7 minutes and 25 seconds.
Quantities of vehicles, their capacities as well as sizes of time windows were
changing during experiments.The total simulation time was divided into 5 intervals
(4 simulation hours each ) with different frequency of request arrival. Their Poison
distribution λ parameters were equal to 0.55, 0.70, 0.1, 0.4, 0.1, as in one of the
experiments described in [7], and the sixth supplementary period of 1 hour, aimed at
allowing the realization of the last requests . The average value of generated requests
was equal to 360.
The following diagrams present the percentages of performed requests in relation
to the quantity of the vehicles used and their capacities. In Fig. 2a are shown the
results obtained for wide time windows (end point is calculated using even
distribution, when the last possible time is the simulation end), whereas the ones
presented in Fig.2b. concern narrow ones (equal 10 minutes each).
Basing upon Fig. 2a one can notice that an increase of rate of request realization of
vehicle is relatively small. For this configuration of requests and transport networks,
the vehicles rarely have a total load higher then 50, a stronger constraint is the

40
30
20
10
0
3

4
#vehicles

5
Capacity=50
Capacity=100

b)

Fig. 2. Request realization in relation with vehicles quantity and capacity for a problem with
a) wide time windows, b) thin time windows

644

J. Kozlak et al.

participation of a vehicle in the realization of the requests previously submitted. In the
case of wide time window, the increase in the quantity of vehicles improves the
percentage of the performed requests.
For narrow time windows (Fig2b), the percentage of the request performed for the
same number of vehicles and their capacities, is clearly lower then for wide ones. For
the number of vehicles in the period of values 3-6, the difference is equal to 2-3.
Similarly as in the case of wide windows, increase of the percentage of performed
requests when the maximal capacity of vehicles is two times higher, is relatively
small.

6 Conclusions
In this paper we have presented a simulation environment to solve dynamic transport
problems of type PDPTW. It seems to us that the main advantages of the proposed
approach to the construction of systems to transport planning is the possibility of
adding emergencies, flexibility of configuration and change of features of particular
vehicles, as well as taking the structure of transport organization and its policy into
consideration during the optimization process.
We intend to enrich the multi-agent environment by introducing the following
elements to the system, which may consist of taking into consideration several
cooperating transport companies, allowing transport requests to arrive from different
sources, also directly to a vehicle which is located in a node where pickup is to be
realized and developing direct interactions among vehicles and request exchange
between them. The another step is the implementation of the model of multi-agent
systems presented in the paper by using a standard multi-agent platform, and through
the development of a decentralised multi-agent system so as to improve the global
computation calculation performance.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Bachem, A., Hochstattler, W. Malich, M.: Simulated Trading A New Parallel Approach
for Solving Vehicle Routing Problems. Proc. of Int. Conf. “Parallel Computing: Trends
and Applications”, 1994
Burckert, H.-J., Fischer, K., Vierke., G. : Transportation scheduling with holonic MAS the TELETRUCK approach. Third International Conference on Practical Applications of
Intelligent Agents and Multiagents (PAAM 98), 1998
Cordeau, J.-F., Laporte G.: The Dial-a-Ride Problem: Variants, Modeling Issues and
Algorithms. Les Cahiers du GERAD, 2002
Desaulniers, G., Desrosiers, J., Erdmann, A., Solomon, M.M., Soumis, F.: The VRP with
Pickup and Delivery. Les Cahiers du GERAD, 2000
Ferber, J.: Les systèmes multi-agents: Vers une intelligence collective, InterEditions, 1995
Fischer, K., Müller, J. P., Pischel, M.: Cooperative Transportation Scheduling: an
Application Domain for DAI. Applied Artificial Intelligence, vol.10, 1996
Gendreau, A., Guertin, F. , Potvin, J.Y., Séguin, R. :Neighborhood search heuristics for a
dynamic vehicle dispatching problem with pick-ups and deliveries. Rapport technique
CRT-98-10, Université de Montréal (1998)

Multi-agent Environment for Dynamic Transport Planning and Scheduling
8.

9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.

645

Gruer, P., Hilaire, V., Kozlak, J., Koukam, A.: A multi-agent approach to modelling and
simulation of transport on demand problem. J. Sołdek , L. Drobiazgiewicz (eds) : Artificial
Intelligence and Security in Computing Systems, The Kluwer Int. Series In Eng. And
Computer Science - 752, 2003
Hilaire, V.: Vers une approche de specification, de prototypage et de verification de
Systèmes Multi-Agents. PhD thesis, UTBM, 2000
Lau H.C., Liang Z.: Pickup and Delivery with Time Windows : Algorithms and Test Case
th
Generation. Proceeedings of 13 IEEE International Conference on Tools with Artificial
Intelligence (ICTAI’01), Dallas, USA, 2001
Li, H., Lim A.: A Metaheuristic for the Pickup and Delivery Problem with Time Windows.
th
in Proceedings of 13 IEEE International Conference on Tools with Artificial Intelligence
(ICTAI’01), Dallas, USA, 2001
Lim, H. , Lim, A., Rodrigues, B.: Solving the Pick up and Delivery Problem using
‘’Squeaky Wheel’’ Optimization with Local Search. Proceedings of American Conference
on Information Systems, AMCIS 2002, Dallas, USA
Madsen, O.B.G., Ravn, H.F., Rygaard, J.M.: A heuristic algorithm for a dial-a-ride
problem with time windows, multiple capacities, and multiple objectives. Annals of
Operations Research 60 (1995)
Mitrowic-Minic, S.: Pickup and Delivery Problem with Time Windows: A Survey. SFU
CMPT TR. 1998-12, ftp://fas.sfu.ca/pub/cs/techreports/1998
Nanry, W.P., Barnes, J.W.: Solving the pickup and delivery problem with time windows
using reactive tabu search. Transportation Research Part B 34, Elsevier Science Ltd 2000,
Potvin, J. Y., Bengio, S.: The vehicle routing problem with time windows - Part II: Genetic
search., INFORMS Journal on Computing 8 (1996)

