A Novel Method Providing Multimedia Contents
According to Preference Clones in Mobile Environment*
Sanggil Kang1 and Sungjoon Park2,**
1

Computer Science and Engineering, INHA University, 253 Younhyun-dong, Nam-gu,
Incheon, South Korea
sgkang@inha.ac.kr
2
Department of Mobile Game, Kongju Communication and Arts College, Gongju, Chungnam
314-713, South Korea
sjpark@kcac.ac.kr

Abstract. We introduce a novel method of automatic providing multimedia
content in mobile environment. With using our method, the problem of the
limitation of resource of mobile devices can be solved. In this paper, we
introduce a novel method of recommendation of personalized contents
according to preference clones using a collaborative filtering technique in
mobile environment. We divide the user group to two sub-groups by analyzing
the match of preferences of members in the sub-groups. The division process
recursively applies to each sub-group and place the sub-groups in a binary
decision tree (BDT). From the binary decision tree, we identify the preference
clones of each target user by matching the target user’s consumption behavior
to that of each sub-group in the BDT with a sequential manner. We also
implemented our system based on Java Micro Edition platform.
Keywords: Binary decision tree, mobile devices, personalization, and
preference clones.

1 Introduction
By the rapid spread of mobile devices such as cellular phone, PDA, and portable TV,
user can enjoy many kinds of multimedia contents through mobile appliances anytime
and anywhere. Especially, the population of Digital Multimedia Broadcasting (DMB)
user increases drastically year by year since available as a commercial service from
May 2005 in Korea. Also, DMB service has been at the center of developing issues in
mobile environment. Because of significant increase of contents through mobile
devices, user sometimes spends heavy effort and time for searching and downloading
their preferred contents.
In order to solve the problem, we introduce a novel method of recommendation of
personalized contents according to preference clones using a collaborative filtering
*
**

This work was supported by INHA UNIVERSITY Research Grant (INHA-35035-01).
Correspondence author.

Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part III, LNCS 4489, pp. 836–843, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

A Novel Method Providing Multimedia Contents According to Preference Clones

837

technique in mobile environment. In this paper the preference clone means a user
whose consumption pattern is very similar to that of another user. We divide the user
group to two sub-groups by analyzing the match of preferences of members in the
sub-groups. The division process recursively applies to each sub-group and place the
sub-groups in a binary decision tree (BDT). From the binary decision tree, we identify
the preference clones of each target user by matching the target user’s consumption
behavior to that of each sub-group in the BDT with a sequential manner.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces related
work. Section 3 overviews the overall architecture of the proposed system. In Section
4, we explain our proposed method. In Section 5, we design and implement the
prototype of the proposed system and show the performance comparison between our
method and a conventional method. We then conclude our paper in Section 6.

2 Related Work
Various personalization techniques can be classified into three possible categories
such as the rule-based, inference method, and collaborative filtering. The rule-based
recommendation is usually implemented by a predetermined rule, for instance, if then rule. Kim et al. [1] proposed a marketing rule extraction technique for
personalized recommendation on internet storefronts using tree induction method. As
one of representative rule-based techniques, Aggrawall et al. [2] proposed a method to
identify frequent item sets from the estimated frequency distribution using
association-rule mining algorithm. The inference method is the technique that a user’s
content consumption behavior is predicted based on the history of personal content
consumption behaviors. Lee [3] designed an interface agent to predict a user’s
resource usage in the UNIX domain by the probabilistic estimation of behavioral
patterns from the user behavior history. Collaborative filtering (CF) technique
recommends a target user the preferred content of the group whose content
consumption mind is similar to that of the user. Because of the mature of the
technique, CF has been attractive for predicting various preference problems such as
net-news [4], e-commerce [5], digital TV [6], digital libraries [7], etc.
Several papers applied CF to mobile devices. Coster et al. [8] used a CF for
predicting rating changes of movie data based on users’ new or updated ratings in
their system, MobiTip [9]. Also, Miller et al. [10] developed a recommender system
for recommending video movie to occasionally connecting users through mobile
devices. Tveit [11] applied a CF to mobile commerce based on using votes or
opinions about products and services from similar customers using Peer-to-Peer.
Zhang et al. [12] explored effective ways of delivering personalized content under the
restrictions on wireless networks and mobile devices.
The literatures mentioned above do not consider recent implicit usage behavior for
inferring users’ preference. However, it can be a critical clue for predicting a target
user’s usage behavior near future. In this paper we use target user’s implicit feedback
by using binary decision technique. From the following section, we demonstrate our
method in detail.

838

S. Kang and S. Park

3 Architecture of Our System
Fig. 1 shows the overall architecture of our system in mobile environment. The
architecture is composed of two parts: one is server side and the other is client side.

Fig. 1. Overall architecture of our system

The server side consists of three parts such as Monitoring Module (MM), Data
Preparation Module (DPM), and Recommendation Module (MM). The MM records
the log file such as user ID, gender, age, content consumption behavior (usage
history), and store them into the Profile DB. The DPM eliminates nosy data from the
collected usage history and makes groups according to users’ age and gender. Also, it
stores them into the Preference Information DB. The RM analyzes the preference of
multimedia contents according to users’ age and gender group using the proposed
algorithm explained in detail from the following section. Then, it recommends
preferred contents to each target user.
The client side has one module called Information Manager Module (IMM). The
IMM displays recommendation list provided from the server side. Also, it records
information of content consumed by the mobile user.

4 The Proposed Recommendation Algorithm
4.1 Group and Member Preference
In general the similarity of user preference can be characterized by age and gender.
For instance, the documentary programs of DMB are usually popular favor for thirties
and forties man, while the show programs are for teenagers and twenties. In each
group, for each user, very similar or identical users to the user can exist, in the sense
of consumption pattern. We call those similar or identical users “preference clones” in
this paper. If preference clones for a new mobile user are founded, we recommend or
provide the preferred contents of the preference clones to the new user, sometimes

A Novel Method Providing Multimedia Contents According to Preference Clones

839

called “target user.” To recommend or provide preferred contents to target user, we
first group existing users by age and gender as seen in (1).

U = [U1 , U 2 , " , U i , " U L ]

(1)

where, Ui (i = 1, 2, . . . L) is the ith age and gender group in the whole existing
reference group, U. Also, the Ui includes J members as expressed in (2).

U i = [u1 , u2 , ", u j , " u J ]

(2)

where, uj is the jth member in sub-reference group Ui. For Ui, the preference of
contents can be computed and ordered by the frequency of the group’s content
consumption during predetermined time period. The overall preference order of
contents for J members can be denoted as PrefUi. Also, for member uj, the preference
of contents can be computed and ordered from high preference to low preference by
the frequency of the member’s content consumption. The preference order of the
contents can be denoted as Prefuj. Using the preference order of each group and its
corresponding members, the preference clones can be found by making sub-groups in
binary decision tree (BDT).
4.2 Sub-reference Groups in Binary Decision Tree (BDT)

From any sub-reference group Ui, we can also decompose it into two sub-groups by
matching between the first element of PrefUi , denoted as PrefUi(1) and that of Prefuj
of each member uj, denoted as Prefuj (1), as seen in (3).

⎧u j → U i , p ,
⎨
⎩u j → U i , n ,

for

prefU i (1) = pref u j (1), ⎫
⎬
otherwise ⎭

(3)

where, Ui,p and Ui,n is called positive sub-reference group and negative sub-reference
group of Ui, respectively. Also, j = 1, 2, . . ., J. With the same process, Ui,p can also
decompose two sub-reference groups. Let’s say, if there are P members in the subreference group Ui,p then the overall preference of contents consumed by the P
members can be computed and ordered. The ordered preferences of the sub-reference
group can be denoted as PrefUi,p. Also, for each member k in the sub-reference group,
his/her ordered preference for the contents can be denoted as Prefuk. The Ui,p can be
decomposed by matching between the second element of PrefUi,p, denoted as
PrefUi,p(2) and that of Prefuk of each member uk, denoted as Prefuk(2), as seen in (4).

⎧uk → U i , p , p ,
⎨
⎩ uk → U i , p ,n ,

for

prefU i , p ( 2) = pref uk ( 2), ⎫
⎬
otherwise ⎭

(4)

where, Ui,p,p and Ui,p,n is called positive sub-reference group and negative subreference group of Ui,p, respectively. Also, k = 1, 2, . . ., K. For the same way, Ui,n can
also decomposed as seen in (5).

⎧uk → U i ,n , p ,
⎨
⎩ uk → U i ,n ,n ,

for

prefU i ,n ( 2) = pref uk ( 2), ⎫
⎬
otherwise ⎭

(5)

840

S. Kang and S. Park

Where, Ui,n,p and Ui,n,n is called positive sub-reference group and negative subreference group of Ui,n, respectively. Also, k = 1, 2, . . ., J-K. With the same process,
each sub-reference group can be decomposed until each sub-reference group can not
be decomposed anymore.
The accuracy of our method depends on the size of reference group. If the size is
big then the accuracy will increase because the reference group has high possibility to
contain more precise preference clones. In the following section, we compare the
performance of our method with the typical Top-N recommendation method by
varying the size of reference group.

5 Experiments
5.1 Experimental Environment

We implemented our system using CLDC/MIDP based on Java ME platform and Java
SDK in the windowsXP environment. In order to test our method, J2ME Wireless
Toolkit Emulator was used.
Due to difficulty in collecting users’ contents in mobile environment until present
time, we used 2000 TV viewers’ watching history for executing our algorithm instead
of the DMB programs. The data was provided by AC Nielsen Korea, one of the
authorized market research companies, from January 1, 2003 to April 30, 2003. The
watching history was collected by the Set-Top Box installed in the users’ houses. The
Set-Top Box also recorded viewers’ profile information such as age and gender, and
watched programs. In the data, there are around 100 programs. Thus, the multimedia
content is considered the program in this experiment.
5.2 Demonstration of Our Method

Fig. 2 shows the demonstration of our method according to target user’s watching
behavior. We structured the binary decision tree (BDT) using 10 teenage boys’
watching history collected during one month as explained in the previous chapter.
When a target teenage user connected to the server, program P1 as seen in Fig. 3(a) is
recommended through his mobile because P1 is the first ranked one in the teenage
boy reference group as seen in the preference table. If the target user plays P1 by
clicking the ‘play’ button on the mobile which implies positive feedback of our
recommendation then we move to the left of the next level and recommend P5 at the
next stage as seen in Fig. 3(b). The P5 is the second ranked program in the subreference group whose all members watched P1. If the target user skips the
recommend program by clicking the ‘skip’ button which implies negative feedback,
we move to the right of the next level and recommend P2 as seen in Fig 3(c). The P2
is the second ranked program in the sub-reference group whose all members did not
watch P5. If the target user plays P2 then we move to the left of the next level and can
find the preference clone u1 of the target user. The programs the preference clone
watched are automatically recommended to the target user in the future. Like this, our
method dynamically recommends programs to the target user in a recursive manner.

A Novel Method Providing Multimedia Contents According to Preference Clones

841

Fig. 2. The BDT of the teenage boy group

(a) The beginning stage

(b) The positive feedback stage

(c) The negative feedback stage

Fig. 3. The examples of dynamical program providing through the target user’s mobile device

5.3 Evaluation of Our Method

In this section, we compared the performance of our method with that of the
conventional recommendation method, TOP-N [13]. The 2000 TV viewers’ watching
history was divided into reference data and target user data. Also, the reference data
was grouped according to its members’ age and gender such as teenage boys, teenage

842

S. Kang and S. Park

girls, twenties man, twenties woman, thirties man, thirties woman, forties man, and
forties woman. The performance was evaluated with the overall ratio of the number of
match between recommended programs to target users’ preference clones and
watched programs by them. Also, we repeated the evaluation by varying the size of
reference data such as 500, 1,000, and 1,500 members in the reference data and the
collection period of usage history such as one month, two months, and three months.
For the performance evaluation, the one next month data of the reference data was
used.
From the table, it is shown that our method outperforms TOP-N method when the
reference data size is relatively big. However, when the reference size is relatively
small, TOP-N is little better than our method. For instance, for 500 reference
members with one month collection period, the accuracy of our method and TOP-N
are 65% and 68%, respectively. However, for 1,000 reference members, we have 73%
for our method and 72% for TOP-N. For 1,500 reference members, we have 81% for
our method and 73% for TOP-N. It is because the possibility that the preference
clones of each target user are included in the reference data is low.
From the table, it is shown that the collection period does not much influence on
the accuracy for both methods. For 1,500 reference data, the accuracies of our method
for one month, two months, and three months are 81%, 82%, and 84%, respectively.
Also, for TOP-N, we have 73%, 74%, and 75%. In general, user’s preference trend
for the multimedia content like TV program does not drastically change. That is the
reason why the collection period does not give an impact on improving the
performance for both our method and TOP-N method.
Table 1. Comparion of performances of our method and TOP-N method
Data
collection
period
1 month
2 months
3 months

Method

500

Reference Size
1,000

1,500

TOP-N
Our
TOP-N
Our
TOP-N
Our

68%
65%
69%
66%
69%
66%

72%
73%
74%
74%
75%
76%

73%
81%
74%
82%
75%
84%

6 Conclusion
In this paper, we introduced a novel method of providing automatic multimedia
contents through mobile devices. From the result of the performance comparison
between our method and the conventional method, we can conclude that the
performance of our method is better than that of the conventional method for
relatively large reference data. However, for small reference data, our method is not
appropriate for use.
The data (2,000 viewers) we used for evaluating our method and the conventional
method is not big enough to confirm the accuracies. Therefore, we need to redo the

A Novel Method Providing Multimedia Contents According to Preference Clones

843

experiment with more data set. Also, we need to apply our method to other mobile
multimedia contents such as music, mobile shopping mall, and mobile web service.

References
1. Kim, J.W., Lee, B.H., Shaw, M.J., Chang, H.L., Nelson, M.: Application of Decision-Tree
Induction Techniques to Personalized Advertisements on Internet Storefronts. International
Journal of Electronic Commerce, vol. 5, no. 3 (2001) 45-62
2. Aggrawall, R., Imielinski, T., Swami, A. : Mining Association Rules between Sets of
Items in Large Databases. Proc. ACM SIGMOD Int’l Conference on Management of Data
(1994) 207-216
3. Lee, J.J. : Case-based plan recognition in computing domains. Proc. The Fifth International
Conference on User Modeling, (1996) 234-236
4. Resnick, P., Lacovou, N., Suchak, M., Bergstrom, P., Riedl, J. : GroupLens: An Open
Architecture for Collaborative Filtering of Netnews. Internet Research Report, MIT Center
for Coordination Science (1994) http://www-sloan.mit.edu/ccs/1994wp.html
5. Schafer, J.B., Konstan, J., Riedl, J. : Recommender systems in e-commerce. ACM
Conference on Electronic Commerce (1999) 158-166
6. Cotter, P., Smyth, B. : Personalization Techniques for the Digital TV world. Proc.
European Conference on Artificial Intelligence (2000) 701-705
7. Bollacker, K.D., Lawrence S., Giles, C.L.: A System for Automatic Personalized Tracking
of Scientific Literature on the Web. Proc. ACM Conference on Digital Libraries (1999)
105-113
8. Coster, R., Svensson M. : Incremental Collaborative Filtering for Mobile Devices.
Preceedings of the 2005 ACM Symposium on Applied Computing (2005) 1102-1106
9. Rudstrom, S., Svensson, M., Coster, R., Hook, K.: MobiTip: Using Bluetooth as a
Mediator of Social Context. 6th International Conference of Ubiquitous Computing (2004)
10. Miller, B.N., Albert, I., Lam, S.K., Konstan, J.A., Riedl, J.: Movielens Unplugged:
Experiences with an Occasionally Connected Recommender System. Proceedings of the
8th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (2003) 263-266
11. Tveit, A.: Pear-to-peer based Recommendations for Mobile Commerce. Proceedings of the
1st International Workshop on Mobile Commerce (2001) 26-29
12. Zhang, D., Shijagurumayum, S.: Personalized Content Delivery to Mobile Devices. IEEE
International Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics vol. 3 (2003) 2533-2538
13. Mukund D., George K.: Item-Based Top-N Recommendation Algorithms, ACM
Transactions on Information System, vol. 22, Issue 1 (2004) 143-177

