The Research on the Method of Process-Based
Knowledge Catalog and Storage and
Its Application in Steel Product R&D
Xiaodong Gao1,2 and Zhiping Fan1
1

School of Business Administration, Northeastern University,
Postal Code 11 00 06 Shenyang, China
2 Shanghai Baosight Software Co., Ltd, Postal Code 20 12 03
Shanghai, China
gaoxiaodong@baosight.com, zpfan@mail.neu.edu.cn

Abstract. Efficient knowledge storage is for easy to look up and speed up the
reaction. Knowledge resource library stored large amount of knowledge achieve,
and it can be distill through all kinds of links. Technically, there are two
concerns, one is to index through what kind of related strategy, establishes
keyword controls, in order to apply the standard literature management tools, the
other is how to adopt efficient storage strategies, in order to index and update the
knowledge system fast, this thesis takes the operation process as a starting point,
investigates the organization strategies towards knowledge classification process
and storage, as well as provide a practice case based on research and develop of
the steel product.

1 Introduction
Most of the organization works are enclosed by the operation process. Operation
process refers to a set of activities which rated together to product values for the
customers. Porter describes the operation process of an enterprise as a value chain,
competition happens not among the enterprise, but among the value chain of them.
Only through efficient management of all the aspects of the value chain, could the
enterprise gain the true competition advantage on the market. Processes in organization
establish the interactive relationship among the employees, responsibilities,
performance and knowledge, through process the enterprise can establish knowledge
research system of an organization, and apply it on manufacturing practice and
knowledge innovation. The key for its technique is the classification and storage
strategy of the knowledge.

2 Knowledge Correlation and Classification
Knowledge correlation refers to the relationship and influence between events, which
means to establish the specific relationship based on the different knowledge
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part III, LNCS 3993, pp. 601 – 607, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

602

X. Gao and Z. Fan

requirement. Not a kind of the knowledge innovation deviate from the application of
the existing knowledge, In other words is to say the knowledge has the necessity
relation with the others, likewise, any kind of the research work needs the other science
knowledge as an assistant, without the matting of the other knowledge, the research can
not develop. To resolve the series of problems inside an organization requires the
related knowledge, background knowledge etc. This related knowledge is what we call
the knowledge correlation.
Generally, based on the operation process of the business management program, and
strings together the straight forward related knowledge to form a methodical
knowledge network, and describe it by language, characters and graphics. Therefore
the method of knowledge correlation is the key of the knowledge storage. Figure 1 is
the example of the knowledge system of computer maintenance.
Knowledge correlation and knowledge classification have a straight forward
relationship. Knowledge classification can be concerned as an infinite and constant
development. It is impossible for a rich and colorful world to contain only one
classification. Therefore, we can not find only one classification to satisfy the entire
knowledge requirement. Knowledge system based on process is also a kind of
knowledge classification. Its goal is to operate process and deliver knowledge easily,
therefore convenient for knowledge application and innovation.

Fig. 1. The knowledge system of computer maintenance

3 Keywords System Based on Process
As all we know, Enterprise’s operation system is based on process. The organic
amalgamation among the operation processes consist the operation system of an
enterprise. Moreover, Process is consisted by a few working procedures, these
procedures are corresponding with working position. In order for the process to be
running smoothly, all the working positions need to be cooperate efficiently. Therefore

The Research on the Method of Process-Based Knowledge Catalog and Storage

603

the operation situation of the whole process is due to the efficiency of all the position.
Every position includes the following knowledge elements:
Performance, which include time, quality, cost, service, and improvement
Methodologies, refers to technical files and working procedures which need to
accomplish the target performance
Hardware, refers to the working situation and environment which need to support to
accomplish the performance
Communication, refers to the connections between the up strings and down strings of
the employment positions.
Useful knowledge exists in the operation process of an organization. It has been
long-term used by the employees and produces the specific benefit. The organic
amalgamation of the performance, methodologies, hardware, and communication
consist of a knowledge node inside the process, the output information of the position is
the input of another, and the amalgamation of all the knowledge (position) forms the
knowledge system based on process, Figure 2 is the example of process based
knowledge factor.

Fig. 2. The sample of process-based knowledge factor

For organization’s efficient knowledge classification, apply a standard archive
management tool, a keyword control system needs to be established. This system shall
be standard, authorities, and hierarchy. Mostly, 1) keywords dictionary explains and
interpret for every keywords, no second definition 2) human resource dictionary based
on the keywords of employees identities, includes the personal information , and
experience 3) knowledge dictionary based on the relationship between keywords
dictionary and knowledge resource 4)keyword correlation dictionary based on the
keywords dictionary establishes a multi hierarchy process framework 5) project
knowledge correlation dictionary based on keywords, establishes the project
knowledge relationship 6) operation knowledge correlation dictionary based on
keywords establishes the relationship among the operation knowledge.

604

X. Gao and Z. Fan

4 The Transformation Between Structural Data and
Non-structural Data
In information system, technically there are two categories, the structural system and
non-structural system. The data processing function in structural system together with
the related strategies in non-structural system can be classified in two parts, the
information linkage and function linkage 1) information linkage, to have the straight
connection for the data inside the database, technically it is very difficult, this needs to
transform the data into information, for example to transfer the personal date into the
personal information and store them as a non-structural archive. e.g.: Through HTML
format transfer every employee’s personal data into an information file, and use its
employee number as the keywords, this can transfer the structural data into
information, and can be applied by the non-structural system.2) function linkage based
on the process ability of database, through WEB/EAI technique, this can be the service
application.
On the other hand, every knowledge archive needs to obey the archive criterion. For
example, Dublin core centralization has its definition for topic and keywords, title,
author, abstract and publisher. According to the number of times for the knowledge
application, the relatively aged knowledge, its demand for query going down, therefore
needs to be rearranged and increase the operation efficiency.

5 The Storage Framework Based on the Knowledge Unit
Knowledge storage strategy can be classified as centralized storage and decentralized
storage. It is feasible to utilize the centralized storage for small amount of knowledge
storage; it has simple structure, small investment and fast result. But, when the
knowledge storage exceeds a certain limit, centralized storage will cause problem,
since the large demanding will cause the problem for accessing, therefore speed down
the reaction. To spend up the reaction, the system dimension and functional
requirements needs to be significantly improved. Therefore increase the investment.
Through practice analysis, it is non-proportional between knowledge innovation and
query. Knowledge innovation has much smaller scale than knowledge query.
Therefore, to establish a unilateral data synchronized system, through unilateral data
source innovation multi-direction data duplication, can guarantee the fast innovation
and query of knowledge. A general multi-piece technique product has fast data
duplication ability, like IMB, Lotus-Domino system.
Technically, use the micro pc server system to separate knowledge innovation and
query, together to support the compression of query, this guarantees the fast reaction
system, As fig 3 shows.
Generally, the knowledge construction inside the knowledge center is based on the
knowledge field; the enterprise can establish the knowledge warehouse step by step
according to its ability, like the manufacturing management knowledge unit in the
knowledge operation, and project module knowledge unit in the project knowledge

The Research on the Method of Process-Based Knowledge Catalog and Storage

605

Fig. 3. The overload-balance strategy of knowledge storage

center. Therefore, as the above diagram, we can use the innovation requirement content
of one knowledge unit. With the responsible for a server which is the main server , and
apply the method of timing innovation, then describe the content to the other by-server,,
and by them through the balance loading server, organize the query assignment
distribution and feedback to support compressed inquire requirement.
Besides, the by- server of the knowledge unit is the backup system of the knowledge
center/ knowledge unit, in case the main server shuts down, the backup system can be
switched to be the main server and continue to operate. The main server and the by
server, balanced loading server is a logical concept. For a system that has not been
frequently visited, it can be configured on a physical device, once the large visits
happens, it can be distributed on different physical devices, Thus, apply the micro
server, invest a small cost can achieve the flexibility of the system and security of the
hardware.

6 Case Application: Process Based Knowledge
Process based knowledge system and its application on the steel product design and
development.
The development process of the vehicle plate is based on the specific customer, and
organized through a standard recognition process. Therefore, all the project

606

X. Gao and Z. Fan

organization and its related archive classification of the vehicle plate shall be strictly
controlled according to three kinds of key techniques (varieties, techniques and
application), two key objects (end user, trial-manufacture procedure). Besides, key
elements can be increased by the specific project. For example: the type of vehicles, the
steel and the number of the projects etc. All these consists the keywords of the vehicle
plate knowledge archive.
The so called the high ranking vehicle plate is the kind to satisfy the demand of the
inside plate of a medium and high ranking vehicle, it possess the excellent mechanical
functionality and cold roll steel as well as the zincification thin steel plate of the surface
quality. This is the most elaborate work in the steel product, it has the great difficulty to
produce and develop, specifically shows: 1) the large demanding of the vehicle plate. 2)
The fast changing of the vehicle style, this cut down the period of changing. 3) The high
requirement of the surface plate, this cause the difficulty to manufacture. 4) The
automatic pipeline of the vehicle manufacturing which demands the high stability of
the steel plate quality.5) The long time manufacturing workflow and lots of the
technical difficulties and high integration.
Through the control system of the key techniques and key objects, together with the
visualized techniques to form a visualized vehicle research and development
knowledge map Thereby, the project office can easily choose the related project data
for a specific project based on the knowledge map. The main workflow is inside the
keywords system of the vehicles plate, according to the specific project keywords.
Choose the appropriate project archive through the knowledge system of the technique,
product, product application, end user, development workflow, and then deliver the
archive to the project and its related product research data, similar technique
environment and its research project, the application date of the specific user. Once the
new data has been produced, it can be delivered together to the virtual environment of
the project.
Abstract the keyword system through professional knowledge, thus the keywords
system of a certain profession is consisted by keyword orders (technique order), they
interlaced compose a knowledge network. The arrangement of the keyword system in
the professional area is the important technique work for the project office. Only to
establish the efficient professional keyword system, can one visually understand the
development of the professional field and its existing working position (purpose and
direction).

7 Conclusion
Knowledge delivery is the new trend of an enterprise’s knowledge application and
innovation. Through the study of this thesis, we know that knowledge can be organized
through process. In order to improve the delivery efficiency, the enterprise needs to
establish the dynamic linkage and it protection strategy for of activity, knowledge
resource, position/ employee, and apply the knowledge storage system based on the
balance loading, resolving scheme.

The Research on the Method of Process-Based Knowledge Catalog and Storage

607

References
[1] Portor M. Chen Xiaoyue interpretation, Competition Advantage[M]. Beijing, Publishing
Company, 1997.
[2] Nancy M. Dixon, Common Knowledge --- How Companies Thrive by Sharing What They
Know[M]. Harvard College 2000.
[3] Despres C, Chauvel D. Knowledge Horizons: The Present and Promise of Knowledge
Management [M]. Berlin: Butterworth-Heinemann, 2000.

