Computational Tasks in Bronchoscope
Navigation During Computer-Assisted
Transbronchial Biopsy
Jaroslaw Bulat1 , Krzysztof Duda1 , Miroslaw Socha1 , Pawel Turcza1 ,
Tomasz Zieli´
nski2 , and Mariusz Duplaga3
1

Department of Measurement and Instrumentation, AGH University of Science and
Technology, al. Mickiewicza 30, 30-059 Krak´
ow, Poland
{kwant,kduda,socha,turcza}@agh.edu.pl
2
Department of Telecommunications, AGH University of Science and Technology,
al. Mickiewicza 30, 30-059 Krak´
ow, Poland
tzielin@agh.edu.pl
3
Collegium Medicum, Jagiellonian University, ul. Skawi´
nska 8, 31-066 Krak´
ow,
Poland
mmduplag@cyf-kr.edu.pl

Abstract. The paper presents algorithmic solutions dedicated to computer navigation system which is to assist bronchoscope positioning
during transbronchial needle-aspiration biopsy. The navigation exploits
principle of on-line registration of real images coming from endoscope
camera and virtual ones generated on the base of computed-tomography
(CT) data of a patient. When these images are similar an assumption
is made that the bronchoscope and virtual camera have approximately
the same position and view direction. In the paper the following computational aspects are described: correction of camera lens distortion,
fast approximate estimation of endoscope ego-motion, reconstruction of
bronchial tree from CT data by means of their segmentation and its
centerline calculation, virtual views generation, registration of real and
virtual images via maximization of their mutual information and, ﬁnally,
eﬃcient parallel and network implementation of the navigation system
which is under development.

1

Introduction

Virtual bronchoscopy [1] CT-guided approach represents a modern solution to
the diﬃcult problem of bronchoscope positioning during medical procedure of
transbronchial needle-aspiration biopsy. It makes use of real-time registration
of real 2D images (coming from an endoscope) and virtual ones (obtained from
virtual camera looking inside a 3D model of bronchial tree, reconstructed from
CT patient data by means of segmentation). Usually, the registration of these
two-source images is performed using in-the-loop maximization of their: correlation [2] or mutual information [3]. In order to speed-up search for precise virtual
camera position, coarse estimation of bronchoscope camera can be performed.
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2008, Part III, LNCS 5103, pp. 178–187, 2008.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

Computational Tasks in Bronchoscope Navigation

179

It is usually done from video stream using corresponding points and epipolar
geometry [2] or optical ﬂow methods and perspective geometry [4]. In turn, next
position of the endoscope camera can be predicted and tracked with Kalman
using [5] or Monte Carlo [6] particle ﬁlters. Using shape-from-shading technique
or triangulation by means of corresponding points it is also possible to extract
3D model of the airways tract from the real-time endoscopic video and try to
register it to the 3D model reconstructed from the CT scans. First such attempt
has been reported in [7] and further elaborated in [8].
2. Exact (precise) position






	



		

Endoscope
Camera


	


	




	




	
	




1. Approximate (coarse) position

Fig. 1. Block diagram of the system under development

In the paper, some computational and implementation issues concerning the
described above bronchoscope navigation scheme are presented. The following
aspects are addressed: correction of camera non-linearities, fast approximate estimation of endoscope ego-motion [9], reconstruction of bronchial tree from CT
data by means of their segmentation and its centerline calculation [10], virtual
views generation, registration of real and virtual images via maximization of
their mutual information [11] and, ﬁnally, eﬃcient parallel and network implementation of the whole navigation system. The architecture of the system being
designed is presented in Fig. 1.

2

Correction of Camera Distortions

The methodology presented in [12], [13] was used for correction of bronchoscope
Olympus BF-160 camera lens distortions. As a test image black dotes lying on
straight lines have been chosen. The distorted image obtained from bronchoscope
camera is presented in Fig. 2a. The applied correction algorithm was based on
maximization of the criterion measuering the degree of lines straightness. Using
the model of radial distortions, the following polynomial was found:
rc (r) = 4.2009 ∗ 10−8 r4 + 1.5991 ∗ 10−10 r3 + 3.7892 ∗ 10−13 r2 + r

(1)

relating the radius rc in distorted image to the radius r in undistorted image.
For better results, unlike [12], [13], in our approach the center of distortions was

180

J. Bulat et al.





Fig. 2. a) Test image from bronchoscope camera, b) Reconstructed, undistorted image

calculated by means of set of optimizations in the neighborhood of geometric
center of the image. The image after correction is presented in Fig. 2b.

3

Segmentation of Bronchial Tree and Calculation of
Navigation Path

Image segmentation is the operation of grouping image pixels into separate objects present in a picture. The ﬁrst step of segmentation algorithm is most often
feature extraction and then checking if the speciﬁc pixel belongs to the object
of interest. In medical CT data segmentation is used to isolate biological structures of interest like whole organs, e.g. bronchial tree, or some interesting, smaller
structures like lymphatic nodes or tumors. Segmentation algorithms can be divided into four major groups: pixel-based, region-based, edge-based and modelbased methods. In our research, the airway tree was segmented with the following
steps: data smoothing with 3D gaussian ﬁlter, global thresholding and checking
26-connectivity. The exemplary segmentation results are depicted Fig. 3.
Centerline of the segmented bronchial tree is used as a navigation path in: virtual bronchoscopy, planning transbronchial biopsy and guiding bronchoscope’s
tip during biopsy. Thefore it precise computation is very important. Classiﬁcation of algorithms for automatic generation of centerline (navigation path) in
bronchial tree can be found in [14], [15].
We have proposed a new algorithm based on the distance transform, acting on
the segmented bronchial tree, and an original iterative method for path searching
[10]. The procedure is equipped with additional heuristic rules that prevent detecting false paths. The algorithm for path detection starts with placing the cube
at the beginning of the bronchial tree with sides parallel to CT data coordinates.
Fig. 3 shows the position of the cube in bronchial tree during successive steps and
values of distance transform on its sides. The transform values on the cube sides
are used for setting up the next point of the path. In the case depicted in Fig. 3a,
the distance transform shows that the next point of the path should be either in Z
or −Z direction. As the direction −Z means going back to previously computed
point, the direction Z is chosen. In case depicted in Fig. 3b, from possible −Z,
Y and −Y the direction Y is used, while the direction −Y is stored and becomes

Computational Tasks in Bronchoscope Navigation





181



Fig. 3. a), b) Successive steps of computing centerline (navigation path) in bronchial
tree (at the bottom values of computed distance transform lying on cube sides are
shown); c) Path computed after the ﬁrst iteration (points connected by the line) are
used as starting points for next iterations (points not connected).

starting point for the next iteration (possible branching node) and the direction
−Z is neglected for the same reason as previously. Fig. 3c presents result of the
ﬁrst iteration: calculated points of the navigation path that are connected with
lines. Consecutive iterations start at points stored as possible branching nodes.
The algorithm ends up after checking all branching nodes (what takes 49 iterations in the presented example). Finally, a polynomial of 6-th degree was ﬁtted
to calculated points in order to make trajectory smoother.

4

Visualization of Bronchial Tree – Virtual Phantom

The visualization part of the navigation system was developed with Borland
C++ Builder and Visualization ToolKit (VTK) cross-platform, open-source library [16]. The Visualization ToolKit makes use of the OpenGL API for 3D
graphic card. The surface rendering technique was used for the sake of good
performance and quality of generated virtual bronchoscopy images. Surface rendering includes two stages: generation of three-dimensional surface representing
bronchial tree walls from CT data and visualization process via a graphic card.
Virtual bronchoscopy images (VB) were used for testing motion estimation and
navigation algorithms based on image registration.
The process of 3D surface generation consists of: loading a DICOM ﬁle with
patient’s computed tomography (CT) data, cropping CT data to reduce their
size and generating isosurface at the level of -500HU by means of marching cubes
algorithm [17]. The isosurface on this level goes through the data that represent
walls of patient’s bronchial tree. The result of computations is the continuous triangular mesh. The triangle strips are created in order to improve rendering performance. For these data a mapper was created to generate OpenGL rendering

182

J. Bulat et al.

primitives and actor object for controlling mesh property which is the ﬁnal step
for virtual bronchoscopy image generation. The generated surface can be saved
to ﬁle for later use.
In order to achieve maximum resemblance with real bronchoscope camera
illumination conditions, the virtual light source was set up as follows: it moves
along with the camera and its position is the same as camera position. The light
is conﬁgured as positional (headlight), and the light cone angle corresponds to
camera cone angle. To prevent overexposing of nearest surfaces the irregular
light intensity along the cone angle was assumed. Light fading attenuation was
also used for distance simulation.

5

Fast Estimation of Bronchoscope Egomotion

In order to speed-up egomotion estimation [18] in bronchial environment we use
simpliﬁed model of geometric relations based on cylindrical shape accompanied
by the ﬁxation on a carina [19], what reduces motion’s degrees of freedom to four
(forward/backward movement, camera rotation, camera tilt in two directions).
It is achieved by continuous tracking of the carina (stationary point) illuminated
by the camera light source, and by analyzing bronchial wall radial moves relative
to ﬁxed point by correlation in polar coordinates [9].
Reverse perspective projection of images before correlations is made by the use
of correspondence between z-axis and r-axis derived from the following trigonometric relation (see Fig. 4):
R
R−r
= tgϕ =
z
z−f

=⇒

r =R 1−

z
z−f

(2)

Let us note that R serves only as a scaling factor of the view. In the current
research we estimate forward motion, after carina stabilization and camera rotation compensation, as arithmetic mean of directional wall motions. Camera tilt
is estimated from geometric mean of these motions.

Fig. 4. Applied models: a) segment of bronchial tree (upper perspective projection and
x-z cross-section), b) imaging in cylindrical environment with radius R, camera focal
length f , radial image axis r and depth from image plane z.

Computational Tasks in Bronchoscope Navigation

183

We assessed algorithm accuracy by series of test in virtual cylinders, virtual bronchial trees and on real operational video sequences from transbronchial
biopsy [11]. The results of experiments show that accuracy of bronchoscope cumulated motion estimation is within 5% of distance in virtual environments.
In Fig. 5a the virtual bronchial tree environment with estimated wall motions
is shown. Fig. 5b shows estimation of cumulated forward/backward motion together with imposed forward virtual camera motion. Disturbing factors in this
experiment were camera rotation, and x-y plane camera moves.
Fig. 6a shows forward/backward bronchoscope trajectory during real biopsy.
This trajectory suggest similarity of frames 7 and 65, being distant in time
but close in space, because of the strong backward move followed by the forward
move. These frames, shown in Fig. 6b and 6c, conﬁrm this similarity and conﬁrm
also satisfactory behavior of our egomotion estimation algorithm.





Fig. 5. Example of camera position estimation along z-axis in virtual bronchial-tree
phantom: a) Virtual environment with estimated radial wall-move vectors, b) Estimated forward/backward camera trajectories for imposed motion: 1 - camera motion
along the path with target ﬁxed on carina, 2 - camera motion with additional camera
tilt and rotation and moving target.







Fig. 6. Estimation of camera position along z-axis from real data: a) estimation result
with two frames close in space but distant in time (mark ’o’), b), c) frames 7 and 65

184

6

J. Bulat et al.

Image Registration Using Mutual Information

The information from egomotion algorithm of bronchoscope motions is not suﬃcient to precise determination of the location of real bronchoscope tip in relation
to virtual bronchial tree, however, can signiﬁcantly speed-up navigation process.
Therefore, before successful navigation will be possible, two tasks have to be completed. The ﬁrst one is to place the virtual bronchoscope (the source of virtual
images) in a position corresponding to the real bronchoscope. This is achieved by
adjusting position of virtual bronchoscope in such a way that generated images
are similar as much as possible to images from real bronchoscope.
After setting up the virtual camera starting position, the second task - calibration of egomotion estimation algorithm is performed. Having two images from
real camera at positions z0 and z0 + d, where z0 is the starting position and d is
outcome of egomotion estimation algorithm, using appropriate image similarity
measure we try to ﬁnd such a displacement of the virtual camera position which
makes virtual image as similar to the real one as possible. Egomotion estimation
is used for coarse estimation of virtual camera positition, then image registration
algorithm is used for ﬁner adjustment.
Methods enabling registration of images from the same or diﬀerent sources
have been extensively developed through the last decades. Numerous papers
were published on this topic [20]. In our approach, in both above described
tasks, mutual information [21] was used as an image similarity measure. It is
based on the concept of joint entropy as given by Shannon for determination of
communication’s channel capacity and is deﬁned as follows:
I(u, v) = H(u) − H(u | v)

(3)

where H(u) denotes the measure of uncertainty of the value of random variable
u, and H(u | v) denotes the same measure but determined with the assumption
that value of random variable v is known. In this way I(u, v) expresses how
much the uncertainty about value of u decreases after getting to know value
v. Correlation between decreasing value of conditional entropy H(u | v) and
increasing value of mutual information I(u | v) is obvious. Using the Bayesian
theorem: P (A, B) = P (A | B)P (B) and the deﬁnition of Shannon’s entropy
H(u) = −

pu (i) log pu (i),
i

H(u, v) = −

puv (i, j) log puv (i, j),

(4)

i,j

the equation expressing mutual information (M I) may be rewritten into the form
I(u, v) = H(u) + H(v) − H(u, v).

(5)

It includes joint entropy H(u, v), which may be determined on the basis of joint
probability distribution, which in turn can be inferred from the joint histogram
h(u, v) after appropriate normalization.
Exemplary images from real and corresponding virtual camera are presented
in Fig. 7. This ﬁgure also shows values of mutual information as a function of virtual camera position. In the experiment, the virtual camera was shifted along the

Computational Tasks in Bronchoscope Navigation





185



Fig. 7. Example of image registration: a) Mutual information as a function of virtual
camera position, b) Real image - frame 71, c) Virtual image corresponding to the real
one found by the registration algorithm

computed navigation path lying in the central part of the airways. Observed local
maxima of the mutual information curve comes from bronchial tree vertebras.

7

Computation Complexity Analysis

System presented in Fig. 1. have been implemented in Matlab language with
the exception of 3D image generation realized by means of hardware supported
OpenGL. In spite of using fast matrix calculation and JIT (just-in-time) optimization in the latest version of Matlab, its real-time operation is not possible
on a high-end x86 class computer.
Since the video frame rate from bronchoscope is 25 frames per second, we have
only 40ms for accomplish one cycle of the proposed navigation algorithm. Execution time of the most important navigation system procedures programmed
both in Matlab and C/C++ language is shown in Table 1.
For precise bronchoscope motion estimation it is necessary to perform: one
camera correction, one coarse brochoscope motion estimation and on average 25
virtual image generations and mutual information calculations. For that reason
one cycle of complete motion estimation needs approximately 5600 ms in Matlab
and 620 ms in C/C++. One can see that even for optimized C/C++ version it
is not possible to perform the algorithm in real-time.
Table 1. Estimated execution time of the most important navigation system procedures for Pentium 4 3.2 GHz processor (single thread)
Procedure

Matlab
C/C++
time [ms] time [ms]

Camera correction
Coarse motion estimation - egomotion
3D image generation (one image)
Mutual information (one image)

13
4600
–
46

1.4
460
1.4
4.9

186

J. Bulat et al.

There are, however, many possibilities for further execution time optimization. First of all, we can use SSE (Streaming SIMD Extensions) instructions of
x86 CPUs instead of plain C/C++. BLAS (Basic Linear Algebra Subprograms)
[22] seams to be the most eﬃcient way of using SSE extension. Next, we can
take advantage of parallel nature of the presented above navigation algorithm
using relatively cheap multicore and multiprocessor systems. Both most demanding procedures (egomotion estimation and mutual information calculation) are
highly independent within one cycle of motion estimation. What is more, BLAS
library has been recently ported to GPU environment and could take advantage
of up to 128 independent processors cores that was introduced in the G80+
generation of the NVIDIA GPUs family with CUDA architecture.
In order to take advantage of massive parallel computation we have chosen
MPI (Message Passing Interface) as a inter-process communication framework.
MPICH2 (implementation of MPI v2 protocol) provide us a great performance
and excellent ﬂexibility. It is available on many hardware and software platforms
including Linux and Windows as well as provide network transparency. Using
this open source library we are able to split visualization process and computation engine to diﬀerent computer connected by TCP/IP network. During testing
procedure of data (image) and control commands transmitting over MPI we have
achieved the following results: up to 1GB/s of messages with data frame between
two processes on one computer (four core Xeon), up to 500000 short (128 bytes)
control messages per second in the similar setup and up to 95Mbps between two
processes on two diﬀerent computer over 100Mbps Ethernet.
Obtained results have convinced us that it is possible to build described above
system working in real-time on the basis of standard PC architecture.

8

Conclusions

In the paper some computational and implementation issues and new solutions
for bronchoscope navigation during computer-assisted transbronchial biopsy
were presented. In authors opinion the proposed, new, very simple and fast algorithm for real-time estimation of endoscope forward and backward ego-motion
is the most crucial in its precise positioning using virtual bronchoscopy CTbased approach. After successful simulation tests real-time implementation of
the described navigation system is under development at present. We have already estimated partial algorithms’ complexity of this modules and tested some
particular hardware solutions: multiprocessor NVIDIA CUDA architecture and
MPI-based communication framework which provide high performance parallel
environment with minimum development eﬀort.

References
1. Bartz, D.: Virtual Endoscopy in Research and Clinical Practise. Eurographics Computer Graphics Forum 24(1) (2005)
2. Mori, K., Deguchi, D., Sugiyama, J., et al.: Tracking of a Bronchoscope Using
Epipolar Geometry Analysis and Intensity-Based Image Registration of Real and
Virtual Endoscopic Images. Medical Image Analysis 6(3) (2002)

Computational Tasks in Bronchoscope Navigation

187

3. Sherbondy, A.J., Kiraly, A.P., et al.: Virtual Bronchoscopic Approach for Combining 3D CT and Endoscopic Video. In: Medical Imaging 2000, Proc. SPIE (2000)
4. Helferty, J.P., Higgins, W.E.: Combined Endoscopic Video Tracking and Virtual
3D CT Registration for Surgical Guidance. In: Proc. IEEE ICIP, pp. II-961–964
(2002)
5. Nagao, J., Mori, K., et al.: Fast and Accurate Bronchoscope Tracking Using Image
Registration and Motion Prediction. In: Barillot, C., Haynor, D.R., Hellier, P. (eds.)
MICCAI 2004. LNCS, vol. 3217, pp. 551–558. Springer, Heidelberg (2004)
6. Deligianni, F., Chung, A., Yang, G.-Z.: Predictive Camera Tracking for Bronchoscope Simulation with CONDensation. In: Duncan, J.S., Gerig, G. (eds.) MICCAI
2005. LNCS, vol. 3749, pp. 910–916. Springer, Heidelberg (2005)
7. Bricault, I., Ferretti, G., Cinquin, P.: Registration of Real and CT-Derived Virtual
Bronchoscopic Images to Assist Transbronchial Biopsy. IEEE Trans. on Medical
Imaging 17(5), 703–714 (1998)
8. Deligianni, F., Chung, A., Yang, G.-Z.: pq-Space Based 2d/3D Registration for
Endoscope Tracking. In: MICCAI 2003. LNCS, vol. 2878, pp. 311–318. Springer,
Heidelberg (2003)
9. Twardowski, T., Zieli˜
nski, T., Duda, K., Socha, M., Duplaga, M.: Fast estimation
of broncho-ﬁberoscope egomotion for CT-guided transbronchial biopsy. In: IEEE
Int. Conference on Image Processing ICIP-2006, Atlanta (2006)
10. Duda, K., Duplaga, M.: Automatic generation of a navigation path for virtual
bronchoscopy. In: PAK, vol. 5bis, pp. 115–118 (2006) (in polish)
11. Duda, K., Zieliski, T., Socha, M., et al.: Navigation in bronchial tree based on
motion estimation and mutual information. In: ICSES, Poland (2006)
12. Vijayan Asari, K., Kumar, S., Radhakrishnan, D.: A New Approach for Nonlinear
Distortion Correction in Endoscopic Images Based on Least Squares Estimation.
IEEE Trans. on Medical Imaging 18(4), 345–354 (1999)
13. Helferty, J.P., Zhang, C., McLennan, G., Higgins, W.E.: Videoendoscopic Distortion Correction and Its Application to Virtual Guidance of Endoscopy. IEEE Trans.
on Medical Imaging 20(7), 605–617 (2001)
14. Kiraly, A.P., Helferty, et al.: Three-Dimensional Path Planning for Virtual Bronchoscopy. IEEE Trans. on Medical Imaging 23(9), 1365–1379 (2004)
15. Bartz, D., Mayer, D., et al.: Hybrid segmentation and exploration of the human
lungs. In: IEEE-Visualization-2003 (No. 03CH37496), pp. 177–184 (2003)
16. VTK – The Visualizarion ToolKit, http://www.vtk.org/
17. Lorensen, W.E., Cline, H.E.: Marching cubes: a high resolution 3D surface construction algorithm. Comput. Graph. 21, 163–169 (1987)
18. Tian, T.Y., Tomasi, C., Heeger, D.J.: Comparison of Approaches to Egomotion
Computation. In: IEEE Conf. CVPR, pp. 315–320 (1996)
19. Daniilidis, K.: Fixation simpliﬁes 3D Motion Estimation. Computer Vision and
Image Understanding 68(2), 158–169 (1997)
20. Zitova, B., Flusser, J.: Image registration methods: a survey. Image and Vision
Computing 21, 977–1000 (2003)
21. Pluim, J.P.W., Maintz, J.B.A., Viergever, M.A.: Mutual information based registration of medical images: a survey. IEEE Trans. on Medical Imaging 22, 986–1004
(2003)
22. BLAS (Basic Linear Algebra Subprograms), software library,
http://www.netlib.org/blas/

