Intrinsic Evolution of Analog Circuits on a
Programmable Analog Multiplexer Array
1

1

José Franco M. Amaral , Jorge Luís M. Amaral , Cristina C. Santini2,
2
2
Marco A.C. Pacheco , Ricardo Tanscheit , and Moisés H. Szwarcman2
1 UERJ - Rio de Janeiro State University
Rua São Francisco Xavier, 524, Maracanã, Rio de Janeiro, 20550-013, RJ, Brazil
{franco,jamaral}@uerj.br
2 ICA: Applied Computational Intelligence Laboratory,
Department of Electrical Engineering, PUC-Rio
R. Marquês de S. Vicente 225, Gávea, Rio de Janeiro, CEP 22453-900, RJ, Brazil
{santini,marco,ricardo,moises}@ele.puc-rio.br

Abstract. This work discusses an Evolvable Hardware (EHW) platform for the
intrinsic evolution of analog electronic circuits. The EHW analog platform,
named PAMA-NG (Programmable Analog Multiplexer Array-Next
Generation), is a reconfigurable platform that consists of integrated circuits
whose internal connections can be programmed by Evolutionary Computation
techniques, such as Genetic Algorithms (GAs), to synthesize circuits. The
PAMA-NG is classified as Field Programmable Analog Array (FPAA). FPAAs
are reconfigurable devices that will become the building blocks of a
forthcoming class of hardware, with the important features of self-adaptation
and self-repairing, through automatic reconfiguration. The PAMA-NG platform
architectural details, concepts and characteristics are discussed. Two case
studies, with promising results, are described: a logarithmic amplifier and an S
membership function circuit of a fuzzy logic controller.

1 Introduction
This work focuses on evolutionary design of analog circuits on a platform named
PAMA-NG (Programmable Analog Multiplexer Array – Next Generation).
Evolutionary Computation is applied to carry out the process of automatic circuit
synthesis through a set of search algorithms, called Evolutionary Algorithms (EAs),
which borrow from biological evolution their main principles. This particular area of
research, where Evolutionary Algorithms are applied to electronic circuit synthesis,
receives the name of Evolvable Hardware (EHW)[1].
The PAMA-NG platform is based on PAMA (Programmable Analog Multiplexer
Array)[2]. PAMA-NG is classified as an FPAA [2][3][4] and supplies an environment
to evolve generic analog circuits based on discrete components, without the need of
simulators, i.e. intrinsic evolution. PAMA is a flexible platform with respect to
granularity: its building blocks can be chosen by the designer, from transistors to high
level analog components, such as operational amplifiers. PAMA-NG introduces new
important features, such as protection against configurations that may damage
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3038, pp. 1273–1280, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

1274

J.F.M. Amaral et al.

electronic components and the possibility of analyzing circuits that have been
evolved, since it provides access to individual circuit elements.
A traditional Genetic Algorithm (GA) [5] drives PAMA’s intrinsic evolution. In
the evolutionary process, a population of chromosomes is randomly generated to
represent a pool of circuit architectures. The chromosomes (control bit strings) are
uploaded to the reconfigurable hardware. Circuit responses are compared to
specifications of a target response and individuals are ranked in accordance with how
close they satisfy the specifications. A new iteration loop involves generation of a
new population from the pool of the individuals in the previous generation. Some
individuals are taken as they are and some are modified by genetic operators, such as
crossover and mutation. The process is repeated for a number of generations, resulting
in increasingly better individuals. This process ends after a given number of
generations or when the obtained result is close enough to the target response. In
practice, one or several solutions may be found among the individuals of the last
generation.
This paper is divided into three additional sections. Section 2 describes how
PAMA-NG: internal interfaces and data flow are shown and the Reconfigurable
Circuit implementation and purpose are described. Section 3 presents two case studies
and section 4 concludes the paper.

2 PAMA-NG
The PAMA-NG evolutionary platform is an analog platform based on analog
multiplexers, which are responsible for the interconnections of the different discrete
components that can be plugged into the board. Figure 1 depicts PAMA-NG block
diagram.
The platform performs intrinsic evolution of analog electronic circuits through a
traditional GA. The chromosome configures the connection of the discrete
components and each gene drives the select input signals of a particular analog
multiplexer. As shown in Figure 1, a multifunction I/O board connected to the PC bus
is responsible for A/D conversion and for chromosome upload. An eight-channel D/A
converter allows for the application of different input values to the circuits being
evolved, in order to perform the input/output mapping for fitness evaluation.
2.1 Reconfigurable Circuit
The Analog Reconfigurable Circuit (ARC) is divided into three layers: discrete
components, analog multiplexers and analog bus (Figure 1). The designer chooses
the components, from low-level discrete ones such as transistors, resistors and
capacitors, to higher level circuits, such as operational amplifiers and comparators, or
even more complex building blocks, such as multipliers and root mean-square
circuits.

Intrinsic Evolution of Analog Circuits on a Programmable Analog Multiplexer Array

1275

G e n e tic A lg o r ith m
I/O b o a rd – P C I b u s
D ig ita l o u tp u t
C h rom os o m e

A /D

B it S trin g

D /A

C irc u it S ig n a ls

A n a lo g R e c o n fig u ra b le C irc u it
D is c r e t e
C o m p o n en ts

A n a lo g B u s ( N )

A n a lo g
M u lt ip le x e r s
MUX
1
N x1

...

s e l b its

NPN
MUX
T
N x1

...

s e l b its

Fig. 1. The PAMA-NG platform block diagram

Each component terminal is connected to a specific line of an analog bus through
an analog multiplexer. The chromosome bits, which are set by the GA running on the
PC, select for each analog multiplexer a line of the analog bus to be connected to the
component's terminal. Each line of the analog bus corresponds to one interconnection
point of the circuit (node); some of them can be associated with external points, such
as an input signal, power supply, ground and circuit output, while others can
correspond to with internal points of interconnection.
The purpose of the ARC is to be generic, flexible and scalable. Discrete
components can be of any type and in any number to fulfill application requirements.
These components may be on sockets or on protoboard, making it easy to change
them.
One ARC circuit module implements a 32 16-to-1 analog multiplexer. The low onresistance (Ron) of 100 ohms of the analog multiplexers prevents the ARC from
damage caused by potentially hazardous configurations during evolution. The search
32
38
space associated to the platform is 16 ~ 10 (number of different possible solutions).
2.2 Important Issues
There are some important issues to discuss when analyzing an evolutionary platform,
such as the circuit evaluation time, the platform's granularity and architecture and its
protection against damaging configurations.

1276

J.F.M. Amaral et al.

PAMA-NG presents a fast circuit evaluation time. Its multifunction I/O board
starts the A/D conversion of the circuit's input and output signals immediately after
the circuit's download to the platform. In tests, the period between two digital samples
has been measured as 0.08ms.
The flexibility is another important feature. The optimal choice of the elementary
block type and granularity is task dependent. PAMA-NG allows all discrete
components to be selected by the designer, according to the application.
There are some other important characteristics that directly affect the evolution,
such as the platform's protection against damaging configurations. In PAMA-NG, the
parasitic resistances of the switches (Ron) provide this protection. Another desirable
characteristic is that there are no architecture constraints, so that the evolution is
allowed to exploit any interconnection pattern.
In view of the above, PAMA presents desirable characteristics when compared to
other reconfigurable platforms designed to intrinsically evolve analog circuits [3][4].
Those characteristics have been contrasted in a previous work [6].

3 Case Studies
In the case studies, PAMA-NG is used to perform intrinsic evolution of analog
circuits through a traditional GA with a chromosome length of 128 bits (32 mux times
4 select-inputs). In order to evolve the circuits, some steps have to be taken.
First, the discrete components have to be chosen. The platform has to be provided
with a sufficient number of discrete components to be capable of achieving the
desired circuit. The type of these components must be adequate. Since PAMA has
originally a limited number of component terminals (32), its flexibility can be
exploited to obtain higher level circuits, by using higher level building blocks as
discrete components.
Next, the number of input and output signals must be assigned. The inputs and
outputs of the circuit have to be connected to the multifunction I/O board.
Finally, a fitness measure has to be created. A precise function translates the output
of the desired circuit. Experience has shown that the choice of an adequate fitness
function plays a significant role in the evolution of an analog circuit.
The Genetic Algorithm used in the experiments has the following characteristics:
Binary Representation: 128 bits
Population Initialization: Random
Reproduction Technique: Steady State
Operators: One-point Crossover an Mutation
Fitness Technique: Exponential Normalization
In the fitness technique used – exponential normalization – probabilities of the
ranked individuals are exponentially weighted [6] and are given by Equation (1).

pi =

c − 1 n −i
c
cn −1

The closer c is to 1, the lower is the "exponentiality" of the selection method.

(1)

Intrinsic Evolution of Analog Circuits on a Programmable Analog Multiplexer Array

1277

3.1 Logarithmic Amplifier

In a logarithmic amplifier the output is proportional to the logarithm of the input
signal. In [7] the intrinsic evolution of a logarithmic amplifier with no gain has been
reported. In that experiment the objective was to demonstrate the platform's flexibility
with respect to granularity; coarse-grained components, such as operational
amplifiers, were used. The discrete components were then chosen based on
conventional configurations for logarithmic amplifiers and some connections were
fixed.
Here a logarithmic amplifier with an amplification of two is presented. This
evolution has no restrictions concerning the discrete components connections.
The following GA parameters are used:
Generations: 300
Population: 400
Crossover: 0.7
Mutation: 0.15
Steady State: 10
Exponential Normalization c parameter: 0.9
Evolution Time: 46 minutes
The discrete components are:
2 amplifiers from IC TL075 (supply voltages: +5V and -5V)
matched transistors from IC3086
1 PNP transistor
1 diode
1 zener 3.3V
resistors (1K, 22K, 47K, 3K3, 2K2, 330K, 100K)
Six of the 16 analog channels are fixed as external:
2 power supplies (+5V)
2 ground reference (0V)
input
output.
The other 10 channels (circuit nodes) are left as internal interconnection points of
the circuit.
The input signal is a saw-tooth waveform of 100Hz with an amplitude range of
150mV to 500mV.
The fitness function used for evaluation of the configured circuits is:
desired output = -2 * ln (Vin).
Fitness = ( |desired output – actual output| )

(2)
5

(3)

Figure 2 shows the schematic diagram of the best circuit evolved. About 200
discrete measurements were made to evaluate each circuit configured in PAMA-NG.
Figure 3 presents the input samples and the actual and desired outputs for the best
circuit. This result shows that the evolved circuit performs well within expectations
since only a small mapping error takes place.

1278

J.F.M. Amaral et al.

Fig. 2. Schematic of the best circuit evolved (without multiplexer's Ron)

Fig. 3. Response of the best circuit evolved: a Logarithmic Amplifier with gain of two

3.2 S Membership Function Circuit

This experiment focuses on the development of a type S function – frequently used as
a membership function in fuzzy inference systems – with amplitude of 3 volts and
break points at 1 and 2 volts. The GA parameters are:
Generations: 100
Population: 400
Crossover: 0.7
Mutation: 0.1
Steady State: 50
Exponential Normalization c parameter : 0.9
The fitness function corresponds to the Mean Square Error of the difference
between the desired output (S membership function) and the actual output. The
transfer function and the schematic of the evolved circuit are illustrated in Figure 4
and Figure 5, respectively. Figure 4 shows the performance of the evolved circuit; it

Intrinsic Evolution of Analog Circuits on a Programmable Analog Multiplexer Array

1279

Fig. 4. Transfer function of type S membership function

Fig. 5. Schematic of the evolved S membership function circuit

can be observed that only a small mapping error takes place at the break point of 1
volt. Figure 5 shows an unusual transistor configuration (Q4). This occurs quite often
with EHW tools and demonstrates their ability to search for different circuit
topologies

4 Conclusions
This work presented the PAMA-NG (Programmable Platform Multiplexer Array –
Next Generation), a FPAA class platform that makes use of analog multiplexers, and
some recent electronic designs carried out on it.
The PAMA-NG platform itself is being constantly updated. The latest version
presents some advantages concerning the previous prototype platform which was first
used to intrinsically evolve circuits [2]. The new ARC (Analog Reconfigurable
Circuit) allows more component terminals (32 instead of 9), allowing the evolution of

1280

J.F.M. Amaral et al.

a great number of circuits. In the new platform, the chromosome (configuration bits)
is downloaded in parallel, in contrast with the serial interface used in previous
versions. In PAMA-NG the converters were updated and the A/D conversion is
performed by a multifunction I/O board connected to the PC bus. The circuit
evaluation speed has increased considerably. The most recent enhancement is a D/A
converter.
Further experiments shall consider the use of multi-objective criteria in circuit
synthesis. The main difficulty to overcome is the access to different measures such as
power dissipation and frequency responses. The synthesis of higher level circuits is
also planned, particularly those related to analog fuzzy logic controllers [8]. The
flexible PAMA-NG platform shall then be used to intrinsically evolve circuits based
on coarse-grained building blocks. PAMA may also be used as a basic cell in a
scalable and parallel system.

References
1.
2.
3.

4.

5.
6.
7.
8.

Zebulum, R.S., Pacheco, M.A., Vellasco, M.M.: Evolutionary Electronics: Automatic
Design of Electronic Circuits and Systems by Genetic Algorithms. CRC Press, Boca
Raton, Florida (2001)
Santini, C., Zebulum, R.S., Pacheco, M.A., Vellasco, M.M., Szwarcman, M.: PAMA rd
Programmable Analog Multiplexer Array. Proc. 3 NASA DoD Workshop on Evolvable
Hardware. IEEE Computer Press (2001) 36-43
Hamilton, A., Papathanasiou, K., Tamplin, M.R., Brandtner, T.: PALMO: Field
Programmable Analog and Mixed-Signal VLSI for Evolvable Hardware. In: Sipper, M.,
nd
Mange, D., Perez-Uribe, A. (eds.): Proc. 2 International Conference on Evolvable
Systems. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 1478. Springer-Verlag (1998) 335-344
Stoica, A., Keymeulen, D., Zebulum, R.S., Thakoor, A., Daud, T., Klimeck, G., Jin, Y.,
Tawel, R., Duong, V.: Evolution of Analog Circuits on Field Programmable Transistor
nd
Arrays. Proc. 2 NASA DoD Workshop on Evolvable Hardware. IEEE Computer Press
(2000) 99-108
Goldberg, D.: Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization and Machine Learning.
Addison-Wesley Publishing Compan, Reading, Massachusetts (1989)
Zebulum, R.S., Santini, C., Sinohara, H., Pacheco, M.A., Vellasco, M.M., Szwarcman, M.:
nd
A Reconfigurable Plataform for the Automatic Synthesis of Analog Circuits. Proc. 2
NASA/DoD Workshop on Evolvable Hardware. IEEE Computer Press (2000) 91-98
Santini, C., Amaral, J.F.M., Pacheco, M.A., Vellasco, M.M., Szwarcman, M.:
Evolutionary Analog Circuit Design on a Programmable Analog Multiplexer Array. Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. on Field Programmable Technology, Hong Kong (2002) 189-196
Amaral, J. F. M., Amaral, J. L. M., Santini, C., Tanscheit, R., Vellasco, M.M., Pacheco,
M.A.: Towards Evolvable Analog Fuzzy Logic Controllers. Proc. 2002 NASA/DoD
Conference on Evolvable Hardware. IEEE Computer Press (2002) 123-128

