Data Assimilation in Multiscale Chemical Transport
Models
Lin Zhang and Adrian Sandu
Department of Computer Science, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University,
Blacksburg, VA 24061, US
{lin83, asandu}@vt.edu

Abstract. In this paper we discuss variational data assimilation using the STEM
atmospheric Chemical Transport Model. STEM is a multiscale model and can
perform air quality simulations and predictions over spatial and temporal scales
of different orders of magnitude. To improve the accuracy of model predictions
we construct a dynamic data driven application system (DDDAS) by integrating
data assimilation techniques with STEM. We illustrate the improvements in
STEM field predictions before and after data assimilation. We also compare
three popular optimization methods for data assimilation and conclude that LBFGS method is the best for our model because it requires fewer model runs to
recover optimal initial conditions.
Keywords: STEM, Chemical Transport Model, Data Assimilation.

1 Introduction
The development of modern industry has brought about much pollutant to the world,
which has deep influence to people’s life. To analyze and control the air quality, large
comprehensive models are indispensable. STEM(Sulfur Transport Eulerian Model)
[1] is a chemical transport model used to simulate the air quality evolutions and make
predictions. A large variety of species in the air are changing at different time and
space magnitude, which requires STEM to be a multiscale system to fully simulate
these changes in the atmosphere.
The dynamic incorporation of additional data into an executing application is an
essential DDDAS concept with wide applicability (http://www.cise.nsf.gov/dddas). In
this paper we focus on data assimilation, the process in which measurements are used to
constrain model predictions; the information from measurements can be used to obtain
better initial conditions, better boundary conditions, enhanced emission estimates, etc.
Data assimilation is essential in weather/climate analysis and forecast activities and is
employed here in the context of atmospheric chemistry and transport models.
Kalman filter technique [2] gives a stochastic approach to the data assimilation
problem, while variational methods (3D-Var, 4D-Var) provide an optimal control
approach. Early applications of the four-dimensional variational (4D-Var) data
assimilation were presented by Fisher and Lary [3] for a stratospheric photochemical
box model with trajectories. Khattatov et al. [4] implemented both the 4D-Var and a
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part I, LNCS 4487, pp. 1026–1033, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Data Assimilation in Multiscale Chemical Transport Models

1027

Kalman filter method using a similar model. In the past few years variational
methods have been successfully used in data assimilation for comprehensive threedimensional atmospheric chemistry models (Elbern and Schmidt [5], Errera and
Fonteyn [6]). Wang et al. [7] provide a review work of data assimilation applications
to atmospheric chemistry. As our STEM model is time dependent in 3D space, 4DVar is the appropriate approach to data assimilation.
The paper is organized as follows. Second section introduces the STEM Chemical
Transport Model. Theory and importance of 4D-Var data assimilation are presented in
the third section, followed by some results of data assimilation using the STEM in the
forth section. In section five, we briefly describe L-BFGS(Limited-memory Broyden
Fletcher Goldfarb Shanno method), Nonlinear Conjugate Gradients and Hessian Free
Newton methods and assess their performances in the STEM model. Summary and
conclusions are given in section six.

2 The STEM Chemical Transport Model
The STEM is a regional atmospheric Chemical Transport Model(CTM). Taking
emissions, meteorology(wind, temperature, humidity, precipitation etc.) and a set of
chemical initial and boundary conditions as input, it simulates the pollutants behavior
in the selected domain. In the following we give the mathematical description of the
Chemical Transport Model [8].
2.1 Chemical Transport Model in STEM
We denote u the wind filed vector, K the turbulent diffusivity tensor, ρ the air
density in molecues/ cm3 . Let V i dep be the deposition velocity of species i , Qi the rate of
surface emissions, and Ei the rate of elevated emissions for this species. The rate of
chemical transformations f i depends on absolute concentration values; the rate at
which mole-fraction concentrations change is then f i ( ρc) / ρ .
Consider a domain Ω which covers a region of the atmosphere with the
boundary ∂Ω . At each time moment the boundary of the domain is partitioned into
∂Ω = Γ IN ∪ Γ OUT ∪ Γ GR , where Γ GR is the ground level portion of the boundary; Γ IN is
the inflow part of lateral or top boundary and ΓOUT the outflow part.
The evolution of concentrations in time is described by the material balance
equations
∂ci
1
1
= −u ⋅ ∇ci + ∇ ⋅ ( ρK∇ci ) + f i ( ρc) + Ei ,
∂t
ρ
ρ

ci (t 0 , x) = ci0 ( x),
ci (t , x) = ciIN (t , x)
K

∂ci
=0
∂n

for

for

t0 ≤ t ≤ T

(1)
(2)

x ∈ Γ IN ,

x ∈ Γ OUT ,

(3)
(4)

1028

L. Zhang and A. Sandu

K

∂ci
= Vi depci − Qi
∂n

x ∈ ΓGR ,

for

for

1 ≤ i ≤ s.

all

(5)

The system (1)-(5) builds up the forward (direct) model. To simplify the
presentation, in this paper we consider the initial state c0 as parameters of the model.
It is known that this does not restrict the generality of the formulation.
An infinitesimal perturbation δc 0 in the parameters will result in perturbations
δci (t ) of the concentration fields. These perturbations are solutions of the tangent
linear model. In the direct sensitivity analysis approach we can solve the model (1)(5) together with the tangent linear model forward in time.
2.2 Continuous Adjoint Model in STEM
Consider a scalar response functional defined in terms of the model solution c(t )
T

J (c 0 ) = ∫ 0 ∫ g (c(t , x )) dxdt
t

(6)

Ω

The response depends implicitly on the parameters c 0 via the dependence of c(t )
on c 0 . The continuous adjoint model is defined as the adjoint of the tangent linear
model. By imposing the Lagrange identity and after a careful integration by parts one
arrives at the following equations that govern the evolution of the adjoint variables:
λ
∂λi
= −∇ ⋅ (uλi ) − ∇ ⋅ ( ρK∇ i ) − ( F T ( ρc )λ )i − φi
∂t
ρ

T ≥ t ≥ t0

λi (T , x) = λiF ( x)
λi (t , x ) = 0
λi u + ρK
ρK

(8)

x ∈ Γ IN

(9)

for x ∈ ΓOUT

(10)

for

∂ (λi / ρ )
∂n

(7)

∂ (λi / ρ )
GR
= Vi dep λi for x ∈ Γ , for all 1 ≤ i ≤ s
∂n

(11)

Where
φi (t , x) =

∂g (c1 ,…, cn )
(t , x),
∂ci

λiF ( x ) = 0 ,

(12)

and λi (t , x) are the adjoint variables associated with the concentrations ci (t , x) ,
1 ≤ i ≤ s . In the above F = ∂f / ∂c is the Jacobian of the chemical rate function f . To
obtain the ground boundary condition we use the fact that u ⋅ n = 0 at ground level.
We refer to (7)-(11) as the (continuous) adjoint system of the tangent linear model. In
the context of optimal control where the minimization of the functional (6) is
required, the adjoint variables can be interpreted as Lagrange multipliers.
The adjoint system (7)-(11) depends on the states of the forward model (i.e. on the
concentration fields through the nonlinear chemical term F ( ρc) and possibly through
the forcing term φ for nonlinear functionals. Note that the adjoint initial condition is

Data Assimilation in Multiscale Chemical Transport Models

1029

posed at the final time T such that the forward model must be first solved forward in
time, the state c(t , x) saved for all t, then the adjoint model could be integrated
backwards in time from T down to t 0 .
2.3 Properties of STEM

The model uses the SAPRC-99(Statewide Air Pollution Research Center's chemical
mechanism) [9] and KPP(the Kinetic PreProcessor) [10], to determine chemical
reactions. KPP implements integration of chemical mechanism using implicit
Rosenbrock and Runga-Kutta method in both forward and adjoint model.
The STEM model runs multiscale simulations in both time and space. From the
time aspect of view, it ranges from 10-6 seconds for fast chemical reactions to days’
simulation measured in hours. Fast chemical reactions are referred to atomic level
reactions, such as O, OH radical activities, while long term simulation usually
accounts for atmospheric species transportation in large range. When it comes to
spatial scales, STEM is able to simulate in range measured in meters, such as
emissions of pollutants like NO, NO2, CO2, Volatile Organic Compounds (VOC) and
particles from vehicles. Besides, continental scales as large as thousands of kilometers
are usually used in STEM for air quality simulation. So far STEM has been employed
for simulations over U.S., Asia and Europe.
For this paper, we use STEM to run on a horizontal resolution of 60Km by 60Km,
with 21 vertical levels defined in the Regional Atmospheric Modeling System’s
sigma-z coordinate system. The domain covers northeast of U.S, ranging from 68°W
to 85°W and from 36°N to 48°N. The simulations are carried out from 8am EDT to
8pm EDT on July 20, 2004, and dynamical time step is 15 minutes.

3 4D-Var Data Assimilation in STEM
Data assimilation is the process by which measurements are used to constrain the model
predictions; the information from measurements can be used to obtain better initial
conditions, better boundary conditions, enhanced emission estimates, etc. Data
assimilation combines information from three different sources: the physical and chemical
laws of evolution (encapsulated in the model), the reality (as captured by the
observations), and the current best estimate of the distribution of tracers in the atmosphere.
In this paper we focus on obtaining optimized initial conditions which are essential
in forward model integration. 4D-Var data assimilation can be used to STEM and is
expected to improve air quality forecasting. In practice, directly measuring the
parameters of the atmospheric conditions in large range is difficult because of
sampling, technical and resource requirements. And due to the complexity of the
chemical transport model, the number of possible state variables is extremely large.
However, data acquisition for field and parameter estimates via data assimilation is
feasible, even though enough observations are still need to fulfill data assimilation.
Figure 1 shows the employment of data assimilation in multiscale systems. The
atmospheric chemical and transport processes take place in a variable range of time
and space. The observations for data assimilation can come from local stations,
planes, and satellites, measured from second to weeks in time and from nm to km in
space. Data assimilation helps models to improve environmental policy decisions.

1030

L. Zhang and A. Sandu

Fig. 1. Atmospheric Chemical and Transport Processes take place at multiple temporal and
spatial scales

We applied 4D-Var data assimilation to obtain the optimal initial conditions using
STEM by minimizing a cost function that measures the misfit between model
predictions and observations, as well as the deviation of the solution from the
background state. The cost function is formulated as

( ) (c

min J c 0 =

1
2

0

− cB

)

T

(

) ∑ (H

B −1 c 0 − c B +

N

1
2

k =0

k

k
c k − c obs

)

T

(

k
Rk−1 H k c k − c obs

)

(13)

and our goal is to minimize the cost function J . In the above formula, c B represents
the 'a priori' estimate (background) of the initial values and B is associated covariance
k
matrix of the estimated background error. H K is an observation operator and cobs
is
the real observations depending on time k . The covariance matrix Rk−1 accounts for
observations and representativeness errors.
The 4D-Var data assimilation is implemented by an iterative optimization
procedure: each iteration requires STEM to run a forward integration to obtain the
value of the cost function and an adjoint model to evaluate the gradient. Since model
states are as high as 106 in our air quality simulation problem, it is prohibitive to
evaluate Hessian of the cost function. Therefore, we choose three optimization
methods that only require the values and the gradients of the cost function.

4 Results for Data Assimilation
We performed data assimilation to optimize initial conditions. The simulation interval
is from 8am EDT to 8pm EDT on July 20, 2004. Figure 2 shows the simulation
domain and three selected AIRNOW stations. AIRNOW stations provide hourly
observations of ground level ozone throughout the entire month of July 2004. To
show the change of ozone in this time interval at one location, we choose three out of
all AirNow stations. The ozone time series at these three stations are illustrated in
Figure 3. From the figure, we can find that the assimilated lines are closer to
observations than non-assimilated lines, which indicates the improvement in model
predictions after data assimilation. This is also confirmed by the scatter and

Data Assimilation in Multiscale Chemical Transport Models

1031

quantile-quantile plots of Figure 4, which indicate that the correlation coefficient
between model predictions and observations increases considerably from R2 = 0.15
for the original model to R2 = 0.68 after assimilation.

Fig. 2. Three selected stations where O3 time series are considered

(a) station A

(b) station B

(c) station C
Fig. 3. Time series of ozone concentrations

(a) Original (R2=0.15)

(b) Assimilated (R2=0.68)

Fig. 4. Scatter plot and quantile-quantile plot of model-observations agreement

1032

L. Zhang and A. Sandu

5 Assessment of Three Optimization Methods
We applied three optimization methods: L-BFGS, Nonlinear Conjugate Gradient and
Hessian Free Newton for data assimilation in STEM and assess the performances of
them. The principle of L-BFGS [11] is to approximate Hessian matrix G by a
symmetric positive definite matrix H, and update H at each step using the information
from the m most recent iterations. Nonlinear Conjugate Gradient method is an
iterative method and generates a set of search directions { p0 , p1 ,…, p m } conjugating
with each other for i ≠ j . The Fletcher-Reeves Conjugate Gradient method is used in
this paper. Hessian Free Newton is an inexact Newton method in which the Hessian
matrix is not available, and we use automatic differentiation or finite differences to
approximate the products of the Hessian times a vector [12].

Fig. 5. Decrease of the cost function vs. the number of model runs for three methods

These methods are tested respectively to optimize initial concentrations. All the
optimizations start at the same cost function of around 54800 and converge at about
16000 within 15 iterations, which proves that they are all able to solve data
assimilation in STEM model. The difference lies in the number of model runs when
they converge. For every model run, the STEM calls forward model and adjoint
model to evaluate value and gradient of the cost function for optimization subroutine,
so the more model runs, the more time needed in optimization. Figure 5 shows
performances of these methods in terms of model runs they required. It is obvious that
L-BFGS converges the fastest. We can conclude that of the three optimization
methods L-BFGS is the best for data assimilation in STEM.

6 Conclusions
STEM is a multiscale atmospheric chemical transport model and has been used for air
quality simulation regionally. Model Predictions can be improved by the technique of
data assimilation. Data assimilation allows combining the information from both
observations and STEM forward and adjoint models to obtain best estimates of the
three-dimensional distribution of tracers. Reanalyzed fields can be used to initialize
air quality forecast runs and have the potential to improve air quality predictions of
the STEM model. Therefore, STEM is closely correlated to data assimilation. In this

Data Assimilation in Multiscale Chemical Transport Models

1033

paper, we perform 4D-Var data assimilation over northeast of U.S. using the STEM
model to optimize initial conditions. Both data and figures show the great
improvement for simulation of STEM after data assimilation. Besides, we assess
performance of three optimization methods that implement data assimilation in the
STEM model. The results imply that L-BFGS best fits the STEM model of the three
methods. Future work will focus on implementing second order adjoint model in
STEM to provide Hessian of the cost function. In this way we can utilize some more
accurate optimization methods for data assimilation.
Acknowledgemets. This work was supported by the Houston Advanced Research
Center (HARC) through the award H59/2005 managed by Dr. Jay Olaguer and by the
National Science Foundation through the award NSF ITR AP&IM 0205198 managed
by Dr. Frederica Darema.

References
1. Carmichael, G.R., Peters, L.K., Saylor R.D.: The STEM-II regional scale acid deposition
and photochemical oxidant model - I. An overview of model development and
applications. Atmospheric Environment 25A: 2077-2090, 1990.
2. Kalman, R.E.: A new approach to linear filtering and prediction problems. Trans. ASME,
Ser. D: J. Basic Eng., 83:95-108, 1960.
3. Fisher, M. and Lary, D.J.: Lagrangian four-dimensional variational data assimilation of
chemical species. Q.J.R. Meteorology, 121:1681-1704, 1995.
4. Khattatov, B.V., Gille, J. C., Lyjak, L.V., Brasseur, G. P., Dvortsov, V. L., Roche, A. E.,
and Walters, J.: Assimilation of photochemically active species and a case analysis of
UARS data. Journal of Geophysical Research, 104:18715-18737, 1999.
5. Elbern, H. and Schmidt, H.: A 4D-Var chemistry data assimilation scheme for Eulerian
chemistry transport modeling. Journal of Geophysical Research, 104(5):18583-18589,
1999.
6. Errera, Q. and Fonteyn, D.: Four-dimensional variational chemical assimilation of
CRISTA stratospheric measurements. Journal of Geophysical Research, 106(D11):1225312265, 2001.
7. Wang, K.Y., Lary, D.J., Shallcross, D.E., Hall, S.M., and Pyle, J.A.: A review on the use
of the adjoint method in four-dimensional atmospheric-chemistry data assimilation. Q.J.R.
Meteorol. Soc., 127(576(Part B)):2181-2204, 2001.
8. Sandu, A., Daescu, D.N., Carmichael, G.R. and Chai, T.: Adjoint Sensitivity Analysis of
Regional Air Quality Models. Journal of Computational Physics, Vol. 204: 222-252, 2005.
9. Carter, W.P.L.: Documentation of the SPARC-99 chemical mechanism for VOC reactivity
assessment final report to California Air Resources Board. Technical Report. University of
California at Riverside, 2000.
10. Damian, V., Sandu, A., Damian, M., Potra, F. and Carmichael, G.R.:The Kinetic
PreProcessor KPP - A Software Environment for Solving Chemical Kinetic. Computers
and Chemical Engineering, Vol. 26, No. 11: 1567-1579, 2002.
11. Liu, D.C. and Nocedal, J.: On the limited memory BFGS method for large-scale
optimization. Math. Programming 45: 503-528, 1989.
12. Morales, J.L., and Nocedal, J.: Enriched Methods for Large-Scale Unconstrained
Optimization. Computational Optimization and Applications, 21: 143-154, 2002.

