International Workshop on
Applications of Workﬂows in Computational
Science (AWCS 08)
Adam Belloum1 , Zhiming Zhao1 , and Marian Bubak1,2
1

Informatics Institute, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands
{adam,zhiming,bubak}@science.uva.nl
2
Institute of Computer Science AGH, Krakow, Poland
{bubak}@agh.edu.pl
http://staff.science.uva.nl/∼ zhiming/workshop/awcs/2008/

Abstract. The goal of the Workshop on Applications of Workﬂows in
Computational Sciences (WACS) is to provide a forum for sharing knowledge and experience on developing workﬂow applications, and to highlight important requirements for developing workﬂow systems. This short
paper gives an overview on scientiﬁc workﬂow management systems and
their application in e-Science, and introduces the topics of the Workshop.
Several research focuses on utilizing scientiﬁc workﬂow in enhancing eScience applications and on developing workﬂow management systems
will be enumerated.
Keywords: scientiﬁc workﬂow, e-Science, application integration, data
management, resource discovery, frameworks, security.

1

Aims and Scope

In many scientiﬁc domains, workﬂows become an important mechanism to prototype and perform complex experiments and to achieve scientiﬁc discoveries. A
workﬂow system allows scientists to wrap and integrate legacy applications via
an intuitive interface, to schedule the computing of diﬀerent tasks at an abstract
level, and to automate the processes in data processing. In this way, domain
scientists can eﬀectively utilize available resources and focus on the logic of the
experiments instead of low level technical details.
During the passed years, a large number of workﬂow systems have been developed, e.g., DAGMan[1] and Pegasus[2] focus on managing massive computing tasks for processing distributed data, Taverna[3] integrates distributed web
services based components, and Kepler[4] provides ﬂexible GUI to prototype
workﬂows and execute them. Decoupling workﬂow engine from the GUI and
implementing the engine as a service allow better interoperability among workﬂow management systems, a good example for this interoperability has been
achieved by invoking the WS-VLAM engine[5] from the Taverna workbench as
a sub-workﬂow in a Taverna workﬂow.
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2008, Part III, LNCS 5103, pp. 459–462, 2008.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

460

A. Belloum, Z. Zhao, and M. Bubak

Most of the SWMS are historically driven by applications in speciﬁc domains,
e.g., bio informatics, high energy physics, and astronomical observations. Investigating the common characteristics in these domain speciﬁc systems and
implement them as part of a generic framework emerges as an important need
for e-Science applications. A number of research projects such MyExperiment[6]
in the UK and VL-e in the Netherlands[7] aim to realize a Grid enabled generic
framework where scientists from diﬀerent domains can share their knowledge and
resources, and perform domain speciﬁc research. Sharing knowledge and resource
requires more interoperability among the major workﬂow management systems.
More sophisticated solution are needed to achieve a seamless integration among
workﬂow, approaches like the workﬂow bus[8] developed in the context of VL-e
present a potential solution to the interoperability problem. Diﬀerent requirements for supporting domain speciﬁc applications are important driving force
for the development of workﬂow systems. It is therefore an important motivation for us organize such workﬂow to collect use cases from diﬀerent application
domains and understand speciﬁc requirements.
An overview of available scientiﬁc workﬂow systems and their application in
e-Science is given in[9], while the challenges in this area are examined in[10].
Recently, workﬂow systems are build exploiting achievements in semantics and
ontologies[11], [12], [13]. The goal of the Workshop on applications of workﬂows
in computational sciences (WACS) is to provide a forum for sharing knowledge
and experience on developing workﬂow applications, and highlight important
requirements for system development.

2

Workshop Content

The Workshop addresses a number of issues related to the development of workﬂow applications.
Data management. Jablonski et al. present an infrastructure called DaltOn for
managing the complexity in processing and integrating scientiﬁc data. DaltOn
provides a data centered vision, namely data logistics, on modeling processes of
collecting, storing, transporting and processing data in scientiﬁc experiments.
The DaltOn aims at decoupling the data processing issues, e.g., syntactic and
semantic conversions, from the actual workﬂow steps, and promoting the reuse
of experiment logics.
Resource discovery. Huang discusses a resource discovery in distributed environment. A P2P environment called Virgo is used as the test bed. A multi-level
virtual group architecture is used to manage the complexity of the system.
Security. Yau, et al. discuss the security and privacy issues scientiﬁc workﬂows.
A trusted computing based scheme is proposed for selecting trusted resource
providers, for protecting conﬁdentiality and integrity of job information, and for
auditing data for process provenance.
Usability. Buckingham et al. present a web accessible scientiﬁc workﬂow system
called GPFlow. A model for collection processing based on key aggregation and

International Workshop on AWCS 08

461

slicing which guarantee the processing integrity and facilitates automatic association of inputs. The GPFlow workﬂow deﬁned on a single value may be lifted to
operate on a collection of values with no change required to the workﬂow. Combing
this workﬂow framework with Grid infrastructure will be the next step to achieve.
Frameworks. Jakimovski et al. present new framework for the Gridiﬁcation
of Genetic Algorithms. The framework enables easy implementation of Genetic
Algorithms and also enables researchers easy and stable usage of the Grid for
their deployment. The design of the framework was based on principles that
make it very open and extensible.
Wibisono et al. describe ongoing eﬀorts for designing a framework for performing parameter sweep experiments. The paper discusses the requirements
gathered from use cases in various scientiﬁc domains indicate that interactivity
is needed but not fully supported by most of existing frameworks designed to
support parameter sweep applications. Preliminary design of a framework that
would support interactivity is presented.
Application use cases. Fernandez-Quiruelas et al. describe how a well known
climate model (CAM) can take advantage of the Grid computing power. In this
work usability and robustness are the major requirements because the potential
end-users have little background in computer systems and should not be bothered with the complexity of the underlying infrastructure. This requires involve
managing a complex workﬂow involving long-term jobs and data management
in a user-transparent way.

3

Summary and Outlooks

Several related workshops have been organized during passed years, e.g., WSES1 ,
SWF2 , and SWBES3 The development of workﬂow management systems faces
two important challenging issues. On one hand, the domain speciﬁc experiments
from diﬀerent applications require customized solutions in workﬂows for particular problems; on the other hand, to enable knowledge transfer and information
sharing between diﬀerent domains, a generic workﬂow solution is also demanded.
A successful workﬂow system no only means it has mature conceptual design and
engineering but more importantly it can be eﬀectively enhance real life applications. The usability of a workﬂow system is essential to introduce the system
to diﬀerent domains scientists: not only suitable interface for composing and
executing workﬂow, but also a set of user oriented tools for viewing, moving
and processing data and for the provenance of the workﬂow and reproducing the
1

2

3

International Workshop on Workﬂow Systems in e-Science,
http://staff.science.uva.nl/∼ zhiming/workshop/wses/
International Workshop on Scientiﬁc WorkFlows,
http://www.cs.wayne.edu/∼ shiyong/swf/
International Workshop on Scientiﬁc Workﬂow and Business workﬂow standards in
e-Science, http://staff.science.uva.nl/~adam/workshops/e-science2007/cfpswbes-2007.htm

462

A. Belloum, Z. Zhao, and M. Bubak

results. Sharing the knowledge in meaningful workﬂows is becoming be an important requirement for e-Science framework. It is necessary to integrate diﬀerent
technologies, e.g., semantic based annotation and searching, and collaborative
working facilitates, with scientiﬁc workﬂow system.

Acknowledgement
We would like to express our great appreciation for all PC members, referees
and colleagues who have supported AWCS 08.

References
1. DAGMan. Directed acyclic graph manager (2005),
http://www.cs.wisc.edu/condor/dagman/
2. Gil, Y., Deelman, E., Blythe, J., Kesselman, C., Tangmunarunkit, H.: Artiﬁcial intelligence and grids: Workﬂow planning and beyond. IEEE Intelligent Systems 19(1), 26–33 (2004)
3. Oinn, T., Addis, M., Ferris, J., Marvin, D., Senger, M., Greenwood, M., Carver, T.,
Glover, K., Pocock, M.R., Wipat, A., Li, P.: Taverna: A tool for the composition
and enactment of bioinformatics workﬂows. Bioinformatics Journal, online (June
16, 2004)
4. Altintas, I., Berkley, C., Jaeger, E., Jones, M., Lud¨
ascher, B., Mock, S.: Kepler:
An extensible system for design and execution of scientiﬁc workﬂows. In: SSDBM,
pp. 423–424 (2004)
5. Wibisono, A., Belloum, A., Inda, M., Roos, M., Breit, T., Hetrzberger, L.O., Korkhov, V., Vasunin, D.: Vlam-g: Interactive dataﬂow driven engine for grid-enabled
resources. Scientiﬁc Programming 15(3), 173–188 (2007)
6. Goble, C.A., De Roure, D.C.: myexperiment: social networking for workﬂow-using
e-scientists. In: WORKS 2007: Proceedings of the 2nd workshop on Workﬂows in
support of large-scale science, pp. 1–2. ACM, New York (2007)
7. VL-e. Virtual laboratory for e-science (2005), http://www.vl-e.nl/
8. Zhao, Z., Booms, S., Belloum, A., de Laat, C., Hertzberger, B.: Vle-wfbus: a scientiﬁc
workﬂow bus for multi e-science domains. In: Proceedings of the 2nd IEEE International conference on e-Science and Grid computing, Amsterdam, the Netherlands,
December 4- 6, 2006, pp. 11–19. IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos (2006)
9. Taylor, I., Deelman, E., Gannon, D., Shields, M. (eds.): Workﬂows for e-Science.
Springer, Heidelberg (2007)
10. Gil, Y., et al.: Examining the Challenges of Scientiﬁc Workﬂows. IEEE Computer 40(12), 24–32 (2007)
11. Bubak, M., Unger, S. (eds): K-WfGrid - The Knowledge-based Workﬂow System for Grid Applications. In: Proceedings of CGW 2006, vol. II, http://www.
cyfronet.krakow.pl/cgw06/, ISBN 978-83-915141-8-4
12. Lee, S., Wang, T.D., Hashmi, N., Cummings, M.P.: Bio-STEER: A Semantic Web
Workﬂow Tool for Grid Computing in the Life Sciences. Future Generation Computer Systems 23(3), 497–509 (2007)
13. Truong, H.-L., Dustdar, S., Fahringer, T.: Performance Metrics and Ontologies for
Grid Workﬂows. Future Generation Computer Systems, vol 23(6), 760–772 (2007)

