Grid-Technology for Chemical Reactions Calculation
Gabriel Balint-Kurti1, Alexander Bogdanov2, Ashot Gevorkyan3, Yuriy Gorbachev4,
Tigran Hakobyan5, Gunnar Nyman6, Irina Shoshmina2, and Elena Stankova2
1

University of Bristol, School of Chemistry,
Bristol BS8 1TS, UK
Gabriel.Balint-Kurti@bristol.ac.uk
2
Institute for High Performance Computing and Information Systems,
199397 St.-Petersburg, Russia
(bogdanov, irena, lena)@csa.ru
3
Institute for Informatics and Automation Problems NAS of Armenia,
375014 Yerevan, Armenia
g_ashot@sci.am
4
St.-Petersburg State Polytechnical University,
195251 St.-Petersburg, Russia
gorbachev@csa.ru
5
Yerevan Physical Institute,
375036 Yerevan, Armenia
hakob@mail.yerphi.am
6
Goteborg University,
412 96 Goteborg, Sweden
nyman@chem.gu.se

Abstract. We discuss a possible strategy for implementing a grid-based
approach to realizing the immense computational resources required to compute
reactive molecular scattering cross sections and rate constants.

1 Introduction
Evaluation of chemical reaction cross-sections and rate-constants as well as more
detailed scattering characteristics is one of the great challenges for computational
technologies. The main difficulties are connected with the multi-dimension and multiscale character of the problem. Both the accuracy and the computations of detailed
state-to-state scattering cross sections are limited by the availability of computational
resources and by the efficiency of the computational algorithm used in their
calculation. We examine here a possible solution to these problems through the use of
Grid technology. The main concept of Grid technology is the solution of a
computational problem through coordinated dynamic resource sharing within a multiinstitutional virtual organizations [1]. Some attempts at such Grid based solutions
have already been implemented [2 - 4]. In these cases the Grid infrastructure supports
the usage of standard quantum chemistry programs (Gaussian [5] and GAMESS [6]).
This paper discusses a possible solution of the reactive scattering problem using a
Grid based technology.
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3516, pp. 933 – 936, 2005.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

934

G. Balint-Kurti et al.

2 Description of Reactive Scattering Problem
We consider principally the process A + (BC)m → (AB)n + C which may take place
with or without involving the formation of a quasi-bound or an activated complex
(ABC)*. When the process occurs via the formation of a quasi-bound complex, both
the classical and quantum mechanical treatment of the process show chaotic
behavior. The computation of the cross sections and rate constants require large,
often unattainably large, amounts of computational resources on a conventional
computer. Here we discuss an alternative approach that effectively utilizes Grid
technologies.
The problem may be divided into two parts that may be solved separately. The first
part being that of calculating the potential energy surface (PES) V ( q1 , q2 , γ ) and the
second part being the calculation of reaction probabilities and rate constants (or other
properties). PESs are usually obtained from ab initio quantum chemical calculations
(we consider these results as initial input to our problem), but they are represented in
Cartesian co-ordinates that are usually not convenient for further calculations. For the
scattering calculations the so-called curvilinear co-ordinates are the most convenient
ones to use[7].
One of the computational problems consists in the transformation of the potential
energy surface to the new co-ordinates U ( x 0 , x1 , x 2 ) ≡ V ( q1 , q2 , γ ) . It is also
convenient to use certain analytic models for the PESs and to just determine their
parameters. The PESs we develop depend on the fairly small number of parameters and
these may be optimized to fit different sets of ab initio data [8]. In any case this problem
may be solved separately. Since this problem is closely related to the inversion of a
large dimensional matrix the corresponding methods may be used for its solution and
these algorithms can also be parallelized. This procedure may easily be transferred to a
Grid technology, implemented on a Grid of loosely connected computational systems.
The calculation of scattering cross sections may be reduced to four sequential problems.
The first one is the generation of the classical geodesic equations on the Lagrange
surface of body system (at first this method of investigation classical dynamical systems
was introduced by Krilov [9]) for the evolution of the system along the reaction coordinate and calculation of trajectory tube distribution; the second one is the problem of
the solution Shroedinger equation on geodesic trajectory tubes; the third one is the
calculation of the transition S -matrix elements and the fourth one is the calculation of
transition probabilities [10, 11].

3 Grid for Chemical Reactions Calculation
The basic principles of the Grid for chemical reaction calculation can be stated as
follows: 1) Present computer and data resources as a single virtual environment by
developing a web portal on the Grid technology. 2) Build an easy-to-use user web
interface for providing access to these resources. 3) Facilitate the sharing of results of
research. 4) Organize archiving of input, output, and intermediate data.

Grid-Technology for Chemical Reactions Calculation

935

As the basic software for Chemical Grid computing the Globus code will be used
because of the following distinguishing advantages [12]. As the scheduling system
weplan to use the Nimrod/G tool [13, 14], which is designed to manage the
computational process including the transfer of input data and of the results of the
calculations.
Returning to the problems arising in solving the reactive scattering problem that
has been partly discussed in section 3, one must complete the following list of steps:
1) Computation of PES. 2) Parameterization of PES. 3) Solution of geodesic
trajectory problems on Lagrange surfaces of the three-body system and the
construction of the trajectory tubes distribution. 4) Calculation of the quantum system
evolution on the trajectory tubes. 5) Computation of S -matrix elements and reaction
probabilities for a set of initial phases ϕ s and collision energies Eki . 6) Averaging of
S -matrix element amplitudes over distribution of trajectory tubes, i.e. calculation of
probabilities of elementary reactive quantum transitions. 7) Visualization of the
results.
A Grid implementation of the solution of the reactive scattering problem implies
the establishment of some infrastructure that should include algorithms for the ab
initio calculation of PESs and the corresponding databases for different scattering
partners. The next step then is the parameterization of the PESs using for instance the
nonlinear optimization algorithm described in [9]. The Chemical Grid should contain
a number of models that will permit the parameterizations of different aspects of PESs
to varying accuracies. The classic geodesic trajectory problem calculation on the
Lagrange surfaces for the reactive collision should be implemented for use in a
distributed computational environment. Also the quantum reactive scattering part for
the different trajectory tubes can be parallelized.
Our experience in complex problem solving using the Grid [15] will be used to
achieve these goals. We wish to create a Chemical Grid that will allow the
incorporation of both the data banks of different PESs and other properties
accumulated by other scientists and our own computational codes.

Acknowledgments
This work was partly supported by the INTAS grant 03-51-4000 and ISTC A-823.

References
1. Foster, I, Kesselman, C. and Tuecke, S.: “The Anatomy of the Grid: Enabling Virtual
Organisations”, International Journal of Supercomputer Applications, 15 (3) 2001, pp.
200-222.
2. Nishikava, T., Nagashima, U. and Sekiguchi, S. “Design and Implementation of Intelligent
Scheduler for Gaussian Portal on Quantum Chemistry Grid” In: P.M.A.Sloot,
D.Abramson,, A.V.Bogdanov, J.J.Dongarra, A.Y.Zomaya, Yu.E.Gorbachev, eds,
Proceedings, Part 3, Computational Science – ICCS 2003, in series Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, v. 2659, pp. 244-253, Springer Verlag, ISBN 3-540-40194-6.

936

G. Balint-Kurti et al.

3. Baldrige, K.K., Greenberg, J.P. “Management of Web and Associated Grid Technologires
for Quantum Chemistry Computation” In: P.M.A.Sloot, D.Abramson,, A.V.Bogdanov,
J.J.Dongarra, A.Y.Zomaya, Yu.E.Gorbachev, eds, Proceedings, Part 4, Computational
Science – ICCS 2003, in series Lecture Notes in Computer Science, v. 2658, pp. 111-121,
Springer Verlag, ISBN 3-540-40194-6.
4. Sudholt, W., Baldridge, K., Abramson, D., Enticott, C. and Garic, S. “Parameter Scan of
an Effective Group Difference Pseudopotential Using Grid Computing”, New Generation
Computing 22 (2004) 125-135.
5. http://www.gaussian.com
6. https://gridport.npaci.edu/GAMESS
7. Pack, R. T. and Parker, G.A., Quantum reactive scattering in three dimensions using
hyperspherical (APH) coordinates. Theory J. Chem. Phys. 87, (1987) 3888.
8. Gevorkyan, A.S., Ghulian, A.V. and Barseghyan, A.R. “Modeling of the Potential Energy
Surface of Regrouping Reaction in Collinear Three-Atom Collision System Using
Nonlinear Optimization” In: P.M.A.Sloot, D.Abramson, A.V.Bogdanov, J.J.Dongarra,
A.Y.Zomaya, Yu.E.Gorbachev, eds, Proceedings, Part 2, Computational Science – ICCS
2003, in series Lecture Notes in Computer Science, v. 2658, pp. 545-554, Springer Verlag,
ISBN 3-540-40194.
9. Krylov, N.S., Works by abroad of statistical physics, publishing company Academy of
Scince SSSR [in Russian] ed A. Fok, Moscow (1950), p.205
10. Bogdanov, A.V., Gevorkyan, A.S. and Grigoryan, A.G., Bifurcations in trajectory problem
as a cause of internal-time singularities and the onset of quantum (wave) chaos, Tech.
Phys. Lett. 25, (1999) 637
11. Bogdanov, A.V., Gevorkyan, A.S., Grigoryan, A.G., Internal Time Peculiarities as a Cause
of Bifurcations Arising in Classical Trajectory Problem and Quantum Chaos Creation in
Three body System, AMS/IP Studies in Advanced Mathematics, V.13. p. 69-80, (1999)
12. Johnston, W. E., The NASA IPG Engineering Team, and The DOE Science Grid Team
Implementing production Grid
13. Abramson, D., Giddy, J., Kotler, L.: High Performance Parametric Modeling with
Nimrod/G: Killer Application for the Global Grid? International Parallel and Distributed
Processing Symposium (IPDPS), Cancun, Mexico (May 2000) 520- 528;
http://www.csse.monash.edu.au/~davida/nimrod/
14. Shoshmina, I., Bogdanov, A.V. and Abramson D. “Whither the Grid?” Proceedings of the
International Conference "Distributed Computing and Grid Technologies in Science and
Education". July 2004, Dubna, Russia. (accepted for publication)
15. Krzhizhanovskaya, V.V., Gorbachev, Yu.E., Sloot, P.M.A. A Grid-based Problem-solving
Environment for Simulation of Plasma Enhanced Chemical Vapor Deposition. In: Book of
abstracts of the International Conference "Distributed Computing and Grid Technologies
in Science and Education". 29 June - 2 July 2004, Dubna, Russia. Publ: JINR, Dubna,
2004. pp.89-90.

