Cryptography Adapted to the New
European Area of Higher Education
A. Queiruga Dios1 , L. Hern´
andez Encinas2 , and D. Queiruga3
1

Department of Applied Mathematics, E.T.S.I.I., University of Salamanca
Avda. Fern´
andez Ballesteros 2, 37700-B´ejar, Salamanca, Spain
queirugadios@usal.es
2
Department of Information Processing and Coding, Applied Physics Institute, CSIC
C/ Serrano 144, 28006-Madrid, Spain
luis@iec.csic.es
3
Department of Business Administration, University of Salamanca
Campus Miguel de Unamuno, FES building, 37007-Salamanca, Spain
queiruga@usal.es

Abstract. A new experience for teaching Cryptography to engineering students is shown. The aim is to give them a better understanding
of secure and cryptographic algorithms by using Maple software, in a
graduate-level course. In this paper we discuss how to structure, deﬁne,
and implement a web-based course as a part of the traditional classes,
according to the convergence of the European Higher Education Project.
The proposed course facilitates the use of new Information and Communication Technologies.
Keywords: Public key cryptography, implementation, Maple software,
information and communication technologies, European area of higher
education.

1

Introduction

The Bologna declaration (1999) proposes the creation of an European Area of
Higher Education (EAHE) to unify university studies in Europe. It emphasizes
the creation of the European Area of Higher Education as a key to promote citizens’ mobility and employability and the Continent’s overall development [2].
Spain is one of the 46 countries involved in the Bologna Process. The corner
stones of such an open space are mutual recognition of degrees and other higher
education qualiﬁcations, transparency (readable and comparable degrees organised in a three-cycle structure) and European cooperation in quality assurance.
This earthquake in thinking about the new education process means that we
must approach the design, development, and implementation of learning environment such that the achievement and assessment of those competencies is
made possible and is facilitated. This new proposal supposes a change of the
instructional design process [12].
The use of Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) in higher education is considered a pre-requisite for the adaptation to the EAHE. University
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2008, Part II, LNCS 5102, pp. 706–714, 2008.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

Cryptography Adapted to the New European Area of Higher Education

707

studies must be adapted to the international European context and technology
development facilitating new strategies of communication. This new situation
forces Universities to renew some situations that until now seemed stable as
teaching methodologies, and change their degrees and studies programmes. ICT
become more and more important in the higher education process, claiming
new spaces and conditions of learning, and new professional roles for lecturers
[8].
One of the ﬁelds of greater projection in the future and greater impact, within
the ICT, is Cryptography. As it is known, this science is closely related to the
Mathematics in general, and Computer Sciences in particular. Its aim is the
preservation of information, including conﬁdentiality, integrity, and authentication. The goal of the Cryptography is to provide safe communications on insecure channels, to allow people send messages by means of a channel that can
be intercepted by a third person (mail or e-mail, telephone, fax, etc.), so only
the authorized receiver can read the messages [7], [15]. The great importance
of Cryptography in our days is due to the proliferation of personal computers
and the facility in the access to the Internet. These facilities have cause serious
problems of security, like virus, spam, phising, publication of conﬁdential information, etc. All of it makes necessary that students and future professionals
are conscious of the dangers that browse the Internet without safety measures
supposes. In this paper, we present some educational tools to learn about Cryptography and how to implement diﬀerent cryptosystems by using Maple software
together with Moodle environment. Moodle is an open source package, designed
using pedagogical principles, in order to help educators to create eﬀective online
learning communities.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In section 2, we will comment the
changes that are happening in the Spanish Universities to reach the European
Area of Higher Education. The course Cryptography and information security
will be detailed in section 3. Background and Maple concepts needed to follow
this course are presented in section 4. In section 5 we will present the Moodle
tools used in the University of Salamanca (http://www.usal.es), the detailed
methods that we used in the course will be stated in section 6, and ﬁnally, the
conclusions will be shown in section 7.

2

Changes in Higher Education

The knowledge society depends for its growth on the production of new knowledge, its transmission through education and training, and its dissemination
through Information and Communication Technologies [1]. As it was mentioned
in the Introduction, one of the means to get the convergence of European Higher
Education and the common goal of the Bologna Declaration is the use of the
ICT in higher education.
Universities face an imperative necessity to adapt and adjust to a whole series
of profound changes, including increased demand, internationalisation and links
with business.

708

A. Queiruga Dios, L. Hern´
andez Encinas, and D. Queiruga

Online education also refers to learning methods that, at least, partly utilize
the ICT available through the Internet. What we propose to the students is to
use the online methods to get a more complete education in speciﬁc subjects. The
online education is a new method of education, very diﬀerent from traditional
education, that take advantage of new media, new ways to communicate, and the
design of new educational experiences. Educators are thus utilizing the Internet
for professional networking, regionally and globally, they learn from one another
about the new media and their applications to education [21], and renew their
knowledge in virtually ﬁelds of enquiry.
The ICT have changed from being considered as a mere object of use towards
an instrument of support in the educational innovation [20]. They aﬀect to different aspects in relation to traditional education, as the change in the role of
the teacher, who has changed from a simple transmitter of knowledge to be a
mediator in the construction of the knowledge of the students; the role of the
student has changed as the traditional educative models do not adjust to the
processes of learning by means of the use of the ICT [18]. Finally, it is important to take into account that the use of new technologies does not require the
invention of new methodologies, but it requires a modiﬁcation in the strategies
for the continuous learning of the student [13].
Modern e-Learning technology may act as a bridge: On the one hand, computer systems make real experiments available over the Internet, any time, anywhere, and – even more important – make the measured data electronically
available for further analysis [11]. On the other hand students could access to
simulation within virtual laboratories.

3

Cryptography and Information Security Course

The Cryptography and information security course has been revised from previous years to give more emphasis to the practical elements of the course. It is
an introduction to Cryptography. The viewpoint of this course is speciﬁcally the
design and analysis of real world cryptographic schemes. We consider tasks like
encryption and decryption processes, digital signatures, authentication, and key
distribution. The goal is to instil understanding of fundamentals into the design
of cryptographic protocols. Formally, the assessed course consists of 7 modules
and a set of laboratory software practices with Maple. The modules are:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Introduction to Cryptography
Mathematical tools
Private Key Cryptosystems
RSA Cryptosystem
ElGamal and Elliptic Curve Cryptosystems
Chor-Rivest knapsack Cryptosystem
Biometric recognition systems

In the beginning, this course was purely theoretical, nevertheless, in recent
years, we have including laboratory practices, using Maple software, and now

Cryptography Adapted to the New European Area of Higher Education

709

we make use of ICT to get rather than an online course: A set of tools making
possible to work with students in classes or in their own houses.
3.1

A Brief Introduction to Cryptography

The objective of Cryptography is to assure the secrecy and conﬁdentiality of
communications between several users and the goal of Cryptanalysis is to break
the security and privacy of such communications [15], [16]. In particular, in Public Key Cryptography (PKC) each user has two keys: The public key, which is
publicly known and it is used by the sender to encrypt a message; and the private
key, which is kept in secret by the receiver and it is used by him to decrypt the
received encrypted messages. In general, PKC bases its security on the computational intractability of some Number Theory Problems, as factorization problem,
discrete logarithm problem or knapsack problem.
3.2

Modules of the Course

The course starts with an introduction to Cryptography and to the necessary
mathematical tools for the correct understanding and development of the diﬀerent modules. This introductory part includes the main mathematical problems
on which the diﬀerent cryptosystems security are based. Later, a basic knowledge of the Cryptography will be approached, including the diﬀerent types of
cryptosystems and the schemes of digital signature associated to them.
The course includes the most important Secret Key or Symmetric Cryptosystems and as far as Public Key or Asymmetric Cryptosystems. RSA Public key
cryptosystem [5], [19] and its protocol of digital signature will be detailed including the more important attacks against their security. ElGamal and Elliptic
Curve cryptosystems [6], [14], are also included. The security of these cryptosystems is based on the discrete logarithm problem. Also the most important
characteristics of the knapsack cryptosystems will be analyzed, in particular
Chor-Rivest cryptosystem [4]. With the purpose of exemplifying in a practical
way the schemes and protocols studied throughout the course, it will be carried
out diﬀerent practices from laboratory by means of the program of symbolic
calculation, Maple. In this way, the analyzed diﬃculties of the mathematical
problems considered and security of cryptosystems will be shown.

4

Implementation and Procedures in Maple

In this section we present the second part of the course, which is addressed to
show the students how to work with Maple software in order to implement procedures, functions, and statements needed to transform the messages, to generate
the keys, to encrypt, and to decrypt messages with the cryptosystems previously
mentioned.
Maple is a comprehensive environment for teaching and applying Mathematics which contains thousands of math procedures. It permits to deﬁne speciﬁc

710

A. Queiruga Dios, L. Hern´
andez Encinas, and D. Queiruga

procedures by using the Maple programming language. It contains several packages to help professors to teach and students to understand mathematical concepts. A package is a collection of routines that are collected together. For example, numtheory, ListTools and LinearAlgebra are packages, which provides a
range of functionality, by commands, for solving problems in some well-deﬁned
problem domain. Maple has excellent online help. In fact, it is possible to access
to this help by choosing Maple Help from the Windows menu, typing a question
tag in the command prompt, or clicking on F1 key.
After knowing the Maple syntax, the students will practice with the main
commands needed to implement diﬀerent cryptosystems. For example, for RSA
cryptosystem they will need some commands like ifactors(n), which returns
the complete integer factorization of the integer n; phi(n) which is the one that
calculates Euler’s phi function or totient function of n, which is the number of
positive integers not exceeding n and relatively prime to n; or Power(c, d) mod
n which computes cd mod n. In case of the Chor-Rivest knapsack cryptosystem
[9], the GF(q,h,f) command returns a table of functions and constants for doing
arithmetic in the ﬁnite ﬁeld of q h elements: GF (q h ) = GF (q)[T ]/(f (T )), where
f (T ) is an irreducible monic polynomial of degree h over the integers modulo q.
If f is not speciﬁed, Maple uses a random one. The Powmod(a,n,f,x) function
computes the remainder of an in GF (q h ). Finally, if u = [u1 , . . . , un ] is a list of
integers and m = [m1 , . . . , mn ] a list of moduli, pairwise relatively prime, the
function chrem(u,m) solves the Chinese Remainder Theorem, i.e., it computes
the unique positive integer a, 0 < a < M (M denotes the product of the moduli),
such that a = u1 mod m1 , a = u2 mod m2 , . . . , a = un mod mn .

5
5.1

Working Environment
EUDORED

Although the implantation of modern models of complementary education, bLearning or e-Learning, not yet are a reality in the Spanish universities, their
use have considerably increased in recent years. The University of Salamanca
has a virtual environment to distribute its teaching: EUDORED (University of
Salamanca environment for web learning). This tool is available for students
and teachers to incorporate new educative technologies to the development of
educational tasks, allowing virtual teaching. EUDORED is constructed on a
technological structure that canalizes the formation through the Internet. In this
way, it facilitates web tools to transfer the interaction processes teacher-student.
The virtual campus, EUDORED (http://www.usal.es/eudored), is based
on a web platform called Moodle (Modular Object Oriented Distance Learning Environment), a course management system designed to help educators for
creating quality online courses. This platform is used by universities, schools,
companies and independent teachers. Moodle is an open source software package and completely free to use (http://www.moodle.org).

Cryptography Adapted to the New European Area of Higher Education

5.2

711

Moodle Platform

Moodle is a virtual environment for education which allows to place contents
and tasks in the web and provides online communication tools. The design and
development of Moodle is guided by a particular philosophy of learning: social constructionist Philosophy. With this learning philosophy people actively
construct new knowledge as they interact with their environment, under the hypothesis that learning is more eﬀective when you are constructing something.
Constructivism is a philosophy of learning founded on the premise that, by reﬂecting on our experiences, we construct our own understanding of the world
we live in. Each of us generates our own rules and mental models, which we use
to make sense of our experiences. Learning, therefore, is simply the process of
adjusting our mental models to accommodate new experiences. Constructivism
calls for the elimination of a standardized curriculum. Instead, it promotes using curricula customized to the students’ prior knowledge. Also, it emphasizes
hands-on problem solving [3].
Another important characteristic of Moodle is that could be considered as a
set of Web 2.0 learning tools. It is known that Web 2.0 refers generally to web
tools that, rather than serve as a forum for authorities to impart information
to a passive or receptive audience, actually invite site visitors to comment, collaborate, and edit information, creating a more distributed form of authority in
which the boundaries between site creator and visitor are blurred [17]. Web 2.0
is related to a perceived second generation of web-based communities and hosted
services – such as social-networking sites, wikis and folksonomies – which aim to
facilitate collaboration and share information between users. Although the term
suggests a new version of the World Wide Web, it does not refer to an update
to any technical speciﬁcations, but to changes in the ways software developers
and end-users use the web.
5.3

Moodle Activities

One of the most important advantages of Moodle environment is that it has
implemented all the useful tools and activities needed for online classes and eLearning in general. The following features are part of the learning environment:
1. Chat: The Chat module allows participants to have a real-time synchronous
discussion via the web. This is a useful way to get a diﬀerent understanding
of each other and the topic being discussed.
2. Forums: It is in forums where most discussion takes place. Forums can be
structured in diﬀerent ways, and can include peer rating of each posting. The
postings can be viewed in a variety for formats, and can include attachments.
3. Glossaries: This activity allows participants to create and maintain a list of
deﬁnitions, like a dictionary. The entries can be searched or browsed in many
diﬀerent formats.
4. Hotpot: This module allows teachers to create multiple-choice, short-answer,
jumbled-sentence, crossword, matching/ordering and gap-ﬁll quizzes using
Hot Potatoes software [10]. The Hot Potatoes suite is a set of six authoring

712

A. Queiruga Dios, L. Hern´
andez Encinas, and D. Queiruga

tools, created by the Research and Development team at the University
of Victoria Humanities Computing and Media Centre. They enable you to
create interactive Web-based exercises of several basic types. The exercises
are standard web pages using XHTML code for display, and JavaScript for
interactivity.
5. Lessons: A lesson delivers contents in an interesting and ﬂexible way. It
consists of a number of pages. Each page normally ends with a multiple
choice question. Navigation through the lesson can be straight forward or
complex.
6. Resources: Resources can be prepared ﬁles uploaded to the course server;
pages edited directly in Moodle; or external web pages made to appear part
of this course.
7. Wiki: A wiki is a web page that anyone can add to or edit. It enables documents to be authored collectively and supports collaborative learning. Old
versions are not deleted and may be restored if required.

6

Course Objectives - Training in Cryptography

We have used Moodle to create a new interactive educational teacher-student
context. Students need to construct their own understanding of each cryptographic concept, so that the primary role of teacher is not to explain, or attempt
to ‘transfer’ knowledge, but to create situations for students that allow them to
make the necessary mental constructions. In 21st century students are familiarized with the Internet and with the new technologies. They usually use them
to chat with friends, to send and receive e-mails, to meet people or to organize
holidays, but they are not conscious that it is a useful tool in the daily classes.
Sometimes they do not see possible that personal computers and the Internet
could be used eﬀectively for classes about Mathematics or Cryptography.
With the purpose of obtaining a suitable training of the students, in each
module we will give the students access to some interesting and introductory
documentation, and we will create a forum to discuss about the current module.
For example, with RSA cryptosystem module we start a new Moodle activity
which is a questionnaire with diﬀerent items related to the algorithms and the
encryption and decryption processes. Other exercises will be proposed to the
students so that they can comment and debate them in the forums created for
that goal. Moreover, some theoretical questions or Hot Potatoes exercises, that
enable the creation of interactive tests [10], will be proposed for the students
assessment.
Another interesting and practical exercise that we propose the students is to
generate their own keys and the possibility of sending encrypted messages to
other students and to decrypt messages that they receive from other classmates
or from the teacher. All of it could be possible using the cryptosystems studied during the course, because they have developed some of them using Maple
software.
At the moment the only way that we use to check Maple source code, is to
write it in a text ﬁle and check the right functionality in Maple itself, but it could

Cryptography Adapted to the New European Area of Higher Education

713

be a good learning tool an API that allows students to write their own source
code (could be Maple, Matlab, Mathematica,...) and to test it at the same time,
without install those programs in their PCs.

7

Conclusions

We have designed a new experience for teaching Cryptography in the University
of Salamanca, Spain. The aim is to give the students a better understanding
of secure and cryptographic algorithms by using Maple software, in a graduatelevel course. In this paper we have proposed a web-based course according to the
convergence of European Higher Education Project, to increase the use of new
Information and Communication Technologies. This course will be available, for
the students of the university, in the virtual environment EUDORED, which is
based on the Moodle platform, and oﬀers a reachable environment easy to work
with.
The course allows us to get a formative evaluation (focuses on improvement
the security and Cryptography knowledge while the course is in progress) as
much as a summative evaluation (focuses on results or outcomes). To make both
evaluations possible, students can access to the online course by the Internet
including the theory, papers and links related to the topic of the subject. The
students will e-mail all the questions, suggestions, or whatever they need to make
this e-Learning possible. Moreover, they will have access to electronic chat room,
and forums to make possible an online participation whenever they want.
Acknowledgment. This work has been supported by Ministerio de Industria,
Turismo y Comercio (Spain) in collaboration with Telef´
onica I+D (Project SEGUR@) with reference CENIT-2007 2004.

References
1. Blackstone, T.: Education and Training in the Europe of Knowledge (January
2008), http://www.uniroma3.it/downloads/297 Lezione%20Blackstone.doc
2. Bologna Declaration (January 2008),
http://www.ond.vlaanderen.be/hogeronderwijs/bologna/documents/MDC/
BOLOGNA DECLARATION1.pdf
3. Brooks, J., Brooks, M.: In Search of Understanding: The Case for Constructivist
Classrooms, Revised Edition, ASCD, 1999.
4. Chor, B., Rivest, R.L.: A knapsack-type public key cryptosystem based on aritmethic in ﬁnite ﬁelds. IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory 34(5), 901–909 (1988)
5. Dur´
an D´ıaz, R., Hern´
andez Encinas, L., Mu˜
noz Masqu´e, J.: El criptosistema RSA,
RA-MA, Madrid (2005)
6. ElGamal, T.: A public-key cryptosystem and a signature scheme based on discrete
logarithm. IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory 31, 469–472 (1985)
7. F´
uster Sabater, A., de la Gu´ıa Mart´ınez, D., Hern´
andez Encinas, L., Montoya
Vitini, F., Mu˜
noz Masqu´e, J.: T´ecnicas criptogr´
aﬁcas de protecci´
on de datos, RAMA, 3a ed., Madrid (2004)

714

A. Queiruga Dios, L. Hern´
andez Encinas, and D. Queiruga

8. Garc´ıa-Valc´
arcel Mu˜
noz-Repiso, A., Tejedor Tejedor, F.J.: Current Developments
in Technology-Assisted Education. In: M´endez-Vilas, A., Solano Mart´ın, A., Mesa
Gonz´
alez, J.A., Mesa Gonz´
alez, J. (eds.) FORMATEX (2006)
9. Hern´
andez Encinas, L., Mu˜
noz Masqu´e, J., Queiruga Dios, A.: Maple implementation of the Chor-Rivest cryptosystem. In: Alexandrov, V.N., van Albada, G.D.,
Sloot, P.M.A., Dongarra, J. (eds.) ICCS 2006. LNCS, vol. 3992, pp. 438–445.
Springer, Heidelberg (2006)
10. Hot Potatoe Home page, http://hotpot.uvic.ca/
11. Jeschke, S., Richter, T., Scheel, H., Thomsen, C.: On Remote and Virtual Experiments in eLearning in Statistical Mechanics and Thermodynamics. In: Proceedings
of the Fifth IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communications Workshops, pp. 153–158. IEEE Computer Society, Los Alamitos (2007)
12. Kirschner, P.A.: Using integrated electronic environments for collaborative teaching/learning. Research Dialogue in Learning and Instruction 2(1), 1–10 (2001)
13. Mason, R.: Models of online courses. ALN Magazine 2, 2 (1998)
14. Menezes, A.: Elliptic Curve Public Key Cryptoystem. Kluwer Academic Publishers,
Boston (1993)
15. Menezes, A., van Oorschot, P., Vanstone, S.: Handbook of applied cryptography.
CRC Press, Boca Raton (1997)
16. Mollin, R.A.: An introduction to cryptography. Chapman & Hall/CRC, Boca Raton (2001)
17. Oberhelman, D.D.: Coming to terms with Web 2.0. Reference Reviews 21(7), 5–6
(2007)
18. P´erez i Garc´ıas, A.: Nuevas estrategias did´
acticas en entornos digitales para la
ense˜
nanza superior. En Did´
actica y tecnolog´ıa educativa para una univesidad en
un mundo digital (J. Salinas y A. Batista), Universidad de Panam´
a, Imprenta
universitaria (2002)
19. Rivest, R.L., Shamir, A., Adleman, L.: A method for obtaining digital signatures
and public-key cryptosystems. Commun. ACM 21, 120–126 (1978)
20. Salinas, J.: Innovaci´
on docente y uso de las TIC en la ense˜
nanza universitaria.
Revista de Universidad y Sociedad del Conocimiento (RUSC) 1, 1 (2004)
21. Weiss, J., et al. (eds.): The International Handbook of Virtual Learning Environments, vol. 14. Springer, Heidelberg (2006)

