A Dynamic Data Driven Wildland Fire Model
Jan Mandel1,2 , Jonathan D. Beezley1,2 , Lynn S. Bennethum1 ,
Soham Chakraborty3, Janice L. Coen2 , Craig C. Douglas3,5 , Jay Hatcher3 ,
Minjeong Kim1 , and Anthony Vodacek4
1

2

University of Colorado at Denver and Health Sciences Center, Denver, CO
80217-3364, USA
National Center for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, CO 80307-3000, USA
3
University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40506-0045, USA
4
Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, NY 14623-5603, USA
5
Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520-8285, USA

Abstract. We present an overview of an ongoing project to build
DDDAS to use all available data for a short term wildﬁre prediction.
The project involves new data assimilation methods to inject data into
a running simulation, a physics based model coupled with weather prediction, on-site data acquisition using sensors that can survive a passing
ﬁre, and on-line visualization using Google Earth.

1

Introduction

DDDAS for a short-term wildland ﬁre prediction is a challenging problem. Techniques standard in geophysical applications generally do not work because the
nonlinearity of ﬁre models are much stronger than those of the atmosphere or
the ocean; data is incomplete; and it is not clear which model is the best for
physical representation and faster than real time speed.

2

Fire Model

The goal in wildland ﬁre modeling is to predict the behavior of a complex system
involving many processes and uncertain data by a physical model that reproduces
important dynamic behaviors. Our overall approach is to create a mathematical
model at the scales at which the dominant behaviors of the system occur and
the data exist.
Perhaps the simplest PDE based wildland ﬁre model [2] is of the form
dT
→
= ∇ · (k∇T ) + −
v · ∇T + A (Sr (T ) − C0 (T − Ta )) ,
dt
dS
= −CS Sr (T ) ,
dt

(1)
(2)

where the reaction rate is a modiﬁed Arrhenius rate,
r(T ) = e−B/(T −Ta ) .
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part I, LNCS 4487, pp. 1042–1049, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

(3)

A Dynamic Data Driven Wildland Fire Model

1043

1000

Temperature(C)

800

600

400

200

0
1.125

1.175

1.225
1.275
time(seconds)

1.325
4
x 10

Fig. 1. Measured time-temperature proﬁle (dotted line) in a wildland ﬁre at a ﬁxed
sensor location, digitized from [1], and computed proﬁle (solid line) [2]. Coeﬃcients of
the model were identiﬁed by optimization to match to measured proﬁle.

Eq. (1) represents a 2D balance of energy in a ﬁre layer of some unspeciﬁed
ﬁnite vertical thickness, (2) represents the balance of fuel, T is the temperature
of the ﬁre layer, r(T ) ∈ [0, 1] is the reaction rate, assumed to depend only on
the temperature, S ∈ [0, 1] is the fuel supply mass fraction (the relative amount
of fuel remaining), k is the diﬀusion coeﬃcient, A is the temperature rise per
second at the maximum burning rate with full initial fuel load and no cooling
present, B is the proportionality coeﬃcient in the modiﬁed Arrhenius law, C0
is the scaled coeﬃcient of the heat transfer to the environment, CS is the fuel
→
relative disappearance rate, Ta is the ambient temperature, and −
v is the given
wind speed from the atmosphere.
Physics-based models of the form similar to (1-3) are known [3,4,5]. The system (1-2) with the reaction rate (3) is formally the same as combustion equations
of premixed fuel, with cooling added. Our interpretation is that the equations are
a rough approximation of the aggregated behavior of small-scale random combustion. We are going to add variables and equations only as needed to match
the observed ﬁre behavior. Possible future extension include pyrolysis, multiple
fuels, crown ﬁre, and moisture (treated as a fuel with negative heat content).
The reaction rate (3) has been modiﬁed to be exactly zero at ambient temperature (according to chemical kinetics, the reaction rate should be zero only at
absolute zero temperature); consequently equations (1-3) admit traveling wave
solutions. The temperature in the traveling wave has a sharp leading edge, followed by an exponentially decaying cool-down trailing edge (Fig. 1). The wave
speed can be found numerically [5], but no mathematical proof of the existence
of traveling waves and their speed for system (1-3) seems to be known.
Since weather is a very signiﬁcant inﬂuence on ﬁre and ﬁre in turn has inﬂuence
on weather, coupling of the ﬁre model with the Weather Research Forecast Model

1044

J. Mandel et al.

(WRF) [6,7] is in progress [8]. It is now well established that ﬁre dynamics can
be understood only by modeling the atmosphere and the ﬁre together, e.g., [9].

3

Coeﬃcient Identiﬁcation

The reason for writing the coeﬃcients of model (1-3) in that particular form is
that it is basically hopeless to use physical coeﬃcients and expect a reasonable
solution. The fuel is heterogeneous, the ﬁre blends into the atmosphere, and
it is unclear what exactly are, e.g., the diﬀusion and the heat loss coeﬃcients.
Instead, we consider information that can be reasonably obtained. For example,
consider the heat balance term at full fuel load (S = 1),
f (T ) = r (T ) − C0 (T − Ta ) .
Generally, there are three temperatures which cause f (T ) to be zero (where
the heat created by the reaction is balanced by the cooling): Ta , arising from
our modiﬁcation of the Arrhenius rate (otherwise there is one zero just above
Ta because some reaction is always present); the autoignition temperature; and
ﬁnally the “high temperature regime” [10], which is the hypothetical steady
burning temperature assuming fuel is constantly replenished. Substituting reasonable values for the latter two temperatures allows us to determine reasonable
approximate values of the coeﬃcients B and C0 . Assuming zero wind, we can
then determine the remaining coeﬃcients in 1D dynamically from a measured
temperature proﬁle in an actual wildland ﬁre [1]. Reasonable values of the remaining coeﬃcients are obtained by (i) passing to a nondimensional form and
matching nondimensional characteristics of the temperature proﬁle, such as the
ratio of the widths of the leading and the trailing edge and (ii) using the traveling
wave speed and intensity to match the scale. Once reasonable starting values are
known, the coeﬃcients can be further reﬁned by optimization to match the measured temperature proﬁle (Fig. 1). See [2] for details. Identiﬁcation of coeﬃcients
in the presence of wind in the model is in progress [11].

4

Numerical Solution

The coeﬃcients identiﬁed from a 1D temperature proﬁle were used in a 2D model,
discretized by standard central ﬁnite diﬀerences with upwinding of the convection term. Implicit time stepping by the trapezoidal method (Crank-Nicholson)
was used for stability in the reaction term and to avoid excessively small time
steps. The large sparse system of linear equations in every time step was solved by
Newton’s method with GMRES as the linear solver, preconditioned by elimination of the fuel variables (which are decoupled in space) and FFT. One advantage
of this approach is that even after more fuels are added, the fuel variables can
still be eliminated at every node independently, and the resulting system has the
same sparsity structure as the heat equation alone. Typically, mesh steps of 1m
– 5m and time steps of 1s – 5s are required to resolve the moving ﬁre front and
to get a reasonable simulation [11].

A Dynamic Data Driven Wildland Fire Model

5

1045

Data Assimilation

Data assimilation is how the data is actually injected into a running model. We
have chosen a probabilistic approach to data assimilation, which is common in
geosciences [12]. The ensemble ﬁlter method used here is one possible approach.
This method estimates the system state from all data available by approximating the probability distribution of the state by a sample, called an ensemble.
The ensemble members are advanced in time until a given analysis time. At
the analysis time, the probability density, now called the prior or the forecast,
is modiﬁed by accounting for the data, which are considered to be observed at
that time. This is done by multiplying the prior density by data likelihood and
normalizing (the Bayesian update). The new probability density is called the
posterior or the analysis density. The data likelihood is a function of state. It is
equal to the density of the probability that the data could have been obtained
for the given state. It can be found from the probability density of data error,
which is assumed to be known (every measurement must be accompanied by
an error estimate or it is meaningless), and an observation function (sometimes
called the forward operator in an inverse problem context). The argument of the
observation function is a model state and its value is what the correct value of
the data should be for that state.
The Ensemble Kalman Filter (EnKF) [13,14] works by forming the analysis ensemble as linear combinations of the forecast ensemble, and the Bayesian
update is implemented by linear algebra operating on the matrix created from
ensemble members as columns.
In a wildland ﬁre application, EnKF produces nonphysical states that result
in instability and model breakdown [2,15]. The linear combination of several
states with a ﬁre in slightly diﬀerent locations cannot match data with a ﬁre in
another location. In a futile attempt to match the data, EnKF makes the analysis
ensemble out of crazy linear combinations of the forecast ensemble. These can be
fatal immediately. Even if they are not, the analysis ensemble tends to bear little
resemblance to the data. This can be ameliorated to some degree by penalization
of nonphysical states [2,15] but not well enough to produce a reliable method:
the ﬁlter is capable of only a small adjustment of the ﬁre location, and its
parameters have to be ﬁnely tuned for acceptable results, especially the data
variance is required to be artiﬁcially large.
For this reason, we have developed a new method that updates the location of
ﬁrelines directly, called the morphing ensemble ﬁlter [16,17], which is based on
techniques borrowed from registration in image processing. Given two images as
pixel values on the same domain, the registration problem is to ﬁnd a mapping
of the domain that turns one of the given images into the other with a residual
(the remaining diﬀerence) that is as small as possible. We write this mapping as
the identity plus a registration mapping. The registration mapping should be as
small and as smooth as possible. Hence, one natural way to solve the automatic
registration problem is by optimization, and we use a method based on [18].
Once the registration mapping and the residual are found, we can construct intermediate images between the two images by applying the registration mapping

1046

J. Mandel et al.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 2. Data assimilation by the morphing ensemble ﬁlter [16]. Contours are at 800K,
indicating the location of the ﬁreline. The reaction zone is approximately inside the
moonshaped curve. This ﬁreline shape is due to the wind. The forecast ensemble (a)
was obtained by a perturbation of an initial solution. The ﬁre in the simulated data
(b) is intentionally far away from the ﬁre in the initial solution. The data for the
EnKF engine itself consisted of the transformed state obtained by registration of the
image. The analysis (c) shows the adjusted location of the ﬁre in the analysis ensemble
members.

and adding the residual, both multiplied by some number between zero and one.
Generalizing this observation, we can choose one ﬁxed state with a ﬁre in some
location, and register all ensemble members. The registration mappings and the
residuals then constitute a transformed ensemble. The morphing ensemble ﬁlter
consists of applying the EnKF to the transformed ensemble and thus using intermediate states rather than linear combinations. This results in an adjustment of
both the intensity and the position of the ﬁre. Now the ﬁreline in the data can
be anywhere in the domain, and the data variance can be small without causing
ﬁlter divergence.
Fire data in the form of an image can be assimilated by registering the image
and then using the transformed image as the observation. The observation function is then only a pointwise transformation of the model state to gridded values
and interpolation. In the general case, the transformed observation function is
deﬁned by composition of functions, and so it is a highly nonlinear function of
the registration mapping. So, assimilation of weather station data and sensor
data will be more complicated and can result in strongly non-Gaussian multimodal probability distributions. For example, a sensor can read low temperature
either because the ﬁre did not get there yet or because it has already passed, so
the analysis density after assimilating one sensor reading would be concentrated
around these two possibilities.
Another view is that the morphing EnKF works by transforming the state so
that after the transformation, the probability distribution is closer to Gaussian.
We have also developed another new technique, called predictor-corrector ﬁlters
[17], to deal with the remaining non-Gaussianity.

A Dynamic Data Driven Wildland Fire Model

6

1047

Data Acquisition

Currently, we are using simple simulated data, as described in the previous section. In the future, data will come from ﬁxed sensors that measure temperature,
radiation, and local weather conditions. The ﬁxed Autonomous Environmental
Sensors (AESs), positioned so as to provide weather conditions near a ﬁre, are
mounted at various heights above the ground on a pole with a ground spike
(Fig. 3a). This type of system will survive burnovers by low intensity ﬁres. The
temperature and radiation measurements provide a direct indication of the ﬁre
front passage and the radiation measurement can also be used to determine the
intensity of the ﬁre [20]. The sensors transmit data and can be reprogrammed
by radio.
Data will come also from images taken by sensors on either satellites or airplanes. Three wavelength infrared images can then be processed using a variety
of algorithms to extract which pixels contain a signal from ﬁre and to determine the energy radiated by the ﬁre and even the normal velocity of the ﬁreline
(Fig. 3b).
The data is related to the model by an observation function. Currently, we
are using simple simulated observation functions, as described in the previous
section. Our software framework supports using multiple types of observation
functions (image, weather station, etc.). Each data item must carry information
about which observation function is to be used and any requisite parameters
(coordinates, scaling factors, etc.) in metadata.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 3. (a) AES package deployed on the Tripod Fire in Washington (2006). The unit
shown has been burned over by the ﬁre but is still functional. The datalogger package
is buried a small distance beneath the surface to shield it from the eﬀects of the ﬁre.
(b) Airborne image processed to extract the location and propagation vector of the
ﬁreline (reproduced from [19] by permission).

1048

J. Mandel et al.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 4. The Google Earth Fire Layering software tool. (a) Closeup on a single ﬁre (b)
3D view.

7

Visualization

Our primary tool for visualization is storing gridded data from the model arrays
into ﬁles for visualization in Matlab. Our Google Earth Fire visualization system
(Fig. 4) greatly simpliﬁes map and image visualization and will be used for model
output in the future. The user can control the viewing perspective, zooming
into speciﬁc sites, and selecting the time frame of the visualization within the
parameters of the current available simulation. Google Earth is quickly becoming
a de-facto standard and wildland ﬁre visualizations in Google Earth are now
available from several commercial and government sources, e.g., [21,22].

Acknowledgment
This research has been supported by the National Science Foundation under
grants CNS 0325314, 0324989, 0324988, 0324876, and 0324910.

References
1. Kremens, R., Faulring, J., Hardy, C.C.: Measurement of the time-temperature and
emissivity history of the burn scar for remote sensing applications. Paper J1G.5,
Proceedings of the 2nd Fire Ecology Congress, Orlando FL, American Meteorological Society (2003)
2. Mandel, J., Bennethum, L.S., Beezley, J.D., Coen, J.L., Douglas, C.C., Franca,
L.P., Kim, M., Vodacek, A.: A wildﬁre model with data assimilation. CCM Report
233, http://www.math.cudenver.edu/ccm/reports/rep233.pdf (2006)
3. Asensio, M.I., Ferragut, L.: On a wildland ﬁre model with radiation. International
Journal for Numerical Methods Engineering 54 (2002) 137–157
4. Grishin, A.M.: General mathematical model for forest ﬁres and its applications.
Combustion Explosion and Shock Waves 32 (1996) 503–519

A Dynamic Data Driven Wildland Fire Model

1049

5. Weber, R.O., Mercer, G.N., Sidhu, H.S., Gray, B.F.: Combustion waves for gases
(Le = 1) and solids (Le → ∞). Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Series
A 453 (1997) 1105–1118
6. Michalakes, J., Dudhia, J., Gill, D., Klemp, J., Skamarock, W.: Design of a nextgeneration weather research and forecast model. Towards Teracomputing: proceedings of the Eighth Workshop on the Use of Parallel Processors in Meteorology,
European Center for Medium Range Weather Forecasting, Reading, U.K., November 16-20, 1998. ANL/MCS preprint number ANL/MCS-P735-1198 (1998)
7. WRF Working Group:
Weather Research Forecasting (WRF) Model.
http://www.wrf-model.org (2005)
8. Beezley, J.D.: Data assimilation in coupled weather-ﬁre models. Ph.D. Thesis, in
preparation (2008)
9. Coen, J.L.: Simulation of the Big Elk Fire using using coupled atmosphere-ﬁre
modeling. International Journal of Wildland Fire 14 (2005) 49–59
10. Frank-Kamenetskii, D.A.: Diﬀusion and heat exchange in chemical kinetics. Princeton University Press (1955)
11. Kim, M.: Numerical modeling of wildland ﬁres. Ph.D. Thesis, in preparation (2007)
12. Kalnay, E.: Atmospheric Modeling, Data Assimilation and Predictability. Cambridge University Press (2003)
13. Evensen, G.: Sequential data assimilation with nonlinear quasi-geostrophic model
using Monte Carlo methods to forecast error statistics. Journal of Geophysical
Research 99 (C5) (1994) 143–162
14. Houtekamer, P., Mitchell, H.L.: Data assimilation using an ensemble Kalman ﬁlter
technique. Monthly Weather Review 126 (1998) 796–811
15. Johns, C.J., Mandel, J.: A two-stage ensemble Kalman ﬁlter for smooth data
assimilation. Environmental and Ecological Statistics, in print. CCM Report 221,
http://www.math.cudenver.edu/ccm/reports/rep221.pdf (2005)
16. Beezley, J.D., Mandel, J.: Morphing ensemble Kalman ﬁlters. CCM Report 240,
http://www.math.cudenver.edu/ccm/reports/rep240.pdf (2007)
17. Mandel, J., Beezley, J.D.: Predictor-corrector and morphing ensemble ﬁlters for
the assimilation of sparse data into high dimensional nonlinear systems. 11th Symposium on Integrated Observing and Assimilation Systems for the Atmosphere,
Oceans, and Land Surface (IOAS-AOLS), CD-ROM, Paper 4.12, 87th American
Meterological Society Annual Meeting, San Antonio, TX, January 2007.
18. Gao, P., Sederberg, T.W.: A work minimization approach to image morphing. The
Visual Computer 14 (1998) 390–400
19. Ononye, A.E., Vodacek, A., Saber, E.: Automated extraction of ﬁre line parameters
from multispectral infrared images. Remote Sensing of Environment (to appear)
20. Wooster, M.J., Zhukov, B., Oertel, D.: Fire radiative energy for quantitative study
of biomass burning: derivation from the BIRD experimental satellite and comparison to MODIS ﬁre products. Remote Sensing of Environment 86 (2003) 83–107
21. NorthTree Fire International:
Mobile Mapping/Rapid Assessment Services.
http://www.northtreeﬁre.com/gis/ (2007)
22. USGS:
RMGSC - Web Mapping Applications for the Natural Sciences.
http://rockyitr.cr.usgs.gov/rmgsc/apps/Main/geiDownloads.html (2007)

