A Research of Grid Manufacturing and Its Application in
Custom Artificial Joint
1

Li Chen 1, Hong Deng , Qianni Deng 2, and Zhenyu Wu 1
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, School of Mechanical and Power Engineering,
Shanghai 20 00 30,
62932905 Shanghai, China
{chen_li, denghong76, wzy}@sjtu.edu.cn
2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Department of Computer and Science, Shanghai 20 00 30,
62932632 Shanghai, China
deng-qn@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract. This paper presents the framework of Grid Manufacturing, which
neatly combines Grid technology with the infrastructure of advanced manufacturing technology. It studies the Grid-oriented knowledge description and
acquisition, and constructs the distributed Knowledge Grid model. It also deals
with the protocol of node description in collaborative design, and builds up the
distributed collaborative design model. And the research on the protocol and
technology of node constructing leads to the collaborative production model of
Grid Manufacturing. Finally, the framework of Grid Manufacturing is applied
in the design and manufacturing of custom artificial joint and the joint product
is produced more efficiently.

1 Introduction
With the rapid technological innovations of the networked manufacturing, much more
is learned about the inherent limitations of the network technology. Grid is regarded
as the next generation Internet as well as Grid Manufacturing is then presented as an
advanced solution for the bottleneck of networked manufacturing. The research on
Grid will build up solid theoretical and technological fundaments to realize a great
stride in manufacturing [1-4].

2 Data and Knowledge Management of Grid Manufacturing
Data and knowledge management of Grid Manufacturing includes the following
steps:
Firstly analyzing the storage mode and structure of heterogeneous data on the Grid
nodes; then building up the general and open knowledge description, internal encapsulation protocol and exchange standard, and various information and knowledge
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3036, pp. 507–510, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

508

L. Chen et al.

required in Grid Manufacturing encapsulation (including the heterogeneous database,
design and operating know-how, thinking process on various nodes, etc.); finally
displaying these knowledge by the uniform external interactive protocols and interfaces[5].

3 Collaborative Design and Production Model of Grid
Manufacturing
The distributed design mechanism based on Grid Manufacturing technology is seeking to enhance the interactions of collaborative design between the dynamic union of
enterprises to the level of high efficiency, high speed, large scale, and massive data
traffic [6].
The construction protocol and technology of manufacturing nodes is to realize the
high performance scheduling and dynamic collaboration of Grid Manufacturing resources.
The kernel of the collaborative production model, the resources scheduling and
manufacturing collaboration will be realized by the five-level Grid structure and related functional modules. With the functions and services provided by the five-level
Grid structure, the manufacturing collaboration can be finally achieved when these
sub-models are realized by the technical support of the corresponding level. The production collaboration model is shown in Fig. 1.
Collaborative production

Manufacturing tasks

Resource
scheduling

Application

Collective

Monitoring procedures
Uniform task
specification

Manufacturing
resource access

Resource

Resource operation
Communication
services

Network access
authorization

Data discovery
services

Proxy information
services

Data storage
facilities

Manufacturing
facilities

Computer
terminal

Communication
facilities

Fig. 1. Collaborative production model

Connectivity

Fabric

A Research of Grid Manufacturing and Its Application in Custom Artificial Joint

cup
liner
ball
handle
Fig. 2. A product of custom artificial hip joint

Knowledge base

Hospital

Real time situation
release
Communication
protocols
Encapsulation of
manufacturing resource

1.Manufacturing resource

Real time situation
release

selection
2. Manufacturing task
3. Real time monitoring

Control center

Grid

and

controlling

of

(Core Grid
node)

Knowledge base

2. Design unit

Real time situation
Communication
protocols
Encapsulation of
manufacturing resource
Inspection

Machining center 2

y

Post processing

delivery

3.Task assignment

Encapsulation of
manufacturing resource

manage-

resource

selection

Communication protocols

Machining center 1
Knowledge

ment for manufacturing

1.Design task

Knowledge base

yy
y

Collaborative design

Material supply

Machining center n

Collaborative
Production

Disinfection and
packaging

Fig. 3. The workflow of custom artificial joint in Grid Manufacturing environment

509

510

L. Chen et al.

4 An Application of Grid Manufacturing in the Custom Artificial
Joint
Custom artificial joint is a special product designed for perfectly matching an individual’s medullary cavity, whose demands are unforeseeable and urgent[7]. Once a
custom artificial joint prosthesis is demanded, it should be supplied as quickly as
possible. Everyone is absolutely individualized.A product of custom artificial hip
joint is illustrated in Fig.2.
The workflow of custom artificial joint in Grid Manufacturing environment is illustrated in Fig.3.

5 Conclusion
This research presents the concept of Grid Manufacturing in the world, which is the
next-generation technology subsequent to the networked manufacturing. Along with
more work done in the Grid Manufacturing environment, the defects with networked
manufacturing will be conquered. The Grid Manufacturing framework will push
forward greatly the development of advanced manufacturing technology. Based on
Grid Manufacturing environment, the design and manufacturing of custom artificial
joint product has been improved obviously. One hand, collaborative design of joint
product among doctors, patient and engineers has been more efficient. On the other
hand, the flexibility of production of joint product also has been improved and the
cost of custom artificial joint has been reduced.

References
1. Xingjun Chu, Yuqing Fan: The research of PDM based on Web. Journal of Beijing Aeronautics and Astronauts University 2 (1999) 205–207
2. Xucan Chen, Yuxing Peng, Sikun Li: PDM of CAD Collaborative Design based on C-S.
Computer Engineering and Design (1998) 53
3. Dan Wu, Xiankui Wang, Zhiqiang Wei et al.: The Distributed PDM based on Collaborative
Service Environment. Journal of Tsinghua University (Science and Technology) 6 (2002)
791–781
4. Zhiqiang Wei, Xiankui Wang, Chengyin Liu et al.: The Distributed PDM under the Environment of Agile Manufacturing. Journal of Tsinghua University(Science and Technology)
8 (2000) 45
5. H.Zhuge: A Knowledge Grid Model and Platform for Global Knowledge Sharing. Expert
System with Applications, Vol. 22. no.4 (2002)
6. G. von Laszewski, I. Foster, J. Gawor et al.: Designing Grid-based problem solving environments and portals. Proceedings of the 34th Annual Hawaii International Conference on
System Sciences, IEEE Press (2001)
7. Shang Peng: The multi-agent design system of custom artificial hip joint. Journal of
8. Chinese Biomedical Engineering 2 (2001)

