Heat Transfer, Newton’s Law of Cooling and the
Law of Entropy Increase Simulated by the
Real-Time Computer Experiment in Java
Adam Galant, Ryszard Kutner, and Andrzej Majerowski
Institute of Experimental Physics, Department of Physics, Warsaw University Ho˙za
69, PL-00681 Warsaw, Poland

Abstract. Exploitation of a real-time computer experiment1 connected
with advanced education of statistical mechanics and thermodynamics
allows us to study a commonly occurring phenomenon of heat transfer
through a diathermic wall; this wall separates the container into two
parts consisting of an ideal gas at diﬀerent temperatures. The system as
a whole is isolated from the surroundigs by very massive border walls. We
assume that the walls are rough which introduces the necessary spatial
molecular chaos in the system. We study (i) the thermalization process
where the temperatures of both parts of the container relax to the same,
ﬁnal one. We found (ii) that the temperature diﬀerence relaxes according
to the empirical Newton’s law of cooling obeyed by real systems. Finally,
we conﬁrmed (iii) the law of entropy increase and veriﬁed its validity for
this small system. We used a simple hybrid molecular dynamics where the
scattering of atoms has a random character but between the successive
scattering steps the motion of atoms is deterministic.

1

Introduction

The second law of thermodynamics is still a subject of intensive study [1,2]
by physical, mathematical and numerical means in the context of chaotic [2,3]
and/or small systems, molecular motors, living organisms, theory of information [3], systems in extreme conditions and/or far from the stationary (or equilibrium) state called also nonlinear nonequilibrium and ﬂuctuation-dissipative
thermodynamics [4]. Another, quickly developing branch of statistical physics is
the non-extensive thermodynamics which generalizes the second law of thermodynamics and the classical deﬁnition of entropy [5]. The validity of the principles
of thermodynamics is still veriﬁed the more so as there are several almost (but
not fully) equivalent formulations of the second law of thermodynamics. The
principal open question is whether the second law of thermodynamics is a basic
law or a coarse-grain one which somehow follows from more fundamental ones?
In other words, what is the relation between the macroscopic description of nature and its microscopic foundation? Hence, one is justiﬁed to pose the question
1

This computer experiment is the Java applet located under the internet address
http://tempac.fuw.edu.pl/erka/clausius/Clausius.html.

P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2657, pp. 45–53, 2003.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

46

A. Galant, R. Kutner, and A. Majerowski

whether complexity and irreversability are a new quality of matter or only an
aspect of microscopic laws [6,7]?
Quite often, the law of entropy increase is presented by experiments related
to expansion or mixing of (ideal or real) gases [8,9]. However in this work we
considered, by a dynamical computer experiment, the more complex process of
heat transfer which as yet is the most important one both for reversible and
irreversible thermodynamics.
The obtained results are aﬀected by ﬂuctuations which, fortunately, for more
than several dozen atoms are suﬃciently small to allow observing the expected
trends in the data. Our computer experiment gives students the opportunity
to currently view (during the lecture) the microscopic realization of the heat
transfer process being the most important one for the statistical mechanics and
thermodynamics.

2

Model and Hybrid Algorithm

We deﬁne the model together with the hybrid algorithm which allows us to simulate and visualize in real time as the Java applet, the evolution of quantities
relevant to nonequilibrium and equilibrium statistical mechanics and thermodynamics. We use the algorithm where the simplest version of the molecular
dynamics is mixed with the simplest ’hit and miss’ Monte Carlo recipe. This
hybrid approach can be an example of the Wolfram idea [10] saying that already simple computer programs can model a complex behaviour of physical
sytems, especially their evolution, which well describes the essential features of
the empirical ones.
Preparation of the initial state. We consider the model of an ideal gas (i.e.,
a gas composed of classical, noninteracting, identical point particles) located in
a container isolated from the surroundigs by very massive border walls. The
container is devided into two parts (of equal volume) by a diathermic wall which
makes possible heat transfer between them (c.f. Figs.1 and 2). This means that
both parts of the container are in thermal contact [11,12] and therefore particles
can indirectly interact. For an ideal gas the assumption is justiﬁed that initially
the kinetic energy of the particles is the same in each part of the container
although the orientations of the velocity vector of the particles are random (other
distributions of kinetic energy, for example the Maxwell one, are also possible
but it does not seem necessary to use them for the ideal gas).
The gas contained in the left part consists of NL particles and has initially
the temperature T0L ; we have the same for the right part. In general T0L = T0R
and NL = NR (all these quantities can be introduced at the beginning of the
computer experiment). The initial temperatures are simply deﬁned by using the
kinetic energy of particles εj0 , j = 1, 2, . . . , NL + NR ,
kB T0L,R = εj0 =

j,y 2
2
(pj,x
0 ) + (p0 )
,
2µ

(1)

Heat Transfer, Newton’s Law of Cooling

47

Fig. 1. The intermediate stage of heat transfer through the diathermic wall (the upper
window). Results of the system evolution after 253 time steps are shown for temperatures of both parts of the container (the middle window), for the diﬀerence of both
temperatures (the lowest window) and the change of entropy of the system (the right
middle window); note that the lowest window has a semi-logarithmic scale while the
two remaining ones have linear scales.

j,y
where kB is the Boltzmann constant, µ is the mass of any particle and pj,x
0 , p0
are its (planar) momentum components. Both particle numbers NL and NR are
placed directly below the respective parts of the container while temperatures are
placed below the red and green thermometers, respectively, shown in Figs.1 and
2; additionaly these temperatures (as well as the temperature of the diathermic
wall deﬁned below) are given as the initial values in the dynamic table shown in
the same ﬁgures (and described in Sec.3).
The initial temperature of the diathermic wall is deﬁned as proportional to
the average kinetic anergy of all particles

kB T0w =

N

1 L j
(
ε +
N j=1 0

N
j=NL +1

εj0 )

48

A. Galant, R. Kutner, and A. Majerowski

Fig. 2. Almost ﬁnal stage of the heat transfer through the diathermic wall as results of
the system evolution (after 1148 time steps) are shown until the temperature diﬀerence
was not greater than 1K; note that the lowest window has a semi-logarithmic scale
while the two remaining ones have linear scales.

= kB (

NL L NR R
T +
T ),
N 0
N 0

(2)

where N = NL + NR is the total number of particles.
We prove in Sec.3 that expression (2) also deﬁnes a temperature neutral
diathermic wall, i.e., a wall whose temperature can only ﬂuctuates but doesn’t
systematically change.
Indirect interaction between particles. To develop the stochastic dynamics
of the system we devided our procedure into several stages. The ﬁrst stage is a
necessary discretization procedure of time t, i.e., t = m∆t, where ∆t is a discrete
time-step and m = 1, 2, . . ., is the number of the successive steps.
In the second stage we consider an inelastic scattering of particles by the
diathermic wall; only in this way the particles can indirectly interact between
themselves. We assume that within a given time interval ∆t exactly nL (≤ NL )
particles from the left part of the container and nR (≤ NR ) particles from the

Heat Transfer, Newton’s Law of Cooling

49

right one interact with the diathermic wall (both nL and nR are ﬂuctuating mdependent numbers). If we denote the internal energy of the diathermic wall in
the mth time-step by εw
m and the corresponding kinetic energies of particles by
εjm =

2
j,y 2
(pj,x
m ) + (pm )
, j = 1, 2, . . . , nL + nR ,
2µ

(3)

we can ﬁnd the energies of each interacting object in the next mth + 1 time-step
by applying the local principle of equipartition energy. Namely,
n

εm+1 =

n

L
R
1
εjm +
εjm + εw
[
m ],
nL + nR + 1 j=1
j=n +1

(4)

L

which is already the same for all scattered particles and the wall; as it is seen,
the diathermic wall is treated here as an additional particle (which can only
oscillate due to reaction forces but is not subject to the translatory motion, i.e.
its momentum is absorbed by the massive border walls). It should be emphasized
that relation (4) is local in time and results from the energy transfer (in the
form of heat); this transfer doesn’t necessaryly proceed from the warmer to
colder part of the container. The extension of our assumption in order that
the diathermic wall would consist of Nw particles is straightforward (then εw
m
should be interpreted as the total energy of Nw particles and the denominator
in expression (4) should be changed by nL + nR + Nw ).
The surface of the diathermic wall is rough which means that the component
of the particle momentum directly before scattering parallel to the surface differs, in general, from the analogous component directly after the scattering, in
distinction to the mirror type of scattering. Hence, the momentum components
of the j th particle (j = 1, 2, . . . , nL + nR ) are given by
pj,x
m+1 = − cos(φj ) 2µεm+1 ,
pj,y
m+1 = sin(φj ) 2µεm+1 ,

(5)

where the scattering angle φj is a random variable, index x denotes here the
direction perpendicular to the surface, while y the parallel direction (as the
diathermic wall is vertical here, c.f. Figs.1 and 2).
j
In the third stage the position (xjm+1 , ym+1
), j = 1, 2, . . . , nL + nR ; m =
0, 1, 2, . . ., of any particle directly after scattering at the diatermic wall is found
by the simple rule; the initial step of this rule is the division of the time interval
∆t = ∆t1 + ∆t2 , where during time ∆t1 a particle reaches the wall while ∆t2 is
the departure time from this wall. We can write,
∆t1 =

xw − xjm
pj,x
m /µ

(6)

independently of whether the particle is located in the left or right part of the
container (here xw is the x-component of the position of the diathermic wall).

50

A. Galant, R. Kutner, and A. Majerowski

Hence, the x-component of the particle position
xjm+1 = xw + ∆t2

pj,x
m+1
, j = 1, 2, . . . , nL + nR ,
µ

(7)

where ∆t2 = ∆t − ∆t1 , while the y-component is given by the relation
j
j
= ym
+ ∆t1
ym+1

j,y

p
pj,y
m
+ ∆t2 m+1 .
µ
µ

(8)

As it is seen, from the knowledge of the state (i.e., the position and momentum)
of the particle directly before the scattering at the diathermic wall we ﬁnd its
state directly after the scattering.
Scattering at the massive border wall. The interaction of any particle with
this wall is elastic although the border wall is again rough. This means that
relation (4) is violated while in expressions (5) we can assume εjm+1 = εjm , j =
1, 2, . . . , NL + NR ; m = 0, 1, 2, . . ., i.e., directly before and after scattering of the
particle at the massive border wall the energy of any scattered particle is the
equal. Fortunately, expressions (6), (7) and (8) are, in principle, valid in this case
but the following comment should be made. Namely, these relations regard the
vertical border walls, where xw means here the x-component of their positions.
For horizontal border walls relations analogous to (6), (7) and (8) are obeyed.
We should emphasize that though we deal with ideal gas two mechanisms
of mixing have been introduced: (i) the space mixing of the particles as the
scattering angle of any particle is random and (ii) the mixing based on the local
principle of equipartition of energy which divides the energy between two parts
of the container. Hence, we extended the possibility of application of the ideal gas
model that can be used as the reference one, for example, for the Boltzmann gas,
where binary collisions between particles are taken into account and the entropy
is calculated analytically (in the approximated way) by using the Boltzmann
kinetic equation and the H function [13].

3

Time-Dependent Thermodynamic Quantities

In this work two types of thermodynamic quantities are calculated and visualized
as a function of time: (i) temperatures of gases in both parts of the container and
the diﬀerence between them and (ii) the change of entropy of the system. We
assume that these quantities are well deﬁned as far as they are subject to suﬃciently small ﬂuctuations so their main trend may be seen (which is particularly
important for the change of the entropy; c.f. Figs.1 and 2).
L,R
The current temperature of the gas in each part of the container, Tm
, in
th
the m time-step (m = 0, 1, 2, . . . ,) is deﬁned as proportional to the current
average kinetic energy of particles in the given part, which is consistent with
deﬁnitions (1) and (3)
L
=
kB Tm

1
NL

NL
j=1

εjm ,

Heat Transfer, Newton’s Law of Cooling

1
=
NR

R
kB Tm

NL +NR

εjm .

51

(9)

j=NL +1

Similarly, for the diathermic wall we deﬁne
w
kB Tm
= εw
m.

(10)

However, the current temperature of the diathermic wall doesn’t systematically change and can only ﬂuctuate (which can be easily seen by looking for
the corresponding data presented during the computer experiment). This can be
understood if we remember that the total energy E of the system is preserved
during its evolution; i.e., for any time-step m(= 0, 1, 2, . . . , ) we can write
N

E=

εjm + εw
m = const.

(11)

j=1

Particularly, for m → ∞ we obtain (by using (9) and (10))
L
R
w
+ NR T∞
+ T∞
.
NL T0L + NR T0R + T0w = NL T∞

(12)

Note that extension of (12) to a more general description where the diathermic
wall consists of Nw (> 1) particles (then temperatures Tlw , l = m, 0, ∞, should
by replaced by Nw Tlw ) doesn’t change the ﬁnal result (15) given below.
Thermodynamic equilibrium is characterized by equality of all (ﬁnal) temperatures, i.e.,
L
R
w
T∞
= T∞
= T∞
= T∞ .

(13)

Moreover, we assume for simplicity the condition of temperature neutrality of
the diathermic wall which requires
w
= T∞ , m = 0, 1, 2, . . . ,
Tm

(14)

and leads, by using (12), (13) and (14), to expression
T0w = T∞ =

NL L NR R
T +
T ,
N 0
N 0

(15)

which is consistent with deﬁnition (2).
When the simulation begin, the temperatures of the left and right parts
(which, in general, are initially diﬀerent) tend to the same value, subject only
to small ﬂuctuations (this is already obeyed for the number of particles greater
than several dozen in each part of the container) while the temperature of the
diathermic wall ﬂuctuates, sometimes even strongly, since this wall is treated as
an additional particle and not a very massive one.
As it is seen from Figs.1 and 2 the dynamic table enclosed there concerns:
L
(1) temporal temperatures of both parts of the container LT emp ≡ Tm
and

52

A. Galant, R. Kutner, and A. Majerowski

R
RT emp ≡ Tm
, where m = 0, 1, 2, . . ., (2) temporal temperature of the diathermic
L
R
w
wall W T emp ≡ Tm
, (3) temporal temperature diﬀerence ∆T ≡ ∆Tm = Tm
−Tm
,
(4) the entropy diﬀerence ∆S ≡ ∆Sm = Sm −S0 , and 5) time ≡ m∆t. Hence, we
can observe that the ﬂuctuations of temperatures of both parts of the container
are relatively small opposite to the temperature of the diathermic wall (as the
latter is considered as an additional particle and not a very massive wall).
It should be emphasized that the diﬀerence between temperatures, ∆Tm ,
of both parts of the container obeys well known the empirical Newton law of
cooling,

∆T (t) = ∆T (0) exp(−t/τ ),

(16)

where τ is the relaxation time depending on thermodynamic parameters of the
system. This law is obeyd by real substances but in our numerical experiment
we are able to imitate it by using ideal gas with an additional mechanism of
spatial mixing of particles.
The law of entropy increase. By using the general deﬁnition of the change of
entropy we can write
dSm =

L
dEm
dE w
dE R
+ wm + Rm ,
L
Tm
Tm
Tm

(17)

where dSm = Sm+1 − Sm is the change of entropy within time interval ∆t, while
j
j
j
= Em+1
− Em
(j = L, R, w) is the energy change (within the same time
dEm
interval) of the left and right parts of the container, and the diathermic wall,
respectively.
As it is seen in Figs.1 and 2, the entropy diﬀerence ∆Sm strongly ﬂuctuates
which is caused not only by the strong ﬂuctuations of the temperature of the
diathermic wall but also by the strong ﬂuctuations of its energy change as well
as energy changes of the ideal gas particles interacting with diathermic wall.
Nevertheless, the general trend of entropy increase is still well seen even for our
small system being far from equilibrium. This is an important result pointing to
the extended range of validity of the law of entropy increase.

4

Concluding Remarks

In this paper we reconsidered the ideal gas model extending its possibility to
simulate empirical phenomena and conﬁrming its usefulness for educational
purposes both in statistical mechanics and thermodynamics. This was possible
thanks to that two mechanisms of mixing were exploited:
(i) Random scattering of particles at rough walls.
(ii) Local energy equipartition at the diathermic wall.
There are several conlusions having both educational and professional character.
(1) By using the real-time computer experiment it was possible to currently
visualize both the ’macroscopic’ heat transfer process and simultaneously its
microscopic realization.

Heat Transfer, Newton’s Law of Cooling

53

(2) By using this dual visualization we pointed out how energy is transferred in
a heating manner.
(3) Within this computer experiment we presented the trend of temperatures to
equilize when subsystems come into the thermal contact.
(4) In this experiment we discovered that the temperature diﬀerence obeys the
empirical Newton’s law of cooling.
(5) In this experiment we observed both the entropy increase and the entropy
ﬂuctuations as well as the elementary entropy change due to entropy changes
of both parts of the container and the diathermic wall.
We hope that the considered computer experiment will be an example that
stimulates students to conduct their own experimentations for deeper understanding of physical phenomena.

References
1. Prigogine I., Stengers I.: Order Out of Chaos: Man’s New Dialogue with Nature.
Bantam Books, Toronto New York London Sydney (1984)
2. Zaslavsky G.M.: Chaotic dynamics and the origin of statitical laws. Physics Today
52 (1999) 39–45
3. Beck C., Schl¨
ogl F.: Thermodynamics of chaotic systems. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge (1995); Dorfman J.R.: An Introduction to Chaos in Nonequilibrium Statistical Mechanics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1999); Schuster H.G.: Deterministic Chaos. An Introduction. Second Revised Edition. VCH
Verlagsgesellschaft, Weinheim Basel Cambridge New York (1988)
4. Stratonovich R.L.: Nonlinear Nonequilibrium Thermodynamics I. Springer-Verlag,
Berlin Heidelberg New York London Paris Tokyo Hong Kong Barcelona Budapest
(1992)
5. Tsallis C.: Possible Generalization of Boltzmann-Gibbs Statistics. J. Stat. Phys.
52 (1988) 479–487
6. Lebowitz J.L.: Microscopic Reversability and Macroscopic Behavior: Physical Explanations and Mathematical Derivations. In: Brey, J.J., Marro, J., Rubi, J.M., San
Miguel, M. In: 25 Years of Non-Equilibrium Statistical Mechanics. Lecture Notes
in Physics, Vol. 445. Spriger-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg New York (1995) 1–21
7. Lieb E.H., Yngvason J.: The Physics and Mathematics of the Second Law of Thermodynamics. Phys. Rep. 310 (1999) 1–96
8. Reif F.: Statistical Physics. Berkeley Physics Course Vol.5. McGraw-Hill Book
Company, New York St. Louis San Francisco Toronto London Sydney (1967)
9. Atkins, P.A.: The Second Law. Scientiﬁc American Books. An Imprint of W.H.
Freeman and Company, New York (1984)
10. Wolfram, S.: A New Kind of Science. Wolfram Media (2002)
11. Reif F.: Fundamental of Statistical and Thermal Physics. McGraw-Hill, New York
San Francisco St. Louis Toronto London Sydney (1965)
12. Baierlein R.: Thermal Physics. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge (1999)
13. Huang K.: Statistical Mechanics. J. Wiley and Sons, New York Chichster Brisbane
Toronto Sigapore (1987)

