Integrating Fire, Structure and Agent Models∗
A.R. Chaturvedi1, S.A. Filatyev 2, J.P. Gore2, A. Hanna1,
J. Means1, and A.K. Mellema1
1
2

Purdue Homeland Security Institute, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907
School of Mechanical Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907

Abstract. A state-of-the-art integrated environment was created to study interaction among fire, structure and agent models in a fire evacuation from a typical
office building. For the fire simulations NIST large-eddy simulation code Fire
Dynamics Simulator (FDS) was used. The code is based on a mixture fraction
model. FDS provided time resolved temperature, CO, CO2, soot distribution in
the building. The agent software was designed to simulate agent behaviors during evacuation by tracking the behavior of each individual in the building taking into account effects of temperature, CO, and soot on the behavior and health
for each agent. The created integrated environment was designed to provide the
bridge between multiple simulations for data transfer and model interaction. It
was shown that fire position, agent positions, and number of exits available affect significantly agents' health and death toll. The results can be used for better
fire safety building design and regulations.

1 Introduction
As the complexity of buildings increases, it becomes more and more challenging to
provide a satisfactory level of fire safety in the buildings. Even if the building satisfies
modern fire safety codes, it does not necessarily guarantee needed safety levels to the
occupants.
The events of September 11, 2001 showed necessity of better response training in
case of emergencies such as terrorist attack on a big building. In order to prepare for
such an event, an understanding of the event is required. Such understanding can
come from scientific analysis of human/environmental interaction. In case of explosion or arson in a building, such as that studied in the present paper, the important
aspects are fire propagation, human interaction with the fire, interaction between the
fire and the building structure. Realistic models describing fire, structure response,
and human behavior are needed for such simulations, as well as an environment
where those models run simultaneously and interact with each other during execution.
Currently, models exist which simulate fire, human behavior during evacuation and
building structure, but these models have yet to be integrated to simulate real-time
events and decisions [1].
∗

This research is partially funded by NSF ITR grant # CNS-0325846.

V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3515, pp. 695 – 702, 2005.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

696

A.R. Chaturvedi et al.

2 Goal
The goal of the project is to create a state-of-the-art integrated environment to study
interaction between fire, structure and agents in emergencies situations. Realistic and
complex models of fire, structure, and agent were used in order to simulate realistic
behavior. These three simulations are normally run independently which created the
need for a medium to transfer information from one simulation to another. In order to
do this the shared reality environment was created.

Fig. 1. Shared reality concept

3 Data Format
The original building layout was produced in 3D Studio Max. The format needed to
be changed for the needs of fire, structure, and agent models since each program was
developed independently and uses different input formats. The conversion was done
in the shared reality engine [1,2]. At each second of the scenario all three models
calculated changes and decisions based on input describing events that took place
during the previous second. The output of one model was obtained by the shared
reality engine, converted to the formats for the other models and transferred to them.
All outputs were then collected by the shared reality engine and converted to text
format which was read by the 3D visualization used for analysis. The visualization
allowed for the presentation of the impact of certain emergencies, to find the correct
measured response and, if possible, to adjust modifications to building plans.

4 Models
The original scenario was evacuation from an office building floor in case of fire with
realistic fire model simulations and agent simulation capturing individual agent
behavior.

Integrating Fire, Structure and Agent Models

697

Fig. 2. Plan of the floor used in both fire and agent simulations

4.1 Geometry
The geometry used in calculations represented a typical floor of an office building.
Physical dimensions were 50m by 30m by 3m; the building layout is shown in Figure
2. The building had windows and doors open to the environment during simulations at
all times. Office doors were also open at all times. Almost every office along the
perimeter had an open window. There were five exits, three along the West wall (left),
one main exit on the South wall (bottom), and one exit on the North wall (top).
Changes in the structure of the building were calculated using LS-DYNA [3,4].
4.2 Fire Model
Fire was simulated using the Fire Dynamics Simulator (FDS 4) program developed by
NIST [5]. FDS 4 is a large-eddy simulation (LES) turbulent code which employs the
mixture fraction model. The code has been successfully used to describe different
processes from fundamental combustion studies of plumes [6] to the replication of
2001 fire of the World Trade Center [7].
For the current simulations all walls, the ceiling and the floor were assumed to
have flammable properties. It was assumed that the fire started as a result of arson. To
accomplish this numerically a tank of kerosene was placed in one of the rooms and
ignited. The tank is shown as a gray rectangle in one of the rooms on the right side of
Figure 2. This room has exits into a corridor separating the floor into almost equal
parts (top and bottom) in Figure 2.
For calculations, a parallel version of FDS 4 was used. The calculations were done
on an IBM SP2 computer using four processors. The total grid size was 360x250x20.
This required about 10 GB of memory. The final computations were conducted for
360 seconds which took about 80 CPU hours.

698

A.R. Chaturvedi et al.

4.3 Agent Model
Initially 48 agents were positioned in different rooms on the floor. Agents started
moving towards the exits at the time fire started. Their path was described by a twodimensional A* algorithm which is a well-known shortest path algorithm [8].
All unobstructed space was divided into nodes. The nodes were placed 14 cm
apart. As agents move from one node to another, they select movements along the
path to the nearest exit. Each evacuation path is then recalculated every second. The
evacuation path could potentially change due to changes in fire conditions obtained
from FDS 4 calculations. A certain value, or cost was assign to every node which
represented the cost (F) of a move from one node to another. It was defined as
F=G+H+K ,

(1)

G was a geometrical factor. If a move from one node to another node was horizontal
or vertical, G was increased by 10. If it was diagonal, G was increased by 14. In addition the cost of a move was increased if the second node was on fire. That was determined by factor H. Factor H included effects of temperature, heat release, and smoke:

H = β1 T + β 2 HRR + β 3Soot ,

(2)

where T ,HRR, and Soot are maximum temperature (oC), maximum heat release per
unit volume (kW/m3), and maximum soot density (mg/m3) in vertical direction at the
current agent position (Xagent, Yagent). β1 , β 2 , β 3 are constants. Heat release information was used as a flame marker and visible position of the fire. The factor K estimated the distance between the position of an agent and the exit.

K = Xagent − Xexit + Yagent − Yexit ,

(3)

where Xagent and Yagent are current x and y positions of the agent, Xexit and Yexit
are x and y positions of the exit. From every position an agent could choose up to 8
possible directions to travel. The agent was limited by walls which considered impenetrable. The agents had collision-with-other-agents detection system as well. It
prevented two or more agents to occupy the same node. A position one agent occupied at certain time was considered impenetrable by other agents at the same time.
The agent moved to the lowest cost (F) position.
It can be seen from (1) - (3) that although an agent cannot walk through the wall it
is capable of walking through fire. This consequence is supported by facts that in
desperate situations people run through fire. Although it is possible for people to walk
through fire it will take a toll on their health.
The agent health will decline while they are evacuating. The formula used in calculations takes into account the temperature, heat release, soot, carbon monoxide, and
carbon dioxide. The agents start with health equal to one, decreasing according to the
following formula:
Healthi − Healthi +1 = α1T + α 2 HRR + α 3 Soot + α 4 CO + α 5CO 2 ,

(4)

where Healthi is health of an agent at time i second, CO is CO volume fraction (ppm),
CO2 is CO2 volume fraction (ppm). Soot density, CO and CO2 volume fractions are

Integrating Fire, Structure and Agent Models

699

maximum values in vertical (z) direction at the agent position as well as temperature
and heat release. α1 ,..., α 5 are constants. Agents died when their health reached a zero
value. The formulas were based on real data for how these elements affect the human
body. The CO data is shown in Table 1 [9].
Table 1. Effects of CO on agents

CO in the Atmosphere

%
Blood
COHb

Percent
0.007
0.01

mg/cubic meter
80
140

ppm
70
120

10
20

0.02

250

220

30

0.0350.052
0.0800.122
0.195

400-600

350520
8001220
1950

40-50

900-1400
2200

60-70
80

Physiological Symptoms

Shortness of breath upon exertion
Shortness of breath upon moderate
exertion, possible headache
Decided headache, dizziness, dimness
of vision, impaired judgment
Headache, confusion, fainting, collapse
Unconsciousness, convulsions, death
if continued exposure
Swiftly fatal

4.4 Agent-Fire Interaction

Current calculations were done under the assumption that agents do not affect the fire.
They cannot either extinguish or increase intensity of the fire by their actions. On the
other hand, the fire propagation affects both agent behavior and health. This assumption allowed us to have independent fire simulation. After finishing the fire simulation, the computed data was used as input for the agent simulations.

5 Results
Immediately after the ignition of kerosene and consumption of air in the room the fire
moved from the room into the corridor and began propagating in the direction of air
source, i.e. open windows and doors. Figure 3 shows temperature distribution at time
200 seconds, at 2.4 meters above the floor. At seen from Figure 3, 200 seconds after
the fire started it has reached one of the building exits. The quickly-moving fire
blocked some agents from exits.
Figure 4 shows evacuation visualization. The smoke shown represents the fire position. Agents are in the process of evacuating the building.
Agents far from the exits were more probable to die due to CO poisoning and
smoke inhalation as a result of being blocked by the fire from exits. Through multiple
runs of the scenario it was observed that disallowing escape through various exits

700

A.R. Chaturvedi et al.

Fig. 3. Temperature distribution at time 200 sec. Vertical position is 2.4 m above the floor

Fig. 4. Visualization of agent evacuation

dramatically affects agent death rate. The death rate with all exits open was 15 out of
48. In replicating the simulation with various combinations of exits closed during
evacuation, it can be seen that the two main exits are critical to agent death rate. The
death rate with just one of the main exits closed (the exit at the top of Figure 4) was
18 out of 48, a 6.25% increase in death rate by closing one exit. Closing both of the
main exits (the top and bottom exits of Figure 4) has the most dramatic effect on the
death rate: 28 out of 48 agents, a 58.3% death rate. This is a 20.8% increase compared
to closing only one main exit. Figure 5 shows the evacuation paths of each agent as
well as dead agent positions when all exits are open. Figure 6 shows the effect of
closing the two main exits.

Integrating Fire, Structure and Agent Models

701

Fig. 5. Agent’s evacuation paths with all exits open. Dots represent initial positions, X’s represent dead agents

Fig. 6. Agent’s evacuation paths with two main exits closed. Dots represent initial positions,
X’s represent dead agents

702

A.R. Chaturvedi et al.

6 Conclusions
The state-of-the-art Shared Reality System was created and successfully tested in case
of evacuation of a building on fire. The system included fire simulation (FDS), agent
simulation, and the Shared Reality Engine for format conversion. The final results
were presented in form of 3D movie visualization. Since fire and agent simulations
did not interact directly with each other but through the shared reality, any one simulation can be replaced with a small change in the Shared Reality Engine to accommodate input/output stream from a new code. This change will not affect the remaining
code. This provides a significant flexibility in selecting the most convenient and advanced software in each area separately.

References
1. Foong, C., Armstrong, B., Dilley, D., Grahn, J., Krull, K., Chaturvedi, A., Gore, J.,
Filatyev, S. “Towards Enabling A Distributed And Scalable Society Of Simulations.” 2005
Spring Simulation Multiconference (SpringSim’05) (2005).
2. Chaturvedi, A., Foong, C., Armstrong, B., Dilley, D., Grahn, J., Krull, K., Gore, J.,
Filatyev, S. “A Society of Simulations.” Submitted to Transactions on Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics (2005)
3. LS-DYNA. < http://www.ls-dyna.com/>
4. Popescu, V., Hoffmann, C., Kilic, S., Sozen, M., Meador, S. “Producing High-Quality
Visualizations of Large-Scale Simulation.” Visualization, 2003. VIS 2003. IEEE (2003)
5. McGrattan, K., Forney, G. “Fire Dynamics Simulator (Version 4). Users Guide.” NIST Special Publication 1019. 2004 <http://fire.nist.gov/fds>
6. Xin, Y., Gore, J.P., McGrattan, K.B., Rehm, R.G., Baum, H.R. “Fire dynamics simulation
of a turbulent buoyant flame using a mixture-fraction-based combustion model.” Accepted
for publication in Combustion and Flame Journal (2005)
7. Prasad, K., Baum, H. “Coupled Fire Dynamics and Thermal Response of Complex Building Structures.” Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 30 (2004).
8. Rabin, S. (2002) AI Game Programming Wisdom. Charles River Media, MA.
9. Canadian Centre for Occupational Health and Safety, International Programme on Chemical Safety. 1999. Carbon Monoxide. <http://www.inchem.org/documents/
ehc/ehc/ehc213.htm>

