Numerical Simulation of Self-heating
InGaP/GaAs Heterojunction Bipolar Transistors
Yiming Li1,2 and Kuen-Yu Huang3
1

Department of Computational Nanoelectronics,
National Nano Device Laboratories, Hsinchu 300, Taiwan
2
Microelectronics and Information Systems Research Center,
National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu 300, Taiwan
ymli@faculty.nctu.edu.tw
3
Institute of Electronics, National Chiao Tung University,
Hsinchu 300, Taiwan

Abstract. We numerically simulate eﬀects of the self-heating on the
current-voltage characteristics of InGaP/GaAs heterojunction bipolar
transistors (HBTs). A set of coupled nonlinear ordinary diﬀerential equations (ODEs) of the equivalent circuit of HBT is formed and solved
numerically in the large-signal time domain. We decouple the corresponding ODEs using the waveform relaxation method and solve them
with the monotone iterative method. The temperature-dependent energy band gap, the current gain, the saturation current, and the thermal
conductivity are considered in the model formulation. The power-added
eﬃciency and the 1-dB compression point of a three-ﬁnger HBT are
calculated. This approach successfully explores the self-heating and the
thermal coupling phenomena of the three-ﬁnger transistors under high
power and high frequency conditions. The numerical algorithm reported
here can be incorporated into electronic computer-aided design software
to simulate ultra-large scale integrated and radio frequency circuits.

1

Introduction

High power heterojunction bipolar transistors (HBTs) operated at micrometerand millimeter-wave frequencies have been of great interest; in particular, for
the advanced wireless and ﬁber communication [1], [2], [3], [4], [5]. These transistors, fabricated for high power applications, usually have a structure of multiple ﬁngers to spread the current and the dissipated heat. Therefore, eﬀects of
the self-heating and the thermal coupling among ﬁngers is one of the important issues for design and fabrication of advanced radio frequency (RF) circuits.
Electrical characteristics depend on the surrounding temperature, so the thermal
eﬀect signiﬁcantly inﬂuences the linearity of operating transistors [6]. Therefore,
a self-heating model should be considered when exploring power dissipations of
InGaP/GaAs devices and related RF circuits.
In this paper we examine eﬀects of the self-heating on a three-ﬁnger InGaP/GaAs HBT operated at high frequency. Using the waveform relaxation
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3516, pp. 292–299, 2005.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

Numerical Simulation of Self-heating InGaP/GaAs HBTs

293

Fig. 1. An equivalent circuit of the simulated three-ﬁnger HBT under constant current
and high frequency excitations

(WR), the monotone iterative (MI), and Runge-Kutta methods [7], [8], [9], [10],
a set of nonlinear ordinary diﬀerential equations (ODEs) with thermal models
is solved numerically in the time domain. The governing ODEs of the equivalent circuit of HBTs are formulated by the Kirchhoﬀ’s current law [11]. This
solution technique has recently been developed by us for circuit simulations [7],
[8], [9], [10]. The temperature-dependent physical quantities are modeled and
several important engineering factors, such as the power-added eﬃciency and
the 1-dB compression point of the simulated three-ﬁnger HBT are calculated.
Our modeling and simulation successfully explores the self-heating and the thermal coupling phenomena of the studied three-ﬁnger transistors circuit operated
under high power and high frequency conditions.
This paper is organized as follows. In Sec. 2, we state the physical model and
numerical method. In Sec. 3, we present the simulation results. Finally, we draw
conclusions.

2

Self-heating Modeling and Numerical Method

A multiﬁnger HBT is formed by several sub-HBTs with their own collector and
emitter, where their base is connected together. As shown in Fig. 1, an equivalent
circuit with a thermal network of the three-ﬁnger HBT is studied in this work,
where each ﬁnger is theoretically assumed to be identical. A thermal model that
describes the relation between the power dissipation and the junction temperature is adopted. The electrical model of HBT considered in our simulation is
based on the Gummel-Poon (GP) large signal model [7], [8], [9], [10]. For the
thermal-electrical feedback mechanism, the temperature-dependant equations
are introduced to the GP model
Eg (TJ ) = Eg (TA ) +

Ea · TA2
Ea · TJ2
+
,
T A + Eb
T J + Eb

(1)

294

Y. Li and K.-Y. Huang

Fig. 2. A plot of the maximum norm error of the junction temperature versus the
number of iterations of the WR loop

TJ XT I
Eg (TA )
Eg (TJ )
)
· exp[(
)−(
)],
TA
k · TA
k · TJ

(2)

ISE(TJ ) = ISE · (

TJ XT I −XT B
Eg (TA )
Eg (TJ )
) NE
· exp[(
)−(
)],
TA
N E · k · TA
N E · k · TJ

(3)

ISC(TJ ) = ISC · (

TJ XT I −XT B
Eg (TA )
Eg (TJ )
) NC
· exp[(
)−(
)],
TA
N C · k · TA
N C · k · TJ

(4)

BF (TJ ) = BF · (

TJ XT B
)
,
TA

(5)

BR(TJ ) = BR · (

TJ XT B
)
,
TA

(6)

IS(TJ ) = IS · (

where TJ and TA are the junction and the ambient temperature, respectively.
We note that for high power devices, TA is the temperature on the back of the
substrate. Above equations include the temperature dependance of energy band
gap (Eg ), the saturation current (IS), the collector and emitter leakage current
(ISC and ISE), and the current gain (BF and BR). The thermal model expresses the relation between the power dissipation and the junction temperature.
The junction temperature with considering the temperature-dependent thermal
conductivity for the three-ﬁnger HBT is given by

Numerical Simulation of Self-heating InGaP/GaAs HBTs

⎤
TJ1
= ⎣ TJ2 ⎦ ,
TJ3

295

⎡

TJ = TA {1 −

−1
(BB − 1)
[RT H · PD ]} BB−1
TA

(7)

where TJn is the junction temperature of the nth ﬁnger, n = 1, 2, 3. RT H · PD
is given by
⎤ ⎡
⎤
PD1
RT 11 RT 12 RT 13
= ⎣ RT 21 RT 22 RT 23 ⎦ · ⎣ PD2 ⎦ .
RT 31 RT 32 RT 33
PD3
⎡

RT H · PD

(8)

RT nn and RT nm denote the self-heating thermal resistance of the nth ﬁnger and
the coupling thermal resistance which counts the coupled heat from the mth
ﬁnger to the nth ﬁnger, respectively. Furthermore, the power dissipation of the
nth ﬁnger is denoted by PDn . Equivalent circuit of the three-ﬁnger HBT is shown
in Fig. 1. The ﬁnger 1 of this HBT is represented by M 1, and M 2 and M 3 are the
ﬁngers 2 and 3, respectively. IBB denotes the constant bias current at the base
and Pin is the power of RF input signal. The behavior of Fingers 1 and 3 is the
same for the identical ﬁngers assumption. By considering the models above, the
electrical and thermal feedback equations for the power HBTs are achieved and
solved self-consistently in the time domain, where the temperature-dependent
thermal conductivity is also included in our numerical solution.
The corresponding coupled nonlinear ODEs of the equivalent circuit of HBTs
above is ﬁrst decoupled using the WR method and then solved with the MI and
Runge-Kutta methods. Compared with the conventional method, the Netwon’s
iteration method, used in the well-known SPICE circuit simulator [8], [9] our
approach in solving the self-heating model is robust and cost-eﬀective for the
large-scale time domain circuit simulation of HBTs.

3

Results and Discussion

First of all, we verify the convergence of the solution method. The testing case
is the device with the collector voltage VCC = 5V , the input current bias IBB =
0.5mA, the frequency is centralized at 1.8GHz, and the convergence criterion
is that the maximum norm error of the output voltage is less than 10−11 V .
Figure 2 shows a plot of the maximum norm error of the junction temperature
versus the number of iterations. Simulation with our method demonstrates better
convergence property than the result of the SPICE circuit simulator [9]. However,
the simulation with the SPICE circuit simulator takes more than 100 iterations
to meet the speciﬁed stopping criterion. For each time step, the CPU time of
our method is of the order of 102 sec. running on a HP workstation XW 8000.
The convergence of SPICE circuit simulator depends upon the selection of initial
guess and the time steps which complicates the solution procedure for practical
engineering application. Our solution algorithm converges monotonically and the
DC solutions, in general, are used as the starting solution.

296

Y. Li and K.-Y. Huang

Fig. 3. The curves of ICC -VCE with respect to diﬀerent IBB for the simulated threeﬁnger InGaP/GaAs HBT circuit. It is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the result without
considering the self-heating [7], [8], [9]

Fig. 4. The simulated ICC -VCE curves with respect to diﬀerent IBB for the ﬁngers
1 and 2 of the HBT. The result of Finger 3 is omitted according to the property of
symmetry

The simulated I-V characteristics of the three-ﬁnger InGaP/GaAs HBT circuit are shown in Figs. 3 and 4. Each curve in these ﬁgures represents the col-

Numerical Simulation of Self-heating InGaP/GaAs HBTs

297

Fig. 5. The computed POU T , PAE, and Gain versus Pin

Fig. 6. Plots of the PAE of Fingers 1 and 2 versus the input power

lector current under constant IBB . Due to the eﬀect of self-heating, the total
collector current decreases when the collector-emitter voltage increases, shown
in Fig. 3. It results in a negative diﬀerential resistance region in the I-V characteristics and a collapse of current gain in the three-ﬁnger HBT circuit. As
shown in Fig. 4, the collector current of the central ﬁnger (Finger 2) decreases
rapidly, compared with the results of neighbor ﬁgures, such as Finger 1. It is due

298

Y. Li and K.-Y. Huang

to the strongly coupled heat from its neighbor two ﬁngers, Finger 1 and Finger
3. As the collector-emitter voltage increases even more (VCC > 4V ), an abrupt
reduction of the collector current of Finger 2 occurs. With the electrical and
thermal interaction, our modeling and simulation can explore the phenomenon
of collapse for the multiﬁnger HBTs under high voltage and high current bias.
As shown in Fig. 5, it is the calculated output power (POU T ), the poweradded eﬃciency (PAE), and the power gain (Gain) versus the diﬀerent values of
the input power (Pin ). The input excitation is a single tone signal at 1.8 GHz.
The bias condition of this single tone simulation is with VCC = 3.6 V and IBB =
0.6 mA. In this simulation, we have taken the eﬀect of heating of the input high
frequency signal into consideration. It is found that, shown in Fig. 5, the Gain
and PAE degrade as Pin increases, and the 1 − dB compression point (P1−dB )
is -2.45 dBm. The eﬀect of thermal coupling among ﬁngers also inﬂuences the
performance of the three-ﬁnger device structure. As shown in Fig. 6, the PAE
of the central ﬁnger (Finger 2) is reduced and degraded when Pin > −3dBm. In
the meanwhile, the PAE of the neighbor ﬁnger (Finger 1) still increases as Pin
increases. This phenomenon illustrates that the performance degradation of the
whole transistor is mainly dominated by the hotter central ﬁnger.

4

Conclusions

In this paper, we have numerically solved a set of nonlinear and self-heating
ODEs for exploring the electrical characteristics of InGaP/GaAs device. The solution approach is mainly based on the WR and the MI methods. Compared with
the well-known SPICE circuit simulator, our approach has successfully shown its
robustness. Diﬀerent electrical characteristics have been calculated to examine
eﬀects of self-heating on the simulated three-ﬁnger HBT circuit. We believe that
the solution method will beneﬁt the community of electronic computer-aided
design; in particular, for modern RF circuit simulation. To perform optimal designs for speciﬁed circuits, we are currently implementing intelligent algorithms
with the developed method.

Acknowledgments
This work is supported in part by the National Science Council (NSC) of TAIWAN under contracts NSC-93-2215-E-429-008 and NSC 93-2752-E-009-002-PAE,
and the grant of the Ministry of Economic Aﬀairs, TAIWAN under contracts No.
92-EC-17-A-07-S1-0011 and No. 93-EC-17-A-07-S1-0011.

References
1. Yanagihara, M., Sakai, H., Ota, Y., Tamura, A: High fmax AlGaAs/GaAs HBT
with L-shaped base electrode and its application to 50 GHz ampliﬁer. Solid-State
Electron. 41 (1997) 1615-1620

Numerical Simulation of Self-heating InGaP/GaAs HBTs

299

2. Oka, T., Hirata, K., Suzuki, H., Ouchi, K., Uchiyama, H., Taniguchi, T., Mochizuki,
K., Nakamura, T: High-speed small-scale InGaP/GaAs HBT technology and its
application to integrated circuits. IEEE Trans. Electron Devices. 48 (2001) 26252630
3. Troyanovsky, B., Yu, Z., Dutton, R. W.: Physics-based simulation of nonlinear
distortion in semiconductor devices using the harmonic balance method. Comput.
Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 181 (2000) 467-482
4. Zhu, Y., Twynam, J. K., Yagura, M., Hasegawa, M., Hasegawa, T., Eguchi, Y.,
Amano, Y., Suematsu, E., Sakuno, K., Matsumoto, N., Sato, H., Hashizume, N.:
Self-heating eﬀect compensation in HBTs and its analysis and simulation. IEEE
Trans. Electron Devices. 48 (2001) 2640-2646
5. Heckmann, S., Sommet, R., Nebus, J.-M., Jacquet, J.-C., Floriot, D., Auxemery,
P., Quere, R.: Characterization and modeling of bias dependent breakdown and
self-heating in GaInP/GaAs power HBT to improve high power ampliﬁer design.
IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Techniques 50 (2002) 2811-2819
6. Park, H.-M., Hong, S.: A novel temperature-dependent large-signal model of heterojunction bipolar transistor with a uniﬁed approach for self-heating and ambient
temperature eﬀects. IEEE Trans. Electron Devices. 49 (2002) 2099-2106
7. Li, Y., Cho, Y.-Y., Wang, C.-S., Hung, K.-Y.: A Genetic Algorithm Approach to
InGaP/GaAs HBT Parameters Extraction and RF Characterization. Jpn. J. Appl.
Phys. 42 (2003) 2371-2374
8. Huang, K.-Y., Li, Y., Lee, C.-P.: A Time Domain Approach to Simulation and
Characterization of RF HBT Two-Tone Intermodulation Distortion. IEEE Trans.
Microwave Theory and Techniques. 51 (2003) 2055-2062
9. Li, Y., Kuang, K.-Y.: A Novel Numerical Approach to Heterojunction Bipolar
Transistor Circuit Simulation. Comput. Phys. Commun. 152 (2003) 307-316
10. Li, Y.: A Monotone Iterative Method for Bipolar Junction Transistor Circuit Simulation. WSEAS Trans. Mathematics. 1 (2002) 159-164
11. Liu, W.: Handbook of III-V Heterojunction Bipolar Transistor. John Wiley & Sons
(1998)

