A Study on Fast Preparation of Electron Microscope
Biological Specimens
Guo Huashan, Yao Hongjun, Wu Yang, Yang Tian, Zhang Wei, and Guo Jianjun
College of Life Science, Huazhong Normal University, Wuhan 430079, China
guohuashan1982@sohu.com

Abstract. The electron microscope is widely used in chemistry, physics and
biology fields, especially in biomedicine ultrastructure research. Using the
ultrasonic waves, the time that we spend in preparing the biological specimen
will be decreased from 5~10 days to 3~5 hours. A few investigation and
discussion of fast preparation was proposed in the paper. This work is very
significant to biomedicine research and clinic pathology diagnoses aspects. It is
better to choose amplitude with low frequency for the purpose of fast
preparation.
Keywords: Electron Microscope, Biology Samples, Preparation, Specimen.

1 Introduction
The electron microscope is widely used in chemistry, physics and biology fields,
especially in biomedicine ultrastructure research. It is very important to know
alternation of morphological structure to detail, but preparations of biology samples
require cockamamie procedure before they can be observed by electron microscope.
Routine preparation costs at least 5 days, even 10 days long or longer. In order to save
time, reduce work, and improve working efficiency, the author has engaged in
electron microscope technology for more than twenty years. A few investigation and
discussion of fast preparation was proposed in the paper. This work is very important
to biology science research and clinic pathology diagnoses aspects.

2 Materials and Methods
2.1 Laboratory Apparatus and Reagents
(1) Apparatus ultrasonic cleaner: An output of 50 watts, vibration frequency of 40
KHz.
(2) Reagents. Paraform+glutaraldehyde mixed fixation, 0.2mol PBS, 1% osmium
tetroxide， 30%， 50%, 60%, 70%, 80%, 90%, 95%, 100% ethanol, acrylic
propane， Epon812 acrylic resin.
To ensure that the reproduction of your illustrations is of a reasonable quality, we
advise against the use of shading. The contrast should be as pronounced as possible.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part III, LNCS 4489, pp. 611–614, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

612

G. Huashan et al.

If screenshots are necessary, please make sure that you are happy with the print
quality before you send the files.
2.2 Preparation
Before preparation, two-thirds volume of ice water is infused to flume of ultrasonic
cleaner as driving medium. Glass vials containing specimens are placed into the
flume. Here, taken the treatment of myocardium tissue of M.m.albula, kidney cortex,
liver tissue, leaf tissue of photinia serrulata as an example.
(1) Pre-fixation
First, cutting material into 1mm3 or smaller pieces, putting them in vial containing
fixation solution as soon as possible, and then placing them into 4 freezer.
Choosing fast-penetrating fixation solution, such as paraform+glutaraldehyde
mixture, acrolein+glutaraldehyde mixture. After 20 minutes, putting vials containing
specimens into flume of ultrasonic cleaner and start ultrasonic cleaner for 10 minutes.

℃

(2) Washing
Discarding fixation solution, washing by 0.1mol PBS to remove the fixation solution
leaving on the surface of specimens, treating by ultrasonic for 4-6 minutes.
(3) Post-fixation
Post-fix specimens by 1% osmium tetroxide after washing, placing them into 4
freezer for20 minutes, and then treating by ultrasonic for 10 minutes. This step should
add ice to flume to keep the temperature down or cold-cycle water.

℃

(4) Washing
Method is as same as (2).
(5) Dehydratation and staining
Dehydrating by ethanol in grads. Treating by 50%, 70%(containing 2% uranylacetate),
80%, 90%, 95%, 100% ethanol, each concentration for 3 minutes, and then treating by
acrylic propane for 3 minutes.
(6) Permeance
The ratio of acrylic propane to Epon812 acrylic resin is 1:1. Treating by ultrasonic for
10 minutes, and then treating by pure Epon812 for 10 minutes. This step is important
for embedding reagent to penetrate specimens fast.
(7) Embedding and polymerization
The specimens after permeance are better placed on warm table put into capsules,
and then embed in pure Epon812. Polymerizing specimens after placing them in 90100 incubator for 1 hour.

，

℃

It can be concluded that the whole process costs less than 4 hours from fixation to
polymerization. After polymerizing, embedded specimens can be used for trimming
and sectioning staining, observing and taking photos by electron microscope.

，

A Study on Fast Preparation of Electron Microscope Biological Specimens

613

3 Results
Compared ultrasonic prepared specimens with routine prepared specimens, according
to the electron microscopic pictures, structure of kidney cortex and liver cell of
M.m.albula, mitochondrion and myofibril in myocardium cell are preserved perfectly.
Similarly, cell wall， plasmodesmatas of plant cells, especially grana and stroma of
chloroplasts, have a normal configuration. In conclusion, this is an improved and
efficient method to prepare electron microscope specimens of both plant and animal
cell (Fig.1, Fig.2).

(a)

(b)

μm
μm

(c)

(d)

μm

） (b).liver of M.m albula（ Bar=10
）
(a).Cardiac muscle of M.m albula（ Bar=10
） (d).leaf of photinia scrrulata（ Bar=10
(c).Kidney cortex of M.m albula（ Bar=10

μm）

Fig. 1. Ultrasonic prepared specimens

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

μm） (b).liver of M.m albula（ Bar=10μm）
μm） (d).leaf of photinia scrrulata（ Bar=10μm）

(a).Cardiac muscle of M.m albula（ Bar=10
(c).Kidney cortex of M.m albula（ Bar=10

Fig. 2. Ultrasonic prepared specimens

4 Discussion and Conclusion
There have been a few reports about fast preparation, Coulter made use of
diminishing sample bulk, reducing dehydration time and vacuum imbuing method.
However, some steps had shortened time [1]. Robbins and G.Jentzsch used Epon812
to steep monolayer cell, used 3 times solvent of embed, every time costs 5 minutes,
the whole press costs 4 days.[3][4][5][6] The scholars who have engaged in fleetness

614

G. Huashan et al.

preparation in homeland are also the same. The author is able to shorten preparation
time, because ultrasonic is used to routine preparation procedure.
The author has done research on the applicability of this device, different
processing method of different samples. Generally speaking it takes longer to process
plant tissue than animal tissue, and it takes longer to process precise faction tissue
than rare faction tissue. Meanwhile, the processing method is also suitable for
scanning electron microscope specimen; however, it’s difficult to process the primary
embedded samples, because ultrasound can detach the primary embedded material
from samples.
Ultrasonic is not only used for electron microscope biology sample preparation, but
also may be used for organization slice up of the light microscope, some problems
need further research. In hospital, frequency of the instrument for ultrasonic diagnosis
and remedy in use is between 800 and 1000 KHz, while ultrasonic frequency used for
electron microscope sample. Preparation is in 40KHz. could it be raised, or what is
the extremity? The best frequency and amplitude (in short, strength), and the exact
length of time to process need further research. Because ultrasonic strength is pretty
important to biology sample preparation, using different strength will cause different
results. If the strength doesn’t exceed the limit, longer time of processing will not
cause the impairment of cells and tissue. Otherwise, if the strength exceed extremely,
it will cause impairment of tissue. Moreover, selection of conductive transmitter and
the decreasing quantity of its vibrational frequency after transmitter flowing into
sample bottle need to research further. The author suggests on that on the basis of not
damaging cell structure, it is better to choose amplitude with low frequency for the
purpose of fast preparation.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.

Coulter M D. J.:U1trastruct Res. 1967, 346-347.
Robbins G, Jentzsch J.:Histochem.Cytochem. 1967, 181-182.
Zheng R.:Practicality cytology technology. Beijing Scientific Press, 1980, 188-189.
Chen Shi, Peng Xueming: Biomedicine electron microscope technology. Social science
Press of China, 1997.
5. Arturo González-Robles: Ultrastructure of trophozoites using fast freeze-fixation followed
by freeze-substition J. of Electron Microscopy, 2001, 423-427.
6. Fu Honglan: Practical Electron Microscopy Beijing.Higher Education Press, 2004, 33-34.

