A Process Meta Model to Support Policy Based
Management in Workflow System
Song Ouyang and Hao Xu
School of Information Science and Engineering, Central South University, Changsha,
Hunan, P.R. China 410083
ouyangsong@yahoo.com,
xuhao916@gmail.com

Abstract. Policy-based management and process-based management are two
main management paradigms that are widely used in information management
systems. The foundation of traditional WfMS is process-based management. In
this paper we present a process meta model to support policy based
management in WfMS. With the new meta model the system has better
flexibility in workflow design time and higher adaptability at run-time. It can
also keep the business rules consistent across the whole enterprise and provide a
uniform method to deal with business rules, resources and security in workflow
system.
Keywords: Workflow, WfMS.

1 Introduction
With the increase of complexity, traditional workflow management systems (WfMS)
are facing many challenges in meeting the requirements of flexibility and adaptability
and implementing resource management and security control [2]. To improve
flexibility and adaptability, a Petri net formalism is presented to analyze structural
change in the workflow process modeling [3]. A new workflow modeling method is
proposed to improve flexibility and adaptability of system [4]. A meta-model is
proposed in [5] to support dynamic changes of workflow process and enable the
dynamic characteristics. Similar approach can be found in [6]. To address various
software and/or hardware resources management issues, a resource management
system that can handle a large number of workflow resources is proposed [7].
The foundation of a traditional WfMS is process-based management. The features
of this management method are: the execution of each step of a task is based on an
instruction and its parameters; the description of the instruction is imperative and it
invokes execution components directly; after one instruction completed, another predefined instruction is initiated based on the pre-defined rules and conditions. The
controlling mechanism between steps is accurate. In some workflow systems, better
flexibility and adaptability in flow control are achieved through expanding the types
of activities and adding more collaboration between activities. For the applications
with comprehensive requirements in resources management and security control,
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part III, LNCS 4489, pp. 289–292, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

290

S. Ouyang and H. Xu

however, it is difficult to improve the flexibility and adaptability by using similar
methods that are used in control flow since the requirements are more complicated.
Another management paradigm widely used in information management systems is
policy-based management. The features of this management method are: the
execution of each step of a task is based on the objective or behavior constraints; the
description of instruction is declarative and it can not invoke execution components
directly in most cases; after one step completed the subsequence step will be executed
based on the analysis of active policies and the state of whole system.
Although some workflow systems used policies to deal with resources and security
control, it is not real policy-based management system. The distinct features of
policy-based management from process-based management are: declarative
instruction, a centralized policy repository, dynamic policy transformations and
looking up for policies, independent policy engine, and decision-making based on
policies.
To meet the challenges we proposed to integrate the policy-based management in a
WfMS [1]. This paper presents a process meta model to support policy based
management in a WfMS. With the new meta model the system has better flexibility in
workflow design time and higher adaptability at run-time.

2 Process Meta-model to Support Policy Based Management
Workflow process meta-model is the base for process definition modeling. A new
process meta-model to support policy management is shown in Fig.1.

Fig. 1. A process meta-model to support policy based management

A Process Meta Model to Support Policy Based Management in Workflow System

291

The main elements in the model are described as follows.
Process Activity: A logical step or description of a piece of work that contributes
toward the achievement of a process.
Workflow Relevant Data: Data that is used by a WfMS to determine the state
transition of a workflow instance.
Transition Condition: Criteria for moving, or state transitioning, from the current
activity to the next activity(s) in a process instance.
Organization Model: The model of an enterprise’s organizational structures.
Resource/Application/Role: They are managed through late-bound components
(Subjects) to perform the specific behavior described by a policy.
Policy Control Point: The proper point defined in workflow to apply policies.
The new meta model has some new features:
(1) It provides more means to develop a process definition in workflow system.
Using policies the complicated business rules, the local activity goals, and the
constraints for resources can be described in a straight way. The flexibility in
workflow design time is much better than that in a traditional process-based
system.

Fig. 2. Relations of activities, roles/participant, resources, and applications

(2) It makes it possible to separate the activities of process from the operations on
roles, resources, and the applications. In the traditional process-based system, the
relations between activities, roles, resources, and applications are shown in Fig.2 (a).
It can be seen that workflow engine needs to deal with them directly. It results in
some difficult in system design and system maintenance. Fig. 2(b) shows the new
relations. All the operations on resources, roles and the applications are done by
policy engine through the late-bound components. The separation benefits the system
design and the enterprise administration.

292

S. Ouyang and H. Xu

3 Advantages of New Approach
Integrate the policy-based management in traditional WfMS has many advantages:
Firstly, it improves flexibility and adaptability. For example, a loan application
usually has many business rules to deal with. This can be done by a traditional
process based workflow system. For some business rules such as determine whether
the supplied information is complete, credit scoring and other risk assessment,
execute the required level of approval and ensure regulatory compliance it is better
using policy-based management. With policy-based management, business managers
can specify only the policies or local objectives for these business rules. Policies can
also describe much complex requirements of resources and security control. So it has
better flexibility in design time. At the run-time the active policies in policy
repository can be changed dynamically, a policy and the components to execute this
policy can be late bound to achieve higher adaptability.
Secondly, a centralized policy repository and an independent policy engine to
execute policies make it possible to keep the business rules consistent across the
whole enterprise.
Lastly, it is possible to use a uniform method to deal with resources and security
controls and business rules. This benefits the system design.

4 Conclusion and Future Work
The new process meta model described in this paper defines new elements to support
policy-based management in WfMS. Based on the model a workflow system has
better flexibility and adaptability. We have some experience on developing the policy
engine in network management systems. The future work is to make expansions to the
traditional workflow engine to achieve close collaboration with the policy engine.

References
1. Song Ouyang, “Integrate Policy based Management and Process based Management─A
New Approach for Workflow Management System”, IEEE proceedings of CSCWD2006,
Nanjing, China (2006).
2. Shi MeiLin, Yang GuangXin, Xiang Yong, Wu ShangGuang, “Workflow Management
Systems: A Survey”, Proceedings of IEEE Intl Conf on Communication Technology,
Beijing (1998)
3. CA Ellis, K. Keddara, G. Rozenberg., “Dynamic change within workflow systems”,
Proceedings of International, ACM Conference, COOCS ’95, Milpitas, CA, August. (1995)
4. Fan YuShun, Wu Cheng, “Research on a Workflow Modeling Method to Improve System
Flexibility”, Journal of Software, Vol. 13 (2002)
5. Sun ReiZhi, Shi MeiLin, “A Process Meta-Model Supporting Dynamic Change of
Workflow”, Journal of Software, Vol. 14 (2003)
6. Zhao Wen, Hu WenHui, Zhang ShiKun, Wang LiFu, “Study and Application of a
Workflow Meta-Model”, Journal of Software, Vol. 13 (2003)
7. Weimin Du, Ming-Chien Shan: “Enterprise Workflow Resource Management”. RIDE
(1999)

