Diﬀerential Gene Survival under Asymmetric
Directional Mutational Pressure
Pawel Mackiewicz1 , Malgorzata Dudkiewicz1 , Maria Kowalczuk1 ,
Dorota Mackiewicz1 , Joanna Banaszak1 , Natalia Polak1 ,
Kamila Smolarczyk1 , Aleksandra Nowicka1 , Miroslaw R. Dudek2 , and
Stanislaw Cebrat1
1

Department of Genetics, Institute of Microbiology, University of Wroclaw,
ul. Przybyszewskiego 63/77, PL-54148 Wroclaw, Poland
{malgosia, pamac, nowicka, kowal, dorota, polak, smolar,
cebrat}@microb.uni.wroc.pl
http://smORFland.microb.uni.wroc.pl
2
Institute of Physics, University of Zielona G´
ora, ul. A. Szafrana 4a,
PL-65516 Zielona G´
ora, Poland
mdudek@proton.if.uz.zgora.pl

Abstract. We have simulated, using Monte Carlo methods, the survival of prokaryotic genes under directional mutational pressure. We have
found that the whole pool of genes located on the leading DNA strand
diﬀers from that located on the lagging DNA strand and from the subclass of genes coding for ribosomal proteins. The best strategy for most
of the non-ribosomal genes is to change the direction of the mutational
pressure from time to time or to stay at their recent position. Genes
coding for ribosomal proteins do not proﬁt to such an extent from switching the directional pressure which seems to explain their extremely
conserved positions on the prokaryotic chromosomes.

1

Introduction

Most of the natural DNA sequences are asymmetric. There are two main mechanisms introducing DNA asymmetry: the replication-associated directional mutational pressure and the selection for protein coding sequences (see for review:
[1], [2]). The replication-associated mutational pressure generates some kind of
a global asymmetry between the two strands called the leading and the lagging
DNA strands. On the other hand, the selection for coding sequences generates a
local asymmetry between sense (coding) and anti-sense (complementary to the
sense) strands of genes. This asymmetry results from the coding function requirement of genes. Thus, as in the case of two chiral molecules, the two possible
ways of superposition of a coding sequence on the asymmetric bacterial chromosome are not equivalent. For example, if the sense strand of a gene located on
the leading strand has more G than C, and C is more often substituted by other
To whom all correspondence should be sent.
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3039, pp. 687–693, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

688

P. Mackiewicz et al.

nucleotides than G on the leading strand, then inversion of this sequence, which
transfers the C-rich anti-sense strand of the gene to the leading strand, would
increase the mutation rate of the gene. Thus, a gene sequence remaining for a
long time on one DNA strand tends to acquire some asymmetry characteristic
for the mutational pressure while sequences occasionally inverted oscillate between the two compositional stages and their composition depends on the time
which they spend on each strand and on how frequent they are translocated. In
this paper we have simulated the eﬀect of changing the mutational pressure on
the gene survival.

2

Methods

Simulations have been performed on 564 leading strand genes and 286 lagging
strand genes from the Borrelia burgdorferi genome [3], whose sequence and annotations were downloaded from GenBank. The replication-associated mutational pressure (RAMP) describing the nucleotide substitution frequencies has been
parameterized as described by Kowalczuk et al. [4]. The matrix describing RAMP
of the lagging strand is the mirror reﬂection of the RAMP for the leading DNA
strand. In one Monte Carlo Step (MCS) each nucleotide of the gene sequence
(its sense strand) was drawn with a probability pmut = 0.01, then substituted
by another nucleotide with the probability described by the corresponding parameter in the substitution matrix. After each round of mutations, we translated
the nucleotide sequences into the amino acid sequences and compared the resulting composition of the proteins with the original. For each gene we calculated
the selection parameter (T ) for the amino acid composition which is the sum of
absolute values of diﬀerences between fractions of amino acids as follows:
20

T =

|fi (0) − fi (t)|,

(1)

i=1

where: fi (0) is a fraction of a given amino-acid in the original sequence (before mutations) and fi (t) is a fraction of a given amino acid in the sequence
after mutations in t MCS. If T was below the assumed threshold, a gene stayed
mutated and went to the next round of mutations (the next MC step). If T
trespassed the threshold - the gene was ”killed” and replaced by its allele from
the second genomic sequence, originally identical, simulated parallely. As a value
of the threshold we have assumed the average value T between pairs of orthologs belonging to two related genomes: B. burgdorferi and Treponema pallidum
which equals 0.3. All simulations were performed for 1000 Monte Carlo steps,
repeated 100 times and averaged. For comparison, the numbers of killed genes
from diﬀerent sets were normalized by the number of genes in the given set. In
the simulations we have applied both stable and changing replication associated mutational pressure (RAMP). Stable RAMP means that during the whole
simulation genes were subjected only to one pressure characteristic for the leading or the lagging strand. In the simulations with changing RAMP genes were

Diﬀerential Gene Survival

689

alternately under the RAMP characteristic for the leading or the lagging DNA
strand, changing with diﬀerent frequencies. These simulations were carried out
in diﬀerent conditions described by the two parameters: F - the fraction of MC
steps during the whole simulation in which the genes were subjected to mutational pressure characteristic for the strand on which they are normally located
in the genome, N - Number of switches of the RAMP from leading to lagging
one or vice versa. In sum, we have analyzed 87 diﬀerent conditions of RAMP
changing (diﬀerent combinations of values F and N).

Fig. 1. The normalized number of killed genes from the leading and lagging strands
of the B. burgdorferi genome. The genes were subjected to mutational pressure characteristic for them (their own pressure) and the mutational pressure characteristic for
the complementary DNA strand (the opposite pressure)

3

Results and Discussion

After simulations of genes subjected to stable mutational pressure we found that
(Fig. 1): (i) The eﬀect of killing grew in time and approximated to a relatively
high level. (ii) The killing eﬀect for the genes staying under their own pressure is
higher for the leading strand genes than for the lagging strand genes. (iii) Both
sets of genes are better adapted to the mutational pressure characteristic for their
recent positions in the genome than to the pressure from the opposite strand.
Furthermore, the killing eﬀect under the opposite RAMP is equally deleterious
for both sets of genes.
In the earlier studies we have found that frequent changes of RAMP could be
the best general strategy for gene survival [5]. In the present studies we are showing the relationship between the frequency of gene transpositions (inversions)

690

P. Mackiewicz et al.

between diﬀerently replicating DNA strands and their survival. The diagram
in Fig. 2 shows which percent of a given set of genes has the highest survival
chance under one of the 87 combinations of tested parameters (F and N) after
1000 MCS of simulation. Generally, genes prefer to stay longer under the RAMP
to which they are actually subjected, but there are no preferred positions for the
ribosomal genes located in the B. burgdorferi genome on the leading strand.
In Fig. 3 we have presented how the number of killed genes depends on N for
diﬀerent F values. These analyses show that too frequent switching the direction
of mutational pressure does not enhance signiﬁcantly the gene survival. Usually
switching every several hundreds of steps is close to the optimal gene survival.
Relationship between the number of killed genes and F has a distinct minimum
(Fig. 4). Ribosomal genes do not proﬁt as much from switching their positions
(data not shown).

Fig. 2. Diagram presenting the best survival strategy for three sets of genes. This diagram shows which percent of a given set of genes has the highest survival chance under
one of the 87 combinations of tested parameters (F and N) of changing mutational
pressure after 1000 MCS of simulation

As it can be seen in Fig. 5 the number of accepted amino acid substitutions in
coded proteins per site (substitutions which did not eliminate the gene function)

Diﬀerential Gene Survival

691

Fig. 3. Relationship between the number of killed genes and N for diﬀerent F values
for three sets of genes after 1000 MCS of simulation

is also higher. That means that the observed divergence of genes which recently
changed their positions on chromosome should be higher, which was actually
observed in numerous genomic analyses ([6] – [8]). In Fig. 5 it is also clear that
the number of accepted substitutions is the lowest for the ribosomal proteins
which are actually extremely conserved.
The last observations, these from simulations as well as from genome analyses
lead to the conclusion that switching the direction of the mutational pressure
does not diminish the total frequency of mutations but rather introduces intragenic suppression mutations which complement the former mutations in the
same gene. Such intragenic suppression should be much more eﬀective for longer genes (see accompanying paper). The ribosomal genes, in all the genomes
analyzed thus far are usually located on the leading strand [9]. Our simulations
have shown that they do not proﬁt very much from transpositions (switching
the mutational pressure) and the deleterious eﬀect of the prolonged opposite
mutational pressure is the same for the leading and lagging DNA strands. Since
these genes are very intensively transcribed it is important for them to concert
the direction of replication fork movement and the direction of transcription.
This eliminates the possible deleterious eﬀect of head on collisions of replication
and transcription complexes ([10], [11]). The location of sense strands of these
genes on the leading strand eliminates this eﬀect.

692

P. Mackiewicz et al.

Fig. 4. Relationship between the number of killed genes and F for diﬀerent N values
for two sets of genes after 1000 MCS of simulation

Fig. 5. Relationship between the number of accepted amino acid substitutions in coded
proteins per site and N for diﬀerent F values for three sets of genes after 1000 MCS of
simulation

Acknowledgements. The work was supported by the grant number
1016/S/IMi/03 and is done in the frame of COST Action P10 program. M.K.
was supported by the Foundation for Polish Science.

References
1. Frank, A.C., Lobry, J.R.: Asymmetric substitution patterns: a review of possible
underlying mutational or selective mechanisms. Gene 238 (1999) 65–77
2. Kowalczuk, M., Mackiewicz, P., Mackiewicz, D., Nowicka, A., Dudkiewicz, A., Dudek, M.R., Cebrat, S.: DNA asymmetry and the replicational mutational pressure.
J. Appl. Genet. 42 (2001) 553–577

Diﬀerential Gene Survival

693

3. Fraser, C.M., Casjens, S., Huang, W.M., Sutton, G.G., Clayton, R., Lathigra, R.,
White, O., Ketchum, K.A., Dodson, R., Hickey, E.K. et al.: Genomic sequence of
a Lyme disease spirochaete, Borrelia burgdorferi. Nature 390 (1997) 580–586
4. Kowalczuk, M., Mackiewicz, P., Mackiewicz, D., Nowicka, A., Dudkiewicz, M.,
Dudek, M.R., Cebrat, S.: High correlation between the turnover of nucleotides
under mutational pressure and the DNA composition. BMC Evol. Biol. 1 (2001)
(1):13
5. Dudkiewicz, M., Mackiewicz, P., Nowicka, A., Kowalczuk, M., Mackiewicz, D., Polak, N., Smolarczyk, K., Dudek, M.R., Cebrat, S.: Properties of Genetic Code under Directional, Asymmetric Mutational Pressure. Lect. Notes Comput. Sc. 2657
(2003) 343–350
6. Tillier, E.R., Collins, R.A.: Replication orientation aﬀects the rate and direction
of bacterial gene evolution. J. Mol. Evol. 51 (2000) 459–463
7. Szczepanik, D., Mackiewicz, P., Kowalczuk, M., Gierlik, A., Nowicka, A., Dudek,
M.R., Cebrat, S.: Evolution rates of genes on leading and lagging DNA strands. J.
Mol. Evol. 52 (2001) 426–433
8. Mackiewicz, P., Mackiewicz, D., Kowalczuk, M., Dudkiewicz, M., Dudek, M.R.,
Cebrat, S.: High divergence rate of sequences located on diﬀerent DNA strands in
closely related bacterial genomes. J. Appl. Genet. 44 (2003) 561– 584
9. McLean, M.J., Wolfe, K.H., Devine, K.M.: Base composition skews, replication
orientation, and gene orientation in 12 prokaryote genomes. J. Mol. Evol. 47 (1998)
691–696
10. Brewer, B.J.: When polymerases collide: replication and the transcriptional organization of the E. coli chromosome. Cell 53 (1988) 679–686
11. French, S.: Consequences of replication fork movement through transcription units
in vivo. Science 258 (1992) 1362–1365

