A Biomechanical Imitative Model for Pulsatile
Morphogenesis
L.V. Beloussov and V.I. Grabovsky
Faculty of Biology, Moscow State University, 119992, Moscow, Russia
lbelous@soil.msu.ru

Abstract. We propose a model which imitates the morphogenesis of several
species of the hydroid polyps and permits the derivation of the geometry
(surface curvature) of each developmental stage from that of a preceding stage.
The model is based upon two experimentally verified assumptions. First,
neighboring cells are assumed to compress each other laterally in a regular and
species-specific pulsatile manner. It is this pressure, and/or an active cell
reaction to it, which changes the curvature of a cell layer. Secondly, cell layers
are assumed to have quasi-elastic properties tending to smooth out their
curvature. With our model, the different pulsatile patterns of cell-cell pressure
are reproduced and the elasticity parameters are modulated. The main principles
of the model can also be used for interpreting the morphogenesis of other
groups of animals. A suggested model emphasizes the self-organizing
properties of a "stressed geometry" of embryonic rudiments.

1 Introduction
The aim of this work is to suggest, by means of an imitative modeling, some “rules of
morphogenesis”, that is, more or less universal algorithms permitting the derivation of
each next stage embryonic shape from a preceded one. Contrary to many up to now
developed models (e.g. [1]) we use the approach which can be called geometromechanical. This means, that we use the formative properties of the mechanically
stressed bodies of a definite geometry (curvature of a surface). Such an approach is
supported by the existense of the regularly arranged and stage-dependent mechanical
stresses, both tensile and pressure ones, within embryonic tissues [2]. In this paper, a
geometro-mechanical approach is used for interpreting the formation of buds in
several species of lower invertebrate animals called hydroid polyps, or hydroids.
Hydroids buds start their development from very simple geometrical shapes which
become complicated later on in a quite monotonous manner, by changing nothing
more than their local curvatures. Their shapes specificity is provided by quite regular
temporal patterns of so called growth pulsations (GP), that is, the periodical (taking
place each several minutes) extensions-retractions of the growing tip. At the extension
GP phase a lateral cell-cell pressure of a turgor origin is substantially increased. At
the retraction GP phase which always follows the extension phase the intracellular
turgor pressure is diminished and so does the lateral cell-cell pressure [3].
We imitate the development of three hydroids species: Dynamena pumila.,
Obelia loveni and Campanulina lacerata. In all the mentioned species the shapes of
P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2660, pp. 698–707, 2003.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

A Biomechanical Imitative Model for Pulsatile Morphogenesis

699

just initiated buds can be roughly approximated by a hemispherical surface adjoining
a cylindrical stem. The growing buds increase their transversal diameters to a
different extent. This increase is the greatest in Dynamena samples, not so great in
Obelia and almost absent in Campanulina whose buds remain quite narrow. As
observed in a longitudinal projection, the buds always take a trefoiled (tripartite)
shapes, with one central and two lateral protuberances. While in Obelia and
Campanulina samples the lateral protuberances are not so pronounced and contribute
to nothing more than tentacles, in Dynamena samples they develop to a much greater
extent, deviate from a central lobe and produce new hydranths.
GP specificity is expressed in the duration ratios of the extension/retraction
phases [4]. This ratio is the greatest in Dynamena samples, takes smaller values in
Obelia colonies and is the smallest in Campanulina (Fig. 1). Correspondingly, we
define the Dynamena GP as broad ones, those typical for Obelia as intermediate and
those exhibited by Campanulina as narrow. The GP patterns correlate in a simple
manner with the shape of the arisen buds: the broader are GP, the greater the
rudiments are transversely extended, and vice versa. One of the main aims of our
model will be to reproduce these correlations.

Fig. 1. A correlation between shapes of the Campanulina and Obelia hydranths (A, B) and
Dynamena growing tip ( C ) on one hand and the patterns of their GP on the other. Left figures
show transversal/longitudinal diameters ratios of the corresponding rudiments. Figures above
GP graphs give the ratios of the hatched squares to the rectangular ones. This is a rough
measure of a “broadeness” of GP.

700

L.V. Beloussov and V.I. Grabovsky

2 Description of the Model
2.1 Main Assumptions
The model is based upon the following suggestions derived from the biological data:
1. A surface of a rudiment consists of a finite number N of kinematically
independent units, each of them corresponding to a group of 2 – 4 cells of a real
rudiment. We take this value because it fits the smallest diameters of the
morphological elements (protuberances, invaginations) produced during
morphogenesis of the given species (see also Results).
2. Any element i is compressed laterally by its neighbors, i-1 and i+1. In the case of
a non-zero local curvature, the pressure force applied to i acquires a radial
component directed towards increasing the local curvature. Therefore, i should be
shifted centrifugally. Correspondingly, we introduce either a purely passive, or
the passive-active centrifugal force fk. (Fig. 2A).
3. We assume that fk is increased during the GP extension phase and is decreased
(up to negative values) during the retraction phase. We express this effect by
introducing a coefficient K of a force fk. We also schematize GP patterns by
dividing each model GP into 5 steps and ascribing to each step the different K
values. We explore separately the effects of a constant (non-pulsating) regime
and of three above mentioned types of pulsations: broad, intermediate and
narrow. They were approximated by the following sets of K values:
Constant regime
Broad pulsations
Intermediate pulsations
Narrow pulsations

1;1;1;1;1;
(in most cases) 1;1;-0,2;1;1
-0,2;0,3;0,8;1;0,7
-0,2;0;0,2;1;0

Fig. 2. The forces which increase and smooth out the curvature. A: a curvature-increasing force
Fk acting upon a cell i due to the lateral pressure exerted by the neighboring cells i-1 and i+1 .
B: a quasi-elastic force Fw acting to any cell of a layer independently of its neighbors.

A Biomechanical Imitative Model for Pulsatile Morphogenesis

4.

5.

701

At the same time, we assume that a quasi-elastic force fw exists which is
constantly (in a non-pulsating manner) applied to an entire cell layer and directed
towards the diminishment of a local curvature (Fig. 2 B).
Due to a high viscosity (friction) of the rudiments’ tissues there are no
accelerations within a system and the forces are taken proportional to the linear
shifts ∆ of the elements per time unit:
∆i = f(fk , fw)
where ∆i is the resulted shift of an element i and f is the function connecting the
value of ∆i with those of the forces fk and , fw.

2.2 Technical Description of the Model
The model is based upon a 2-dimensional set, its dimensionality taken as [2, No*],
where No is a number of kinematically independent units within a model rudiment.
Each element of a set [a, b] contains a coordinate a (x or y) of an element i. For
example, an element [1, 12] contains an X-axis coordinate of an element No12 within
an euclidean space, while an element [2, 12] contains an Y-coordinate of the same
element.
We take two initial configurations (arrangement of elements), both of them 2dimensional (as exemplifying medial longitudinal sections through the rudiments’
bodies), which we call cylindrical (Fig. 3A) and curved (Fig. 3B). In the both cases a
first 1/3 of the elements’ set is used for constructing a “left” wall of a rudiment. The
second 1/3 creates a “cap”, namely, a semi-circle, its beginning being joined with the
end of a “left” wall while its end being joined with the beginning of a right wall. The
last 1/3 contributes to the right wall itself. In the case of a cylindrical configuration
the both walls are straight lines.

Fig. 3. Cylindrical (A) and curved (B) initial rudiments

In the case of a curved rudiment the left wall is an arch of a radius R, while the right
one an arch of a radius R1 = R + D, where D is a diameter of a “cap”. Usually we take
R : D = 4.

702

L.V. Beloussov and V.I. Grabovsky

Then, according to the model algorithm we are transforming the coordinates of each
element. The algorithm includes three following steps:
1. Change of an element’s coordinate according to: (a) its momentary coordinate;
(b) the coordinates of two neighboring elements, and (c) the value of K
coefficient given as a parameter;
2. Correction of the newly obtained coordinates in relation to: (a) the coordinates of
an average position of the given element and the two neighboring ones; (b) the
value of a W coefficient given as a parameter;
3. Rearrangement of the obtained coordinates for avoiding the distances between
neighboring points to override the limits of an initially taken interval. This is a
condition limiting the mutual cells shifts within a real rudiment.
When thus obtained new set of coordinates of a given element replaces the initial one,
the first step of a GP (out of 5) is fulfilled. Then the program returns back to point 1
for fulfilling the second step of GP, etc. After performing all the 5 steps, the program
may be either stopped or starting a new GP. The number of GP can be set
automatically installing a parameter No of steps.
At each step of the program, the transformations of the coordinates obey the
following formalisms (Fig. 4A).
Step 1 can be generally expressed as
(i)’x,y = f1{(i) x,y; (i - 1) x,y; (i + 1) x,y; Kn}
where
(i)x,y are coordinates of an element i (i = 1,2,3… No);
Kn is the parameter of each step of a pulsation (n = 1,2,…5);
f1 is the function connecting the values;
In our model we take the function f1 as

 (i − 1) x , y + (i + 1) x , y

− (i ) x , y 
(i )’x , y = (i ) x , y − S ⋅ K n 
2



Where

S=

[i − 1, i + 1]
[i − 1, i ] + [i, i + 1]

(in square brackets the euclidean distances between the points are given).
The parameter S is introduced for avoiding too sharp bending of a rudiments’ surface.
As one can see, under slight bending it is close to 1 while under increased bending it
approaches zero.
After fulfilling this step, the initial elements’ coordinates (i) are exchanged by the
new ones (i)’. This step imitates the main model assumption, namely, the passive-

A Biomechanical Imitative Model for Pulsatile Morphogenesis

703

active movement of each element of a rudiment’s surface towards the local curvature
increase.
Step 2: corrections of the new coordinates (i)’ according to the value of W
parameter and the initial coordinates of the point i and its nearest neighbors (i-1 and
i+1). Formally the corresponding transformations of the coordinates can be expressed
as
(i)’’x,y = f2{(i)’ x,y; (i) x,y; (i - 1) x,y; (i + 1) x,y; W}
The function f2 looks like

(i )’’xy = (i )’xy −W ⋅ ((i )’xy −( X Y ))
__
where XY are the averaged coordinates of all the three points: i, i-1 and i+1 (the
corresponding point is denoted by a triangle, Fig. 6B). This step imitates the
mechanical elasticity of a rudiment expressed by W parameter. The greater be its
value, the more elastic should be the rudiment’s tissue (Fig. 4B).
Step 3. Now the distances between the neighboring elements are tested and if they do
not correspond to the formal limits the coordinates are rearranged.
The program language is Visual Basic 6.0. The program was implemented on IBM
PC.

Fig. 4. A working scheme for producing a curvature-increasing (A) and a smoothing (B)
component of the cell shifts.

3 Results
Fig. 4 exemplifies a generalized scheme of shape formation under different W values
and different pulsatile regimes. Firstly, one can distinguish two different regimes with
respect to the effect of the W values on the shapes produced. With low W values the
trajectories of the imaging points cross each other, so that the points rapidly converge
into dense “spots” (Fig. 5 C, G, L). This corresponds to the early developmental

704

L.V. Beloussov and V.I. Grabovsky

stages of some embryos, but not to those which morphogenesis we aim to model. On
the other hand, under very high elasticity values the initial shapes always gradually
unfold towards a stationary state of a slightly concave line (Fig. 5H), or give a “sandglass” shape (Fig. 5M) which again has little or no relation to the real morphogenesis.
There are the intermediate zones of W values (correlated with pulsatile patterns) into
which the required shapes are fairly well reproduced. We call them the
“morphogenetic zones”, MZ (densely outlined in Fig. 5). The shapes reproduced
within MZ, are rather sensitive to the pulsatile patterns, and this sensitivity fits the
empirical data (4). The shapes produced under constant regime (Fig. 5A,B) are rather
poor and non-realistic. Those employing “broad” pulsations possess the apically
extending rudiments (Fig. 5 D, E) and wide stems which are straight even if emerged
from the curved rudiments (Fig. 5 F). This is typical for Dynamena. The
“intermediate” pulsations give the rudiments without an apical extension (Fig. 5 J)
and having S-shaped stems (Fig. 5 K). Those are features characteristic for Obelia.
Lastly, under “narrow” pulsations we get quite narrow shapes (Fig. 5 N, N1) which
are straight even if produced by curved rudiments (Fig. 5 O). It is remarkable, that the
shapes emerged from the axi-symmetrical initial rudiments rapidly (after a restricted
number of iterations) come to the stationary states (this is illustrated by thin contours
of the frames D, E, I, J, N1). On the other hand, the shapes produced by the curved
rudiments exhibit more prolonged “growth” (frames B, F, K, O) which is just typical
for the stems of hydroid polyps. Some more details of the shapes formation under
different pulsatorial regimes are given in Fig. 6. As one can see, the resulted shapes
are quite sensitive to the changes in the pulsatorial regimes, especially, to the changes
in the amplitude of “troughs”: surprisingly, an increase or a decrease of a single
trough within GP can produce rather global shape transformations. Meanwhile, the
modeled shapes are biologically realistic.
Another important developmental parameter (not included in Fig. 5) is associated
with the kinematically independent units. We found, that the morphogenesis is quite
non-sensitive (robust) to the total number of such units: the initial rudiments cut from
below and including slightly more than the apical hemisphere exhibit roughly the
same morphogenesis as the complete rudiments.
That corresponds to the high regenerative capacities of hydroid polyps, which are able
to reconstruct roughly the same shapes from little pieces of their tissue. On the other
hand, the morphogenesis turned out to be very sensitive to the density of the units’
arrangement: under high density (single units are of the scale of the single cells
diameters) the shape changes are going slowly, so that quite monotonous wavy
patterns are produced. In the opposite, if the units are too large, all the rudiments,
irrespective of the pulsatorial regimes, come to smooth spheroid shapes. We
speculate, that the optimal density of the kinematically independent units (employed
in our model) is partly determined by the inherent properties of a tissue, and partly
self-selected within the course of morphogenesis, as providing a most rapid formation
of macroscopic shapes.
We are well aware that our model is up to now very much simplified as
compared with the biological reality. Obviously, a number of the control parameters
should be increased. One can also assume that they are evolved during development
We suggest however that the main assumptions of the above presented model will be
included in these, more perfect constructions.

A Biomechanical Imitative Model for Pulsatile Morphogenesis

705

Fig. 5. Generalized scheme of the main model shapes, as depending upon the pulsatorial
regimes and the quasi-elasticity of tissues. Columns from left to right: constant regime, broad,
intermediate and narrow growth pulsations (imaged below). Vertical axis: values of a quasielasticity coefficient (W). Densely outlined are the morphogenetic zones. Within MZ, the
lowest frames B, F, K, O show the typical resulted shapes of the curved rudiments, while the
upper shape(s) A, D, E, I, J, N, N1 are those of cylindrical rudiments. Frames D, E, I, J, M, N1
(shown by thin lines) give just the final configurations, all of which are stationary. On the
contrary, black frames give the apposition of all the intermediate configurations.

706

L.V. Beloussov and V.I. Grabovsky

Fig. 6. Shapes modeled within MZ under different pulsation regimes if starting from a
cylindrical configuration. A: “broad” GP. Left frame: 50 iterations (=10 GP), right frame: 75
iterations (=15 GP), stationary configuration. B: “broad” GP, but trough at the 3rd step is
changed from –0,2 to +0,2. C: same” trough is +0,3. Note the change of an arisen shape from
quasi-quadrangular to quasi-triangular. These are observed in real Dynamena colonies. For A–
C W = 0,48. In all the cases Dynamena-like shapes are obtained. D: “intermediate” GP,
producing Obelia-like shapes. W = 0,39. Left frame: 5 iterations, right frame: 15 iterations,
stationary configuration.

4 Conclusions
The model presented is related to one of the most fundamental biological problems,
namely to the conceptual gap between genetic factors which influence shape
formation and the shapes themselves. The main difficulty here is in understanding,
how the genetic factors which are per se uniformly distributed within embryonic
space, are able to control both local and holistic morphological (that is, spatially nonuniform) properties of the developing organisms. One can see, that the both main
parameters used in our model (elasticity W and the pulsatile patterns) are indeed
spatially uniform and may be hence directly linked with genetic factors. As to the
pulsatile patterns, this is shown directly (5). Same seems to be plausible in respect to
the dimensions (density) of the kinematically independent units. Meanwhile, as
shown by the model, such values can largely affect numerous morphological features.
We suggest therefore, that the genetic control of development can be considered as a
parametric modulation of some universal morphogenetic rules.

Acknowledgements. This work was supported by the Russian Fund for Fundamental
Investigations (RFFI), grant # 02-04-49004.

A Biomechanical Imitative Model for Pulsatile Morphogenesis

707

References
1.
2.

3.
4.

5.

Meinhardt, H.: Models of Biological Pattern Formation. Academic Press, London (1982).
Beloussov, L.V., Saveliev, S.V., Naumidi, I.I., Novoselov, V.V.: Mechanical Stresses in
Embryonic Tissues: Patterns, Morphogenetic Role, and Involvement in Regulatory
Feedback Int. Rev. Cytol. 150 (1994) 1–34.
Beloussov, L.V., Labas, J.A., Kazakova, N.I., Zaraisky, A.G. Cytophysiology of Growth
Pulsations in Hydroid Polyps. J. Exp. Zool. 249 (1989) 258–270.
Beloussov, L.V., Labas, J.A., Kazakova, N.I. Growth pulsations in hydroid polyps:
kinematics, biological role and cytophysiology. In: Rensing, L. (ed) Oscillations and
Morphogenesis. Marcel Dekker, N.Y., Basel, Hong Kong (1993) 183–193.
Wyttenbach, C.R.: Genetic Variations in the Mode of Stolon Growth in the Hydroid
Campanularia flexuosa. Biol. Bull. 137 (1969) 547–556.

