Study on Asymmetric Two-Lane Traffic Model
Based on Cellular Automata
Xianchuang Su1 , Xiaogang Jin2, , Yong Min2 , and Bo Peng2
1

College of Software Engineering, Zhejiang university, Hangzhou 310027, China
2
AI Institute, College of Computer Science, Zhejiang university,
Hangzhou 310027, China
xiaogangj@cise.zju.edu.cn

Abstract. With the consideration of driver’s velocity preference, we redefine the velocity updating rules of NaSch model and extend them to an
asymmetric two-lane cellular automaton model with a recently proposed
lane changing rule set. The analysis focuses on the reproduction of empirically observed results and the relations between empirical results and
vehicle plugs. Vehicle plug is a structured vehicle set which slows down
the traffic flow and it is also a bridge from microscopic to macroscopic
level. Simulation results show that encouraging lane changes have little
effect on decomposing vehicle plugs. In order to decrease plugs we should
keep slow vehicles out of expressway or make a flexible overtaking ban
of slow vehicle according to practical situations.

1

Introduction

In recent years, more and more cellular automata (CA) models of traffic flow have
been proposed. CA model formulate simple rules which mimic the behavior of the
drivers as simply as possible, yield reasonable results compared with empirical
findings and can be easily modified to study various instances. The basic model
has been introduced by Nagel and Schreckenberg(NaSch model) [NS]. And a
more sophisticated CA model [KSS1] has been developed which is capable of
reproducing all of the empirically observed traffic states in single-lane traffic, i.e.
free flow, wide moving jams and especially synchronized traffic.
In an asymmetric two-lane traffic only a few empirical results exist which help
to specify lane changing rule[GY][HL]. Lane change frequency should increase
with vehicle density, shows a maximum in the vicinity of the flow maximum and
then decreases with increasing density. And a special feature of a highway with
a right-lane preference is the empirically observed lane usage inversion. There
are more vehicles distributed on the left than on the right lane, and the flow is
larger for the left than for the right lane while vehicle density is over the vicinity
Supported by Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) grant 60103015 and
The Project-sponsored by SRF for ROCS, SEM.
Corresponding author.
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3514, pp. 599–606, 2005.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

600

X. Su et al.

of the flow maximum. In [KSS2][KSS3][KSS4][RN] the two-lane extensions of
NaSch model reproduce the density dependence of lane change frequency and
the lane usage inversion quite well.
While the NaSch model only ensures the avoidance of crashes and every driver
is only confined with a maximum velocity. For the desire of the drivers for smooth
driving, we introduce ideal velocity with the consideration of individual velocity
preference into NaSch model. Each driver takes speed at the vicinity of individual
ideal velocity and moves on with the anticipation. Also the lane changing rules in
[KSS3] could be mended by anticipation method which is capable of improving the
usage of two-lane highway space and making the lane change process more neatly.
In the next section a modified asymmetric two-lane model is proposed not
only for reproducing the empirical results on macroscopic level, i.e. density dependence of lane change frequency and the lane usage inversion, but also for
letting the drivers in model have more human natures by reconstructing the local rule on microscopic level. In section 3 we introduce U (t) which represent the
average unhappiness of all drivers and show that by encouraging lane changing,
U (t) could stay at a low degree and the flow of traffic goes up linearly with the
increasing density when the traffic is in free flow state. The influence of slow
vehicle such as truck is remarkable in inhomogeneous asymmetric two-lane highway. Without the overtaking ban on truck, the flow would go down steeply with
the increasing rate of trucks in all vehicles at the early stage and retain at a low
level afterwards. The negative impact of truck rate on flow is vanished with the
increasing vehicle density. We catch different segments of the highway and find
that vehicle plug plays a main role in the negative impact. Once a vehicle plug
is formed by a pair of trucks which occupy both two-lanes at short distance, the
vehicles behind the plug are difficult to get through it. The relations between
vehicle density, rate of truck and the formation of plug are discussed in detail.
The plug is easy to form and spread all over but the measures that can dissipate
it are difficult to find. Here we make some tries that may be helpful. In the last
section a short summary and a discussion are followed.

2

Models

In this inhomogeneous asymmetric two-lane traffic model, a system update is
performed in two sub-steps. In the first step the vehicles change lanes according
to the lane changing rules and do not move. In the second step, the cars move
according to the calculated velocity. Both sub-steps are performed in parallel
for all vehicles. Before we present the lane changing rules, we briefly define
the single-lane motion rules. For the sake of completeness we briefly recall the
definition of the NaSch model. The NaSch model is a discrete model for traffic
flow. The road is divided into cells which can be either empty or occupied by a car
with a velocity v = 0, 1, · · · , vmax . The vehicles move from left to right on single
lane with periodic boundary conditions and the system update is performed in
parallel for all vehicles according to the following rules (see table 1 for a summary
of the parameters and variables of models):

Study on Asymmetric Two-Lane Traffic Model Based on Cellular Automata

601

Table 1. Summary of the variables and parameters used in the model definition
Variable
x
v
va
d
de
dof e
dose

Parameter
Position
Velocity
Anticipation velocity
Distance headway
Effective distance headway
Effective distance headway other lane
Effective distance behind other lane

Variable
Rs
ρ
vmax
ds
vi
Pb
Pa

Parameter
Rate of slow vehicle
Vehicle density
Maximum velocity
Safe gap
Ideal velocity
Deceleration probability
Acceleration probability

Fig. 1. Sketch of a road segment. Here take right lane as main lane and left lane as
overtake lane. The hatched cells are occupied by vehicles

(1) Acceleration and deceleration:
v(n, t + 1) =

min (v(n, t) + 1, vmax ), v(n, t) < d
d,
v(n, t) ≥ d

(2) Decelerated by noise: if rand() < Pb then v(n, t+1) = max (v(n, t + 1) − 1, 0)
(3) Motion: v(n, t + 1) = x(n, t) + v(n, t + 1)
where v(n, t) and x(n, t) denotes the velocity and the position of number n-th
vehicle at system time t, respectively. With the deceleration probability Pb , various motions of drivers could be described in a random way. For the desire of the
drivers for smooth and comfortable driving, Schneider et al[SE] and Knospe et
al[KSS3] proposed a more realistic model based on NaSch model by introducing
the effective distance headway de :
de (n, t) = d(n, t) + max (va (n, t) − ds , 0)
va (n, t) = min (d(n + 1, t), v(n + 1, t))
where vehicle n + 1 denotes the leading vehicle of n. The velocity of leading
vehicle is anticipated and de (n, t) allows for smaller gaps, larger velocity and
higher lane space usage.
In real world, each driver has one’s velocity preference. Here, we introduce
the ideal velocity vi (vi < vmax ) for each driver and the rules are designed to let
the velocity varying around vi . The status of the brake light B is assigned to 1
when a deceleration occurred, otherwise B is assigned to 0.

602

X. Su et al.

The update rules for motion are then as follows, which should be done step
by step:
(1) Acceleration and deceleration: if de (n, t) > vi (n) > v(n, t) then v(n, t + 1) =
v(n, t) + 1; if (de (n, t) > vi (n) and v(n, t) ≥ vi (n) and rand() < Pa ) or de (n, t) ≤
vi (n) then v(n, t + 1) = min (v(n, t) + 1, de (n, t)); otherwise v(n, t + 1) = v(n, t);
(2) Decelerated by noise: if rand() < Pb then v(n, t + 1) = max (v(n, t) − 1, 0);
(3) Upper limit: v(n, t + 1) = min (v(n, t + 1), vmax );
1, v(n, t + 1) < v(n, t)
(4) Brake light: B(n, t + 1) =
;
0, v(n, t + 1) ≥ v(n, t)
(5) Motion: x(n, t + 1) = x(n, t) + v(n, t + 1) .
The acceleration and deceleration rules of step one is designed for keeping
the drivers driving at the vicinity of vi in free flow state, and the changing of
velocity could be smoother. While in the state of synchronized traffic or wide
moving jams, the velocities are constrained by the vehicle density. In order to
extend the single-lane model to an asymmetric two-lane model, we should introduce lane changing rules which agree with the two mechanisms used in real
life. The one is right-lane preference that the driver should use the right lane
as often as possible. The other one is the right-lane overtaking ban. In [KSS3]
a sophisticated lane changing rule set has been proposed, which agrees with the
two mechanisms and is capable of reproducing the density dependence of lane
change frequency and the lane usage inversion. In order to keep the model simply we restrict the lane interaction to vehicles which have to brake (B = 1)
in the next time step due to an insufficient gap in front. The lane changing
rules are as follows (see table 1 and figure 1 for the parameters and variables of
rules):
(1) From right to left lane:
(i) Incentive criterion: B = 0 and v > de
(ii) Safety criterion: dof e > v and dose > vos
(2) From left to right lane:
d e
de
(i) Incentive criterion: (B = 0 and of
v > 2.0 and ( v > 4.0)) or (v > de );
(ii) Safety criterion: dof e > v and dose > vos
where dof e denotes the effective gap to the leading vehicle on the destination
lane, dose denotes the effective gap to the succeeding vehicle on the destination
lane, and they are defined as follows:
dof e = dof + max (min (gap, vof ) − ds , 0)
dose = dos + max (min (dof , v) − ds , 0)
It is obviously that the difference between two incentive criterions agrees with
the right-lane preference mechanism. Since the velocity of the vehicle is taken
into account in the incentive criterion that from left to right, slow vehicles are
allowed to change lane even at small distances.

Study on Asymmetric Two-Lane Traffic Model Based on Cellular Automata

3

603

Results and Discussions

The numerical simulations are started with randomly generated initial configurations, and evolve to steady terminal states over a long time. On a 2 × 20000
lattice as figure 1, trucks and cars are randomly distributed. We distribute the
vi of trucks according to a Gaussian profile with different variances and a mean
v i = 5. While the v i of cars is set to 8, and vmax = 12. The sum of left and right
lane usages is 2. In order to describe the emotions of drivers, we introduce U (t)
which reflects the unhappiness of all drivers who are not at their ideal velocities
at system time t:
n
1
|v(j, t) − vi (j)|
U (t) =
n j=1
vi (j)
In figure 2 the variables of traffic flow varying with the increasing vehicle
density are depicted (the units only have a relative meaning) and agree with
the empirically observed results well. With the increasing density at early stage,
traffic flow goes up linearly, mean velocity keeps on a high level and unhappiness
stays at a low level while the lane change frequency goes up steeply. And we
35
1.6

30

1.4

lane usage

flow [veh/min]

25

20
15
10

0
0

50

100

150

200

density ρ [veh/km]

250

1

0.8

0.6

left lane
right lane
average

5

1.2

left lane
right lane

0.4

300

50

100

200

250

300

(b)
0.9
0.8

0.9

0.7

0.8

unhappiness U(t)

lane change frequence [1/(km*sec)]

(a)
1

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.3

0.2
0

150

density ρ [veh/km]

fast vehicle
slow vehicle

0.1
50

100

150

200

density ρ [veh/km]

(c)

250

300

0
0

50

100

150

200

density ρ [veh/km]

250

300

(d)

Fig. 2. Fundamental diagrams of asymmetric two-lane model with 10% slow vehicles.
The slow vehicles are not allowed to change to left lane

604

X. Su et al.

can see that the active lane changes provide more chances for driver to drive
at a high and satisfying velocity at free flow phase. Meanwhile, most of the
vehicles are distributed on right lane for the right-lane preference. However, the
left lane usage will exceed the right lane and then achieve its maximum in the
vicinity of flow maximum, and the flow of left lane is larger than the right at the
same time. A simple explanation for these is that the trucks or some slow cars
dominate the right lane and the cars would like to take the left lane for more
satisfying velocities. There are many factors in producing these phenomena, and
a detail analysis is presented in [KSS3]. With the increasing density, the velocity
predominance of cars against trucks is decreased, and the free flow phase turns
into synchronized flow phase. In this stage the mean velocity of all drivers is
determined only by density but not at the wills of drivers.
In real world, the entry of slow vehicle into highway is forbidden or the
overtaking of slow vehicle is banned. Here the numerical simulations below will
show us how the performances will be if we did not follow these instructions.
30

flow [veh/min]

25

20

15

10

5
0

ρ=120[veh/km]
ρ=50 [veh/km]
0.2

0.4

0.6

slow vehicle rate R

0.8

1

s

Fig. 3. Flow statistics of asymmetric tow-lane model under two different flow densities.
Note that the trucks are allowed to change to the left lane

In figure 3, when ρ = 50 and the rate of trucks Rs ∈ [0, 0.27), flow goes down
linearly and steeply. Meanwhile, the mean velocity of all drivers also has the same
variation, and the lane change frequency goes up steeply with the increasing Rs
at this stage. However, when ρ = 50 and Rs ∈ [0.27, 1], flow maintains at a
low level, and so does the mean velocity. The lane change frequency decreases
at the same time. All these phenomena are related to the slow vehicle plugs. In
figure 1, we can see how the slow vehicle plugs are formed. Suppose A and B
are all trucks, in the vehicle structure of figure 1, the succeeding vehicles of A
and B will have few chances to go through the vehicle structure. And then more
vehicles will be formed as slow vehicles at a segment with local high density
which is called a vehicle plug. More and more vehicle plugs will be formed with
the increasing Rs ∈ [0, 0.27) until they have been distributed everywhere. We
tried to decompose the vehicle plugs by encouraging lane changing, i.e. tuning
the numerical parameters in incentive criterion of lane changing rule that from

Study on Asymmetric Two-Lane Traffic Model Based on Cellular Automata

605

left to right lane. But the result was even worse, since the flow enhanced only
a little while the lane changing frequency increased doubly which would cause
more crashes and make drivers tired and depressed. Therefore, it is important
to keep slow vehicles out of expressway under these circumstances.
In figure 3, when ρ = 120, flow declines linearly but more steeply than the
flow with ρ = 50 and then it reaches a stationary value over a short range
of Rs (Rs ∈ [0, 0.05)). Due to the vehicle plugs are easy to be formed than to
be decomposed under higher density (the balance between plug forming and
decomposing is interesting), under ρ = 120 a small addition of Rs can generate
more plugs than under ρ = 50. The velocity predominance of cars against trucks
is declined under the phases of synchronized traffic or wide moving jams. At
these phases, flow and mean velocity are determined mainly by vehicle density.
Therefore, the range of Rs that flow varies over to reach its stationary value
under ρ = 120 is shorter than that under ρ = 50 . We can unchain the slow
vehicle entry ban under the phases of synchronized traffic or wide moving jams
for that the ban has little effect on flow increasing. And the constraints on slow
vehicles can be applied flexibly according to different situations. For example, it
is unpractical to keep all slow vehicles out of highways in the region with road
network underdeveloped. In this situation, we can make a flexible overtaking
ban of slow vehicles to achieve a higher flow and make drivers happy.

Fig. 4. Contour of (F lowf orbid − F lowallow )/F lowf orbid as a function of flow density
ρ and slow vehicle rate Rs . Here F lowf orbid and F lowallow represent the traffic flow
when slow vehicles are forbidden to change to the left lane or allowed respectively

Suppose that the ellipse in figure 4 represents density and Rs of a two-lane
highway as a function of time in one day. The arrow represents the direction
that time goes by. The A and B are the moments of day. In order to achieve
higher flow, slow vehicles should observe the overtaking ban from moment A to
moment B. However, from moment B to moment A the slow vehicle overtaking
ban should be cancelled.

606

4

X. Su et al.

Conclusion

We redefined the velocity updating rules of NaSch model with the consideration
of velocity preference of driver, and extended it with a sophisticated lane changing rule set to an asymmetric two-lane model. The model reproduced empirical
results on macroscopic level, i.e. density dependence of lane change frequency
and the lane usage inversion. And we found that active lane changes provide
more chances for driver to drive at a high and satisfying velocity at free flow
phase with the slow vehicle overtaking ban. However, the effect of lane change
will vanished without the ban since the vehicle plugs are easier to be formed
by structured slow vehicles than to be decomposed only by active lane changes.
And even a low fraction of slow vehicle can make the mean velocity and flow
go down steeply. In order to weaken the negative impact of vehicle plugs and
achieve higher flow, we should keep slow vehicles out of expressway or make a
flexible overtaking ban of slow vehicle according to practical situations.
With a simple local interaction set, CA model can reproduce most empirically
observed results of complex traffic system and present microscopic causes of
formulations of the empirical results. Since the traffic simulations based on CA
are at the stage of developing and most analyzes are qualitative. There are many
works could be done, for example, clarifying the quantitative relations between
simulated and realistic results for quantitative analysis.

References
[NS]
[SE]
[KSS1]

[KSS2]

[KSS3]
[KSS4]
[RN]
[GY]

[HL]

Nagel K., Schreckenberg M.: A cellular automaton model for freeway traffic.
Journal de Physique I. 2 (1992) 2221-2229
Scheider J., Ebersbach A.: Anticipatory drivers in the Nagel-Schreckenberg
model. International Journal of Modern Physics C. 13 (2002) 107-113
Knospe W., Santen L., Schadschneider A., Schreckenberg M.:Towards a realistic microscopic description of highway traffic. J. Phys. A. Math. Gen. 33
(2000) 477-485
Knospe W., Santen L., Schadschneider A., Schreckenberg M.. Single-vehicle
data of highway traffic: microscopic description of traffic phases . Phys. Rev.
E. 65 (2002) 056133
Knospe W., Santen L., Schadschneider A., Schreckenberg M.. A realistic twolane traffic model for highway traffic. J. Phys. A 35 (2002) 3369-3388
Knospe W., Santen L., Schadschneider A., Schreckenberg M.. Disorder effects
in cellular automata for two-lane traffic. Physica A. 265 (1999) 614-633
Rickert M., Nagel K., Schreckenberg M., Latour A.: Two lane traffic simulations
using cellular automata. Physica A. 231 (1995): 534-550
Ganglen C.,Yangming K. An empirical investigation of macroscopic lanechanging characteristics on uncongested multilane freeways. Transportation
Research Part A. 25 (1991) 375-389
Hall F. L., Lam T. N.: The characteristics of congested flow on a freeway across
lanes, space, and time. Transportation Research Part A. 22 (1988) 45-56

