Mixed Key Management Using Hamming
Distance for Mobile Ad-Hoc Networks
Seok-Lae Lee1 , In-Kyung Jeun1 , and Joo-Seok Song2
1

2

KISA, 78 Garak-Dong, Songpa-Gu, Seoul, 138-803, Korea
{sllee,ikjeun}@kisa.or.kr
Yonsei University, 134 Shinchon-Dong, Seodaemoon-Gu, Seoul, 120-749, Korea
jssong@emerald.yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract. Unlike ﬁxed networks, mobile ad-hoc networks have diverse
characteristics, such as dynamic topologies, bandwidth-constrained links,
energy-constrained operation, limited physical security, etc. Due to these
characteristics their security requirements are diﬀerent from those of
ﬁxed networks. This paper presents a method of authenticating the nodes
in the ad-hoc network and securely transmitting information in consideration of the characteristics of the mobile ad hoc network. To this end,
this paper proposes a method of combining asymmetric and symmetric
cryptography to enhance the eﬃciency of secret key management for authentication and secure channel establishment. In particular, this paper
proposes a method that introduces the concept of Hamming Distance
to share the secret keys between the nodes. According to this proposal,
secure communication between the nodes is possible when one node manages only log2 N secret keys.
Keywords: Hamming Distance, Certiﬁcate, Public-key, Ad-hoc Network, Secret Key.

1

Introduction

Mobile ad-hoc networks provide convenient infra-free communications over wireless channels. Recently, mobile ad-hoc wireless networking technology has been
applied to various applications such as military tactical networks, sensor networks, and disaster area networks [5]. But it is diﬃcult to implement mobile
ad-hoc networks due to physical constraints such as the limited power range
and small memory of mobile device, and security issues [6] such as authentication. Recently, there are many eﬀorts to resolve the constraints of mobile ad-hoc
networks with various security issues [7], [8], [9], [11].
In [7], [8], [9], Luo et al distributed the functions of certiﬁcation authority
through a threshold secret sharing method [3], [4] and scalable multi-signature
mechanism. In [11], Capkun et al proposed a fully self-organized public-key management system that doesn’t need any trusted authorities in mobile ad-hoc network. The authors presented methods by which the authentication mechanism of
the mobile ad-hoc network can act on its own without the help of the centralized
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part II, LNCS 4488, pp. 665–672, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

666

S.-L. Lee, I.-K. Jeun, and J.-S. Song

TTP(Trusted Third Party), but since it acts on the basis of the public-key algorithm, it needs to be improved in terms of actual implementation or eﬃciency
in consideration of the performance of the nodes.
Accordingly, this paper proposes a method of ensuring the security and reliability of the mobile ad-hoc network by providing authentication and secure
communication based on symmetric cryptography while acting independently
from the centralized TTP. Besides, the concept of Hamming Distance [1] is introduced to show that it is possible to securely transmit information between
the nodes, though one node only manages log2 N secret keys. In this paper, N
means the number of nodes in the network.
This paper is organized as follows: In section 2, we explain the concepts of
Hamming Distance. In section 3, we present a secure communication channel
establishing method. In section 4, we propose the key management method.
In section 5 and 6, we propose a path construction algorithm and analyze its
performance.

2

Concepts

First, we explain the basic characteristics of Hamming Distance between two integers and the concept of Hamming Distance for improving the number of secret
keys exchanged between one node and others as log2 N . We use the following
two deﬁnitions to simplify our explanation.
① The IDs of two nodes, a and b, are deﬁned as aID (∈ ZN ) and bID (∈ ZN ) and
Hamming Distance between these IDs are deﬁned as HD(a, b) (or HD).
② A node a stores and manages the secret keys exchanged with other nodes.
At this time, node a from the viewpoint of other nodes is deﬁned as parent
node (P N ) and the other nodes is deﬁned as child nodes (CN ). Besides,
one of CN is deﬁned as CNi . Each node meets the following condition :
HD(P N, CNi ) = 1.
Theorem 1. For a ∈ ZN , deﬁne Ra = {x ∈ ZN | HD(a, x) = 1}, then
|Ra | = log2 N where Zn = {0, 1, ..., N − 1}, N = 2m , m > 0
Proof. For an integer a ∈ ZN , the number of integers which Hamming Distance
in comparison with a is ”1” is the same as the number of integers which Hamming weight in comparison with ”0” is ”1”. Generally, the number of integers
that Hamming weight in comparison with ”0” is r is computed to m Cr . Here, m
means log2 N and C means combination. Thus, for a number a, the number of
integers that Hamming Distance is ”1” is equivalent to m(= log2 N ) as m C1 .
In this paper, each node is assigned an element over ZN as the unique ID of
its public-key certiﬁcate. At this time, this ID is diﬀerent concept with the
serial number of public-key certiﬁcate x.509 v3 [10] and is managed by using
the extension ﬁeld within certiﬁcate. To construct a secure communication path
and manage a secret key eﬃciently, each node is assigned its own ID by the

Mixed Key Management Using Hamming Distance

667

R001

Fig. 1. The set of IDs with HD = 1

administrator of the ad-hoc network. This ID has particular inter-relationship
with some nodes by using HD. As for this matter, we explain in section 5 and 6
through a path construction algorithm and simulation. In addition, the number
of nodes that a node has to manage will become log2 N .
Figure 1 brieﬂy describes the characteristics explained in the above. Figure 1
represents the relationship between integers with HD=1 about the integer set of
N =8. Namely, the number of integers that Hamming Distance with ”001” is ”1”
is 3 (=log2 8) such as {”000”, ”011”, ”101”}. At this time, if ID of P N is ”001”,
IDs of CN are {”000”, ”011”, ”101”}. Namely, R001 becomes {”000”, ”011”,
”101”}. According to Theorem 1, a P N only stores and manages the secret keys
belonging to log2 N nodes.

3

Secure Communication Channel

This section uses the concept of Hamming Distance to describe how to establish
a secure channel for securely transmitting information between nodes in the adhoc network. For simplicity’s sake, it is assumed that N is 8, and information is
transmitted through the secure channel between two nodes(N000 and N110 ).
For starters, each node identiﬁes the nodes with HD=1. In ﬁgure 2, nodes
with HD=1 in comparison with N000 are {N001 , N010 , N100 }. To establish a
secure channel between nodes, each node exchanges secret keys with those nodes
with HD=1. To ensure security at this time, each node uses the public-key of
the other node to encrypt and transmit its secret key. In other words, nodes
exchanging secret keys with node N000 are {N001 , N010 , N100 }, and the secret keys are {K(000,001) , K(000,010) , K(000,100) }. At this time, K(000,001) and
K(001,000) is the same secret key. And node N000 may exchange a diﬀerent secret key with each node to enhance security. In this method, all nodes exchange
the secret keys with nodes that satisfy HD=1. On the assumption that secret
keys were exchanged like this, the method of establishing a secure channel for
securely transmitting information between two nodes will be explained. That is,
a communication path between Sn and Dn in ﬁgure 2 is determined to securely

668

S.-L. Lee, I.-K. Jeun, and J.-S. Song

Fig. 2. The concept of a communication path construction

transmit information from N000 to N110 . There are six paths in ﬁgure 2 and one
of these paths is selected to transmit information.

4

Secure Key Management

A node that wants to participate in the ad-hoc network needs to cross certify
and exchange the encryption key for secure communication with other nodes.
This section proposes a method that combines asymmetric and symmetric cryptography as the method of managing secret keys necessary for cross certiﬁcation
and encryption in this ad-hoc network. Asymmetric cryptography is used when
the public-key certiﬁcate for an ad-hoc network administrator is issued from
the TTP, and when an initial key is installed on each node. The initial key is
used when a node participating in the ad-hoc network exchanges secret keys
with other nodes. Symmetric cryptography is used for authentication and secure
communication between nodes.
In general, in symmetric cryptography, as all nodes must share secret keys with
each other, the number of secret keys managed by one node must be (N − 1) like
ﬁgure 3(a). However, in our paper, we show that it is possible to get the secure
communication even if only log2 N secret keys are exchanged like ﬁgure 3(b).
This paper divides the key management method into four stages: administrator’s
preparation, node initialization under the administrator’s control, secret key
exchange, and secure communication.
4.1

Preparation

In the preparation stage the administrator of an ad-hoc network registers in the
centralized TTP to initialize nodes. In other words, the administrator generates
a public-key pair using his own PC, stores the private-key in his tamper-prooﬁng
device, sends the public-key to TTP, and gets the certiﬁcate issued from TTP.

Mixed Key Management Using Hamming Distance

669

Fig. 3. Traditional method vs. Hammming Distance method

4.2

Node Initialization

For a node to participate in an ad-hoc network, it must be identiﬁed to the
existing network participants. To this end, the node must have the information
necessary for identifying and conﬁrming itself to the nodes already participating
in the ad-hoc network (authentication information). In the node initialization
state this authentication information is given to the nodes. Node initialization
is performed by the administrator.
Node initialization is as follows. ① The administrator connects to TTP. TTP
veriﬁes the administrator’s public-key certiﬁcate(administrator authentication).
② A secure channel is established for secure communication between the TTP
and administrator (secure channel establishment). ③ The administrator generates the public-key pair corresponding to the node, stores the private-key in the
tamper-prooﬁng area of the node and sends the public-key to the TTP (node’s
public-key pair generation). ④ The TTP generates a certiﬁcate to the public-key
of the node, and then sends its own certiﬁcate and node’s certiﬁcate together
to the node (node’s certiﬁcate issuance). At this time, the TTP’s certiﬁcate is
used to authenticate other nodes while participating in the ad-hoc network, and
the node’s certiﬁcate is used to authenticate itself for other nodes. In particular,
the node’s certiﬁcate in this stage complies with x,509 v3 certiﬁcate proﬁle, but
includes diverse information, such as ID, IP address,device usage, and device
validity date, to restrict the use of the node’s certiﬁcate.
4.3

Secret Key Exchange

In this stage, the secret keys for secure communication between nodes are shared.
In general, for secure communication between nodes, all nodes must own secret
keys necessary for data encryption. In sharing these secret keys, it is important
to minimize the impact of the leakage of the secret keys in the network to an
intruder and provide end-to-end security. As the best method, if the network
size is N , one node needs to exchange secret keys with (N − 1) other nodes, and

670

S.-L. Lee, I.-K. Jeun, and J.-S. Song

1. Initialization :
- path_length
- PN

4. Randomly select CN i and replace by CN j :

0,

- path_nodes[0]

Sn

4 - 1. j 0

Sn

4 - 2. randomly select CN j , CN j

2. Compute the Hamming Distance
between PN and Dn :
- If HD(PN, Dn) 1, then go to step 5
3. compute the Hamming distance CN i and Dn :
3 - 1. i

0, path_length path_length 1

3 - 2. Randomly select CN i , CN i

RPN :

(a) If CN i is not available, them
-i

RPN :

(a) If CN j has been already processed or
not available, then
-j j 1
- if j

(b) replace PN by CN j :
- path_nodes[path_length]
- PN

i 1

- if i log 2 N , then go to step3 - 2

log 2 N , then go to step4 - 2

- go to step 5(Fail)

PN

CN j

(c) go to step 3 - 1

- go to step 5(Fail)
(b) if HD(CN i , Dn)
(c) if i log 2 N , then i

1, then go to step 5

5. Output (path_length, path_nodes[]) and stop.

i 1 and

go to step 3 - 2

Fig. 4. The path construction algorithm

bears the burden of managing (N − 1) secret keys. Accordingly, there must be
some trade-oﬀ among the network security, the burden of exchanging secret keys
between nodes, and the quantity of secret keys managed by one node.
As the concept of Hamming Distance is introduced, it seems possible to securely transmit information in the ad-hoc network only if secret keys are shared
between those nodes with HD=1. Figure 3(b) illustrates how secret keys are
shared between nodes. Since one node only needs to manage log2 N secret keys
in the above method, the burden of the node will be reduced to a considerable
extent.
4.4

Secure Communication

For secure communication between two nodes, a communication path between
the two nodes must ﬁrst be established. Section 5 describes how to establish
the path. Once the path is established, the secret keys owned by the nodes on
respective paths are used for communication between two nodes. That is, secure
communication between two nodes can be explained by means of ﬁgure 2. The
assumption in ﬁgure 2 is that the communication path from N000 to N110 is
{N000 → N010 → N110 }. First of all, as N000 and N010 share the secret key
K(001,010) , N000 uses the secret key K(000,010) to transmit information to N010 ,
whereas N010 uses a secret key K(010,110) to transmit information to N110 .

5

Path Construction Algorithm Using Hamming Distance

A path construction algorithm refers to ﬁnd one path establishing the secure
communication channel from Sn(Source node) to Dn(Destination node). In ﬁgure 2, there are six paths from Sn to Dn and only One of these paths is constructed as the secure communication path from Sn to Dn.

Mixed Key Management Using Hamming Distance

671

We present an algorithm illustrated in ﬁgure 4 to search a path from Sn to
Dn by using the characteristics of Hamming Distance. First, the terminology
that used in ﬁgure 4 will be explained brieﬂy. P ath nodes represents the path
information from Sn to Dn in the process of constructing a path. The algorithm
proposed in this paper is divided into two parts. One is computing Hamming
Distance between Dn and the CNi of P N . The other is a process to replace P N
with one node among CN of P N in case that HD = 1. If HD(P N, Dn) = 1 or
HD(CNi , Dn) = 1, the path construction algorithm is successfully terminated.
If HD = 1, P N is replaced by randomly choosing one of CN . And then by
using CN of the replaced P N , it also veriﬁes to satisfy HD= 1. As repeating
this computation, a path can be found.
In general, the path construction algorithm is similar to routing algorithm in
mobile ad-hoc network. In this paper, algorithm performance is deﬁned in the
perspective of how to accurately ﬁnd a path. By using the algorithm performance
evaluation method proposed in [7], it is deﬁned as the following.
Pb (THD , r, ZN )
|{(Sn, Dn) ∈ ZN × ZN : Sn →suc Dn}|
=
|{(Sn, Dn) ∈ ZN × ZN : Sn →tri Dn}|

(1)

Here, THD : A path construction algorithm using HD, r : (N − Nr )/N
Sn →tri Dn : Path searching trials, Sn →suc Dn : Path constructing cases

6

Simulation Results for the Path Construction
Algorithm

The main goal of this simulation is to verify a completion level of our proposed algorithm in ﬁgure 4. Thus, this simulation intends to analyze the success
probability of path construction in case that the number of nodes on mobile
ad-hoc network is smaller than N (= 2m ) . Namely, we analyze the success possibility by evaluating the performance of the proposed algorithm according to

Fig. 5. Success probability(Pb ) vs. Node reducing factor(r)

672

S.-L. Lee, I.-K. Jeun, and J.-S. Song

the node reducing rate r. Figure 5 represents the success probability of constructing a path versus node reducing factor r(= { 0.1, ..., 0.9}) according to N
(= {128, 512, 2048, 8192}). As seen in ﬁgure 5, a path is constructed about 97.6%
success probability at conﬁdence interval [2] 99% in case of r= 0.5. If r <0.5, the
success probability will be high. As a result, the performance of our algorithm
is outstanding.

7

Conclusion

We used asymmetric and symmetric cryptography to propose a method of secure communication between nodes over mobile ad-hoc network. Besides, the
method based on Hamming Distance was proposed as the method of exchanging keys between nodes so that one node manages only log2 N secret keys. The
performance of our method was evaluated through simulation. According to the
result of the simulation, the probability of this algorithm successfully ﬁnding a
path was above 97.9% at 99% conﬁdence interval, in case that r is smaller than
0.5. In addition, our method can minimize the impact of the leakage of some
secret keys on the entire ad-hoc network as individual nodes own diﬀerent secret
keys. However, Our method doesn’t guarantee the end-to-end security directly
between source and destination nodes in this paper. Accordingly, additional research needs to be made into this area.

References
1. R. Hamming: Coding and Information Theory, Prentice-Hall, 1980.
2. Raj Jain: The art of computer systems performance analysis, John Wiley & Sons,
Inc., 1991.
3. A. Herzberg, S. Jarecki, H. Krawczyk, M. Yung: Proactive Secret Sharing, or: how
to cope with perpetual leakage, Advances in Cryptography - Crypto 95’ Proceedings, LNCS Vol 963, 1995.
4. Y. Frankel, P. Gemmell, P.-D. MacKenzie, and M. Yung: Optimal-Resilience Proactive Public-Key Cryptosystems, IEEE Symp. on Foundations of Computer Science,
1997.
5. K. Fokine: Key Management in Ad Hoc Networks, LiTH-ISY-EX-3322-2002, 2002.
6. F. Stajano and R. Anderson: The Resurrecting Duckling : Security Issues for Adhoc Wireless Networks, Proc. seventh Int’l workshop security protocols, 1999
7. H. Luo and S. Lu: Ubiquitous and Robust Authentication Services for Ad Hoc
Wireless Networks, Technical Report 200030, UCLA Computer Science Department, Oct. 2000.
8. J. Kong, P. Zerfos, H. Luo, S. Lu, and L. Zhang: Providing robust and ubiquitous
security support for MANET, Proc. ninth Int’l conf. Network Protocols, Nov. 2001.
9. H.Luo, P. Zerfos, J. Kong, S. Lu, and L. Zhang: Self-securing Ad Hoc Wireless
Networks, Seventh IEEE Symp. on Computers and Communications, 2002.
10. R. Housley, W. Polk, W. Ford, and D. Solo: Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure Certiﬁcate and CRL Proﬁle, IETF RFC3280, April 2002.
11. S. Capkun, L.Buttyan and J.-P. Hubaux: Self-Organized Public-Key Management
for Mobile Ad Hoc Networks, IEEE Trans. on mobile computing, vol. 2, No. 1,
Jan./Mar. 2003.

