MicroCASim: An Automata Network Simulator Applied
to the Competition Between Microparasites and Host
Immune Response
Luciana B. Furlan1,2, Henrique F. Gagliardi2,3, Fabrício A.B. da Silva3, Ivan T. Pisa1,
and Domingos Alves2
1

Departamento de Informática em Saúde (DIS), UNIFESP, São Paulo, SP, Brazil
lubenzoni@yahoo.com.br, ivanpisa@dis.epm.br
2 Laboratório de Computação Científica Aplicada à Saúde Coletiva (LCCASC),
UNISANTOS, Santos, SP, Brazil
henrique.gagliardi@gmail.com, quiron@unisantos.br
3 Programa de Mestrado em Informática, UNISANTOS, Santos, SP, Brazil
fabricio@unisantos.br

Abstract. In this work we had developed an alternative model framework to
study the concept of immunological memory by proposing as a simplified
model for the interaction dynamics between a population of pathogens and the
immunological system. The model is based on a probabilistic cellular automata
which allows relatively easy inclusion of some of the real immunological
systems in a transparently biological manner. The resulting virtual laboratory is
called Microscopic Cellular Automata Simulator (MicroCASim), a software
whose basic idea is to create a tool to assist the visualization of the interaction
dynamics of these entities in silico.

1 Introduction
The antigen-specific mechanisms of lymphocytes (T cells and B cells) are the most
advanced and most precise mechanism of host defense. These cells are also
responsible for the development of immunological memory, a hallmark of the
adaptive immune response. This memory, which stores its encounters with invaders,
enables humans to rapidly clear, or even prevent altogether, infection by pathogens
which they have been previously infected [1]. Whether such immunity is maintained
through constant exposure to infection via long-lived clones of lymphocytes that are
able to recognize specific antigens and maintain antibody production in the absence of
repeated exposure, or via the persistence of the microparasite at low levels of
abundance within the host, remains unclear stil [1].
In the complex area of the interacting immune system, when there is potentially
insufficient information available to construct a detailed model, cellular automata can
be used [1-3]. There have been few models using the concept of cellular automata, in
which the body is depicted as a grid [3,4]. We address this issue by describing in this
work the implementation of Microscopic Cellular Automata Simulator (MicroCASim),
a software to simulate the competition between the population of effectors cells (T
and B lymphocytes) and the population of pathogens, based on a generalized
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part I, LNCS 3991, pp. 1005 – 1008, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

1006

L.B. Furlan et al.

probabilistic cellular automata [4]. The remainder of the paper is organized as
follows. In the next Section we present the set of cellular automata rules that govern
the interaction of the populations of effectors cells and pathogens. The MicroCASim
itself is presented in the Section 3. Finally, some concluding remarks are stated in
Section 4.

2 The Alternative Probabilistic Cellular Automata Model
Consider a discrete dynamical system where a population of N entities is distributed
on the sites of a bi-dimensional square lattice (the virtual lymph node) M = mij (where
i and j may vary from (1,L) for L, N = L x L). Each individual site is assigned to
receive three specific attributes: (1) a spatial address or lattice position (i,j); (2) a set
of possible occupation states where each site is either empty or occupied by a T cell, a
B cell and a pathogen (Fig. 1), and finally (3) an period τ i , specifying the number of
units of time an entity of type i can die.

Fig. 1. Schematic representation of the virtual lymph grid

The dynamics of the system is modeled by three main features: the mobility of its
inner elements, the competition between its elements and its reproduction along the
time. Mobility is modeled as a diffusion process using the Tofoli-Margolus scheme
[5]. We use two diffusion steps within each simulation time step that are defined as
follows: the lattice is divided in blocks of 2x2 cells and each block has a pRE
probability to rotate 90o and pT to translate.
The competition is modeled by a predator-pray mechanism of interaction which the
effectors cells can kill each virus with an estimated probability when a local contact is
established with the pathogen on its neighborhood. In equation 1, we can see the
definition of the probability where a virus occupying a site being eliminated due the
presence of n1 effectors cells from type 1 and n2 from type 2 in its neighborhood:

Pc = 1 − (1 − λ1 )n1 * (1 − λ 2 )n2

(1)

which λi is the probability of a type i immune system cell to kill a virus cell and 1- λi
being the probability of this type of cell to do not kill a virus cell when rounded by ni
cells of type i. Therefore, the defined probability in equation 1 is the probability that
both immune system cells to eliminate the virus. Schematically, this mechanism
works as follows:

MicroCASim: An Automata Network Simulator

1007

Pc = 1 − (1 − λ1 )3 * (1 − λ2 ) 2

Fig. 2. In the figure we observe that central cell changed from a vírus to an empty cell. The
empty cell is represented by white spaces. Here we have n1=3 and n2=2.

For effectors cells, first we ensure that a constant amount of cells will enter the
system after a particular instant of time τ that the first virus has entered in the system
and replicated itself. Here, the effectors cells of type i depend on the number of
viruses entered the system. The same kind of dependency also occurs for the effectors
cells of the type j that depends on the number of effectors cells of type i to enter on
the system. After that, this procedure is modified to allow that entrance of effectors
cells is proportional to the quantity of virus in the system, i.e.:

pCi =

ρ1 (N v + NCj )
N

(2)

whose ρi is a parameter related to the probability of the immune system recognize the
virus (eq. 2). The replication can be divided into two phases: virus and immune
system replication, which replicates it selves by its own way. Every element of the
system has its own time life.

3 The MicroCASim Software System
The MicroCASim software system is a simulation environment for the study and
analysis of these models with their own probabilistic rules. The simulation was
implemented using object oriented methodology and the C++ programming language
was chosen for this. The system architecture is composed of four distinct modules:
specification, simulation, visualization and analysis. In the specification module the
user can configure all the parameters of each available model through a setup
window. At each simulation update, the replication, competition and mobility
mechanisms of elements are executed, respectively and the resulting data is sent to the
visualization module to display the simulation process to the user (Fig. 3).
The visualization module offers also controls to adjust the velocity, simulation
animation settings, and a graphic window to visualize simulation current status.
Particularly, the Fig. 3 displays a very interesting simulation scenario. We can
observe the model with action of a regulatory network with two kinds of immune
system cells interacting and a replicating antigen. Its worth to note that there is a
stationary behavior due to the coexistence between the B and T cells, which produces
in the system an immunological memory effect.
Thus, if the same virus infects again the system, its response will be faster than the
previous one, eliminating the menace in a short time. Furthermore, through the
analysis module we are able to see the average progression of the infection and the
immunological response by generating series of stochastic realizations. Hence, it is
possible to sweep all the space of parameters of the present models.

1008

L.B. Furlan et al.

8 days

16 days

41 days

Fig. 3. A model simulation: the model with 3 types of cells

4 Conclusions
The most important feature of the model presented here is the explicitness of
individual contact process and mixing. This model is a good platform where to start
further expansions like incorporation of various types of interacting immunological
entities. Furthermore, owing to its extreme simplicity, this formulation may be useful,
in the sense of having the value of an approximation, to tackle problems in
immunology.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by (FAPESP: Proc. 02/03564-8).

References
1. Anderson, R.M., May, R.M.: Infectious Diseases of Humans. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford
University Press (1991).
2. Seiden, P.E., Celada, F.: A model for simulating cognate recognition and response in the
immune system. J. Theor. Biol., Vol. 158. (1992) 329-357.
3. Celada, F., Seiden, P.E.: A computer model of cellular interaction in the immune system.
Immunology Today, Vol. 13. (1992) 56-62.
4. Alves, D., Hass, V., Caliri, A.: The predictive power of R0 in an epidemic probabilistic
model. Journal of Biological Physics, Vol.29. 1 (2003) 63.
5. Tofoli, T., Margolus, N.: Cellular Automata Machines: A New Environment for Modeling.
MIT Press (1987).

