Evaluation of Fluid-Thermal Systems by
Dynamic Data Driven Application Systems
D. Knight, T. Rossman, and Y. Jaluria
Dept of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
Rutgers - The State University of New Jersey
New Brunswick, NJ 08903
knight@soemail.rutgers.edu

Abstract. A Dynamic Data Driven Application Systems (DDDAS) approach is developed for evaluation of ﬂuid-thermal systems wherein a
complete speciﬁcation of the boundary conditions is not known a priori
and experimental diagnostics are restricted to a limited region of the
ﬂowﬁeld. The methodology is applied to the conﬁguration of a heated
jet injected into a laminar boundary layer where the jet temperature is
not known a priori. Preliminary results are presented.

1

Introduction

The design and control of eﬃcient ﬂuid-thermal systems requires detailed quantitative information on the ﬂowﬁeld (e.g., pressure, species concentration, temperature and velocity). Examples of such systems are combustors, furnaces, and
reactors [1]. In many situations, very limited access to the ﬂow domain is available and strong constraints are thus placed on the experimental data that can
be obtained through non-intrusive (e.g., optical) and intrusive techniques. An
example is the optical ﬁber drawing furnace, which typically has an infrared sensor to monitor the temperature of the heating element at only one location and
must use this single source of information to control the optical ﬁbre drawing
process [2, 3, 4]. Another example is the combustor in a turbofan engine.
A common approach is to use numerical simulation (i.e., Computational Fluid
Dynamics [CFD]) to obtain the desired information in the given domain using
the available experimental data. However, this procedure can be successful only
if the boundary conditions for the numerical simulation are well deﬁned. In many
cases of practical interest, such as the draw furnace and combustion chamber
mentioned previously, the boundary conditions (in particular, the thermal conditions) are not known with suﬃcient accuracy or even at all. In the optical
ﬁbre drawing furnace, for example, the temperature distribution at the wall is
the result of the overall heat transfer processes in the domain and cannot be
taken as a known input to the model. This temperature distribution aﬀects the
ﬂuid properties, as well as chemical reactions and the transport mechanisms in
the ﬂow. The wall temperature distribution is critical to the calculation of the
glass ﬂow and thus the characteristics of the ﬁber. However, it is typically infeasible to measure the wall temperature, and hence the information regarding the
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part III, LNCS 3993, pp. 473–480, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

474

D. Knight, T. Rossman, and Y. Jaluria

boundary conditions is incomplete. It is possible to infer the boundary conditions
from an inverse procedure. For example, Issa et al [2] determined the temperature distribution at the wall of a cylindrical ﬁber drawing furnace by using the
limited experimental data obtained by measuring the temperature at the axis
of a graphite rod located at the center of the furnace using an inverse calculation based on the governing transport equations coupled with an optimization
procedure.

2

Dynamic Data Driven Application Systems

The Dynamic Data Driven Applications Systems (DDDAS) concept was described in the DDDAS Workshop held at the National Science Foundation in
March 2000 [5]. DDDAS is a novel approach to engineering and scientiﬁc research
wherein experiment and simulation interact in a synergistic, symbiotic manner.
DDDAS can be implemented in either an open loop or closed loop manner. In the
former case, experimental data is streamed into the simulation (or vice-versa)
to achieve greater accuracy, detail and/or robustness. An example is real time
streaming of meteorological measurements into weather simulations. In the latter
case, experiment and simulation interact iteratively, where the experiment guides
the simulation, and the simulation in turn guides the experiment (see Darema
[6]). The recent Dynamic Data Driven Applications Systems Workshop in January 2006 [5] summarized major achievements using the DDDAS approach and
identiﬁed additional opportunities. Additional information is available on the
DDDAS.org homepage [7].
The Dynamic Data Driven Applications Systems concept may be directly
applied to signiﬁcantly improve the evaluation of ﬂuid-thermal systems using
combined experiment and simulation. The basic concept is to synergize the
experiment and simulation in a manner which exploits the advantages, and recognizes the limitations, of each approach. We speciﬁcally focus on systems evaluation in thermal sciences wherein the systems are characterized by two major
limitations. First, experimental measurements are limited to optical diagnostics
in restricted regions of the ﬂow (e.g., a subsection of the ﬂowﬁeld using optical
access along a single direction). Second, there is incomplete a priori speciﬁcation
of the boundary conditions for the ﬂow simulation.

3
3.1

Description of Research
Objective

The objective of the research is the development of a general methodology for
synergizing experiment and simulation for system evaluation in thermal sciences
wherein the experimental measurements are restricted in region and scope, and
the a priori boundary conditions for simulation are incomplete. The approach is
ﬁrmly based on the DDDAS concept wherein the experiment directs the simulation and vice-versa in a closed-loop manner. The basic approach is to approximate the unknown boundary conditions by minimizing the error in the prediction

Evaluation of Fluid-Thermal Systems by DDDAS

475

of the measured data (i.e., the experiment driving the simulation), and to identify needed subsequent experimental measurements to reduce the error (i.e., the
simulation driving the experiment).
3.2

Conﬁguration

We consider a rectangular jet injected perpendicular to an incompressible laminar boundary layer. The conﬁguration is shown in Fig. 1. The inﬂow is an
equilibrium laminar boundary layer in air deﬁned by the speciﬁed freestream
conditions (velocity U∞ , static pressure p∞ and static temperature T∞ ) and
boundary layer thickness1 δ∞ . The jet is deﬁned by the jet average velocity Uj ,
static pressure pj , and static temperature Tj .
D

C

Computational domain boundary

H

G

E

F

Example of restricted region
for optical measurements
z

U∞ , p∞ , T∞ , δ∞

x
A
Adiabatic
ﬂat plate

Uj , pj , Tj
Jet

B
Adiabatic
ﬂat plate

Fig. 1. Flow conﬁguration

The computational domain ABCD is shown in Fig. 1. The inﬂow conditions
(U∞ , p∞ , T∞ and δ∞ ) are assumed known. By analogy to the optical ﬁber
furnace, the jet exit temperature Tj is assumed unknown, while the jet exit
pressure pj and average velocity Uj are assumed known. In future work, more
complex problems will be considered. The speciﬁc values are indicated in Table 1.
The objective of this initial research problem is the determination of the jet
exit temperature Tj through a DDDAS methodology using a closed-loop iteration of experiment and simulation. The experimental data are diode laser absorption measurements [8, 9, 10]. The simulation is performed using the commercial
1

Here, δ∞ is the laminar boundary layer thickness that would exist at the location
of the jet exit in the absence of the jet. Equivalently, the distance from the leading
edge of the ﬂat plate to the jet exit may be speciﬁed.

476

D. Knight, T. Rossman, and Y. Jaluria
Table 1. Flow Conditions
Quantity Value
U∞ (m/s)
5
101
p∞ (kPa)
298
T∞ (K)
15
Uj (m/s)
101
pj (kPa)
tbd
Tj (K)
L (mm)
158
W (mm)
3.2
legend
L
distance from leading edge to jet
W
width of jet
tbd
to be determined by DDDAS

Fluent software [11] which solves the incompressible Navier-Stokes equations
using a spatially and temporally second-order accuracy ﬁnite volume algorithm.
3.3

DDDAS Methodology

A DDDAS methodology is used to determine the optimal location of the experimental measurements through an iterative procedure involving experiment
and simulation. The methodology is illustrated in Fig. 2. Consider a diode laser
absorbance measurement in a vertical plane at a speciﬁc location (x, z) within
a limited region EFGH shown in Fig. 1. The relative instantaneous absorbance
A(x, z, t) over a spanwise distance y1 ≤ y ≤ y2 is deﬁned as
A(x, z, t) =

(Io − I(x, z, t))
Io

(1)

where Io is the incident intensity at (x, y1 , z) and I(x, z, t) is the instantaneous
transmitted intensity at (x, y2 , z). The absorbance A(x, z, t) can also be accurately calculated from Beer-Lambert’s Law
A(x, z, t) = 1 − exp −

y2

κν dy

(2)

y1

assuming the diode laser frequency ν, mean partial pressure pi (x, y, z, t) of
the speciﬁc absorbing species (e.g.,O2 ) and static temperature T (x, y, z, t) are
known. The absorbance per cm of the Q R2 (6) line of the oxygen b1 Σg+ ν = 0 ←
X 3 Σg− , ν = 0 transition at 761.139 nm is
dA
= 0.083 T −1 − 2.26 · 10−5
dy

(3)

where T (x, y, z, t) is the static temperature in K. We identify the experimental
measured absorbance in (1) by Ae (x, z, t) and the simulated absorbance in (2)
by As (x, z, t).

Evaluation of Fluid-Thermal Systems by DDDAS

477

Since the ﬂowﬁeld is unsteady as discussed below, the experimental and simulated absorbance power spectra Pe (f ; x, z) and Ps (f ; x, z) are compared where
f is the frequency. At a given (x, z)-location, we may deﬁne the L2 norm of the
diﬀerence between the experimental and simulated absorbance power spectra as
∞

E(x, z) =

2

[Pe (f ; x, z) − Ps (f ; x, z)] df

(4)

0

The integral (4) is computed at the speciﬁc multiple (x, z)-locations of the experiment. An rms value of the error Erms is computed as
Erms =

1
n

E(xi , zi )

(5)

i

where n is the number of experimental location measurements.
The error Erms is a function of the assumed value for the jet exit temperature
Tj . We determine a revised value for Tj by minimizing the error Erms using
the Sequential Quadratic Programming procedure CFSQP [12] developed at the
University of Maryland.
The ﬂowﬁeld is recomputed using the updated Tj and then the ﬂowﬁeld is
searched to ﬁnd the x−location where the Total Variation of ∂ A¯s (x, z)/∂z is
the largest, where A¯s is the time-averaged absorbance at (x, z) and the Total
Variation is deﬁned by
TV(A¯s (x)) =

z2
z1

∂ A¯s
dz
∂z

(6)

This heuristic algorithm is based on the concept that the optimal x−plane location for the next experimental measurement is characterized by the largest
variations in the experimental measurement over the x−plane.

4

Results

We present the preliminary results of our DDDAS methodology (Fig. 2) for
evaluation of the ﬂuid-thermal system shown in Fig. 1 based upon the ﬁrst four
months of our research project. A time-accurate Navier-Stokes simulation was
performed for the ﬂow conditions shown in Table 1 using an initial jet temperature Tj = 398 K. Instantaneous temperature contours2 are shown in Figs. 3
to 6 at intervals3 of 40 ms. The ﬂowﬁeld is strongly unsteady. The hot jet ﬂuid
is entrained into large spanwise vortices which convect downstream. Since the
absorbance is inversely proportional to temperature (see (3)), the instantaneous
absorbance signal at a ﬁxed location (x, z) varies as each vortex is convected
past.
2
3

The axes are in meters.
For comparison, the time required for the freestream ﬂow to traverse from the left
to right boundaries of the computational domain is 155 ms.

478

D. Knight, T. Rossman, and Y. Jaluria

Initialization
Select initial value for Tj

Simulation

Compute ﬂowﬁeld

Update Tj

Deﬁne Experiment

Find revised value for Tj
by minimizing Erms

Determine x-location for
experimental measurement
¯s (x))
by max TV(A

Experiment
Measure Ae (x, z, t) at
locations determined by
simulation
Experiment

Fig. 2. DDDAS Methodology

Fig. 3. t = 0

Fig. 4. t = 40 ms

Fig. 5. t = 80 ms

Fig. 6. t = 120 ms

An experimental facility (Fig. 7) has been constructed in the low speed wind
tunnel at Rutgers University for the problem conﬁguration (Fig. 1). Initial measurements of oxygen absorption were taken 30 mm downstream of the jet exit
and 30 mm above the wall based upon the simulation results which indicated
that the temperature ﬂuctuations would be large at this location (see Figs. 3 to

Evaluation of Fluid-Thermal Systems by DDDAS

479

6). The experimental inﬂow conditions were similar to the simulation; however,
the jet velocity Uj = 8.7 m/s. The absorption path was a dual-pass geometry with the laser traversing the ﬂowﬁeld twice at a half angle of 0.2 degrees.
Therefore, the eﬀective spatial resolution of the diagnostic is 5 mm. The raw
absorbance data traces were reduced to ﬁnd temperature as a function of time
using (3).
The temperature results display a highly unsteady behavior similar to the
simulation. The power spectrum of the experimental temperature ﬂuctuations
(Fig. 8) shows evidence of vortex shedding behavior with characteristic frequencies at 8 and 15 Hz.

Fig. 7. Experimental conﬁguration

5

Fig. 8. Pe at x = 30 mm, z = 30 mm

Future Work

Our immediate future work will focus on three problems. First, we will complete
the determination of the jet temperature Tj (and therefore the complete evaluation of the ﬂuid-thermal system in Fig. 1) using our DDDAS methodology.
Second and third, we will extend the complexity of the problem to two a priori
unknown boundary conditions (Tj and Uj ) and then three a priori unknown
boundary conditions (Tj , Uj and pj ). This sequence of problems will validate
the accuracy and robustness of our DDDAS approach.

6

Conclusions

A methodology for evaluation of ﬂuid-thermal systems is developed based upon
the Dynamic Data Driven Application Systems approach. The methodology is
intended for ﬂuid-thermal systems where complete speciﬁcation of the boundary conditions is not known a priori and experimental measurements are restricted to a subregion of the ﬂuid-thermal domain. The methodology synergizes
experiment and simulation in a closed-loop, iterative manner to achieve a full
evaluation of the ﬂuid-thermal system. Preliminary results are presented for the
conﬁguration of a heated jet injected into a laminar boundary layer where the
jet temperature is not known a priori. Future work is described.

480

D. Knight, T. Rossman, and Y. Jaluria

Acknowledgments
The research is sponsored by the US National Science Foundation under grant
CNS-0539152 (1 Oct 2005 - 30 Sept 06). The program manager is Dr. Frederica
Darema.

References
1. Y. Jaluria. Design and Optimization of Thermal Systems. McGraw-Hill, New York,
1998.
2. J. Issa. Temperature Measurement in an Optical Fiber Draw Furnace. MS Thesis,
Dept of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Rutgers University, 1995.
3. S. Roy Choudhury and Y. Jaluria. Practical Aspects in the Drawing of an Optical
Fiber. Journal of Materials Research, 13:483–493, 1998.
4. Y. Jaluria. Thermal Processing of Materials: From Basic Research to Engineering.
Journal of Heat Transfer, 125:957–979, 2003.
5. Dynamic Data Driven Applications Systems (DDDAS) Website. National Science
Foundation, http://www.nsf.gov/cise/cns/darema/dddas/index.jsp.
6. F. Darema. Dynamic Data Driven Applications Systems: A New Paradigm for
Application Simulations and Measurements. In Fourth International Conference
on Computational Science, pages 662–669, Berlin, 2004. Springer-Verlag.
7. Dynamic Data Driven Applications Systems (DDDAS) Homepage.
http://www.dddas.org/.
8. S. Chou, D. Baer, and R. Hanson. Diode-laser Absorption Measurements of CH3 Cl
and CH4 Near 1.65 μm”. Applied Optics, 36:3288–3293, 1997.
9. R. Mihalcea, D. Baer, and R. Hanson. Diode Laser Sensor for Measurements of
CO, CO2 and CH4 in Combustion Flows. Applied Optics, 36:8745–8752, 1997.
10. D. Nelson, M. Zahniser, J. McManus, C. Kolb, and J. Jimenez. A Tunable Diode
Laser System for the Remote Sensing of On-road Vehicle Emissions. Applied
Physics B, 67:433–441, 1998.
11. Fluent Version 6. Fluent, Inc. http://www.ﬂuent.com.
12. C. Lawrence, J. Zhou, and A. Tits. Users Guide for CFSQP Version 2.3: A C Code
for Solving (Large Scale) Constrained Nonlinear (Minimax) Optimization Problems, Generating Iterates Satisfying All Inequality Constraints. Technical Report
TR-94-16r1, Institute for Systems Research, University of Maryland, November
1994.

