Dynamic Data-Driven Fault Diagnosis of Wind Turbine
Systems
Yu Ding1, Eunshin Byon1, Chiwoo Park1, Jiong Tang2, Yi Lu2, and Xin Wang2
1

Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843
yuding@iemial.tamu.edu
2
University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269
jtang@engr.uconn.edu

Abstract. In this multi-university collaborative research, we will develop a
framework for the dynamic data-driven fault diagnosis of wind turbines which
aims at making the wind energy a competitive alternative in the energy market.
This new methodology is fundamentally different from the current practice
whose performance is limited due to the non-dynamic and non-robust nature in
the modeling approaches and in the data collection and processing strategies.
The new methodology consists of robust data pre-processing modules,
interrelated, multi-level models that describe different details of the system
behaviors, and a dynamic strategy that allows for measurements to be
adaptively taken according to specific physical conditions and the associated
risk level. This paper summarizes the latest progresses in the research.

1 Introduction
Wind turbines convert the kinetic energy of wind into the electrical energy, which
provides a pollution-free source of electricity. Today wind power is considered the
fastest growing energy source around the world. The key issue for all renewable energy
utilizations is the cost and the marketability [1]. In the US, Class 6 sites (with average
wind speeds of 6.7 m/s at 10 m height) can in theory market electricity at prices of 3 to
4c/kWh, which, together with the tax credit (1.7c/kWh), allows wind energy to compete
with traditional energy sources. As more sites are developed, easily accessible new
Class 6 sites are becoming less available. Emphasis has now been shifted to Class 4
wind sites (5.8 m/s at 10 m height), which cover vast areas of the Great Plains from
northern Texas to the US-Canada border. Class 4 sites represent almost 20 times the
developable wind resource of Class 6 sites. Currently the electricity at Class 4 sites can
be generated at costs in the range of 5 to 6 c/kWh. In order to position the wind energy
as an attractive option, the Federal Wind Energy Program (FWEP) has set a goal to
reduce the cost of electricity generated at Class 4 sites to 3c/kWh. One major hurdle to
achieve this goal is the high cost for maintaining the wind turbines at remote areas,
given the labors, time, and heavy-duty equipment involved. The FWEP’s goal can be
achieved only after the number of false alarms, the failure-caused down time, and the
actual maintenance cost of wind turbines can be significantly reduced.
Clearly, a reliable, robust fault detection and diagnosis system plays a critical role
in making the wind power more marketable. In a modern wind turbine, the most
expensive and fault-prone components are the gearbox and the blades, especially for
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part I, LNCS 4487, pp. 1197–1204, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

1198

Y. Ding et al.

those low speed wind turbines operating at Class 4 sites. While researchers have
pursued fault diagnosis for similar structures for decades, diagnosis of wind turbine
components is unique and poses new challenge. First, these low speed wind turbines
constantly operate under non-stationary conditions and involve very complicated
gearboxes with multiple stages of gears to speed up a hundred times or more. Second,
in order to increase the unit power conversion efficiency, the blades used are
significantly longer, up to 70m in length as compared to the 20m ones currently
installed in high speed wind turbines. For these blades with such enormous size and
made of composite materials, traditional modal-information-based fault diagnosis is
difficult to be implemented on-line and is insensitive to the dominant failure mode,
namely the delamination within the layered composites [2].
The most challenging aspect of wind turbine fault diagnosis comes from the high
requirements placed on the accuracy and credibility, owing to the cost-sensitive nature
related to the FWEP’s goal. The currently available signal processing and diagnosis
methods are deterministic in nature, leading to a large number of false alarms [3]. In
view of these challenges and the urgent need, in this project we develop a new
framework for the effective and robust diagnosis of wind turbine systems using the
dynamic data-driven methodology. This methodology, as illustrated in Fig. 1, consists
of robust data pre-processing modules for highly sensitive feature extraction,
interrelated models that describe different details of the system behaviors at multiple
levels, and a dynamic strategy that allows the measurements to be adaptively taken
according to the specific physical conditions and the associated risk level. In this
paper, we summarize the progresses made in the research.
A lumped parameter
vibration model

Adaptive wavelets
for feature extraction

Robust methods for
sensor self-diagnosis

Robust, feature-oriented pre-processing

Low risk

Scheduled local
interrogation

Pr(fault) High risk with
no fault ID

Whole-system
local interrogation

High risk with
fault ID

Narrowed area
local interrogation

An influence
coefficient network

MART model

A global hybrid predictive model

Data from wireless
sensors or mobile
Local damage
acoustics sensors
propagation model

Get more sensing data

Confidence about
damage prediction

Not
confident

(Dynamic interrogation
strategy)

Update the predictive model

Data from
wired sensors

Historical data

confident

Maintenance
decision & action

Fig. 1. Framework for dynamic, data-driven diagnosis of wind turbine systems

2 Signal Pre-processing and Local-Level Detection
At local level, we are concerned about the health conditions of the gearbox and the
blades. For the monitoring of the gearbox, vibratory signals during the wind turbine

Dynamic Data-Driven Fault Diagnosis of Wind Turbine Systems

1199

operation collected by accelerometers will be used. For the monitoring of the blades,
we mainly rely on an active damage interrogation scheme that uses embedded
piezoelectric actuators to generate Lamb wave propagation in the blades. The wave
propagation anomaly will indicate damage occurrence such as delamination.
The common feature of the aforementioned signals that are used for health
monitoring is that they are non-stationary either due to the wind turbine operation, or
due to the nature of the wave excitation. For such signals, it is better to choose timefrequency representations, among which wavelet analysis is particularly useful, to
extract their critical features. Different from traditional Fourier transform-based
frequency analysis, wavelet transforms lead to the flexibility in using narrow
windows for the analysis of high-frequency content and wide windows for low
frequencies. Newland [4] developed harmonic wavelet and its generalized form,
whose wavelet levels represent non-overlapping frequency bands that can help
interpret frequency contents and link detection results with physical meanings. Liu
improved the generalized harmonic wavelet transform by applying an entropy-based
algorithm for best basis selection, in the sense that it gives the sparsest representation
of the signal [5]. Since the time-frequency interpretation is adaptive to specific
signals, finding the common wavelet bases for a set of samples (signals) in the
presence of noise requires extra improvement, which is the focus of our current study.
From the Fourier transform in the frequency domain
k
− iω
⎧
1
e n −m
⎪
Wmnk (ω ) = ⎨ (n − m)2π
⎪
0
⎩

m2π ≤ ω ≤ n 2π

(1)

otherwise

Newland derived the family of generalized harmonic wavelets [4]
k
)=
wmnk (t ) = wmn (t −
n−m

k ⎤
k ⎤
⎡
⎡
exp ⎢in2π (t −
) − exp ⎢im2π (t −
)
n − m ⎥⎦
n − m ⎥⎦
⎣
⎣
(n − m)i 2π t

(2)

where m and n are the level parameters, 0≤m≤n, and integer k denotes the translation
parameter within the level (m, n). The advantage of harmonic wavelets is that signal
analysis is restricted to specific frequency bands with known physical meanings, and
these bands are represented by corresponding wavelet levels. A discrete algorithm is
developed to calculate coefficients by computing the inverse discrete Fourier
transform (IDFT) of successive blocks (each corresponds to a level m, n) of the
Fourier coefficients of the input signal.
Liu treated each selection {( m0 , n0 ),( m1 , n1 ),… ,(mL −1 , nL −1 )} as a partition of
Ω = {0,1,…, N f } and developed a Shannon entropy-based algorithm to search a

partition tree for the best partition (in the sense that the signal can be represented most
sparsely) [5]. For any sequence x = {xj}, the Shannon entropy is defined as
H (x) = −∑ p j log p j
j

(3)

2

where p j = x j / x 2 , and pj log pj is set as 0 if pj = 0. The entropy above is a measure
of the sparsity and therefore we expect smaller entropy for a better partition of

1200

Y. Ding et al.

wavelet coefficients. We incorporate this technique to the pre-processing of Lamb
wave-based damage detection in laboratory beam-type specimens. The iteration
procedure for a sequence of 16 elements using a binary partition tree is illustrated in
Fig. 2 (Phase II). For the initial partition, every single Fourier coefficient forms an
‘initial subgroup’, whose the Shannon entropy can be called initial entropy. Then in
Step 1, every 2 successive Fourier coefficients form a ‘Step 1 subgroup’, whose
entropy is calculated and compared with the corresponding sum of initial entropies.
For the example in Fig. 2, the sum entropy of the ‘initial subgroups’ 1 and 2 is smaller
than that of the ‘Step 1 subgroup’ 1. The former subgroups, instead of the latter, are
therefore kept after the selection in Step 1. After the entire iteration, the features of
the input signal will be highlighted by projecting samples onto those best basis
functions.

Fig. 2. Discrete-time adaptive harmonic wavelet transform using FFT/IFFT (N=16)

The above strategy of adaptive harmonic wavelet transform (AHWT) is signaldependent. Multiple signals from the same gearbox or blade may, however, lead to
different wavelet basis partition simply due to the existence of noise. In order to build
a baseline dataset, the detection algorithm requires a common wavelet basis set for all
the samples. We hence extend the adaptive harmonic wavelet transform for
multivariate applications. Each time series sample sl = {sl(r), r = 0,1,…,N-1}
collected from the accelerometer or piezoelectric sensor is associated with a set of
basis functions {wmnk}l, then all the L samples are projected on {wmnk}l to yield a
matrix of wavelet coefficients [a1 … aL]l. The total Shannon entropy can be defined
as H([a1 … aL]l) = H(a1)+…+ H(aL), where l=1,…,L (the number of samples). We
select the common wavelet basis set {wmnk}u such that the wavelet coefficients [a1 …
aL]u have the smallest total Shannon entropy, i.e.,
u = arg min H ([a1 ... aL ]l )
l

(4)

Dynamic Data-Driven Fault Diagnosis of Wind Turbine Systems

1201

We call [a1 … aL]u the baseline dataset; similarly, the on-line collected response
signal can be processed by applying the above procedure.
With the AHWT as basis for feature extraction, we may then use several statistical
analysis tools for local-level detection. Principal component analysis (PCA)
transforms a number of correlated variables into a smaller number of uncorrelated new
variables called principal components. Consider a block of baseline data and let C
be the corresponding covariance matrix. PCA yields an orthogonal (eigenvector)
matrix V = [v1 … vK] matrix and a diagonal (eigenvalue) matrix D = diag(λ1,…,λK)
such that CV = VD. The eigenvalues are arranged in descending order λj ≥ λj+1.
Introducing the effective rank rk of X [6], we can discard the eigenvectors associated
with λrk+1,…, λK and form a modified eigenvector matrix Vm. Here we choose rk as the
smallest number so that the accumulative energy is above a certain threshold ET%,
rk0 = min rk s.t.

rk

∑λ
j =1

K

j

> ET %∑ λ j

(5)

j =1

given that the eigenvalues represent the distribution of the original energy among
each of the eigenvectors. The local-level detection is facilitated by the Hotelling’s T2
analysis [7]. First, baseline data are sub-grouped and used to establish an upper
control limit UCL1 under a certain confidence level 100(1-α)%, where α indicates the
error probability (0<α<1). Then in phase II, a distinction is made between the
baseline and the online sensor data using a modified upper control limit UCL2. If any
calculated T2 value exceeds the phase II upper control limit, we may conclude, with
(a)

(b)

60

Baseline signal
Test signal

AHW T Absolute Coefficients, Undamaged Beam.

936

40

Frequency (KHz)

Voltage (mV)

780

20

0

-20

-40

624

468

312

156

-60

25

50

75

100

125

25

50

Time (μs)
(c)

75
Time ( μ s)

100

125

(d)

AHW T Absolute Coefficients, Damaged Beam.

300

Damaged
Undamaged

936

250

200
624

T2 value

Frequency (KHz)

780

468

150

100

312

UCL2

50

156

25

50

75
Time ( μ s)

100

125

0

5

10

15

20

25

Wavelet Coefficient Subgroup

Fig. 3. Piezoelectric interrogation and wave signals: local-level data-driven signal processing

1202

Y. Ding et al.

confidence level 100(1-α)%, that the structure is in its damaged state. Fig. 3 shows an
example of successful detection of crack damage in a laboratory beam structure using
piezoelectric-based damage interrogation.

3 Dynamic Interrogation and Decision-Making
We intend to develop a “risk-based dynamic decision making” policy, considering the
loss that may be caused by undetected component failures and the cost of doing
unnecessary maintenance work for normally operating components. In this dynamic
procedure, we classify the sensor feedbacks and the subsequent actions into three
levels: (1) the normal level, and thus operate as is, when no sign indicates any serious
problems; (2) the alert level and then put the monitoring into the intensive care mode;
(3) the alarm level, and thus dispatch the maintenance crew for on-site repairing.
Under intensive care, one need update the sensor measurements more frequently, use
advanced mobile sensors for obtaining additional information, and invoke
computationally intensive modules for predicting failure modes with reduced
uncertainty. So the intensive care mode will incur additional cost but will not be as
expensive as dispatching the crew. The decision will be made dynamically by
weighing a group of factors.
Factors need to be considered including the costs and risks associated with
different actions to be taken (e.g., dispatch a maintenance crew or not),
weather conditions now and in the near future which affects both the wind power
generation, the severity of any existing mechanical problem, and the feasibility of a
repairing mission, the loss caused by the disruption to power generation as the result
of a major maintenance or as the result of an utter failure. A hidden Markov model [8]
is being used to model the wind turbine’s health status. Weather is an important
condition for wind turbine operations because wind is the primary source for
producing wind power [9]. Non-stationarity and irregularity in wind conditions induce
the fatigues causing many component failures. The weather condition also affect the
feasibility and cost of a repairing mission since doing a repair under a severe weather
Criteria
Cost
• maintenance cost
• lost profit
• break-out cost

Reliability level
• Availability
requirement
• Pre-defined alert
and alarm level

External Condition

• current/forecasted
•
•

weather condition
(wind speed, etc)
wind farm size/type
(off/onshore, etc)
distance from
maintenance center

Internal Condition
Adaptive measurement

• Maintenance history
• Age of turbines and
components

Evaluation of risks

• Probability of turbine
states

Optimal decision

• uncertainty

• uncertainty

Fig. 4. Factors considered in the dynamic decision making process

Dynamic Data-Driven Fault Diagnosis of Wind Turbine Systems

1203

condition will be more costly than doing so under a fair condition. Shutting down the
wind turbine for repair will also incur losses in power production so one would be
better off to schedule such an action during a low wind period than a high wind
period. In addition to the weather condition, a wind farm type such as where the wind
farm is located (for instance, offshore will need special care and vessel), the distance
between the wind farm and maintenance center are also the external factors in our
decision making process.
As for the internal conditions related to the wind turbine, the probabilities about the
turbine state, which is derived from sensor signals, are the most important input
factor. Other factors include the age of the turbine and the repair history and so on.
Our main objective in this decision making process is to minimize the risk caused by
the information uncertainties [10, 11] from the external and internal factors. The
criteria and influential factors are summarized in Fig. 4. Next, we present a simple
example to explain the dynamic decision making process.
In the following example, we simplify the above consideration by assuming that
the external conditions remain constant. We assume that a wind turbine could be in
two health states: survival or failure and the sensor feedback can be classified into
three categories: that is, Ot ∈ {o1 , o2 , o3} or Ot′ ∈ {o1′, o′2 , o3′ } , where Ot' is obtained from
an advanced sensor under intensive care, and oi indicates an escalated risk of turbine
failure as i increases. Similar treatments were also used prior studies [8].
Fig. 5 shows a possible trajectory of sensory data and the corresponding scenario
of decision rules at each epoch. The wind turbine operates normally during t1 ~ t3. At
t4, o2 is observed from a regular sensor, implying that an intensive care is needed.
When invoking the advanced sensor, we got an o1' so we operate wind turbine as
usual. Afterwards, o2 and o2' are observed both at t5 and t6. Then we calculate the risk
based on both sensor feedbacks and found the failure risk is not high enough at t5 so
we remain in the intensive care. But the failure risk crosses the alarm level at t6 so we
need to dispatch the crew for maintenance. After the repair, the wind turbine returns
to the normal level. At t10, an alarm signal is detected so we need to dispatch the crew
right away without going through an intensive care period.

o3

8

data from regular sensors

8

data during intensive care
o2

o1

time t1
decision
rules

o′2

8 8 8
8 8 8

a1

t2
a1

t3
a1

8 8 8
t4
a3

t5
a3

t6
a3

È È È
a1

a1

a2

o′3

t7
a1

t8
a1

t9
a1

o′1

t10
a2

a1 operate as it is
a 2 dispatch
the maintenance
crew
a3 carry out
intensive care

Fig. 5. A trajectory of sensor signals and decision rules

1204

Y. Ding et al.

4 Summary
This paper summarizes the recent progresses made in the dynamic data-driven fault
diagnosis of wind turbine systems. The health monitoring of wind turbine systems is
inherently challenging due to the high requirements placed on the accuracy and
reliability of the monitoring system. To fundamentally solve the relevant issues, a
series of tools and strategies have been developed and explored, which include robust
data-driven local signal processing and preliminary detection algorithms, redundancy
analysis for sensor network reliability and robustness, and global strategy for dynamic
interrogation and decision making.

Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the National Science Foundation
through the grant number CMMI-0540132 and CMMI-0540278.

References
1. National Wind Technology Center, Wind Program Multi-Year Technical Plan,
http://www.nrel.gov/wind_meetings/2003_imp_meeting/pdfs/mytp_nov_2003.pdf.
2. Zou, Y., Tong, L., and Steven, G.P.: Vibration-based model-dependent damage
(delamination) identification and health monitoring for composite structures – a review.
Journal of Sound and Vibration, 230 (2000) 357-378.
3. Tumer, I.R., and Huff, E.M.: Analysis of triaxial vibration data for health monitoring of
helicopter gearboxes. ASME Journal of Vibration and Acoustics. 125 (2003) 120 – 128.
4. Newland, D.E.: Harmonic wavelet analysis. Proceedings: Mathematical and Physical
Sciences. 443 (1993) 203-225.
5. Liu, B.: Adaptive harmonic wavelet transform with applications in vibration analysis.
Journal of Sound and Vibration. 262 (2003) 45-64.
6. Konstantinides, K., and Yao, K.: Statistical analysis of effective singular value in matrix
rank determination. IEEE Transactions on Acoustics, Speech & Signal Processing. 36
(1988) 757-763.
7. Johnson, R.A., and Wichern, D.W.: Applied Multivariate Statistical Analysis, 5th Edition.
Prentice Hall (2002).
8. Baruah P. and Chinnam, R. B.: HMMs for diagnosis and prognosis in machining process.
International Journal of Production Research. 43 (2005) 1275-1293.
9. European Commission: Advanced maintenance and repair for offshore wind farms using
fault prediction and condition monitoring techniques. Project report of European
Commission under Contract NNE5/2001/710 (2005).
10. Gebraeel, N.: Sensory-updated residual life distributions for components with exponential
degradation patterns. IEEE Transactions on Automation Science & Engineering. 3 (2006)
382-393.
11. Pedregal, D.J. and Carnero, M. C.: State space models for condition monitoring: a case
study. Reliability Engineering & System Safety. 91 (2006) 171-180.

