The Impact of Information Technology on Quality of
Healthcare Services
Mariusz Duplaga
Jagiellonian University Medical College, Skawinska Str.8, 31-066 Krakow, Poland
mmduplag@cyf-kr.edu.pl

Abstract. The incorporation of information technology tools in medical
practice results not only in opportunities related to improved quality and
availability of services but also in transformation of the model of care delivery.
Spreading use of the computer applications in healthcare is propelled by the
growing expectations of citizens about quality of medical care. Furthermore,
modern healthcare system relies on the concepts of patient’s empowerment,
shared care and continuity of services. The fulfilment of all these requirements
may be possible through establishment of the e health environment allowing
for safe “electronic” contacts between physicians and their patients. In turn, the
use of telemedical applications improves the process of information exchange
between professionals representing different referential levels and areas of
medicine. The awareness of the fact that medical errors themselves may be
meaningful cause of morbidity and mortality, accerelated searches for effective
countermeasures. The use of computer-based solutions is perceived currently as
one of the effective remedies. The paper explores the opportunities of
improvement of healthcare performance and quality with solutions brought by
information technology.

1 The Role of Information Technology in the Vision of Modern
Healthcare
The perception of healthcare has been evolving from the moment when humans
started to perform conscious actions for preserving health and treating ailments. The
approaches based on the irrational beliefs or individual experience of practitioners
were substituted by evidence-based clinical practice in 20th century. Simultaneously,
radical changes in lifestyle and nutrition had profound impact on life duration and
quality of life. The expenditures for healthcare remain important part of national
products in developed countries. Increased awareness of health-related problems
results in high expectations about healthcare performance among the citizens. The
increased life duration, the emphasis put on maintaining high quality of healthcare
services, the sophisticated medical technology and high incidence of chronic
conditions in modern societies add to growing trends in healthcare expenditures.
The progress in telecommunication and computers science leads to essential
transformations in other domains. The great expectations about opportunities for
increased cost-effectiveness and quality of services exist also in healthcare.
Information technology opens the window for assuring appropriate healthcare quality
obtained within reasonable costs. Particularly, rapid growth of Internet community is

M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3039, pp. 1118–1125, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

The Impact of Information Technology on Quality of Healthcare Services

1119

perceived as the factor which will radically change the model of health services
delivery. The traditional approach to medical care requires substantial changes, if vital
health-related needs of developed societies are to be fulfilled. Traditional codes of
practice in medicine put stress on direct contacts between the physician and the
patient. The form of this contacts is frequently defined by appropriate legal
regulations. However, there are many forms of healthcare services in which
traditional approach could be modified with the use of modern tools of
communication. The best examples of such services include follow-up visits of
chronic patients, monitoring of symptoms severity or educating patients about their
diseases. In this context, it is understandable that the patient with established
diagnosis, remaining under long-term control of his or her physician, returning for the
consecutive visits does not require detailed history taking and physical examination
on every occasion. Instead, the physician should focus on issues raised by the patient
and problems that are priority in the context of the individual patient and specific
disease.
The communication between the patients and health professionals may be
considerably enhanced as questions raised by the patients are answered without the
visit to physician’s office. The doubts about disease course may appear quite often in
patients anxious about their health status, and the digital platform of communication
offers more flexible approach to the provision of explanations by health professionals.
Simultaneously, the change in the forms of patient-physician communication brings
new challenges to formal and legal regulations of standards of care.[1] The use of
electronic communication for routine contacts between physicians and the patients is
associated with some risks, but generally, it may be perceived, assuring technical
feasibility and security of the specific technical solution, as convenient substitute for
repeated visits of the patient in the physician’s office performed for checking the
patient’s status and renewing prescriptions.[25] Internet and e-mail as new modes of
communication between patients and physicians allow for greater flexibility and
optimum use of health professionals’ time.[24]
The Internet-based applications have also the potential for improvement of clinical
practice services through better timing, adjustment according to patient’s needs and
integration of evidence-based guidelines in the information systems, e.g. in the form
of decision support tools. After first clinical trials, it became obvious that even severe
conditions may be efficiently treated at home providing appropriate communication
with the patient as well as monitoring of vital signs and symptoms via telemedical
infrastructure is assured. Teleconferencing system may be installed in patient’s home
and used by the patient with assistance of family members or social workers.
The inclusion of patients in the process of diagnostics and therapy is perceived
nowadays as one of the key conditions of successful care.[30] Their active role in
monitoring of disease severity became the obvious aim of medical management in
chronic conditions, such as diabetes, bronchial asthma or arterial hypertension.
However, self-observations and self-measurements conducted by the patients should
be supported by interaction with health professionals having the access to patients’
data. The Internet and telecommunication links shape perfect environment for such
activities. Extensive use of web technologies for chronic care is possible in those
societies which have appropriate access to Internet. The rapid growth of the mobile
telephony penetration brings another tool suitable for telemonitoring applications.

1120

M. Duplaga

The Internet health-related platforms are devoted to various aspects of chronic
care. The website focused on specific disease offers many opportunities for
improvement of care effectiveness. Patients are able to enter their self-observations
and self-measurements results on-line but they can also receive answers to questions
on every day activities related to their medical conditions without going to
physician’s office.[13] Simultaneously, health professionals can monitor health status
of their patients through monitoring centre.[11] The process of monitoring may be
enhanced with the feature of alert triggering in case of deterioration of parameters
monitored by the patient prompting for appropriate action from the physician.
The Internet users surfing on the Web frequently use it as the source of healthrelated information.[16] The consumers of health services search for information
about specific disorders, providers or health programmes as well as for contacts with
support groups. The WWW-based medical record gives the patients access to his or
her data from home environment.[31]
Self-education is important opportunity for chronic patients related to the
widespread use of Web-based applications. Internet technologies enable individualised education and training process. More advanced solutions emerge the patient
in the environment supporting self-management of the medical problem but also
imposing the regularity of activities. In such environment the patient gains selfassurance that in case of deterioration the appropriate information will be forwarded
to healthcare provider.
Full exploration of advantages related to the use of information technologies yields
many other fields of application in healthcare such as the implementation of
preventive measures, the efficient use of individual genetic information in early stages
of health-supporting interventions (e.g. lifestyle modification, diet, avoiding specific
factors), the transformation of the traditional contacts between health professional and
patients and development of virtual support environments for people with special
needs.The clinical care incorporates new modes of services delivery through the use
of systems supporting electronic healthcare record, telemedical applications or
electronic prescribing. Telemedicine offers broad spectrum of clinical scenarios
enabling the e-visits for patients, teleconsultations between health professionals
representing different medical centres or specialities, telepresence and teletraining in
interventional specialities or even virtual surgery. The availability of information
system in medical facility enables the implementation of reminding and alerting
applications or decision support tools enhancing the quality of the process of care.

2 Improvement of Patient Safety
The awareness of the incidence of medical errors exploded with the report of the
Institute of Medicine from USA published in 1999.[23] The main issue emphasized in
the report was the great magnitude of the harm resulting from medical errors, the
importance of appropriate organization of healthcare services in avoiding medical
errors as well as the need for mandatory reporting programmes. The conclusions
included in the Report were based on the publications in pear review journals issued
in preceding 10 years. The data from this publications allowed for the estimations

The Impact of Information Technology on Quality of Healthcare Services

1121

about the consequences of medical errors on national scale in USA. The most
shocking information was realization that even 98000 deaths annually may be related
to medical errors. In 2001, the next report of the Institute of Medicine, titled
“Crossing the Quality Chasm” was published.[21] The six aims for improvement
indicated in this report include safety, effectiveness, patient-centeredness, timeliness,
efficiency and equity. These aims may be approached with the application of
information technology tools.[4]
The positive role of technology in reduction of the incidence of medical errors
should result in broader use of such solutions, like bar-coding of medication, wireless
PDA devices for access to patients record and drug information as well as systems for
drug order entry. Among the most frequent adverse effects occurring in healthcare,
first three places are hold by adverse drug events, nosocomial infections and
procedural complications.
Adverse drug event are the largest, single category of medical errors. Medication
errors are responsible for considerable number of physician’s office visit and
hospitalizations. The broader use of computer applications should be particularly
effective in diminishing the number of adverse drug events related to medication
errors. Three type of solutions are proposed in this context: computerized physician
order entry (CPOE), automated dispensing machines (ADMs) and computerized
medication administration records (CMARs).[22] The use of information systems,
especially in the areas where automation process is available, is perceived as the way
of errors containment in medical management. CPOEs offered in the IT market are
able to detect negative drug interaction, unexpected shifts of dosage or conflicts
between medication and medical conditions.[5], [26] Another important solution
influencing three most frequent types of adverse effects in healthcare is the use of bar
codes. [27]
The use of e-prescribing systems in outpatient practices should be encouraged as
their implementation is potentially beneficial for patient safety and efficiency of
management.[8], [9] The main benefits include the generation of legible and accurate
prescriptions checked for harmful interactions, adherence to guidelines and health
programmes as well as the option of access to patient information and availability of
decision support functions at the point of care.
It is also obvious that great global impact on incidence of medical errors would
have the widespread use of electronic medical record systems with functions of order
entry, medication administration records and decision support than implementation of
many single-purpose applications.

3 The Improvement of Access to Health Care Services with
Telemedicine
Telemedicine means delivery of healthcare services conducted with the application of
teleinformatic infrastructure. Advanced telemedical system or network enables
diversified forms of medical services and information transfer among institutions and
health professionals when direct contact is impossible. Telemedical system should
fulfill such criteria as geographic distance between centres which exchange medical

1122

M. Duplaga

information and the use of teleinformatic technologies as substitute of direct contacts.
This type of services is also called telehealth, cybermedicine, or more recently, ehealth. The appearance of new definitions of telemedicine is related to continuous
development of this domain and finding new areas of applications for teleinformatic
technologies.[7]
First telemedicine implementations were developed in 50-ies of 20th century.
Telemedicine underwent considerable evolution from this time.[29] Today,
telemedicine is perceived not only as the way of delivery of healthcare services in
some extreme circumstances (as geographic isolation or emergency states) but more
as the use of modern telematic tools for improvement of availability and quality of
medical services. The use of telemedical application is not even over the world.
Paradoxically, developed countries seem to be more devoted to establish telemedical
applications in their healthcare environments as they see potential substantial benefits
from their implementation. These benefits became more obvious due to rapid growth
of the population of Internet users as it offers less expensive, more homogeneous and
easily available technology to population. Even if benefits from the growing use of
Internet in healthcare are very convincing, there are some issues which require careful
recognition e.g. problems related to security and confidentiality of the e-health
communications. The assurance of the quality of healthcare services delivered by
Internet is also important issue.[10], [28]
Telemedicine employs various types of technical solutions. The systems available
today include store-and-forward applications, videoteleconferencing systems and
applications based on the WWW technologies. Store-and-forward applications are
used in asynchronous mode as some time elapses between the moment of data transfer
and their interpretations. Such system may be used for transmission of patients data to
consultant who, in convenient moment, will read them and respond to questions.[3],
[20] Store-and-forward systems are usually used in situations, in which
videoteleconferencing contact is not necessary for efficient telemedical interaction or
available telecommunication have limited band of transmission. This may occur in
rural, peripheral locations without advanced telecommunication infrastructure.
Real-time interactions are possible in videteleconferencing systems.[18] Multi-point
teleconferencing infrastructure enables numerous participants involvement in the
teleconsultation sessions. Tumor boards appointed for making decision on oncologic
problems are good example of such telemedical services.[6] Videoteleconferencing
telemedical scenarios require broadband connections to enable the transmission of
high volumes of data. They usually rely on the use of ISDN lines or fiberoptic
links.[14] Specialistic peripheral equipment is used for registration of medical images
and other types of data (stethoscopes, otoscopes, dermoscopes or whole body
examination cameras). Document cameras enable the transfer of data which are not
available in electronic form.
There are no single technology which could satisfies all requirements of specific
implementation. The successful realization of telemedical scenario depends on choice
of technology which satisfies users’ requirement related to the volumes of transmitted
data and band of the connection. Appropriate choice of teleinformatic infrastructure is
also dictated by the scale of available financial support in healthcare system.[12], [19]

The Impact of Information Technology on Quality of Healthcare Services

1123

4 Chronic Care – Evolving Models of Care Based on
Telemonitoring
Chronic diseases became the major health burden in developed countries. The
estimations made all over the Europe and in the USA indicate that even 70% of health
care expenditures is spent for management of chronic diseases in these areas. The
number of patients suffering from chronic conditions is growing, but simultaneously a
great number of them want to conduct active professional and social life. This results
in the need for the improved efficiency of health care systems. The patient’s role in
the therapy and symptoms control, the importance of close patient follow-up,
community services and prevention are not emphasized properly in healthcare
systems as they served for years mainly for the provision of care to patients with acute
illnesses.[32] The use of Internet technologies in health services provision in chronic
care brings new opportunities and potentially cost-effective models of care.[15]
E-health environment offers additional characteristics to modern healthcare through
shaping new types of relation between patients and physicians, enabling automatic
screening for exacerbations of disease, and creating the network of support for the
patient.
The increase of the population of patients requiring chronic care and monitoring
became the factor triggering the search of cost-effective but safe, health services
delivery models. The rapid adoption of Internet in many domains brought also the
promise for improvement of efficiency of healthcare delivered to patients with
chronic diseases. The WWW technologies seem to be particularly feasible to obtain
the appropriate level of interactivity for chronic patients.[2], [17] Patient
empowerment means his or her involvement in prolonged observations of disease
course, conducting self-measurement of parameters essential for specific disease. The
main trace of self-management in chronic diseases is based on registration of selfobservations and self-measurements in long-term perspective. Prolonged tracing of
physiologic parameters enables the description of the course of disease and
forecasting of exacerbations. Self-observations and self-measurements may be the
basis for automatic triggering of alerts sent to health professionals and patients. Trend
observed in the disease course are also the basis for modification of medication by the
patient (self-adjusted treatment).

5 Summary
The traditional relation between physician and patient underwent considerable
changes in last decades. The interactions between patient and healthcare system
evolved to various forms. There is also the increasing pressure on healthcare
providers to deliver services of high quality in cost-effective manner. The wider use
of information technology in healthcare brings new opportunities for healthcare
services delivery observing evidence-based approach.
The achievement of desired features of modern healthcare, such as seamless and
shared care as well as continuity of care may be supported with web-based and
mobile applications. Internet adds considerably to the concept of pervasive services,

1124

M. Duplaga

especially in the area of chronic care. Patients with chronic conditions became the
main consumers of healthcare services and telemonitoring services is new efficient
way of care delivery in this population demanding frequent interactions with
healthcare providers. Computer-based applications are also perceived as important
solution enabling the reduction of medical errors. The access to limited specialized
medical resources may be enhanced due to telemedical application. Their use increase
also the collaboration within clinical team taking care of individual patient and
formed by health professionals based in various institutions.

References
1.

2.
3.
4.
5.

6.

7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.

18.

Balas A.E., Jaffrey F., Kuperman G.J., Boren S.A., Brown G.D., Pinciroli F., Mitchell
J.A.: Electronic Communication With Patients: Evaluation of Distance Medicine
Technology. JAMA 1997; 278(2): 152-159
Balas E.A., Iakovidis I.: Distance Technologies of Patient Monitoring. BMJ 1999; 319:
1309
Bangert D., Doktor R.: Implementing store-and-forward telemedicine: Organizational
issues. Telemed. J. e-Health 2000; 6(3): 355-360
Bates D.W., Cohen M., Leape L.L., Overhage J.M., Shabot M.M., Sheridan T.: Reducing
the frequency of errors in medicine using information technology. JAMA 2001; :299-308
Bates D.W., Leape L.L., Cullen D.J., Laird N., Petersen L.A., Teich J.M., Burdick E.,
Hickey M., Kleefield S., Shea B., Vander M., Seger D.L.: Effect of computerized
physician order entry and a team intervention on prevention of serious medication errors.
JAMA 1998;280: 1311-1316,
Davison A.G., Eraut C.D., Khan N., Haque S., Tanqueray A., Trask C.W., Lamont A.,
Uppal R., Sharma A.: Telemedicine for lung cancer: a new multidisciplinary approach.
Thorax 1999; 54(3): A37
DeBakey M.E.: Telemedicine has now come of age. Telemed. J. 1995; 1(1): 3-4.
Elison B.: Electronic Prescribing in Ambulatory Care. J Manag Care Pharm 2001;7(2)
E-Prescribing. California Healthcare Foundation. November 2001
Ferguson T.: Digital Doctoring – Opportunities and Challenges in Electronic PatientPhysician Communication. JAMA 1998; 280(5): 1361-1362.
Field M.J., Grigsby J.: Telemedicine and Remote Patient Monitoring. JAMA 2002; 4: 423425
Field M.J.: Telemedicine: a guide to assessing telecommunications in health care. National
Academy Pr. Washington, 1996.
Forkner-Dunn J.: Internet-based Patient Self-care: The Next Generation of Health Care
Delivery. J Med Internet Res 2003; 5(2): e8 [url:http://www.jmir.org/2003/2/e8]
Galvez P., Newman H.: Networking, videoconferencing and collaborative environments.
Comp. Physics Communications 1998; 110: 43-50
Gillespie G.: Deploying an I.T. cure for chronic disease. Health Data Manag 2000; 8(7):
68-74
Glick T.H., Moore G.T.: Time to learn: the outlook for renewal of patient-centred
education in the digital age. Med Educ 2001; 35: 505-509
Gomaa W.H., Morrow T., Muntendam P., Smith G.: Technology-based disease
management: A low-cost, high-value solution for the management of chronic disease. Dis
Manag Health Outcomes 2001; 9(10): 577-588
Gustke S., Balch D.C., Rogers L.O., West V.L.: Profile of users of real-time interactive
teleconference clinical consultations. Arch. Family Med. 2000; 9(10): 1036-1040

The Impact of Information Technology on Quality of Healthcare Services

1125

19. Harrison R., Clayton W., Wallace P.: Can telemedicine be used to improve
communication between primary and secondary care? BMJ 1997; 313(7069): 1377-1381.
20. Houston M.S., Myers J.D., Levens S.P., McEvoy M.T., Smith S.A., Khandheria B.K.,
Shen W.K., Torchia M.E., Berry D.J.: Clinical Consultations Using Store-and-Forward
Telemedicine Technology. Mayo Clinic Proceed. 1999; 74(8): 764-769
21. Institute of Medicine: Crossing the Quality Chasm. A New Health System for the 21st
Century.National Academy Press, Washington, DC,2001
22. Kilbridge P., Welebob E., Classen D.: Overview of the Leapfrog Group Evaluation Tool
for Computerized Physician Order Entry. Leapfrog Group and First Consulting Group,
2001
23. Kohn L.T., Corrigan J.M., Donaldson M.S. (eds): To Err is Human: Building a Safer
Health System: a report from the Committee on Quality of Healthcare in America.
Institute of Medicine, National Academy of Sciences. National Academy Press,
Washington, DC, 1999
24. Leslie S.: Online consulting. The experience of a commercial service. J Telemed Telecare
2001; 7(Suppl. 2): S2:78-82
25. Mandl K., Kohane I., Brandt A.: Electronic Patient-Physician Communication: Problems
and Promise. Ann Intern Med 1998; 129(6): 495-500
26. Mekhjian H.S., Kumar R.R., Kuehn L: Immediate benefits realized following
implementation of physician order entry at an academic medical center. J Am Med Inform
Assoc, 2002; 9: 529-539
27. Patterson C., Cook R., Render M.: Improving Patient Safety by Identifying Side Effects
from Introducing Bar Coding in Medication Administration. J Am Med Inform Assoc
2002; 9: 540-553]
28. Stanberry B. The legal and ethical aspects of telemedicine. 2: Data protection, security
and European law. J. Telemed. Telecare 1998; 4: 18-24.
29. Strode S.W., Gustke S., Allen A.: Technical and Clinical Progress in Telemedicine.
JAMA; 281(12): 1066-1068
30. Tattersall R.: The expert patient: a new approach to chronic disease management for the
twenty-first century. Clin Med 2002; 2(3): 227-229
31. Tsai C., Starren J.: Patient Participation in Electronic Medical Record. J Am Med Ass
2001; 285(13): 1765
32. World Health Organization “Innovative Care for Chronic Conditions: Building Blocks for
Action. Global Report.” 2002

