High Performance Geocomputation - Preface
Yong Xue1,2,*, Dingsheng Liu3, Jianwen Ai1,4, and Wei Wan1,4
1

State Key Laboratory of Remote Sensing Science, Jointly Sponsored by the Institute of
Remote Sensing Applications of Chinese Academy of Sciences and Beijing Normal University,
Institute of Remote Sensing Applications, CAS, P.O. Box 9718, Beijing 100101, China
2
Department of Computing, London Metropolitan University, 166-220 Holloway Road,
London N7 8DB, UK
3
Center for Earth Observation and Digital Earth, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing
100080, P.R. China
4
Graduate University of Chinese Academy of Science, Yuquan Road, Beijing 100049, China
y.xue@londonmet.ac.uk

Abstract. This paper presents the introduction to Geocomputation workshop in
ICCS2008. The Workshop on Geocomputation continues with the ICCS conferences held in Amsterdam (2002), St. Petersburg (2003), Krakow (2004), Atlanta
(2005), Reading (2006), and Beijing (2007).

1 Preface
High Performance Geo-Computation (HPGC) is the application of high performance
computational science to Earth sciences. It applies high-performance computational
resources to various types of Earth science data, information, and models for solving
Earth science problems. It develops discipline-specific theories, algorithms, architectures, systems, supporting tools, and infrastructure within the overall context of computational science. HPGC is concerned with new computational techniques, algorithms,
and paradigms that are dependent upon and can take advantage of high performance
computing, distributed computing, and high throughput computing. The areas of application for HPGC include, but are not limited to, spatial data analysis, dynamic modelling, simulation, space-time dynamics and visualization, virtual reality, and applications
employing non-conventional data clustering and analysis techniques. HPGC is an integrated computing environment. It is driven by the advances in computing technologies,
such as cluster computing, the pervasive computing and/or ubiquitous computing and
Grid computing as part of a common framework that offers the best immersion of users
and applications in the global environment.
However, the key technologies for Geo-grid differ from those for general purpose
Grid computing in many aspects, which often refer to methods and solutions being
used to implement geo scientific application on top of grid infrastructure. These technologies include three levels:
*

Corresponding author.

M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2008, Part II, LNCS 5102, pp. 603 – 604, 2008.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

604

1.

2.

3.

Y. Xue et al.

The Grid adaptation to geoscience, Grid enabled geo resources, and Grid enabled geographic application. The Grid adaptation to geoscience, namely incorporating general-purpose Grid middleware and third party components into
Earth science missions, aims to change the Grid to better meet the needs from
geo community. For example, traditional Grid service for data management are
required to be modified, as for adapting to complexity and massiveness in spatial
data processing, by modifying the data transfer protocol and improving data replica mechanism.
Grid enabled geo resources means builders and administrators change diverse
resources of geo-spatial data, models and algorithms, with special emphasis on
encapsulating, deploying and registering them in the grid environment. Thus users can have access to these resources. Grid enabled geo resources is one of the
most important parts with respect to Geo-Grid.
Grid enabled geographic application actually is a sets of invocations of operations with dependency on each other, and the contexts in which certain operations are. Grid application in geo science filed include as follow: resources
describing mechanism, platform building-up tool, visualization tool, and develop
tool. These toolboxes provide essential foundation for building large-scale system for Geo-science application.

This workshop consists of six papers. All papers have gone through the normal
refereeing process of ICCS conference. These papers discuss recent results on several aspects of geocomputation, including theories and applications. The first paper
by Jankowski et al. deals with the numerical simulation of threshold-crossing problem allowing us to assess the probability that a random field of contamination does
not exceed a fixed level in a certain two-dimensional (2-D) spatial domain. The
numerical evaluation of the Legendre functions are especially challenging for very
high degrees and orders which are required for advanced geocomputations. The
computational aspects of SHTs and their inverses using both quadrature and leastsquares estimation methods are discussed with special emphasis on numerical preconditioning that guarantees reliable results for degrees and orders up to 3800 in
REAL*8 or double precision arithmetic in the paper by Blais et al.. In the paper
from Tawfik et al., a prototype, which uses context information and a range of design and user-related criteria to analyse the accessibility of road layouts and plan
routes, is developed; a case study is used to validate the prototype. In the paper by
Cope et al., authors examined emerging urgent Earth and geoscience workflows, the
data services used by these workflows, and their proposed urgent data management
framework for managing urgent data services. The design, analysis and implementation of InterCondor system was presented in the paper by Xue et al.. The InterCondor system is an implementation of the concept of InterGrid. Finally, Liu et al.
in their paper proposed the new architecture of SIG, upon which the constituted GIS
nodes can provide GISer-vices based on existing SIG platform.
Last but not least, we are grateful to the authors and referees for their hard work.

