Chance Discovery in Credit Risk Management:
Estimation of Chain Reaction Bankruptcy
Structure by Directed KeyGraph
Shinichi Goda and Yukio Ohsawa
School of Engineering, The University of Tokyo, 113-8656 Japan
sgoda@mwa.biglobe.ne.jp

Abstract. Credit risk management based on portfolio theory becomes
popular in recent Japanese ﬁnancial industry. But consideration and
modeling of chain reaction bankruptcy eﬀect in credit portfolio analysis leave much room for improvement. That is mainly because method
for grasping relations among companies with limited data is underdeveloped. In this article, chance discovery method with directed KeyGraph
is applied to estimate industrial relations that are to include companies’
relations that transmit chain reaction of bankruptcy. The steps for the
data analysis are introduced and result of example analysis with default
data in Kyushu, Japan, 2005 is presented.
Keywords: chance discovery, credit risk, chain reaction, bankruptcy.

1

Introduction

Credit risk management based on portfolio theory becomes popular in recent
Japanese ﬁnancial industry promoted by introduction of BIS regulation and
increasing use of model-based loan decision making. Simulation method comes
to be common tool for analysis of credit portfolio and simulation models have
been developed for credit risk management [1,2,3,4]. However, there still remain
major areas for improvement. Analysis on chain reaction bankruptcies is one of
these areas.

2

Eﬀect of Chain Reaction Bankruptcy

Chain reaction bankruptcies are common phenomenon. Its general deﬁnition is
like “bankruptcy triggered by a preceding default of a company that has trade
and other relations with the bankrupting company”.
Most of industry experts regard it necessary to take the eﬀect of chain reaction
bankruptcy into accounts when they analyze proﬁle of their credit risk portfolio.
By introducing chain reaction factor into analysis, we can expect to better grasp
the risk proﬁle of credit risk portfolio since amount of loss caused by a default
can be larger if there are other bankruptcies triggered by the default.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 142–149, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Chance Discovery in Credit Risk Management

143

However, majority of simulation models actually used in business do not fully
take the chain reaction into account. That is mainly because it is diﬃcult to
directly grasp relations among companies since available data is limited as;
1. Background information about bankruptcies publicly available is very limited, and it is not organized in way that can be used for statistical analysis.
2. Corporate data related to relations among corporation is very limited to public. Few companies make trade, ﬁnancial and technological relations public,
but very few with numbers.

3

Current Methods to Grasp Relations

Adjustments have been devised in models and simulators to include relation effect, but there is much room for improvement. A major method to take the eﬀect
into account is to grasp relations among companies by measuring co-relations
among movements of the security price of the companies (In this method, a company’s security price is regarded as representative of default probability of the
company). But this method is applicable only to security issuing large companies
whose number is very small. On the other hand, most of companies in a credit
risk portfolio are non-security-issuing and small-mid size.
Another way is to make industry groups represent companies that belong to
them, and to estimate relations among companies by grasping relations among
the industries. Co-relations are measured among indexes of securities issued by
companies in the industry groups and are applied to non-security-issuing ones in
the groups. But the idea to estimate relations among industries with co-relations
among security prices seems to be unreasonable. The most of Japanese companies
are non-security-issuing ones and there is not enough evidence of the relations
among security-issuing companies being same as that of non-issuing ones.

4

Grasp Chain Reaction Bankruptcy Structure by
Chance Discovery Method

We proposed a method that detects relationship among bankrupted companies,
without direct information of trade relations i.e., by chance discovery method in
our previous work [5]. (The basic idea of this method follows the method that
used for the chance discovery of earthquake by Ohsawa, Y. [6,7]).)
In this method, we estimate trade and/or other relations among companies
defaulted in a geographical area within a certain time period, by visualizing
relations among industry groups that include the defaults with KeyGraph. The
method is based on the assumptions as follows;
1. There should be relations that transmitted factors causing defaults among
companies that defaulted in a geographical area within a certain time period.
2. The default transmitting relations among companies should be mainly based
on and represented by relations among industry groups. As seen in the above

144

S. Goda and Y. Ohsawa

deﬁnition of chain reaction bankruptcy, “trade relation” is generally regarded
as one of the most inﬂuential relations. Trade relation between a pair of
industry is generally universal among companies in the paired industries.
3. Default transmitting relations among industries could be paths to transmit
default of a company in an industry to other companies in other industries.
Suppose that cloth retailer A and cloth wholesaler B defaulted within a month
successively in Kansai district. Suppose other sets of cloth retailer and wholesaler
those located in same districts defaulted successively within a month repeatedly.
We can estimate with high conﬁdence that there were sets of trade relation
between the cloth retailer and the wholesaler defaulted successively and that the
sets of trade relation between the two companies caused the successive default,
even if there is no public information of sets of trade relations between the two
companies. We can estimate so based on expert’s knowledge about cloth trading
industry and on the observed default patterns analyzed with KeyGraph.

5
5.1

Methodology
Original Method

First, we explain the original method proposed in our previous work [5] and
introduce its basic idea. Steps are as follows (see Table 1);
Step1. Preparation of data
1. Data of defaults: each default event has attributes of default date, geographical area in which the defaulted company is located and an industry to which
it belongs.
2. Sorting: group the defaults by area and sort the events in each area by default
dates.
3. Select companies that seemed to have triggered chain reaction.
Step2. Transformation of company data to industry data
Transform company data prepared in Step1. to industry data by replacing a
company’s name to a code of an industry to which the company belongs.
Step3. Transformation of data to sentence form
1. Make the default events grouped by area in sentence form by order of their
default dates. Each event is denoted by industry name and spaced.
2. Form one sentence starting from a triggering company and ending at a company whose default date is after the default date of the starting company.
Step4. Discovery of relations among industries by KeyGraph
1. Extract co-occurrence of default events by using KeyGraph with sentences
formed default data.

Chance Discovery in Credit Risk Management

145

2. Interpret a result of KeyGraph and estimate relations among industries.
It is important to read relations expressed in a KeyGraph with experts’
knowledge.
Examples of experts’ knowledge about factors that are supposed to work
behind relations extracted by KeyGraph are as listed below.
a. Technological and business relations among industries
(example) An automobile is made of steel, glass, tires and electronic parts.
b. Commonality of customers among industries
(example) Consumers living in Kyushu region shop at cloth/food retailers
and eat restaurant both located in Kyushu.
c. Ownership relation:
Table 1. Example of data and sentence

5.2

Time Order Method (with Directed KeyGraph)

The original method had two points to be improved;
1. Time order among defaults is not captured. That makes the estimation of
causal relation among defaults diﬃcult.
2. The criteria for selecting trigger defaults were not clear enough.
In our previous work [5], we made a sentence with default events in a month
that starts from a hypothetical trigger default that were selected from a list
of defaults that was made by Japanese SME Agency, based on the size or
impact of defaults.
We newly introduce time order method to deal with above points. The basic
idea of the new method is to try to better distinguish the causal relations among
defaults with the time order among them.

146

S. Goda and Y. Ohsawa
Table 2. Method for making time ordered pair of defalts

Default date
1/1 1/10
1/20
2/1
2/5
2/25
2/28
12/1 12/20 12/30
Name of company
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
···
X
Y
Z
Industry code
10
20
30
40
10
30
20
40
10
50
Pair Start from 10(A)
S10 20 S10 30
Start from 20(B)
S20 30 S20 40 S20 10
Start from 30(C)
S30 40 S30 10
Start from 40(D)
S40 10 S40 30 S40 20
Start from 10(E)
S10 30 S10 20 · · ·
···
···
Start from 20(W)
S20 40 S20 10
Start from 40(X)
S40 10 S40 50

With time order method, by making a sentence include only a pair of defaults
with distinction of earlier event of the two, the time order among defaults can
be expressed by KeyGraph with direction – we name it as “directed KeyGraph”.
Detailed steps are as follows (see Table 2);
1. Make a sentence of a pair of defaults.
2. Put “S” to industry code of the earlier default in a pair to distinguish it as
a starting default.
3. Make series of pairs with a selected starting default indicated by “S”, and
ending defaults each of which follows the starting default within a period.
4. Select another default that occurred next to the ﬁrst default as the second
starting event and take step 3.
5. Repeat step 3. and 4. until all the defaults in the analyzed period are selected
as starting events.
6. Make and include linking pairs to link the nodes those are captured as ending
events but at the same time are starting ones. For example, in Table 2, default E, that is coded as 10, is included in pair “S20 10”, “S30 10”, “S40 10”
as an ending default and also included in pair “S10 30”, “S10 20” as a starting one.
When the paired data is analyzed with directed KeyGraph, starting defaults
are indicated by “S” put on the industry code. When a node, “S20” for example,
is linked to another node, “10”, it means that defaults in the industry 20 occurred
before defaults in 10, indicating that defaults in 20 trigger the defaults in 10.
In case two nodes of same industry are linked, like “10 – S10”, it means ending
defaults in “10” are at the same time starting defaults.

6

Case Study – Analysis of Chain Reaction Structure of
Bankruptcies in Kyushu, 2005

As a case study, we applied time order method described above to data of
bankruptcies in Kyushu district, Japan, 2005. The reason for limiting area for
analysis only to Kyushu district is simply to make the size of data controllable.

Chance Discovery in Credit Risk Management

147

A. Contents of data
Samples are 343 defaults in Kyushu, a local part of the Japanese samples described below. About 10,400 pairs are made from the above selected 343 default
samples.
1. Japanese samples, about 3,400 defaults, are randomly selected from the all
defaulted companies that defaulted based on bankruptcy laws and published
in the oﬃcial gazette in Japan, 2005. The area consists of 9 districts including
Kyushu. Samples are categorized in about 200 mid-level industry groups by
author, based on the industry categories deﬁned by Teikoku Databank, Ltd.
2. Period for pairing one starting default with ending ones is set to one month.
3. About 6,200 linking pairs are added.
B. Analysis
First, the data was analyzed by original method and then by time order
method.
(1) Original method (see Fig. 1 for result)
With this KeyGraph by original method, we can understand that defaults in
linked industries occurred in a close time period. But it is diﬃcult to estimates
whether the co-occurrence is based on chain reaction. That is partly because
this graph lacks of information about causal relation among defaults.
(2) Time order method with directed KeyGraph (see Fig. 2 for result)
In Fig. 2, time orders among defaults in the industries are shown by arrows
indicating causal relations among them. Nodes consist of starting defaults are indicated by “S ” put on industry codes. Time order is expressed by arrows from
a node with “S ” to another node without “S ”. Circled pair of two nodes, one
with “S ”, are in same industry. For example, an arrow from S C61 goes to C63,
showing defaults in C61 occurred before defaults in C63 in major case, not vice
versa. C63 is linked to S C63 and two nodes are circled. An arrow then goes from
S C63 to C62. It shows that defaults in C63 those occurred after defaults in C61
are, at the same time, defaults those occurred before those in C62. It indicates
that defaults in C63 caused by those in C61 then triggered defaults in C62.
When we see Fig. 2 this way, we can better estimate causal relations among
defaults. The number of arrows go out from C61 (= S C61) and C62 (= S C62)
are greater than those go into C61 and C62, that indicates defaults in civil
engineering/construction and civil engineering industry caused defaults in other
industries in major case, not vice versa. The defaults in C61, C62 might then trigger defaults in variety of related industries like C54 (brick layer work), C77 (pipe
work), T31 (transportation trade), i.e. Arrows from S W03 (textile/cloth/others
wholesale) go to C62 and to C63, indicating defaults in W03, caused by depressed
consumer spending for cloth, were source of defaults in C62 and in C63 other
than decreased public construction work. Many arrows go out from R39, indicating defaults of super markets, caused by depressed consumer spending, triggered
defaults of groceries, toy/accessory shops in the super markets and of electric
machinery wholesalers who trade with the market.

148

S. Goda and Y. Ohsawa

Fig. 1. KeyGraph by original method

Fig. 2. KeyGraph by time order method (“S ” indicates starting default)

Chance Discovery in Credit Risk Management

7

149

Conclusion

In this article, we applied chance discovery method to estimate structure of
industrial relations that are to transmit chain reaction of bankruptcy. We introduced time order method with directed KeyGraph to capture/express time
order of defaults and to better estimate causal relations among defaults. The result of the analysis of default data in Kyushu 2005 was promising. With further
accumulation of analyses and improvement of method, a structure estimated by
chance discovery method will suﬃciently be a base for risk analysis and risk
management of a credit portfolio.
The areas for further improvements are;
1. techniques for extracting appropriate time range between start/end of defaults
2. measurement of inﬂuence over a default probability of an industry/company
of a default event to be transmitted through estimated industrial relations
3. modeling of estimated industrial relations in network structure for the use
for risk analysis and risk management of a credit portfolio

References
1. Saunders, A.: Credit Risk Measurement (Japanese), Kinyu Zaisei Jijo Press, 2001.
2. FISC: “Working Report on Risk Management Model”, 1999.
3. Nakabayashi, A. and Sasaki, M.: “Models for credit risk measurement and its application to Japanese bank”, FRI Review, 2 No. 2, 1998.
4. Torii, H.: “Portfolio based credit risk management models – its eﬀectiveness and
limit”, Weekly Kinyu Zaisei Jijo Magazine, June, 1998.
5. Goda, S. and Ohsawa, Y.: “Chance Discovery in Credit Risk Management – Estimation of chain reaction bankruptcy structure by chance discovery method”, Proceedings of the 2006 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics
(6 Volumes), October 8–11, 2006.
6. Ohsawa, Y.: “Discovering risky subduction zones of earthquake”, Information Technology for Chance Discovery, 314–325, Tokyo-Denki University Press, 2005.
7. Ohsawa, Y.: “Visualizing relations between chances and surrounding events”, Information Technology for Chance Discovery, 121–153, Tokyo-Denki University Press,
2005.

