Asymptotic Behavior of hp–HGS (hp–Adaptive
Finite Element Method Coupled with the
Hierarchic Genetic Strategy) by Solving Inverse
Problems
Robert Schaefer1 and Barbara Barabasz2
1

2

Department of Computer Science
Department of Modeling and Information Technology,
AGH University of Science and Technology,
Al. Mickiewicza 30, 30-059 Cracow, Poland,
schaefer@agh.edu.pl
barabasz@metal.agh.edu.pl

Abstract. The new hp–HGS multi-deme, genetic strategy for economic
solving of the parametric inverse problems is introduced. The inverse
problems under consideration are formulated as the global optimization
ones, where the objective express the discrepancy between the computed
and measured energy. The eﬃciency of the proposed strategy results from
the coupled adaptation of the accuracy of solving optimization problem
and the accuracy of hp–FEM direct problem solver. The asymptotic analysis allows to estimate the expected computational cost of hp–HGS and
to show its advantage over the single population SGA algorithm as well
as over the HGS strategy without the FEM error scaling.

1

Introduction

The class of direct problems under considerations is deﬁned by the abstract variational equation describing the sample physical phenomena (e.g. the variational
equations of the linear elasticity described in [3]):
u ∈ u0 + V
b (d; u, v) = l (v) ∀v ∈ V

(1)

where u0 is the shift of the Dirichlet boundary conditions and V is the proper
Sobolev space. The form of functionals b, l depend of the physical phenomena
and of its parameter d ∈ D, where D is the regular compact in RN , N < +∞. For
symmetric and positively deﬁned b, the variational problem (1) can be formulated
as the minimization one
u ∈ u0 + V
(2)
min{E (d; u)},
where the functional E(d; u) = 12 b (d; u, u) − l (u) stands for the total energy of
the modeled system.
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2008, Part III, LNCS 5103, pp. 682–691, 2008.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

Asymptotic Behavior of hp–HGS

683

One of the most eﬀective numerical method of solving the above problem
is the hp–adaptive Finite Element Method (hp–FEM) which approximates its
solution by the sequence of ﬁnite dimensional problems (see Demkowicz [4]). The
coarse mesh solution uh,p ∈ Vh,p that satisﬁes
uh,p ∈ u0 + Vh,p
b (d; uh,p , vh,p ) = l (vh,p ) ∀vh,p ∈ Vh,p

(3)

is computed in each step of this strategy. Moreover the ﬁne mesh solution
u h ,p+1 ∈ V h ,p+1 that satisﬁes the equation similar to (3) in the space V h ,p+1 is
2
2
2
computed. Notice that both approximate solution spaces satisfy Vh,p ⊂ V h ,p+1 ⊂
2
V . Formally, the solutions to (1), (2), (3) depend also on the parameter d ∈ D.
Based on the relative hp–FEM error analysis (see Demkowicz [4])
errF EM (d) = uh,p (d) − u h ,p+1 (d)
2

(4)
E

the ﬁnal solution of the hp–FEM step is established. It persists the modiﬁcation
introduced by u h ,p+1 only in elements, where this error is large. The norm · E
2
deﬁned on the space V expresses the energy of its argument (see e.g. Ciarlet [3]).
We assume that all above problems (1), (2), (3) are well posed, i.e. they posses
the unique solution for all possible values of the admissible parameter d ∈ D.
The inverse problem under consideration leads to encountering the unknown
ˆ = E(d;
ˆ u) of the exact solution u ∈ V to
parameter dˆ ∈ D while the energy J(d)
(1) is known (e.g. it is measured during the laboratory test). It can be formulated
as follows:
Find gˆ ∈ D such that :
ˆ ≤ limh→0, p→+∞ Jh,p (g) − J(d)
ˆ
g) − J(d)
limh→0, p→+∞ Jh,p (ˆ

(5)

The above problem is the global optimization one with the admissible set of solutions D. The quantities gˆ, g represent approximated parameters and dˆ the
exact parameter of the inverse problem which we are looking for. Moreover
Jh,p (g) = E(g; uh,p (g)) is the energy of solution uh,p (g) obtained by hp–FEM.
We assume moreover, that the suﬃcient conditions are satisﬁed (see Demkowicz
ˆ has a ﬁnite limit for all g, dˆ ∈ D, while
[4]) that the expression Jh,p (g) − J(d)
h → 0, p → +∞.
One of the main diﬃculties of the above optimization problem is caused by
presence of more than one global extreme or local extremes with the objective
very close to the minimal one. Moreover, the cost of the objective evaluation
ˆ is large, because of the large cost of iterative solving of direct
Jh,p (g) − J(d)
problem. Please, notice that this cost strongly depends on the required accuracy of the direct problem solving. The global search with the exceptionally low
computational cost (counting in the number of objective evaluations) is then
desirable for solving the inverse problem (5).

684

R. Schaefer and B. Barabasz

We propose the new strategy hp–HGS which is based on the economic Hierarchic Genetic Strategy (HGS) (see Schaefer, Kołodziej [10]) with the adaptive
solution accuracy. It oﬀers relatively small number of ﬁtness function calls and
ability of global search of solution, especially in case of many local extremes. The
proposed strategy additionally decreases the total computational cost by scaling
the accuracy of the direct problem solving with respect to varying accuracy of
the inverse problem solution.
The HGS proceeds tree-structured, dynamically changing set of dependent
demes. The depth of HGS tree is limited by m < +∞. All demes work asynchronously and are synchronized by the message-passing mechanism if necessary.
The evolution of each deme is governed by the separate instance of the Simple
Genetic Algorithm (SGA) (see Vose [15]).
The low-order demes (closer to the root) perform more chaotic search with the
lower accuracy, while the demes of higher order perform the more accurate, local
search. The various search accuracy is obtained by the various encoding precision
and by the diﬀerent length binary strings as the genotypes in demes of diﬀerent
order. The unique deme of the ﬁrst order (root) utilizes the shortest genotypes,
while the leafs utilizes the longest ones. To obtain the search coherency for demes
of diﬀerent order the special kind of hierarchical, nested encoding is used. First
the densest mesh of phenotypes in D for the demes of m-th order is deﬁned. Next
the meshes for the lower order demes are recursively deﬁned by selecting some
nodes from the previous ones. The maximum diameter of the mesh δj associated
with the demes of the order j determines the search accuracy at this level of the
HGS tree. Of course δ1 >, . . . , > δm .
Each deme expecting leaf-demes sprouts the new child-deme after the constant
number of genetic epochs K called the metaepoch. The child-deme is activated in
the promising region of the evolutionary landscape surrounding the best ﬁtted
individual distinguished from the parental deme at the end of the metaepoch.
HGS implements also two mechanisms that allow to reduce the search redundancy. The ﬁrst one called conditional sprouting disable to sprout new deme
in the region already occupied or explored by the brother-deme (another childdeme of the same order sprouted by the same parent). The second mechanism
called branch reduction reduces the branches of the same order that perform the
search in the common landscape region or in the region already explored.
The HGS details and various implementations of this strategy as well as its
high eﬃciency by solving global optimization problems are presented in [6], [11],
[8], [10], [16], [7].

2

Relation Between the hp–FEM Error and HGS
Objective Function Error

Let us apply HGS for solving the inverse problem (5). The ﬁtness function for
the particular deme should be based on the energy error
ˆ
eh,p (g) = Jh,p (g) − J(d)

(6)

Asymptotic Behavior of hp–HGS

685

computed by using hp–FEM which approximate the objective function of the
global optimization problem (5) for the particular values of h and p. As previˆ the known, exact energy
ously, dˆ ∈ D denotes the exact parameter value and J(d)
of the exact solution while Jh,p (g) the approximated value of energy computed
by hp–FEM with respect to the parameter value g ∈ D obtained from the HGS
individuals’ genotype.
Let us assume for a while that g is constant and represents the parameter
value decoded from the genotype that appears in the HGS deme of the j-th
order, j ∈ {1, . . . , m}. The regression of the error (6) while improving the FEM
approximation may be evaluated as follows (see Lemma 2 in [12]):
e h ,p+1 (g) ≤
2

1
(g) − uh,p (g)
uh
2 2 ,p+1

2
E

ˆ
+ |Jh,p (g) − J(d)|

(7)

ˆ . Further using the formula (8) in [12] we
where e h ,p+1 (g) = J h ,p+1 (g) − J(d)
2
2
may obtain
e h ,p+1 (g) ≤ u h ,p+1 (g) − uh,p (g)
2

2

2
E

+ u(g) − uh,p (g)

2
E

ˆ
+ L|g − d|

(8)

ˆ is the
where L stands for the Lipshitz constants of the functional J and |g − d|
error of the inverse problem solution that characterizes the individuals belonging
ˆ corresponds
to the HGS demes of the j-th order. It is easy to observe, that |g − d|
to δj . The above formula shows, that the error of the energy evaluation over the
ﬁne FEM mesh is restricted by the relative FEM error on the coarse FEM mesh
solution with respect to the ﬁne mesh solution plus the absolute FEM error over
the coarse FEM mesh plus the accuracy of the proper HGS branch.

3

hp–HGS Definition

The main idea of hp–HGS is to adjust dynamically the accuracy of the objective
computation to the particular value of the parameter g encoded in the individuals’ genotype as well as for the inverse problem error that characterizes the
current HGS branch. It may be obtained by balancing the components of the
FEM error given by the right hand side of the formula (8), assuming δj as the
accuracy of inverse problem solving by the branch of j-th order. We will perform then the hp-adaptation of the FEM solution of the direct problem while
the quantity errδFjEM is greater then the assumed Ratio, which stands for the
parameter of this strategy.
Notice, that no matter how the ﬁtness of the individual i is computed by
iterative process of the hp–FEM adaptation, the ﬁtness function fj is well deﬁned
for all individuals in branches of j-th order (it is not a random variable).
The draft of the single hp–HGS deme activity is stressed in the pseudo-code
Algorithm 1. The function branch_stop_condition(P ) returns true if it detects the lack of evolution progress of the current deme P . The separate module continuously checks whether the satisfactory solution was found or hp–HGS

686

R. Schaefer and B. Barabasz

could not ﬁnd more local extremes. If yes, the global_stop_condition signal
is send to all computing demes. The conditional sprouting mechanism is implemented as follows. Each branch excepting root computes the average of its
phenotypes and send it to its parental deme. These values are analyzed by the
children_comparison(x) procedure and compared with the phenotype of the
best ﬁtted individual x distinguished from the parental deme. This procedure
returns true if x is suﬃciently close to the existing child-demes. The branch
reduction mechanism is omitted in Algorithm 1 for the sake of simplicity. All
inter-deme messages are send and received asynchronously using buﬀers.
1:
2:
3:
4:
5:
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:
11:
12:
13:
14:
15:
16:
17:
18:
19:
20:
21:
22:
23:
24:
25:
26:
27:
28:
29:
30:
31:
32:
33:
34:

if (j = 1) then
initialize the root deme;
end if
t ← 0;
repeat
if (global_stop_condition received) then
STOP;
end if
for (i ∈ P t ) do
solve the direct problem for g = code(i) on the coarse and ﬁne FEM meshes;
compute errF EM (g) according to the formula (4);
while (errF EM (g) > Ratio ∗ δj ) do
execute one step of hp adaptivity;
solve the problem on the new coarse and ﬁne FEM meshes;
compute errF EM (g) according to the formula (4);
end while;
compute ﬁtness fj (i) using the FEM mesh ﬁnally established;
end for
if (j > 1) then
compute the phenotypes’ average and send it to the parental deme;
if (branch_stop_condition(P t )) then
STOP;
end if
end if
if (((t mod K) = 0) ∧ (j < m)) then
distinguish the best ﬁtted individual x from deme P t ;
if (¬ children_comparison(x)) then
sprout;
end if
end if
perform proportional selection, obtaining multiset of parents;
perform SGA genetic operations on the multiset of parents;
t ← t + 1;
until (f alse)

Algorithm 1: Pseudo-code of the j-th order deme P in the hp–HGS tree

Asymptotic Behavior of hp–HGS

4

687

hp–HGS Asymptotic

The main goal of the asymptotic analysis presented below is to evaluate the
eﬃciency of hp–HGS and compare its computational cost with the cost of two
other strategies of solving inverse problem (5). The ﬁrst strategy is the coupling
of HGS with the same SGA engines in each branch as in hp–HGS, but with
the ﬁtness function fm computed as in hp–HGS leafs (e.g. by solving the direct
problem with the maximum accuracy) and then induced to all branches of lower
order. Notice, that such induction is well deﬁned because of the nested HGS encoding (all phenotypes in branches of the order j are also phenotypes in branches
of the j + 1 order). The second strategy is the single population SGA with the
same ﬁtness fm as previously. The size of the SGA population ensures the same
initial local coverage of the admissible domain D by the SGA individuals as by
individuals of each hp–HGS leaf.
We will intensively use the theory of the SGA heuristic (genetic operator)
and its ﬁxed points developed by Vose [15] as well as the convergence results of
SGA sampling measures (see Schaefer [11], Chapter 4). Let Gj : Λrj −1 → Λrj −1
be the genetic operator (heuristic) of all branches (SGA demes) of the order
j. It depends only on the number of genotypes rj , ﬁtness function fj and the
genetic operations applied in branches of the order j. Moreover the unit simplex
Λrj −1 ⊂ Rrj stands for the set of frequency vectors of all possible demes of the
order j. We assume that each genetic operator Gj has the unique ﬁxed point zj in
Λrj −1 that represent the limit population (i.e. the inﬁnite cardinality population
after the inﬁnite number of genetic epochs). Moreover zj stands for the global
attractor of Gj on Λrj −1 (i.e. ∀x ∈ Λrj −1 limt→+∞ (Gj )t (x) = zj ).
Each deme x ∈ Λrj −1 of the order j may induce the probabilistic measure
on D given by the density ρx ∈ Lp (D), p ≥ 1, so we may establish the mapping Ψj : Λrj −1 → M(D) such that Ψj (x)(A) = A ρx (ξ)dξ for each measurable
set A ⊂ D. The space M(D) collects all probabilistic measures over the admissible set D. The densities ρx , x ∈ Λrj −1 are piecewise constant on some
subsets surrounding the phenotypes induced by the encoding of j-th order (e.g.
on the Voronoi neighborhoods of phenotypes). Details of this construction may
be found in Schaefer [11]. Let us denote ρj = ρzj and ψj = Ψj (zj ) for the sake
of simplicity.
We assume that SGA governing the evolution of the hp–HGS branches of j-th
order j ∈ {1, . . . , m} are well tunned (see Schaefer [11], Deﬁnition 4.63) i.e. the
densities ρj dominates on some closed sets C j ⊂ D with the strictly positive
Lesbegue measure (not necessary connected). Each set C j surrounds the local
extremes to the objective of the inverse problem (5) and is contained in the
basins of attraction of these extremes. Moreover we assume that C 1 ⊃ C 2 ⊃
, . . . , ⊃ C m.
The analogous assumptions are made for the strategy in which the ﬁtness fm
is implemented in all HGS branches. The resulting quantities will be denoted as
ρ˜j , ψ˜j , C˜ j , j = 1, . . . , m in this case.

688

R. Schaefer and B. Barabasz

Theorem 1. Given the above assumptions, the hp–HGS deme of the order j0 =
2, . . . , m survives with the probability not greater than κj0 given by the formula:
j0

κ

j0

1

= ψ1 (C )
j=2

ψj (C j )
.
ψj (C j−1 )

Sketch of the proof : Similarly to the proof of Hypothesis 1 in [10], it may be
easily checked, that if the hp–HGS branch is sprouted from C j−1 to C j , then
the probability of its surviving may be approximated by
j0

ψ1 (C 1 )(1 − η1 )
j=2

ψj (C j )
(1 − ηj )
ψj (C j−1 )

where 1 − ηj is the probability that the branch of the order j survives if it
is sprouted inside C j . If the deme of the order j is sprouted outside C j , then
the probability of its surviving is ηj . This value becomes arbitrary small after
the suﬃcient number of genetic epochs which is the issue of well tuning of this
branch, and the inclusion C j ⊂ C j−1 .
Lemma 1. Under the conditions similar to those assumed in the Theorem 1 the
probability of surviving the deme of the order j0 = 2, . . . , m in the HGS tree is
not greater then
j0
ψ˜j (C˜ j )
κ
˜ j0 = ψ˜1 (C˜ 1 )
˜ ˜ j−1 )
j=2 ψj (C
for the strategy in which the fitness fm is implemented in all HGS branches.
Lemma 1 generalizes the Hypothesis 1 in [10] to the case of HGS branches of the
arbitrary order j0 = 2, . . . , m. Its proof is analogous to the proof of the theorem
1 above.
Corollary 1. Let a1 < a2 <, . . . , < am are the averaged costs of solving direct
problems for the individuals in hp–HGS branches of the orders 1, . . . , m. The
computational cost of the single genetic epoch in all hp–HGS branches may be
approximated by
m

Ωsj−1 κj μj aj .

μ1 a1 +
j=2

Proof : Using the theorem 1 we can evaluate the expected computational cost of
the single genetic epoch of the hp–HGS branch of degree j > 1 which equals:
Ωsj−1 κj – the expected number of demes of the order j times the constant
cardinality of each deme μj times the averaged cost aj . The thesis is obtained
by summing over all degrees of the hp–HGS tree.
The above results allow to formulate three practical corollaries which try to
evaluate the eﬃciency of the new introduced strategy.

Asymptotic Behavior of hp–HGS

689

Corollary 2. Let hp–HGS satisfies all assumptions of the theorem 1 and SGA
is applied to solving the same inverse problem with the fitness fm . The expected
number of individuals in hp–HGS leafs is smaller than the expected number of
individuals in SGA, so the computational cost of the single genetic epoch in the
SGA search is greater then the analogous cost of processing hp–HGS leafs.
Proof : The expected number of individuals in the hp–HGS leafs is Ωsm−1 κm μm .
The local initial coverage of D by the SGA individuals will be the same as the
initial coverage by the hp–HGS leaf individuals if the size of the SGA population
equals Ωsm−1 μm . Because all hp–HGS branches are well tunned then κm < 1.
Corollary 3. If the hp–HGS and HGS branches are similarly well tuned i.e.
ψ˜j (C˜ j ) ∼
= ψj (C j ), j = 1, . . . , m, then the cost of the single genetic epochs in
hp-HGS branches is smaller then the analogous cost in HGS branches.
Proof : We can easily observed, that the assumption of the corollary implies
κ
˜j ∼
= κj . The cost of the single genetic epoch of the HGS root is μ1 am while in
the hp–HGS root equals μ1 a1 . The cost of the single genetic epoch of the HGS
˜ j am while in the hp–HGS branch is
branch of the order j > 1 equals Ωsj−1 μj κ
j
Ωsj−1 μj κ aj . The thesis holds because aj < am for j = 1, . . . , m − 1.
For sample, more detail comparison of HGS and hp–HGS computational costs
the progression of the averaged costs of solving direct problems aj by the growing branch order j will be evaluated. Here we assume the particular regression of
the inverse problem error δj = αj−1 δ, where δ and α < 1 are some positive parameters. Moreover we assume that the hp–HGS error by solving direct problem
decreases exponentially with respect to nj – the number of degrees of freedom
that deﬁnes the ﬁnal approximate space Vh,p . This assumption is motivated by
theoretical considerations (see Babu˘ska [1], [2]) and many test computations (see
e.g. [4], [5], [14], [13]).
Corollary 4. Given the above assumptions the average cost aj of solving direct
problem for individuals of the hp–HGS deme of j-th order is
O (θ (j − 1) + β)

3γ

where the constants θ > 0, β ≥ 0 and γ > 1 depend on the inverse problem under
consideration.
Proof : >From the deﬁnition of hp–HGS algorithm (see Algorithm 1) errF EM =
δj Ratio = αj−1 δ Ratio if we solve the direct problem for the individual in the
branch of the j-th order, j = 1, . . . , m. Assuming the exponential decrement
1
of the hp–FEM error, errF EM may be also expressed as err0 exp −C (nj ) γ
where err0 > 1 is the maximum error larger or equal then one established for
the ﬁtness computation in the root deme and C > 0, γ > 1 are some constants.
γ
Comparing both expressions we have (θ (j − 1) + β) = nj where θ = − lnCα

690

R. Schaefer and B. Barabasz

Ratio)
and β = ln err0 −ln(δ
. The ﬁrst constat θ is stritcly positive, because C > 0
C
and α < 1 while β ≥ 0 follows from the condition of the hp–HGS strategy (see
Algorithm 1, line 12). Finally, the well known dependency aj = O(n3j ) (see e.g.
Demkowicz [4]) motivates the thesis.

5

Conclusions

– Solving the inverse parametric problems is usually a diﬃcult and time consuming numerical task. The sophisticated global optimization strategies have
to be applied in order to ﬁnd multiple solutions, keeping the memory and
computational costs at the acceptable level.
– The hp–HGS strategy presented in this paper oﬀers two ways to decrease
the computational and memory costs by solving inverse parameter problems. Firstly it is obtained by decreasing of the number of the objective
calls by using the adaptation of the inverse problem accuracy (HGS strategy). Secondly, the cost of the direct problem solution which is necessary for
computing the particular value of the objective function is decreased by the
proper scaling of the FEM error using the hp adaptation technique.
– The theoretical results of the hp–HGS analysis allow to evaluate the expected
computational cost of this strategy (Corollary 1). Moreover it was shown that
its computational cost is less then the cost of the single population SGA
algorithm (Corollary 2) as well as the cost of the HGS strategy without the
FEM error scaling (Corollary 3). The sample formula that allow the more
detailed cost comparison was drown for the second case (Corollary 4).
– No matter how SGA with the binary encoding is sometimes criticized as a
tool for solving optimization problems in the continuous domains, it is used
in each branch of the ﬁrst version of hp–HGS mainly because the theoretical
results that characterize its asymptotic behavior are available. We plan to
design the next version of hp–HGS which will be based on the hierarchic
genetic strategy with the real number encoding (see [11], [16]).
Acknowledgements. The part of the work was performed within COST action
P19 and supported by the MNiSzW, project nr. COST/203/2006.

References
1. Babu˘ska I., Guo, B.: The hp-version of the ﬁnite element method, Part I: The basic
approximation results. Comput. Mech. 1, 21–41 (1986)
2. Babu˘ska, I., Guo, B.: The hp-version of the ﬁnite element method, Part II: General
results and applications. Comput. Mech. 1, 203–220 (1986)
3. Ciarlet, P.: The Finite Element Method for Elliptic Problems. Society for Industrial
& Applied Mathematics, Philadelphia (2002)

Asymptotic Behavior of hp–HGS

691

4. Demkowicz, L.: Computing with hp-Adaptive Finite Elements. One- and TwoDimensional Elliptic and Maxwell Problems, vol. I. Chapmann & Hall / CRC
Applied Mathematics and Nonlinear Science (2006)
5. Demkowicz, L., Kurtz, J., Pardo, P., Paszyński, M., Rachowicz, W., Zdunek, A.:
Computing with hp-Adaptive Finite Elements. Frontiers: Three-Dimensional Elliptic and Maxwell Problems with Applications, vol. II. Chapmann & Hall / CRC
Applied Mathematics and Nonlinear Science (2007)
6. Kołodziej, J.: Hierarchical Strategies of the Genetic Global Optimization. PhD
Thesis, Jagiellonian University, Faculty of Mathematics and Informatics, Kraków,
Poland (2003)
7. Kołodziej, J., Jakubiec, W., Starczak, M., Schaefer, R.: Identiﬁcation of the CMM
Parametric Errors by Hierarchical Genetic Strategy Applied. In: Burczyński, T.,
Osyczka, A. (eds.) Solid Mechanics and its Applications, vol. 117, pp. 187–196.
Kluwer, Dordrecht (2004)
8. Momot, J., Kosacki, K., Grochowski, M., Uhruski, P., Schaefer, R.: Multi-Agent
System for Irregular Parallel Genetic Computations. In: Bubak, M., van Albada,
G.D., Sloot, P.M.A., Dongarra, J. (eds.) ICCS 2004. LNCS, vol. 3038, pp. 623–630.
Springer, Heidelberg (2004)
9. Schaefer, R., Barabasz, B., Paszyński, M.: Twin adaptive scheme for solving inverse
problems. In: X Conference on Evolutionary Algorithms and Global Optimization,
pp. 241–249. Warsaw Technical University Press (2007)
10. Schaefer, R., Kołodziej, J.: Genetic search reinforced by the population hierarchy.
In: De Jong, K.A., Poli, R., Rowe, J.E. (eds.) Foundations of Genetic Algorithms
7, pp. 383–399. Morgan Kaufman Publisher, San Francisco (2003)
11. Schaefer, R. (with the chapter 6 written by Telega H.): Foundation of Genetic
Global Optimization. Springer, Heidelberg (2007)
12. Paszyński, M., Barabasz, B., Schaefer, R.: Eﬃcient adaptive strategy for solving
inverse problems. In: Shi, Y., van Albada, G.D., Dongarra, J., Sloot, P.M.A. (eds.)
ICCS 2007. LNCS, vol. 4487, pp. 342–349. Springer, Heidelberg (2007)
13. Paszyński, M., Demkowicz, L.: Parallel Fully Automatic hp-Adaptive 3D Finite
Element Package. Engineering with Computers 22(3-4), 255–276 (2006)
14. Paszyński, M., Kurtz, J., Demkowicz, L.: Parallel Fully Automatic hp-Adaptive
2D Finite Element Package. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 195, 711–741 (2006)
15. Vose, M.D.: The Simple Genetic Algorithm. MIT Press, Cambridge (1999)
16. Wierzba, B., Semczuk, A., Kołodziej, J., Schaefer, R.: Genetic Strategy with real
number encoding. In: VI Conference on Evolutionary Algorithms and Global Optimization, pp. 231–237. Warsaw Technical University Press (2003)

