TCM-Grid: Weaving a Medical Grid for
Traditional Chinese Medicine
Huajun Chen, Zhaohui Wu, Chang Huang, and Jiefeng Xu
Grid Computing Lab,College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University,P.R.China,
{huajunsir,wzh,changhuang,xujf}@zju.edu.cn
http://grid.zju.edu.cn

Abstract. We present a TCM-Grid for Traditional Chinese Medicine
(TCM). The purpose of the TCM-Grid is to aid the development of distributed systems that help health professionals, researchers, enterprizes
and personal users to retrieve, integrate and share TCM information and
knowledge from geographically decentralized TCM database resources
and knowledge base resources in China. Our approach involves developing a Database Grid for discovering and accessing TCM database
resources coordinately and a Knowledge Base Grid supporting TCM
knowledge sharing globally. With our application experience, we argue
that nowadays’ Grid architecture is not enough: we need Database Grid
to support ﬁnely granular data sharing and integration, and we also
need a Knowledge Base Grid to support knowledge-intensive task. We
also recommend a Grid Ontology eﬀort to enable Grid intelligence.

1

Introduction

Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM), with a history that spans thousands of
years, has provided us a wide variety of resources for biomedical and health
science. These resources include TCM literatures, medicinal materials, Chinese
herbs, TCM compounding rule, Chinese medical formula and so on, both ancient
and present. In China, there have been thousands of TCM hospitals, enterprizes
and research institutes who have developed various TCM information products
to serve people’s health care and research demands such as TCM self-health
consultation, TCM literature analysis and retrieval, new medicine design,etc.
For example,by cooperating with China Academy of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, we have set up Traditional Chinese Medical Database System, a
series of databases of TCM [10] .
In both e-business and e-science for TCM, we have an urgent need to
integrate TCM systems or services across distributed, heterogeneous, dynamic
”virtual organizations” formed from the disparate TCM resources within a
single organization (hospitals, enterprizes and research institutes) and/or from
external resource sharing and TCM information resource provider relationships.
Fortunately, we have found that the OGSA (Open Grid Service Architecture)[1]
has promised to addresses above challenges. Therefore, with the cooperation
with China Academy of Traditional Chinese Medicine, we began to develop
P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2659, pp. 1143–1152, 2003.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

1144

H. Chen et al.

a TCM-Grid to achieve our goals. However, with our ﬁrst inspection and
eﬀorts, we have found that OGSA is not enough to satisfy our real needs and
expectations.
At ﬁrst, OGSA dose not provide proper way of database resource
integration, registration and discovery. Second, medical informatics is a
knowledge-intensive domain, we have requirements of represent TCM information at a knowledge level and construct high-level expert system such as
TCM new medicine design expert system and TCM tutor expert system,etc.
That urged us to provide basic infrastructure supporting TCM knowledge
base creation, maintaining, utilizing and knowledge sharing across China. At
last, sometimes we want autonomic discovery , binding and then integration
of resources, in other word, we need some intelligence to help us discover and
locate proper resources (both database resources and knowledge base resources)
in such a information overwhelming environment,but OGSA care nothing on
that at all(dynamic dose not mean intelligence).
Therefore, we introduce an architecture in term of Database Grid to
support smaller granularity data sharing (database resource sharing). And with
our research on semantic web [11] area, we have also present an architecture in
term of Knowledge Base Grid to support knowledge sharing in semantic web.
We also argue that to bring the Grid into its full potential, we should develop
Grid Ontology corresponding to the Web Ontology eﬀort in Semantic Web
communities to address the complexity , dynamic, diversity and heterogeneity
of a Global Grid and support autonomic grid service discovering,locating and
executing .

2
2.1

The Backbone of TCM-Grid: DB-Grid and KB-Grid
Database Grid

Comparing to the DataGrid [2] with the aim of the sharing of huge amounts
of distributed data ﬁles that we call as coarsely granular data resources over
the network infrastructure, the Database Grid (DB-Grid) initiative is to develop
and test the technological infrastructure that will enable the sharing of databases
that contain more ﬁnely granular data resources.
A large number of existing database are important information resources,
which contain rich domain speciﬁc information. Take the TCM area as an example, through years of work on collection, translation and compilation of ancient
books of TCM, hundreds of TCM databases have been formed which collects numerous clinic cases, medicine prescriptions, diseases records and other precious
experience in the TCM ﬁeld. These databases constitute a basic information
platform that needs to be accessed in many TCM research activities. Database
Grid should get each of these database resources accessible on the Grid. Furthermore, Database Grid should provide users with an eﬃcient mechanism for
coordinated use of these content-related databases, for example providing the
integration access service by constructing a virtual database so that users can
access distributed data sources with single access point.

TCM-Grid: Weaving a Medical Grid

1145

In a service-oriented view, we should respectively deﬁne some generic
database services. These generic services deﬁne the functionalities that a qualiﬁed database resource must provide. In [3] we have proposed the following basic
services:
– Database Grid Information Service: support the initial discovery and ongoing monitoring of the existence and characteristics of resources, services,
computation and other entities
– Database statement service: support the typical operations on database contents, including retrieval, insertion, deletion, and modiﬁcation of the data
schema;
– Database Management Service : enables DBA to perform a remote control;
– Database Accounting Service : enables database users to be charged of resource usage;
– Database Directory : Database directory is an aggregate registry that collects, manages and indexes individual database information models;
– Virtual Database : A virtual database is a middleware that integrates a
number of databases but does not actually store any data;
– Database Market : data market is an open place for databases to interchange
database units.
2.2

Knowledge Base Grid

TCM and medical informatics is a knowledge-intensive domain. In a serviceoriented perspective, we want to build large-scale knowledge-based service such
as self-health consultation services.Underlying those services are there a variety
of TCM knowledge base resources such as TCM Ontology, TCM compounding
rule bases, TCM therapeutic principle knowledge bases, etc., which maybe be
maintained by diﬀerent organizations and/or individuals all around China.
Nevertheless, how could we integrate so many decentralized knowledge
base resources to support constructing intelligent services? We argue that
OGSA is not enough here for its aim to integrate information systems but
not knowledge-based systems. In the following, we extend this argument
in two respects and then introduce the core components to deﬁne more precisely how our KB-Grid functions and how it could be implemented and applied.

2.2.1 Standard Knowledge Representation for Web
To overcome the heterogeneity of web,the ﬁrst thing we need is a standard
method for knowledge representation and information description in web.
With this eﬀort, we can enable the web to be an intelligent information space,
which is machine-understandable. That’s the aim of the W3C’s activity on
Semantic Web [5]. They have recognized the importance of the standardization
of knowledge representation and recommended the RDF [5] as the basic model
for web knowledge representation .Above the RDF, DAPPA has presented the
DAML+OIL [12] for Web Ontology description.

1146

H. Chen et al.

Based on above eﬀorts, we have proposed a hybrid knowledge markup
language (KML) as our standard method for TCM knowledge representation. KML consists of a D-Box (Description Logic Box) for TCM-Ontology
deﬁnition, R-Box (rules box) for TCM compounding rule deﬁnition, and a
C-Box (case knowledge box supporting case-based reasoning) for TCM clinical
cases description. The KML schema draft has been available from our website
(http://grid.zju.edu.cn).

2.2.2 Standard Knowledge Protocols
In an environment with intelligence enabled , that means there are great of
knowledge services distributed on the Grid , those knowledge services must
coordinate their activities with each other to further their own interests or
satisfy group goals. The fundamental concerns lying here are distributed control
and semantic interoperability, that means we need knowledge level protocols.
The design of knowledge protocol is more diﬃcult and complex than simple
information protocols such as LDAP or SOAP. As all known, computing grid
has chosen the LDAP protocol for their GRIP/GIIS [6], and maybe they will
choose SOAP as the substitute. We argue that both LDAP and SOAP is not
enough for knowledge level communication.
At ﬁrst, at the knowledge level, the message format for communication
should contain the knowledge interchanged. The knowledge interchange format
is very diﬀerent with the data model adopted in LDAP. It should take some
form like the ﬁrst order logic syntax at the semantic level. At second, the
control process is more complex here for that we should model the BDI (Belief,
Desire, Intention) of the intelligent services by epistemic logic. Those are topics
of multi-agents system in distributed artiﬁcial intelligence. We have made
some suggestion on designing the knowledge protocol for KB-Grid in [4]. Such
knowledge protocols will play core role not only for knowledge system cooperation but also for autonomic application integration in large-scale environment.

2.2.3 Core Components of KB-Grid
A typical KB-Grid consist of the following core components:
Shared Ontologies: Ontology lay down the ground concepts and rules for their
domain. One could view the ontology as some controlled vocabulary which
could facilitate the semantic interoperability between heterogeneous knowledge base resources .[14]
Knowledge Server: Our Knowledge Server is the web container for knowledge
which is represented by RDF/DAML+OIL/OWL/RuleML. It is the runtime
environment for webKBs. The key characteristic of knowledge server is that
it could process semantic query, then do some inference within its KBs and
then return the answers in a semantic form.
KB-MDS: KB-MDS is provided for model the meta-information about the
organization and discovery of the KB resources.It act as the meta-directory
for webKBs

TCM-Grid: Weaving a Medical Grid

1147

Ontology Browser: that’s the user interface for KB-Grid. It supports semantic
browsing against the knowledge server. We have ﬁnished the prototype of a
TCM-Ontology browser. It supports TCM-Ontology (represented by RDF)
and semantic query against the TCM-Ontology server.
For more detail about KB-Grid, please refer [4].
2.3

Grid Ontology

The Web communities such as W3C has initialed a Web Ontology eﬀort [13].
Ontologies ﬁgure prominently in the emerging Semantic Web as a way of representing the semantics of documents and enabling the semantics to be used by
web applications and intelligent agents. Ontologies can prove very useful for a
community as a way of structuring and deﬁning the meaning of the metadata
terms that are currently being collected and standardized.Ontologies are critical
for applications that want to search across or merge information from diverse
communities. Although XML DTDs and XML Schemas are suﬃcient for exchanging data between parties who have agreed to deﬁnitions beforehand, their
lack of semantics prevent machines from reliably performing this task given new
XML vocabularies. [7] tells us more about the importance and the usage of Ontology in Web.
We argue that OGSA will face the same problem when it scales up globally. We really have used an ontology for the Computing Grid. That ontology
includes the concepts and vocabularies for computing grid domain, for example
CPU, Memory, Storage device and their combination to construct high-level virtual machines. Yes, that is the MDS data model existing in the LDAP server.
For Computing Grid, the data model for LDAP is enough, because the resource
model of computing grid is simple. However, when we extend the Grid to global
application or service integration , the data model of LDAP or SOAP will fail
because the global web is really much more complex than we have imagined : so
many heterogenous web resources (web databases,web pages,web services) cover
almost all domain of human knowledge and distribute all around the world. To
enable Grid intelligence, we need build Grid Ontology to enable autonomous
service discovery and integration.
Generally, a domain of virtual community such as TCM will build their
own shared Ontology. Then the organization and/or individual who want to join
such community will obey that Ontology to build their information or knowledge systems. Section3 will introduce the TCM Ontology which we have built
for TCM community.

3

Implementation of TCM-Grid

To verify the ideas presented above, this section will discuss some key issue with
respect to the implementation of TCM-Grid.

1148

3.1

H. Chen et al.

TCM Ontology

The Ontology we want to build include related terms/concepts, their deﬁnitions
and/or meanings, their relationships with each other, and some basic rules of the
domain. We use Protg 2000, which is developed by Medical Informatics of Stanford University, to build TCM ontology. Generally, Protg 2000 uses the Semantic
Web language RDFS as basic data storage format, but it can be easily adapted
and extended to the other Semantic Web languages such as DAML+OIL.

Fig. 1. The snapshot of TCM Ontology

Fig. 1 depicts the snapshot of TCM ontology class hierarchy. It shows
that TCM is an abstract base class in TCM Ontology, and there are about 13 basic slots (attributes) of it. Then there exist about 20 subclasses like Human Info,
psychology and physiology, therapeutics, and Chinese Medical Formula in TCM
Ontology. TCM ontology has contained much more special concepts and classes
such as yin-yang symptom complex, ﬁve-elements,body point, Chinese Medical
Formula, Meridians, etc. Now we have ﬁnished building the whole class deﬁnition
of TCM Ontology and edited about 100,000 records of TCM Ontology instances.
UMLS (Uniﬁed Medical Language System) is a web-accessible medical
thesaurus developed by NLM (National Library of Medicine) of America as a
basic knowledge source in medicine. It has 135 kinds of semantic classes and
about 53 semantic relationships deﬁned. Because TCM is one of the members of
world medicine, we adopt this formal and regular deﬁnition in medicine as the
basis of TCM ontology design.
3.2

TCM-Grid Infrastructure

Just as the ﬁgure2 has illustrated, we divide the TCM-Grid infrastructure into
three levels. The backbone consists of a variety of data sources and knowledge
sources. Above those sources, we could construct high-level services including
some high-level database service and knowledge-based services. Above those services, we could form the virtual hospitals, virtual enterprizes and virtual research
institutes.

TCM-Grid: Weaving a Medical Grid

1149

Fig. 2. TCM-Grid Infrastructure

Database Grid is used to manage database resources in a TCM virtual
oraginzation. In this case, there are a number of basic databases, including Patient Record Databases, TCM Medicine Databases, TCM OTC Databases, TCM
Literature Databases, Traditional Chinese Drug Database, Traditional Tibetan
Drug Database and so on. Those databases serve as public information sources,
which are geographically distributed and owned by diﬀerent institutions and/or
individuals. For example, the patient record databases maybe consist of hundreds of databases belonging to diﬀerent hospitals distributed all around China,
and we could call such a database group a sub-db-grid of TCM-Grid. Above
that, a virtual database is constructed to integrate those basic TCM databases
and provide federated access service. One can access one another’s local data in
two modes. One way is through the database access service, which deals with
remote requests and return records. The other is downloading the application
data units from a database market and loading them into its own database for
local access. We have ﬁnished the design of the database resource model, and
are developing a component which could run as daemon at the database client,
when some modiﬁcations (adding a table for example) have happened in the
member database, it will update the information about himself in the central
database directory server.We are also developing the virtual database component which act as a uniform DB-Grid query interface. User sends their query
to the virtual database service, and the virtual database service will dispatch
the query to proper member databases by the meta-information stored by the
central directory server.
KB-Grid is used to facilitate knowledge sharing among TCM VOs. In
this case, there are also a number of knowledge bases including TCM symptom
KBs, TCM Therapeutic Principle KBs, TCM medical formulas, TCM Com-

1150

H. Chen et al.

pound Rule Bases, TCM Therapeutic Case Bases and so on. The TCM Ontology
is also a kind of knowledge source, and it includes the TCM metathesaurus and
TCM specialist lexicon. The TCM metathesaurus contains information about
TCM concepts and terms from many controlled vocabularies and classiﬁcations
used in patient records, administrative health data, bibliographic and full-text
databases and TCM expert systems. The TCM specialist lexicon provides the
lexical information needed for the specialist Natural Language Processing. We
have ﬁnished the building of TCM ontology (about 10M). That ontology has
contained a hierarchical TCM terminology represented by RDF/RDFS. Almost
all the synonyms in TCM have been also included. We are developing a TCM
ontology browser that has two main functionalities: the ﬁrst one is the graphical
display and semantic browsing of the ontology; the second is that it acts as the
ontology-base query answer user interface.
Relying on these basic data and knowledge sources, we could construct
high-level service. Moreover, above the high-level services, we could form virtual
organizations.
3.3

A Working Scenario: TCM New Medicine Design

To make our discussion more clearly, we give a simple working scenario for TCMGrid.
Relying on the basic data and knowledge sources, a clinical development
research for a new medicine is carried out, which can be deployed into the following phrases: TCM compound rule analysis, new medicine and medical formula
design, preclinical testing, clinical testing and new medicine production. The
above process maybe involves a research institute, a few hospitals for clinical
test and some enterprizes to produce and sell the new medicine. At ﬁrst, the
research institute initiates a new medicine design process. With the assistance
of the new medicine design supporting service, they make analysis of the TCM
compound rule base and TCM therapeutic principle knowledge base, and design a new TCM medical formula. Some hospitals are involved in the preclinical
test and clinical test phrase. With their clinical decision supporting service, they
make the clinical test and record the results. When the new medicine is appropriate, some TCM enterprise will be involved and put the new medicine into
production.
We have seen a working scenario which have a urgent need for dynamic
integration of geographically distributed database resources, information system
and knowledge-based system across the Internet environment.

4

Related Work

For database resources sharing across Grid, DAI-WG (Database Access and Integration Working Group) in GGF [8] is currently identifying consistent and eﬀective ways of making existing, autonomously managed databases available within
a Grid setting. Most requirements identiﬁed by them are applied to our proposal. Their approach to database access and integration is constructing OGSA

TCM-Grid: Weaving a Medical Grid

1151

compatible service speciﬁcation. However, we think protocol is a fundamental
issue in deﬁning any networked computing model no matter what form of implementation is ﬁnally taken. So our eﬀorts will focus on the formal representation
of the related protocols.
For the large-scale web-based knowledge-base system , The Knowledge
Grid eﬀort in Chinese Academy of Sciences [9] has also proposed a worldwide resource (knowledge, information, and services) sharing and management platform.
However, we argue that their platform has no awareness of developing knowledge
protocols and high-level knowledge services. Another work worthy to mention is
the DARPA’s DAML-S [12] eﬀort which supplies Web service providers with a
core set of markup language constructs for describing the properties and capabilities of their Web services in unambiguous, computer-intepretable form. DAML-S
markup of Web services will facilitate the automation of Web service tasks including automated Web service discovery, execution, interoperation, composition
and execution.

5

Conclusion and Future Work

This paper describes our experience with building a medical grid for Traditional
Chinese Medicine. Our ultimate goal is to aid the development of distributed systems that help health professionals, researchers, enterprizes and personal users to
retrieve, integrate and share TCM information and knowledge from geographically decentralized TCM database resources and knowledge base resource all
around China.
Based on our experience, we have found that nowadays’ Grid architecture
such as OGSA does not satisfy our real need and expectations. With our eﬀort
on Database Grid and Knowledge Base Grid, three respects have enhanced the
OGSA. First, the DB-Grid enhances OGSA by supporting the database resources
sharing by its database services and protocols, because most of the e-businesses
involve the database. Second, KB-Grid enhances OGSA by knowledge sharing
and knowledge-based services . Third, Grid Ontology enhances OGSA for its
usage as the central control vocabulary which will enables the automatic Grid
service dicovering, locating and executing.
In the future, we plan to ﬁnish the design and implementation of core
database services and protocols and then deploy those components to the Traditional Chinese Medical Database System [10] . In the knowledge-based system
aspect, we plan to design and implement a knowledge server as the run time environment for RDF-based webKBs, and high-level knowledge query language will
be designed to support ontology query . All the above eﬀorts will be integrated
into the TCM-Grid eﬀort.
Acknowledgement. We gratefully acknowledge helpful discussion with other
members in the Grid Computing Lab of Zhejiang University. This work is supported in part by the Grid-Based TCM Dynamic Information Resource Management and Knowledge Service subprogram of the Foundational Technology and
Research Program, China Department of Science and Technology, and the China

1152

H. Chen et al.

863 Research Program on Intelligent Workﬂow Technologies supporting Creditable E-Commerce under Contract 2001AA414320, and the China 863 Research
Program on Core Workﬂow Technologies supporting Components-library-based
Coordinated Software Development under Contract 2001AA113142.

References
1. The Physiology of the Grid: An Open Grid Services Architecture for Distributed
Systems Integration. I. Foster, C. Kesselman, J. Nick, S. Tuecke, Open Grid Service
Infrastructure WG, Global Grid Forum, June 22, 2002.
2. The Data Grid: Towards an Architecture for the Distributed Management and
Analysis of Large Scientiﬁc Datasets. A. Chervenak, I. Foster, C. Kesselman, C.
Salisbury, S. Tuecke. Journal of Network and Computer Applications, 23:187–200,
2001.
3. Zhaohui Wu, Changhuang, Guozhou Zhen, Database Grid: An Internet Oriented
Database Resource Management Architecture, in Proceedings of GCC 2002, the
International Workshop on Grid and Cooperative Computing of Chinese Academic
of Science..
4. Zhaohui Wu, Huajun Chen, Jiefeng Xu, The Anatomy of Knowledge Base Grid, in
Proceedings of GCC 2002, the International Workshop on Grid and Cooperative
Computing of Chinese Academic of Science.
5. W3C Semantic Web Activity:http://www.w3.org/2001/sw/Activity [6]
6. Karl Czajkowski, Steven Fitzgerald, Ian Foster, Carl Kesselman : Grid Information
Services for Distributed Resource Sharing: Proc. 10th IEEE International Symposium on High-Performance Distributed Computing (HPDC-10),IEEE Press,2001;
7. Deborah L. McGuinness. ”Ontologies Come of Age”. In Dieter Fensel, J im Hendler,
Henry Lieberman, and Wolfgang Wahlster, editors. Spinning the Semantic Web:
Bringing the World Wide Web to Its Full Potential. MIT Press, 2002.
8. Database Access and Integration Services WG of GGF,website,
http://www.ggf.org/6 DATA/dais.htm;
9. H.Zhuge, A Knowledge Grid Model and Platform for Global Knowledge Sharing,
Expert Systems with Applications, vol.22, no.4, 2002, pp.313-320, (Elsevier Science), 2002.
10. Traditional Chinese Medical Database System ,website,
http://www.cintcm.com/e cintcm/index.htm;
11. Tim Berners-Lee, James Hendler, Ora Lassila, the Semantic Web, Scientiﬁc American, May 2001
12. The DARPA Agent Markup Language Program: http://www.daml.org/
13. W3C Web-Ontology Activity: http://www.w3c.org/2001/sw/WebOnt/
14. Stanford Knowledge Interchange Format:
http://www-ksl.stanford.edu/knowledge-sharing/kif/

