Collaborative Tagging as a Tripartite Network
Renaud Lambiotte and Marcel Ausloos
SUPRATECS, Universit´e de Li`ege, B5 Sart-Tilman, B-4000 Li`ege, Belgium
{Renaud.Lambiotte, Marcel.Ausloos}@ulg.ac.be

Abstract. We describe online collaborative communities by tripartite
networks, the nodes being persons, items and tags. We introduce projection methods in order to uncover the structures of the networks, i.e.
communities of users, genre families... The structuring of the network is
visualised by using a tree representation. The notion of diversity in the
system is also discussed.

1

Introduction

Recently, new kinds of websites have been dedicated to the sharing of people’s
habits and tastes, examples including their preferences in music, scientiﬁc articles, movies, websites... These sites allow members to upload from their own
computer a library that characterises their habits in the corresponding topic (an
iTunes music library for instance), and next to create a web page containing
this list of items. Additionally, the website proposes the users to discover new
content by comparing their taste with that of other users, thereby helping them
discover new musics/books/websites... that should (statistically) ﬁt their proﬁle.
This method rests on a feedback between the users and a central server, and
is usually called collaborative ﬁltering. The emergence of these collaborative
websites answers the needs of Internet users to retrieve useful and coherent
informations from the millions of pages and data that form the Web. The main
particularities of collaborative systems are: (i) their non-commercial purpose,
even though the frontier with commercial companies is more and more vague
(see for instance the acquisition of del.icio.us by Yahoo in November 2005); (ii)
their transparency, namely these sites are relatively open and do not hide the
proﬁles of each user, contrary to Amazon for instance. From a scientiﬁc point
of view, this transparency opens perspectives in order to perform large scale
experiences (including thousands of people) on taste formation, quantitative
sociology, musicology... The available data also suggest alternative methods in
order to perform large scale classiﬁcations of music/science/internet. Those subdivisions should be based on the intrinsic structure of the audience of the items.
In parallel with this sharing and statistical comparing of content, collaborative
websites usually propose tagging possibilities. This process, called ”folksonomy”
(short for ”folk taxonomy”) means that the websites allow users to publicly tag
their shared content, the key point being that their tag is not only accessible to
themselves, but also to the whole ensemble of users. For instance, in the case
of music sharing habits, a group like The Beatles is described in diﬀerent ways,
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part III, LNCS 3993, pp. 1114–1117, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

Collaborative Tagging as a Tripartite Network

1115

i.e. pop, 60s, britpop..., that depend on the diﬀerent backgrounds, tastes, music
knowledge or network of acquaintances... of the users.

2

Methodology

The structure of collaborative websites can be viewed as a tripartite network.
Namely, it is a network composed of three kinds of nodes: i) the persons or users
μ; ii) the items i that can be music groups or scientiﬁc articles; iii) the tags I that
are used by the person μ to describe the item i. Depending on the systems under
consideration, a person can use one or several tags on each item. The resulting
network can be represented by a graph where edges run between the item i and
the user μ, passing through the tag I. Moreover, a weight is attributed to each
link depending on the number of tags given by μ to i. For instance, if μ uses two
tags for i, the weight of the links is 12 .
Let us note nU the number of users, nIt the number of items, and nT the
number of tags in the considered sample. Consequently, each listener μ can be
μ
characterised by the nIt × nT matrix σ :
⎛
⎞
0 ... 1/2 ... 1/2 ... 0
⎜ ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ⎟
μ
⎟
σ =⎜
(1)
⎝ ... 1/3 ... 1/3 ... ... 1/3 ⎠
... ... ... ... ... ... ...
μ

μ

where σ iI denotes the weight of tag I in its description of i, so that I σ iI = 1
if μ owns i and zero otherwise. Each item and each tag is also characterised by
i
I
similar matrices that we note γ and α respectively.
A common way to simplify the analysis of multi-partite networks consists in
projecting them on lower order networks, i.e. unipartite or bipartite networks.
In the following, we only focus on the correlations between two kinds of nodes,
for instance between the users and the items. To do so, we ﬁrst reduce the
tripartite network to a bipartite one by summing over all nodes of one kind,
thereby neglecting possible correlations between the three kinds of nodes. For
instance, the bipartite network users-item is obtained by summing over all tags,
so that each listener μ is now described by the the nIt -vector σ μ|I :
σ μ|I = (..., 1, ..., 0, ..., 1, ...),

(2)
μ

the index running over all items, and where σ μ|I = I σ iI . The items are characterised by the nU -vector γ i|I = (..., 1, ..., 0, ..., 1, ...). These vectors are signatures
of the users/items, that account for their interests/audience. In the case of music,
we call these vectors the music signatures of people and groups.
In order to project the bipartite network on a unipartite one, we look at the
correlations between two nodes of the same kind, relatively to his behaviour with
another kind. For instance, one may look how persons μ and λ are correlated by
using common items. To do so, we introduce the symmetric correlation measure:

1116

R. Lambiotte and M. Ausloos
μλ
CCF
=

σ μ|I .σ λ|I
|σ μ|I ||σ λ|I |

≡ cos θμλ

(3)

where σ μ|I .σ λ|I denotes the scalar product between the two nIt -vector, and || its
associated norm. This correlation measure, that corresponds to the cosine of the
two vectors in the nIt -dimensional space, vanishes when the persons have no
common item, and is equal to 1 when their item libraries are strictly identical.
At this level, the search for structures requires the analysis of large correlation
matrices, and the uncovering of connected blocks that could be identiﬁed as
families/genres/communities. In order to extract families of alike elements from
the correlation matrix C, we deﬁne the ﬁlter coeﬃcient φ ∈ [0, 1[ and ﬁlter the
matrix elements so that Cφij = 1 if C ij > φ and Cφij = 0 otherwise. Starting from
φ = 0.0, namely a fully connected network, increasing values of the ﬁltering
coeﬃcient remove less correlated links and lead to the shaping of well-deﬁned
islands, completely disconnected from the main island.
A branching representation of the community structuring [1] is used to visualise the process. To do so, we start the procedure with the lowest value of
φ = 0.0, and we represent each isolated island by a square whose surface is proportional to its number of internal elements. Then, we increase slightly the value
of φ, e.g. by 0.05, and we repeat the procedure. From one step to the next step,
we draw a bond between emerging sub-islands and their parent island. The ﬁlter
is increased until all bonds between nodes are eroded (that is, there is only one
node left in each island). Let us note that islands composed of only one element
are not depicted for the sake of clarity. Applied to the above correlation matrix
C ij , the tree structure gives some insight into the specialisation by following
branches from their source toward their extremity.
By construction, the above procedure unambiguously attributes to each element a hierarchical set of categories [2]. Consequently, starting from collaborative ﬁltering that is a non-exclusive and non-hierarchical process, we have arrived
to an exclusive and hierarchical structure that may be viewed as a taxonomy.
This relation could have helpful applications in order to automatically structure
content in systems without a central authority.

3

Applications: Measuring Diversity

Amongst others, this work provides tools in order to compare the tastes and
interests of diﬀerent persons, as well as to measure their diversity. Practically,
let us focus on music collaborative websites and consider the case of two users μ1
and μ2 who own a list of music groups, each of them characterised by a spectrum
of genres. From this knowledge, one would like to ﬁnd a quantitative measure of
the diversity of the persons, and a way to measure whether they have a similar
taste. Let us note τ μ1 and τ μ2 the vector of genres characterising μ1 and μ2 ,
where
(4)
τ μ1 = (τμ1 1 , ..., τμ1 I , ..., τμ1 nT ).

Collaborative Tagging as a Tripartite Network

1117

τμ1 I is the number of times that the tag I is associated to an item of μ1 and nT
is the total number of tags in the system. A naive way to study diversity consists
in implicitly assuming that all tags have diﬀerent meaning and in characterising
a person by the width of the distribution of τ . This is what we have done in
ref.[3], where we deﬁned a probabilistic entropy in order to measure these ﬂuctuations. It is nonetheless an oversimpliﬁcation that does not take into account
the correlations between the tags, i.e. the fact that tags may have more or less
equivalent meanings.
A more reﬁne measure of diversity should require a proper counting of the categories to which the user belongs. To do so, we propose to visualise the branches
and sub-branches of the hierarchical tree in which the user is more active than the
average. Let us assume that, at some level of the ﬁltering, an island (the node of
one branch in the tree representation) is composed of K tags, say I1 , ..., Ii , ..., IK .
Let us denote τISi the total number of times the tag Ii is used in the sample, while,
as deﬁned above, τμIi is the total number of times Ii is tagged to the items belonging to μ. The above island, composed of K genres, is then characterised
by:
K
nT
τIS ), that gives the empirical probability that a tag
- pS = ( i=1 τISi )/( I=1
used in the sample belongs to the considered island.
nT
μ
μ
- pμ = ( K
I=1 τI ), that is the probability that a tag used on an
i=1 τIi )/(
item of μ belongs to the same island.
The activity of the user in the island is simply evaluated by looking at the
ratio r = pμ /pS . By construction, this quantity is bigger than 1 if the user owns
many groups belonging to this island, and smaller than 1 otherwise.
Applying the method to all the nodes of the tree representation , and using
a colour representation in order to represent the value of r, i.e. the nodes are
printed in a colour ranging from green (low r) to blue (high r) [4], the user’s diversity may be visualized. Moreover, diﬀerent users may be compared by looking
whether they are active in the same branches or in diﬀerent branches.
During the poster presentation, the above techniques will be applied to empirical data extracted from websites specialised in music, e.g. audioscrobbler.com
and musicmobs.com, and in scientiﬁc articles, i.e. citeulike.com.
Acknowledgments. This work has been supported by European Commission
Project CREEN FP6-2003-NEST-Path-012864.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.

R. Lambiotte and M. Ausloos, Phys. Rev. E, 72, 066107 (2005)
S. Golder and B. A. Huberman, cs.DL/0508082
R. Lambiotte and M. Ausloos, EPJB, in press; physics/0509134
R. Lambiotte and M. Ausloos, cs.DS/0512090

