Evaluation of Historic Buildings Based on
Structural Equation Models
Qiaohui Tong1 , Tianzhen Liu2 , Hengqing Tong2 , and Zhuoling Ou2
1

2

School of Urban Design, Wuhan University,
Wuhan, Hubei, 430070, P.R. China
qhtong@whu.edu.cn
Department of Mathematics, Wuhan University of Technology,
Wuhan, Hubei, 430070, P.R. China
tonghq2005@mail.whut.edu.cn

Abstract. This paper proposes a quantitative method for historic buildings evaluation, which is the essential step before conservation decisions.
We introduce Structural Equation Models (SEM) in the evaluation of
historic buildings making evaluation more objective. We select certain
independent variables and dependent variables, including the ﬁrst degree and the second degree indexes and relationships among them, and
put forward an applicable index system which could be spread in all historic sites.1
Keywords: Structural equation models, Evaluation, Historic buildings.

1

Introduction

Historic buildings are the most important evidence of the past life style and
cannot be regenerated for human being in society. Generally speaking historic
buildings include relic, old buildings and outstanding modern architecture in
the historical city. Preservation of historic buildings is always the emphasis of
research of city planning and architecture, and is also the necessary work of
governmental decision-making. For protection of historic buildings, we should
classify the grade of buildings and separate diﬀerent kinds of the buildings.
Therefore, evaluation of historic buildings should be put forward and make corresponding settlement for diﬀerent grade historic buildings.
Compared with other professional ﬁeld, architecture ﬁeld lacks for qualitative
and quantitative analysis. We need to introduce mathematic method to architecture ﬁeld, especially to the work of historic buildings evaluation.
There always are index systems in many work of historic buildings evaluation,
and these indexes need to be summarized. Traditionally the summarizing coeﬃcients are designated aforehand. However, in this paper we introduce a method
in which the summarizing coeﬃcients are calculated by samples, so it is more
objective, and could oﬀer more deep analysis for the index systems.
1

The project was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China(2006, 30570611).

Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part III, LNCS 4489, pp. 162–165, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Evaluation of Historic Buildings Based on Structural Equation Models

2

163

SEM for Evaluation of Historic Buildings

Structural equation modeling (also SEM) has become a very popular dataanalytic technique. It is widely applied in Psychology and Sociology as well as
other ﬁelds, especially in Customer Satisfaction Index (CSI) model which is required by a series of ISO9000 criterions. The researches of SEM are very plentiful
and incessancy (C. Fornell, et al., 1996; S. Auh and M.D. Johnson, 2005).
There are two systems of equations in a SEM. One is a structural system of
equations among structural variables, and another is an observation system of
equations between structural variables and observed variables. Now we build a
SEM for evaluation of historic buildings. The model includes 5 structure variables
and 18 observed variables. The variables are in the Table 1 as follows. Notice
that the numbers of observed variables corresponding each structure variable are
4,4,4,2,4.
Table 1. Index of Variables
Structure
Observed variables
variables
ξ1
Historic value Time of the Degree of the Related
fa- Degree of rebuilding
integrity
mous people ﬂection of the
and event
local cultural
circumstance
η1
scientiﬁc value Function
of Value of tech- Scientiﬁc use Level of the
building
in nique
construction
city planning
η2
artful value
Detail
and Value of the Fa¸cade of the Interior decodecoration of landscape near building
ration
the art
the building
η3
useful value
Quality of the Whether can
building
be continually
used
η4
protective
Reality of pro- Memorize of Value of the Meaning
of
value
tection
being
main- landmark
protection of
tained
the building

Among the structure variables there are some path relationships or causalities.
These causalities among the structure variables can be expressed as equations
as follows.
⎛
⎞
⎞
⎛ ⎞ ⎛
⎞⎛ ⎞ ⎛
εη1
0 0 0 00
γ11
η1
η1
⎜ εη2 ⎟
⎜ η2 ⎟ ⎜ β21 0 0 0 0 ⎟ ⎜ η2 ⎟ ⎜ γ21 ⎟
⎜
⎟
⎟
⎜ ⎟=⎜
⎟⎜ ⎟ ⎜
(1)
⎝ η3 ⎠ ⎝ β31 β32 0 0 0 ⎠ ⎝ η3 ⎠ + ⎝ γ31 ⎠ ξ1 + ⎝ εη3 ⎠
η4
η4
γ41
εη4
β41 β42 β43 0 0
where η1 ∼ η4 , ξ1 are structural variables, βi j is the path coeﬃcient from dependent variable ηj to ηi , and γi j is the path coeﬃcient from independent variable
ξj to dependent variable ηi .

164

Q. Tong et al.

In general, suppose that η1 ∼ ηm are m dependent variables, arranging them
as a vector η by column as (1); and ξ1 ∼ ξk are k independent variables, arranging
them as a vector ξ by column also. The m × m square matrix B is the coeﬃcient
matrix of η, the m × k matrix Γ is the coeﬃcient matrix of ξ, εη is the residual
vector, then SEM (1) may be extended as:
η = Bη + Γ ξ + εη

(2)

The structural variables are implicit and cannot be observed directly. Each structural variable is corresponding with many observed variables.
Suppose that there are M observed variables and each one has N observed
values, then we will get a N ×M matrix. The relationships between the structural
variables and the observed variables can also be expressed in equations by two
ways of path causality. Let xt j , j = 1, · · · , S(t) be the observed variables corresponding to ξt , t = 1, · · · , k, and yi j , j = 1, · · · , L(i) be the observed variables
corresponding to ηi , i = 1, · · · , m, then the observation systems of equations
from observed variables to structural variables are:
S(t)

ξt =

ψt j xt j + εξ t

,

t = 1, · · · , k

(3)

j=1
L(i)

ωi j yi j + εη i , i = 1, · · · , m

ηi =

(4)

j=1
k

m

S(t) +

where
t=1

L(i) = M .
i=1

We call (2)(3)(4) a SEM, and sometimes we call it path analysis model.
At present, the path causality in popular PLS algorithm for SEM is from
observed variables to structural variables as (3)(4), and the iterative initial value
vector for ψt j , ωi j is arbitrary. As we all know, the convergence of the PLS has
not been proved well, and its convergence rate may be very slow.

3

The Best Initial Value in PLS Algorithm of SEM

We ﬁnd that arbitrary initial value is not necessary and PLS can be calculated
by a suitable iterative initial value based on the least square estimation in the
observation equations.
For this reason, we can write the observation systems of equations from structural variables to observed variables. It is also a linear system of equations with
some random errors.
⎞ ⎛
⎞
⎞
⎛
⎛
εxt1
xt1
υt1
⎟ ⎜ ..
⎟
⎟
⎜.
⎜ ..
(5)
⎠ = ⎝.
⎠ ξt + ⎝ ..
⎠ , t = 1, · · · , k
⎝.
xt S(t)

υtS(t)

εxtS(t)

Evaluation of Historic Buildings Based on Structural Equation Models

⎛

yi1
⎜ ..
⎝.
yiL(i)

⎞

⎛

λ i1
⎟ ⎜ ..
⎠ = ⎝.

⎞

⎛

εy i1
⎟
⎜ ..
⎠ ηi + ⎝ .

λ i L(i)

165

⎞
⎟
⎠ , i = 1, · · · , m

(6)

εy i L(i)

where υt j and λ i j are load items.
Carefully analyzing the relationships among the variables in above equations,
we ﬁnd a series of the least square relationships, and obtain the least square
solution of the observation systems of equations from structural variables to observed variables. Our algorithm paper has been accepted by international journal
”Mathematical and Computer Modelling” and will be published in 2007. Our
algorithm program has been received in DASC software developed by us. More
details are omitted here.

4

Conclusion and Discussion

According a group of evaluation data by the observed variables, we complete
the computation using DASC software. The data example including data ﬁles,
ﬁgures, and calculation results are oﬀered completely. They can be downloaded
from my website: http://public.whut.edu.cn/slx/english/index.htm. We should
prove our method is successful.
Having got the solution of SEM in evaluation of historic buildings, the path
relationship among the indexes and the path eﬀective coeﬃcients, we can deeply
analyze and discuss the eﬀective relationships among the indexes.

References
1. M.S.Waterman: Study on the Evaluation of Indigenous Danger of Architecture Production. Operations Research and Management Science, 16 (2001) 16-18
2. Claes Fornell, Michael D. Johnson, Eugene W. Anderson, Jaesung Cha, Barbara
Everitt Bryant: The American Customer Satisfaction Index: Nature, Purpose, and
Findings. Journal of Marketing, 60 (4) (1996) 7-18
3. Seigyoung Auh., Michael D. Johnson.: Compatibility Eﬀects in Evaluations of Satisfaction and Loyalty. Journal of Economic Psychology, 26 (1) (2005) 35-57
4. Hengqing Tong: Data Analysis and Statistical Computation(DASC). Electronic publication, Science Press of China, (2005).
5. Chuanmei Wang, Hengqing Tong: Best Iterative Initial Values for PLS in a CSI
Model. Mathematical and Computer Modelling, to be published in 2007.

