Dynamic Data Driven Applications Systems –
DDDAS 2008
Craig C. Douglas1,2
1
2

University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40506-0046
Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520-8285, USA
douglas-craig@cs.yale.edu

Abstract. This workshop is centered about the recently emerged paradigm of Dynamic Data Driven Applications Systems (DDDAS). The
DDDAS concept has already been established as a revolutionary new
approach of a symbiotic relation between application and measurement
systems, where applications can accept and respond dynamically to new
data injected into the executing application, and reversely, the ability of
such application systems to dynamically control the measurement processes. The synergistic feedback control-loop between application simulations and measurements can open new domains in the capabilities of
simulations with high potential pay-oﬀ: create applications with new and
enhanced analysis and prediction capabilities and enable a new methodology for more eﬃcient and eﬀective measurement processes. This new
paradigm has the potential to transform the way science and engineering
are done, with major impact in the way many functions in our society
are conducted, such as manufacturing, commerce, transportation, hazard prediction/management, and medicine. The workshop will present
such new opportunities, as well as the challenges and approaches in the
applications’, algorithms’ and systems’ software technologies needed to
enable such capabilities, and will showcase ongoing research in these aspects with examples from several important application areas.

1

Overview

More and more applications are migrating to a data-driven paradigm including contaminant tracking, chemical process plants, petroleum reﬁneries, well
bores, and nuclear power plants. In each case sensors produce large quantities
of telemetry that are fed into simulations that model key quantities of interest.
As data are processed, computational models are adjusted to best agree with
known measurements. If properly done, this increases the predictive capability
of the simulation system. This allows what-if scenarios to be modeled, disasters to be predicted and avoided with human initiated or automatic responses,
and the operation of the plants to be optimized. As this area of computational
science grows, a broad spectrum of application areas will reap beneﬁts. Examples include enhanced oil recovery, optimized placement of desalination plants
and other water intakes, optimized food production, monitoring the integrity of
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2008, Part III, LNCS 5103, pp. 3–4, 2008.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

4

C.C. Douglas

engineered structures and thus avoiding failures, and real time traﬃc advice for
drivers. These are but a few of countless examples.
Visualization is used at all stages of DDDAS: setting up data and initial and/or
boundary conditions, seeing and analyzing results, and steering computations.
DDDAS is ripe for multidisciplinary research to build applications, algorithms,
measurement processes, and software components from which tools can be developed to solve diverse problems of regional and international interest. The
advances that will result, including enhanced repositories of re-usable software
components and high quality real time applications, support of separation of
concerns, and reduced development time, will be of great value to industry and
governments, and will set the stage for further valuable research and development
and new education paradigms for students. A comprehensive list of ongoing state
of the art projects is kept up to date on http://www.dddas.org in the projects
area.
Several research thrusts in which advances should signiﬁcantly enhance the
abil ity of data-driven computational science to bring its tremendous beneﬁts to
a w ide array of applications. These research thrusts are,
– Eﬀective assimilation of streams of data into ongoing simulations.
– Interpretation, analysis, and adaptation to assist the analyst and to ensure
the most accurate simulation.
– Cyberinfrastructure to support data-driven simulations.
These three areas interact with two other research ﬁelds symbiotically: (1) forward multiscale modeling and simulation, and (2) deterministic and statistical
methods in inverse problems.
Research areas (1) and (2) combined with (3) DDDAS must work within the
context of uncertainty and will beneﬁt from the development of statistically
sound, uniﬁed treatments of uncertainties. For example, in forward multiscale
modeling and simulation, input data are uncertain and these uncertainties should
be propagated to uncertainties in output quantities of interest. In an inverse
problem, proper treatment of measurement uncertainties and errors must be
integrated with treatment of uncertainties associated with bforwardb models.
be treated systematically. In a data-driven application, all of these uncertainties
are present and must
Data management in a DDDASis typically supported by tools for data acquisition, data access, and data dissemination. Data acquisition tools retrieve
the real time or near real time data, processing and storing them. Data access
tools provide common data manipulation support, e.g., querying, storing, and
searching, to upper level models. Data dissemination tools read data from the
data store, format them based on requests from data consumers, and deliver
formatted data to data consumers.
DDDAS is the paradigm of the data rich information age that we live in.

