Lecture Notes in Computer Science

1

Lecture Notes in Computer Science:
Utilising Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) for the
Modelling of Granular Material in Large-Scale
Engineering Processes
1

1

Nicholas Christakis1, Pierre Chapelle1, Mayur K.Patel , Mark Cross ,
Ian Bridle2, Hadi Abou-Chakra3 and John Baxter3
1

Centre for Numerical Modelling and Process Analysis, University of Greenwich, Old
Royal Naval College, Park Row, Greenwich,
SE10 9LS London, UK
{N.Christakis, P.Chapelle, M.K.Patel, M.Cross}@gre.ac.uk
2
The Wolfson Centre, University of Greenwich, Wellington Street, Woolwich,
SE18 5PF London, UK
I.Bridle@gre.ac.uk
3 Department of Chemical and Process Engineering, University of Surrey,
6GU2 5XH 9042 Guildford, Surrey, UK
{H.Abou-Chakra, J.Baxter}@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract. In this paper, the framework is described for the modelling of granular material employing Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD). This is achieved
through the use and implementation in the continuum theory of constitutive relations, which are derived in a granular dynamics framework and parametrise
particle interactions that occur at the micro-scale level. The simulation of a
process often met in bulk solids handling industrial plants involving granular
matter, (i.e. filling of a flat-bottomed bin with a binary material mixture through
pneumatic conveying-emptying of the bin in core flow mode-pneumatic conveying of the material coming out of a the bin) is presented. The results of the
presented simulation demonstrate the capability of the numerical model to represent successfully key granular processes (i.e. segregation/degradation), the
prediction of which is of great importance in the process engineering industry.

1 Introduction
In recent years significant effort has been put into the modelling of granular flows
using a continuum mechanics approach ([1-2]). Although these models may be partially successful in capturing some characteristics of the flow, they do not incorporate
essential information on material parameters, which are needed to model the various
interactions between different particles or particles with their surrounding solid
boundaries. Thus, they can not be used to simulate processes, which are of great importance in the process engineering industry (i.e. hopper filling/emptying, pneumatic

Lecture Notes in Computer Science

2

conveying etc.), where these interactions lead to phenomena such as particle size segregation or particle degradation/breakage.
On the other hand, micro-mechanical models are able to describe successfully the
flow of granular material by accounting for all various types of interactions at the
microscopic level ([3-4]). However, these models can only be applied to a small
number of discrete particles, because of the complexity of the simulated processes.
Therefore, such models are not suitable for large-scale process modelling, as considerable amounts of computing time are required for the simulation of processes that involve large numbers of particles.
In the present paper it is argued that the micro-mechanical behaviour of different
particle species in a multi-component granular mixture, can be parametrised and employed into a continuum framework in the form of constitutive models. In this way,
by embedding the necessary micro-mechanical information for the individual particle
species within the continuum theory, the modelling of multi-component granular
mixtures is enabled.
In this work, the continuum framework and the micro-mechanical parametrisations,
employed to account for particle size segregation and breakage/degradation, are discussed. As an example, the simulation of a filling (through dilute phase pneumatic
conveying) – emptying (in core flow mode) of a flat bottomed bin and further pneumatic conveying of the material coming out of the bin is presented. Conclusions are
then drawn on the capability of the numerical model to realistically capture key
granular processes (i.e. segregation /degradation) and its utilisation as a powerful
computational tool by the process engineering community.

2 The Computational Framework
The full set of flow equations were solved using PHYSICA [5], a Computational Fluid
Dynamics (CFD) finite-volume code developed at the University of Greenwich. The
PHYSICA toolkit is a three-dimensional, fully unstructured-mesh modular suite of
software for the simulation of coupled physical phenomena. SIMPLE-based algorithms and a choice of differencing schemes and different iterative solvers are offered
in the code for the solution of the flow equations. A range of turbulence models,
source-based solidification/melting algorithms and elasto-visco-plastic solid mechanics models are also an integral part of the framework, and the code has been successfully applied to problems involving complex interactions of physical behaviour over
arbitrarily unstructured domains (see e.g. [6-7]).
The CFD code is utilised for the solution of conservation equations for mass, momentum and energy for the individual granular material components. For a N-species
granular mixture, 3N+3 momentum (in the x-, y- and z-directions) and N+1 energy
equations, for each of the mixture N-components and the surrounding air should be
solved. However, for reasons of simplification, only 3 momentum equations for the
bulk (the sum of all N-species and air) were solved. Moreover, an equation for energy
was not solved because energy-linked flow parameters were accounted for in the micro-mechanical constitutive models, which link the granular temperature of the flow

Lecture Notes in Computer Science

3

directly to the bulk velocity gradients via kinetic/theoretical considerations [8]. The
effectiveness of these assumptions will be demonstrated during the presentation of the
numerical simulations. Appropriate source terms were implemented in the momentum
equation to account for the effects of granular friction near solid boundaries (e.g. [9]).
It should also be noted that the computational framework made use of micromechanical criteria in order to predict the flow boundary and the existence of stagnant
zones (core flow mode) during the flow of granular materials [10].
A scalar equation was solved for each of the individual fractions fi of the mixture,
representing the fractional volume of each of the material components in every computational cell. The summation of all individual fractions in a cell gave the total
amount of material present in that cell at a certain time. This sum is only allowed to
take values between 0 (cell empty of material) and the maximum allowed packing
fraction (always less than unity). The maximum allowed packing fraction is a function of the individual components’ shapes, sizes etc. and should be a model-input
value, determined through experimental data. The scalar equation for each individual
fi may be written as

∂fi / ∂t +

Â^I

i

(ub + useg)} = Si .

(1)

where ub is the bulk velocity (as results from the solution of the momentum equation),
useg is a segregation “drift” velocity and Si is a source/sink term representing degradation in the i-th particle size class. Some details about the parametrisation of the segregation/degradation processes in the micro-mechanical framework are given in the
following sections.
2.1 Parametrisation of Segregation
The segregation “drift” velocities were analysed in the micro-mechanical framework,
by using principles of kinetic theory [11]. Using the reduced Liouville equation as a
starting point, a generalised Boltzmann equation that included inelastic collision effects was derived by considering particle chaotic motion conditions. Hence, the nonequilibrium velocity distribution functions were determined for each particle size in a
multi-component granular mixture through the use of a generalised grad moment
method. In this way, for each material component three transport processes, that effectively lead to segregation, were identified:
(a) Shear-induced segregation (representing the flow of coarser particles in the
mixture across gradients of bulk velocity)
(b) Diffusion, (representing the flow of finer particles down a concentration gradient), and
(c) Percolation (representing the gravity-driven motion of the finer particles through
the coarse phase in a mixture).
Functional forms of all three “drift” components were derived and transport coefficients were calculated for each mixture phase by using linear response theory and
integrating the relevant time correlation functions in a Discrete Element Method

Lecture Notes in Computer Science

4

(DEM) framework [3]. A full description and analysis of the functional forms of the
derived constitutive equations for all three mechanisms, as well as validation results
are given in [12].
2.2 Parametrisation of Degradation
Two distinct approaches have been incorporated in the numerical model for the modelling of degradation, according to whether the granular mixture was quite dense or
quite dilute. The former case (dense-phase mixture) can be modelled in an Eulerian
framework by employing population balance models to construct source terms for
Equation (1), which depend on material properties and local boundary conditions (e.g.
[13]). Of more engineering importance however, is the case of dilute-phase mixtures
(dilute-phase pneumatic conveying systems can be found in most bulk solids handling
plants), where the particles are fully dispersed in the fluid flow. The present paper
concentrates on dilute-phase mixtures and their degradation modelling. An Eulerian/Lagrangian approach for the fluid and the particle phases, respectively, was
adopted in this case, where a stochastic simulation procedure was included to represent particle degradation caused by particle-wall collisions.
In the modelling approach, each computational particle represented a group of particles with the same properties. The forces acting on particles were the air drag force,
the gravity force and the force due to the gas pressure gradient. The collisions between
particles and the influence of the particle phase on the fluid flow were neglected, since
only very dilute systems were considered.
A particle on its way through a pneumatic conveying line frequently collides with
the pipe and bend walls. The force produced on the particle at the time of impact may
lead to its degradation. Particle damage can occur in two principal modes according to
the level of applied stresses and the material properties, namely breakage and abrasion
(particle surface damage). Some of the most important parameters affecting particle
impact degradation are the particle velocity, the collision angle, the properties of the
particle and wall materials and the particle size and shape.
Since the main degradation usually occurs at bends [14], only collisions of particles
with bend walls were assumed to give rise to particle damage and were considered in
the present work. Particle degradation was simulated using a stochastic calculation
procedure, based on the definition of “degradation rules”, formulated from two characteristic functions, namely the probability for a particle to degrade and the size distribution of the degradation products. In the model, the probability of degradation and
the size distribution of the degradation products were calibrated from experiments of
impact degradation of single particles, using a rotating disc accelerator type degradation tester [15]. A statistical factor for the degradation process was introduced, since
the effects of parameters such as particle shapes, particle orientation at the impact
point, wall roughness etc., were not explicitly considered during the solution procedure.
In this way, particles impacting on the walls of a bend were let to degrade according to their degradation probability function. In the instance of a degradation event, the

Lecture Notes in Computer Science

5

original particles were split into a number of daughter particles, whose sizes were
distributed according to the degradation product size distribution. Each daughter particle was given a fraction of the momentum of the original particle equal to the ratio of
the daughter and original particle volumes and the new particle velocities resulting
from the rebound process were calculated.

3 Numerical Simulations
To demonstrate the capabilities of the presented model, a test case was chosen, which
represents a full process of handling of granular material and is an example of a process commonly met in bulk solids handling operations.
(a) inlet bend
(b) cylindrical flat-bottomed bin
(c) second bend
Arrows represent the direction of material
flow.
Fig. 1. Schematic representation of the simulated system.

The process involves the modelling of the pneumatic conveying of an initially
mono-sized material in dilute-phase. The material, after travelling in a pipe with a
bend, degrades into various size classes. The output of the pneumatic conveyor is
treated as a binary 50-50 mixture (50%/50% coarse/fine particles) of 4.6:1 particle
size ratio and fills a cylindrical flat-bottomed bin. Once the bin is filled, the material
is assumed to have reached its maximum packing fraction and its initial segregated
distribution is set according to theoretical predictions and experimental data [16]. The
modelling of the discharge of the material from the bin follows and the effects of
segregation in the mixture during core flow discharge are presented. The output of the
material discharge is then taken through pneumatic conveying system with a bend, and
the final distribution of the mixture is recorded after its final exit, see Figure 1.
3.1 Dilute-phase Pneumatic Conveying of Mono-sized Material.
The calculation domain consists of a 90° pipe-bend with an internal diameter of
0.05 m and a ratio of the bend radius to the pipe diameter equal to 3.6, see Figure 2a.
The conveyed material was mono-sized spherical particles of 931 µm diameter and
3
solids density of 2000 kg/m . This component simulation was performed for a con3
veying air velocity of 14 m/s and particle concentration of 10 kg/m , a typical value
for industrial operating conditions under which particle degradation constitutes a

Lecture Notes in Computer Science

6

problem. The particle velocity, at the inlet of the bend was assumed to be equal to the
air velocity and homogeneously dispersed.

a

b

Fig. 2. Numerical grid of (a) the pipe bend and (b) cylindrical flat-bottomed bin

For these impact degradation calculations, the size range between 0 and 1000 µm
was divided into evenly-spaced size intervals. The dependence of the particle degradation probability and the fragment size distribution on the particle velocity and the
particle size were determined from experimental data, obtained from 90° impact degradation experiments on single particles. A restitution coefficient of 0.8 was employed
for the calculations during the rebound process.
100
bend inlet
bend outlet

80

60
50.1

40

20
6.0

7.3

9.4

9.3

8.2

9.3
0.2

0
0-150

150-300 300-425 425-500 500-600 600-710 710-850 850-1000
Size range (microns)

Fig. 3. Particle size distribution at the bend inlet and outlet of the filling conveying system.

The calculated particle size distribution in the bend outlet cross-section is presented in Figure 3. Almost all the original particle sample fed into the inlet was seen to
have degraded (mass fraction of original 931 µm diameter particles at the outlet was
0.2 %) and a broad size distribution of the particles was predicted at the bend outlet.
The proportion of debris of size below 150 µm was very high, whereas the size intervals ranging from 150 µm to 850 µm were approximately evenly populated, with a
mass fraction value less than 10 % in each interval. It should be noted that the use of
“degradation rules” based on 90° impact degradation tests leads most likely to overpredicting the degradation amount occurring in the bend. In reality, the smaller the
impact angle, the smaller the force produced on the particle and hence, less amount of

Lecture Notes in Computer Science

7

degradation should result. Refinement of the present model, by incorporating the effect of the impact angle on the degradation processes, is currently underway.

3.2 Discharge of a Flat-Bottomed Bin in Core Flow Mode
The output of the pneumatic conveyor was used to fill a cylindrical flat-bottomed
bin of 65 cm diameter, 94 cm height and 6.5 cm orifice at the bottom, around its central axis. For reasons of simplification, the pneumatic conveyor output size distribution
was represented as a 50-50 binary mixture of 4.6:1 particle size ratio. It consisted of
fines of size below 150 µm (volume averaged diameter of 120 µm) and coarse particles of size between 150 µm and 850 µm (volume averaged diameter of 555 µm). The
material was assumed to be at its maximum packing fraction (total solids fraction of
0.5) and resting in the bin at its angle of repose (34º). The initial segregated profile
was fitted according to theoretical predictions and experimental data [16], so that only
coarse particles could be found around the central axis of the bin, then there existed a
region where the mixture composition was 50-50 and only fine particles were concentrating close to the walls of the bin. Because of the material properties and the vessel
geometry, it was predicted through the micro-mechanical flow criteria [10] that the
discharge of the mixture was going to occur in core flow mode (where stagnant material regions exist). Due to the axisymmetric nature of this case, a semi-3D geometry
o
was chosen, with a slice of 5 angle being simulated. The simulated bin geometry and
applied mesh are shown in Figure 2b.
During the initial stages of discharge (less than 3% of the total emptying time), the
central part was observed to collapse, thus creating a channel. Once the channel
reached the top surface, this began to descend and steepen until it reached the material
angle of repose. Thereafter, the material emptied from the bin very slowly through
avalanching from the surface region of the bulk, with the angle of repose and the central channel always being maintained (this mode of emptying is also known as “ratholing”). Eventually, a stagnant region was left in the domain, with no more material
exiting the bin. The final stagnant material was also maintained at the angle of repose.
The evolution of the interface of the total material fraction and the individual components (fines and coarse) at various points in time is depicted in Figure 4.
Segregation was obvious during the intermediate stage of the discharge, when the
50-50 mixture region was discharging. As can be observed in the fourth temporal
snapshot of Figure 4, the moving coarse particles were making their way towards the
interface, while the finer particles of the flowing zone were moving away from the
interface (this phenomenon is known as “rolling segregation”). Once the 50-50 region
disappeared, then only fine particles were seen to exit the bin. This is demonstrated in
Figure 5, where the mass percentage in the mixture (averaged over the outlet region)
of each of the individual fractions are plotted against normalised emptying time.

Lecture Notes in Computer Science

8

Total

Fines

Coarse

t/Tmax

0.004

0.007

0.012

0.02

0.05

0.1

0.3

0.6

0.8

1.0

Fig. 4. Interface profiles for the individual/total solids fractions. Intensity of gray shade indicates increase in material.

Fig. 5. Mass percentage in the mixture of the individual fractions (averaged at the outlet) plotted
against normalised emptying time during core flow discharge.

The graph is split in three regions corresponding to the three regions of the initial
vessel filling state. Region 1, initially containing coarse particles only, emptied very
quickly, hence the sharp decrease (increase) in the coarse (fine) particle curve. Region
2, initially containing the 50-50 mixture, exhibited very sharp peaks, thus indicating
the effects of rolling segregation with the mixture composition at the outlet alternating
between mostly coarse and mostly fines. Region 3, initially containing mostly fine
particles, appeared much later into the discharge, with the mixture at the outlet containing almost exclusively fines and the occasional spike appearing, indicating that
some coarse (remnants of the 50-50 mixture initial distribution) exited the domain.
This result was anticipated and is in agreement with theoretical predictions and experimental observations.

Lecture Notes in Computer Science

9

3.3 Pneumatic conveying system located downstream of the storage vessel
The final simulation was performed using the same flow conditions (pipe bend geometry, conveying air velocity and particle concentration) as for the upstream conveying system, except the orientation of the bend (see Figure 1). As it has been shown,
the composition of the outgoing particles at the outlet of the bin varied during the
vessel discharging due to segregation phenomena. The calculations of the particle
degradation in the downstream pipe bend were performed for four different averaged
compositions of coarse particles (d = 555 µm) and fines (d = 120 µm) at the bin outlet,
representative of the various regimes identified on the segregation curve. The simulated compositions are shown in the table in Figure 6.
Similarly to the filling conveying system, significant degradation of the particles
occurred in the bend and the particle size distributions were considerably different in
the bend inlet and outlet cross-sections. Figure 6 presents for times 1 to 4 the mass
fractions of coarse particles (now defined as particles with diameter between 150 µm
and 555 µm) and fines (diameter below 150 µm) in the bend outlet. For times 1 to 3,
about 40 % of the particles fed into the bend were converted into fines of size below
150 µm.
c o a rse

Coarse

fin es

1 00 %

Fines

80 %

Time1

100%

0%

60 %

Time2

70%

30%

40 %

Time3

30%

70%

20 %

Time4

0%

100%

0%
tim e 1

tim e 2

tim e 3

tim e 4

% bin outlet composition

Fig. 6. Proportion of coarse particles (150 µm < d < 555 µm) and fines (d < 150 µm) at the bend
outlet of the conveying system downstream the storage vessel.

4 Conclusions
In this paper, a computational framework was presented for the modelling of granular
material flows, based on Computational Fluid Dynamics and implemented with micromechanical constitutive models for the effective representation of the interactions
between particles at the microscopic level. The presented simulations demonstrated
the potential capability of the model to realistically represent key granular processes
(segregation/degradation), which are of great importance in the process engineering
industry. It should also be noted that the modelling of core flow in a continuum mechanics framework is believed to be unique. Further development of the model and
inclusion of parametrisations for the modelling of aggregation will make it a powerful
computational tool for engineers, which will aid them in the characterisation of
granular material flows and the processes involved.

Lecture Notes in Computer Science

10

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

7.

8.

9.
10.

11.
12.

13.
14.
15.

16.

Tardos, G.I.: A fluid mechanistic approach to slow, frictional flow of powders, Powder
Tech. 92 (1997) 61-74
Karlsson, T., Klisinski M., Runesson, K.: Finite element simulation of granular material
flow in plane silos with complicated geometry, Powder Tech. 99 (1999), 29-39
Baxter, J., Tüzün, U., Burnell, J., Heyes, D.M.: Granular Dynamics Simulations of Twodimensional Heap Formation, Phys. Rev. E 55 (1997), 3546-3554
Yang, S., Hsiau, S.: The Simulation and Experimental Study of Granular Materials
Discharged from a Silo with the Placement of Inserts, Powder Tech. 120 (2001), 244-255
Cross, M.: Computational Issues in the Modelling of Materials Based Manufacturing
Processes, J. Comp Aided Mats Design 3 (1996), 100-116
Bailey, C., Taylor, G.A., Bounds, S.M., Moran, G.J., Cross, M.: PHYSICA: A Multiphysics Framework and its Application to Casting Simulation. In: Schwarz, M.P. et
al.(eds): Computational Fluid Dynamics in Mineral & Metal Processing and Power Generation, (1997) 419-425
Pericleous, K.A., Moran, G.J., Bounds, S., Chow, P., Cross, M.: Three Dimensional Free
Surface Flows Modelling in an Unstructured Environment for Metals Processing Applications, Appl. Math. Modelling 22 (1998), 895-906
Nikitidis, M.S., Tüzün, U., Spyrou, N.M.: Measurements of Size Segregation by Selfdiffusion in Slow-Shearing Binary Mixture Flows Using Dual Photon Gamma-ray Tomography, Chem. Eng. Sci. 53 (1998), 2335-2351
Brown, R.L, Richards, J.C.: Principles of Powder Mechanics, 1st edn, Pergamon Press,
Oxford (1970)
Nedderman, R.M.: The Use of the Kinematic Model to Predict the Development of the
Stagnant Zone Boundary in the Batch Discharge of a Bunker, Chem. Eng. Sci. 50 (1995),
959-965
Zamankhan, P.: Kinetic theory of multicomponent dense mixtures of slightly inelastic
spherical particles, Phys. Rev. E 52 (1995), 4877-4891
Christakis, N., Patel, M.K., Cross, M., Baxter, J., Abou-Chakra, H., Tüzün, U.: Continuum
Modelling of Granular Flows using PHYSICA, a 3-D Unstructured, Finite-Volume Code.
In: Cross, M., Evans, J.W., Bailey, C. (eds): Computatinal Modeling of Materials,
Minerals and Metals Processing, San Diego, CA, TMS (2001) 129-138
Hogg, R.: Breakage Mechanisms and Mill Performance in Ultrafine Grinding, Powder
Tech. 105 (1999) 135-140
Bemrose, C.R., Bridgwater, J.: A Review of Attrition and Attrition Test Methods, Powder
Tech., 49 (1987) 97-126
Kleis, I.R., Uuemois, H.H., Uksti, L.A., Papple, T.A.: Centrifugal Accelerators for Erosion
Research and Standard Wear Testing. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on
the Wear of Materials, Dearborn, MI, ASTM (1979) 212-218
Salter, G.F.: Investigations into the Segregation of Heaps of Particulate Materials with
Particular reference to the Effects of Particle Size. Ph.D. Thesis, University of Greenwich,
London (1999)

