Multiscale Modeling of Biopolymer
Translocation Through a Nanopore
Maria Fyta1 , Simone Melchionna2 , Efthimios Kaxiras1, and Sauro Succi4
1

3

Department of Physics and Division of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University, Cambridge MA 02138, USA
mfyta@physics.harvard.edu, kaxiras@physics.harvard.edu
2
INFM-SOFT, Department of Physics, Universit`
a di Roma La Sapienza
P.le A. Moro 2, 00185 Rome, Italy
Simone.Melchionna@Roma1.infn.it
Istituto Applicazioni Calcolo, CNR, Viale del Policlinico 137, 00161, Rome, Italy
succi@iac.rm.cnr.it

Abstract. We employ a multiscale approach to model the translocation of biopolymers through nanometer size pores. Our computational
scheme combines microscopic Langevin molecular dynamics (MD) with
a mesoscopic lattice Boltzmann (LB) method for the solvent dynamics,
explicitly taking into account the interactions of the molecule with the
surrounding ﬂuid. Both dynamical and statistical aspects of the translocation process were investigated, by simulating polymers of various initial
conﬁgurations and lengths. For a representative molecule size, we explore
the eﬀects of important parameters that enter in the simulation, paying
particular attention to the strength of the molecule-solvent coupling and
of the external electric ﬁeld which drives the translocation process. Finally, we explore the connection between the generic polymers modeled
in the simulation and DNA, for which interesting recent experimental
results are available.

1

Introduction

Biological systems exhibit a complexity and diversity far richer than the simple
solid or ﬂuid systems traditionally studied in physics or chemistry. The powerful
quantitative methods developed in the latter two disciplines to analyze the behavior of prototypical simple systems are often diﬃcult to extend to the domain
of biological systems. Advances in computer technology and breakthroughs in
simulational methods have been constantly reducing the gap between quantitative models and actual biological behavior. The main challenge remains the wide
and disparate range of spatio-temporal scales involved in the dynamical evolution
of complex biological systems. In response to this challenge, various strategies
have been developed recently, which are in general referred to as “multiscale
modeling”. These methods are based on composite computational schemes in
which information is exchanged between the scales.
We have recently developed a multiscale framework which is well suited to
address a class of biologically related problems. This method involves diﬀerent
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part I, LNCS 4487, pp. 786–793, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Multiscale Modeling of Biopolymer Translocation Through a Nanopore

787

levels of the statistical description of matter (continuum and atomistic) and
is able to handle diﬀerent scales through the spatial and temporal coupling
of a mesoscopic ﬂuid solvent, using the lattice Boltzmann method [1] (LB),
with the atomistic level, which employs explicit molecular dynamics (MD). The
solvent dynamics does not require any form of statistical ensemble averaging as
it is represented through a discrete set of pre-averaged probability distribution
functions, which are propagated along straight particle trajectories. This dual
ﬁeld/particle nature greatly facilitates the coupling between the mesoscopic ﬂuid
and the atomistic level, which proceeds seamlessy in time and only requires
standard interpolation/extrapolation for information-transfer in physical space.
Full details on this scheme are reported in Ref. [2]. We must note that to the
best of our knowledge, although LB and MD with Langevin dynamics have been
coupled before [3], this is the ﬁrst time that such a coupling is put in place for
long molecules of biological interest.
Motivated by recent experimental studies, we apply this multiscale approach
to the translocation of a biopolymer through a narrow pore. These kind of biophysical processes are important in phenomena like viral infection by phages,
inter-bacterial DNA transduction or gene therapy [4]. In addition, they are believed to open a way for ultrafast DNA-sequencing by reading the base sequence
as the biopolymer passes through a nanopore. Experimentally, translocation is
observed in vitro by pulling DNA molecules through micro-fabricated solid state
or membrane channels under the eﬀect of a localized electric ﬁeld [5]. From a
theoretical point of view, simpliﬁed schemes [6] and non-hydrodynamic coarsegrained or microscopic models [7,8] are able to analyze universal features of
the translocation process. This, though, is a complex phenomenon involving the
competition between many-body interactions at the atomic or molecular scale,
ﬂuid-atom hydrodynamic coupling, as well as the interaction of the biopolymer with wall molecules in the region of the pore. A quantitative description of
this complex phenomenon calls for state-of-the art modeling, towards which the
results presented here are directed.

2

Numerical Set-Up

In our simulations we use a three-dimensional box of size Nx × Nx /2 × Nx /2
in units of the lattice spacing Δx. The box contains both the polymer and the
ﬂuid solvent. The former is initialized via a standard self-avoiding random walk
algorithm and further relaxed to equilibrium by Molecular Dynamics. The solvent is initialized with the equilibrium distribution corresponding to a constant
density and zero macroscopic speed. Periodicity is imposed for both the ﬂuid
and the polymer in all directions. A separating wall is located in the mid-section
of the x direction, at x/Δx = Nx /2, with a square hole of side h = 3Δx at
the center, through which the polymer can translocate from one chamber to
the other. For polymers with up to N = 400 beads we use Nx = 80; for larger
polymers Nx = 100. At t = 0 the polymer resides entirely in the right chamber at

788

M. Fyta et al.

x/Δx > Nx /2. The polymer is advanced in time according to the following set of
Molecular Dynamics-Langevin equations for the bead positions rp and velocities
v p (index p runs over all beads):
Mp

dv p
=−
dt

∂rp VLJ (rp − r q ) + γ(up − v p ) + Mp ξp − λp ∂rp κp

(1)

q

These interact among themselves through a Lennard-Jones potential with σ =
1.8 and ε = 10−4 :
σ 12
σ 6
−
(2)
VLJ (r) = 4ε
r
r
This potential is augmented by an angular harmonic term to account for distortions of the angle between consecutive bonds. The second term in Eq.(1)
represents the mechanical friction between a bead and the surrounding ﬂuid, up
is the ﬂuid velocity evaluated at the bead position and γ the friction coeﬃcient.
In addition to mechanical drag, the polymer feels the eﬀects of stochastic ﬂuctuations of the ﬂuid environment, through the random term, ξp . This is related to
the third term in Eq.(1), which is an incorrelated random term with zero mean.
Finally, the last term in Eq.(1) is the reaction force resulting from N − 1 holonomic constraints for molecules modelled with rigid covalent bonds. The bond
length is set at b = 1.2 and Mp is the bead mass equal to 1.
(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 1. Snapshots of a typical event: a polymer (N = 300) translocating from the right
to the left is depicted at a time equal to (a) 0.11, (b) 0.47, and (c) 0.81 of the total
time for this translocation. The vertical line in the middle of each panel shows the wall.

Translocation is induced by a constant electric force (Fdrive ) which acts along
the x direction and is conﬁned in a rectangular channel of size 3Δx × Δx × Δx
along the streamwise (x direction) and cross-ﬂow (y, z directions). The solvent
density and kinematic viscosity are 1 and 0.1, respectively, and the temperature
is kB T = 10−4 . All parameters are in units of the LB timestep Δt and lattice
spacing Δx, which we set equal to 1. Additional details have been presented in
Ref. [2]. In our simulations we use Fdrive = 0.02 and a friction coeﬃcient γ = 0.1.
It should be kept in mind that γ is a parameter governing both the structural
relation of the polymer towards equilibrium and the strength of the coupling
with the surrounding ﬂuid. The MD timestep is a fraction of the timestep for
the LB part Δt = mΔtMD , where m is a constant typically set at m = 5. With
this parametrization, the process falls in the fast translocation regime, where

Multiscale Modeling of Biopolymer Translocation Through a Nanopore

789

the total translocation time is much smaller than the Zimm relaxation time. We
refer to this set of parameters as our “reference”; we explore the eﬀect of the
most important parameters for certain representative cases.

3

Translocation Dynamics

Extensive simulations of a large number of translocation events over 100 − 1000
initial polymer conﬁgurations for each length conﬁrm that most of the time
during the translocation process the polymer assumes the form of two almost
compact blobs on either side of the wall: one of them (the untranslocated part,
denoted by U ) is contracting and the other (the translocated part, denoted by
T ) is expanding. Snapshots of a typical translocation event shown in Fig. 1
strongly support this picture. A radius of gyration RI (t) (with I = U, T ) is assigned to each of these blobs, following a static scaling law with the number of
beads NI : RI (t) ∼ NIν (t) with ν
0.6 being the Flory exponent for a threedimensional self-avoiding random walk. Based on the conservation of polymer
length, NU + NT = Ntot , an eﬀective translocation radius can be deﬁned as
RE (t) ≡ (RT (t)1/ν + RU (t)1/ν )ν . We have shown that RE (t) is approximately
constant for all times when the static scaling applies, which is the case throughout the process except near the end points (initiation and completion of the
event) [2]. At these end points, deviations from the mean ﬁeld picture, where
the polymer is represented as two uncorrelated compact blobs, occur. The volume
of the polymer also changes after its passage through the pore. At the end, the
radius of gyration is considerably smaller than it was initially: RT (tX ) < RU (0),
where tX is the total translocation time for an individual event. For our reference
simulation an average over a few hundreds of events for N = 200 beads showed
that λR = RT (tX )/RU (0) ∼ 0.7. This reveals the fact that as the polymer passes
through the pore it is more compact than it was at the initial stage of the event,
due to incomplete relaxation.
The variety of diﬀerent initial polymer realizations produce a scaling law dependence of the translocation times on length [8]. By accumulating all events for
each length, duration histograms were constructed. The resulting distributions
deviate from simple gaussians and are skewed towards longer times (see Fig. 2(a)
inset). Hence, the translocation time for each length is not assigned to the mean,
but to the most probable time (tmax ), which is the position of the maximum in
the histogram (noted by the arrow in the inset of Fig. 2(a) for the case N = 200).
By calculating the most probable times for each length, a superlinear relation
between the translocation time τ and the number of beads N is obtained and is
reported in Fig. 2(a). The exponent in the scaling law τ (N ) ∼ N α is calculated
as α ∼ 1.28 ± 0.01, for lengths up to N = 500 beads. The observed exponent
is in very good agreement with a recent experiment on double-stranded DNA
translocation, that reported α 1.27 ± 0.03 [9]. This agreement makes it plausible that the generic polymers modeled in our simulations can be thought of as
DNA molecules; we return to this issue in section 5.

M. Fyta et al.

4

10

ΔMD=1
ΔMD=5
ΔMD=10
ΔMD=20

counts

translocation time τ

790

5000

7500 10000

time

γ=0.05
γ=0.1
γ=0.5

3

10

100

(b)

10
100
number of beads N

(c)

10

100
t

(a)

10

Fig. 2. (a) Scaling of τ with the number of beads N . Inset: distribution of translocation
times over 300 events for N = 200. Time is given in units of the LB timestep. The
arrow shows the most probable translocation time for this length. Eﬀect of the various
parameters on the scaling law: (b) changing the value of the MD timestep (ΔtM D ); (c)
changing the value of the solvent-molecule coupling coeﬃcient γ.

4

Eﬀects of Parameter Values

We next investigate the eﬀect that the various parameters have on the simulations, using as standard of comparison the parameter set that we called the
“reference” case. For all lengths and parameters about 100 diﬀerent initial conﬁgurations were generated to assess the statistical and dynamical features of the
translocation process. As a ﬁrst step we simulate polymers of diﬀerent lengths
(N = 20 − 200). Following a procedure similar to the previous section we extract
the scaling laws for the translocation time and their vatiation with the friction
coeﬃcient γ and the MD timestep ΔtMD . The results are shown in Fig. 2(b)
and (c). In these calculations the error bars were also taken into account. The
scaling exponent for our reference simulation (γ = 0.1) presented in Fig. 2(a)
is α
1.27 ± 0.01 when only the lengths up to N = 200 are included. The
exponent for smaller damping (γ = 0.05) is α
1.32 ± 0.06, and for larger
(γ = 0.5) α 1.38 ± 0.04. By increasing γ by one order of magnitude the time
scale rises by approximately one order of magnitude, showing an almost linear
dependence of the translocation time with hydrodynamic friction; we discuss
this further in the next section. However, for larger γ, thus overdamped dynamics and smaller inﬂuence of the driving force, the deviation from the α = 1.28
exponent suggests a systematic departure from the fast translocation regime.
Similar analysis for various values of ΔtMD shows that the exponent becomes
α 1.34 ± 0.04 when ΔtMD is equal to the LB timestep (m = 1); for m = 10
the exponent is α 1.32 ± 0.04, while for m = 20, α 1.28 ± 0.01 with similar
prefactors.
We next consider what happens when we ﬁx the length to N = 200 and vary
γ and the pulling force Fdrive . For all forces used, the process falls in the fast
translocation regime. The most probable time (tmax ) for each case was calculated and the results are shown in Fig. 3. The dependence of tmax on γ is linear
related to the linear dependence of τ on γ, mentioned in the previous section.
μ
,
The variation of tmax with Fdrive follows an inverse power law: tmax ∼ 1/Fdrive

Multiscale Modeling of Biopolymer Translocation Through a Nanopore

Fdrive=0.02

γ=0.1

2e+04

tmax

tmax

5e+04

2e+04

1e+04

(a)
0
0.00

0.20

0.40

γ

0.60

791

(b)
0

0.80

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

Fdrive

Fig. 3. Variation of tmax with (a) γ, and (b) Fdrive for N = 200 beads

with μ of the order 1. The eﬀect of γ is further explored in relation to the eﬀective
radii of gyration RE , and is presented in Fig. 4. The latter must be constant
when the static scaling R ∼ N 0.6 holds. This is conﬁrmed for small γ up to about
0.2. As γ increases, RE is no more constant with time, and shows interesting
behavior: it increases continuously up to a point where a large fraction of the
chain has passed through the pore and subsequently drops to a value smaller
than the initial RU (0). Hence, as γ increases large deviations from the static
scaling occur and the translocating polymer can no longer be represented as two
distinct blobs. In all cases, the translocated blob becomes more compact. For all
values of γ considered, λR is always less than unity ranging from 0.7 (γ=0.1) to
0.9 (γ=0.5) following no speciﬁc trend with γ.
1.6
1.2
γ=0.07
γ=0.1
γ=0.2
γ=0.3
γ=0.5

RE 0.8
0.4
0

0

0.2

0.4
0.6
scaled time

0.8

1

Fig. 4. The dependence of the eﬀective radii of gyration RE (t) on γ (N = 200). Time
and RE are scaled with respect to the total translocation time and RU (0) for each case.

5

Mapping to Real Biopolymers

As a ﬁnal step towards connecting our computer simulations to real experiments
and after having established the agreement in terms of the scaling behavior, we
investigate the mapping issue of the polymer beads to double-stranded DNA.
In order to interpret our results in terms of physical units, we turn to the persistence length (lp ) of the semiﬂexible polymers used in our simulations. Accordingly, we use the formula for the ﬁxed-bond-angle model of a worm-like
chain [10]:
b
(3)
lp =
1 − cos θ

792

M. Fyta et al.

where θ is complementary to the average bond angle between adjacent bonds.
In lattice units (Δx) an average persistence length for the polymers considered,
was found to be approximately 12. For λ-phage DNA lp ∼ 50 nm [11] which is set
equal to lp for our polymers. Thereby, the lattice spacing is Δx ∼ 4 nm, which
is also the size of one bead. Given that the base-pair spacing is ∼ 0.34 nm, one
bead maps approximately to 12 base pairs. With this mapping, the pore size is
about ∼ 12 nm, close to the experimental pores which are of the order of 10 nm.
The polymers presented here correspond to DNA lengths in the range 0.2 − 6
kbp. The DNA lengths used in the experiments are larger (up to ∼ 100kbp); the
current multiscale approach can be extended to handle these lengths, assuming
that appropriate computational resources are available.
Choosing polymer lengths that match experimental data we compare the corresponding experimental duration histograms (see Fig. 1c of Ref. [9]) to the
theoretical ones. This comparison sets the LB timestep to Δt ∼ 8 nsec. In Fig. 5
the time distributions for representative DNA lengths simulated here are shown.
In this ﬁgure, physical units are used according to the mapping described above
and promote comparison with similar experimental data [9]. The MD timestep
for m = 5 will then be tMD ∼ 40 nsec indicating that the MD timescale related to the coarse-grained model that handles the DNA molecules is signiﬁcantly stretched over the physical process. Exact match to all the experimental
parameters is of course not feasible with coarse-grained simulations. However,
essential features of DNA translocation are captured, allowing the use of the current approach to model similar biophysical processes that involve biopolymers
in solution. This can become more eﬃcient by exploiting the freedom of further
ﬁne-tuning the parameters used in this multiscale model.

0.6kbp
counts

1.2kbp 2.4kbp

0

3.6kbp

80

4.8kbp

time (μsec)

6kbp

160

240

Fig. 5. Histograms of calculated translocation times for a large number of events and
diﬀerent DNA lengths. The arrows link to the most probable time (tmax ) for each case.

6

Conclusions

In summary, we applied a multiscale methodology to model the translocation
of a biopolymer through a nanopore. Hydrodynamic correlations between the
polymer and the surrounding ﬂuid have explicitly been included. The polymer
obeys a static scaling except near the end points for each event (initiation and
completion of the process) and the translocation times vary exponentially with

Multiscale Modeling of Biopolymer Translocation Through a Nanopore

793

the polymer length. A preliminary exploration of the eﬀects of the most important parameters used in our simulations was also presented, speciﬁcally the
values of the friction coeﬃcient and the pulling force describing the eﬀect of the
external electric ﬁeld that drives the translocation. These were found to significantly aﬀect the dynamic features of the process. Finally, our generic polymer
models were directly mapped to double-stranded DNA and a comparison to
experimental results was discussed.
Acknowledgments. MF acknowledges support by Harvard’s Nanoscale Science
and Engineering Center, funded by NSF (Award No. PHY-0117795).

References
1. Wolf-Gladrow, D. A.: Lattice gas cellular automata and lattice Boltzmann models.
Springer Verlag, New York 2000; Succi, S.: The lattice Boltzmann equation. Oxford
University Press, Oxford 2001; Benzi, R. Succi, S., and Vergassola, M.:, The lattice
Boltzmann-equation - Theory and applications. Phys. Rep. 222 (1992) 145–197.
2. Fyta, M. G., Melchionna, S., Kaxiras, E., and Succi, S.: Multiscale coupling of
molecular dynamics and hydrodynamics: application to DNA translocation through
a nanopore. Multiscale Model. Simul. 5 (2006) 1156–1173.
3. Ahlrichs, P. and Duenweg, B.: Lattice-Boltzmann simulation of polymer-solvent
systems. Int. J. Mod. Phys. C 9 (1999) 1429–1438; Simulation of a single polymer chain in solution by combining lattice Boltzmann and molecular dynamics. J.
Chem. Phys. 111 (1999) 8225–8239.
4. Lodish, H., Baltimore, D., Berk, A., Zipursky, S., Matsudaira, P., and Darnell, J.:
Molecular Cell Biology, W.H. Freeman and Company, New York (1996).
5. Kasianowicz, J. J., et al: Characterization of individual polynucleotide molecules
using a membrane channel. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 93 (1996) 13770–13773;
Meller, A., et al: Rapid nanopore discrimination between single polynucleotide
molecules. 97 (2000) 1079–1084; Li, J., et al: DNA molecules and conﬁgurations
in a solid-state nanopore microscope. Nature Mater. 2 (2003) 611–615.
6. Sung, W. and Park, P. J.: Polymer translocation through a pore in a membrane.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 77 (1996) 783–786.
7. Matysiak, S., et al: Dynamics of polymer translocation through nanopores: Theory
meets experiment. Phys. Rev. Lett. 96 (2006) 118103.
8. Lubensky, D. K. and Nelson, D. R.: Driven polymer translocation through a narrow
pore. Biophys. J. 77 (1999) 1824–1838.
9. Storm, A. J. et al: Fast DNA translocation through a solid-state nanopore.
Nanolett. 5 (2005) 1193–1197.
10. Yamakawa, H.: Modern Theory of Polymer Solutions, Harper & Row, NY 1971.
11. Hagerman, P. J.: Flexibility of DNA. Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biophys. Chem. 17
(1988) 265–286; Smith, S., Finzi, L., and Bustamante, C.: Direct mechanical measurement of the elasticity of single DNA molecules by using magnetic beads. Science
258 (1992), 1122–1126.

