Ecological Strategies and Knowledge Mapping
1

2

Jose Bidarra and Ana Dias
1

Universidade Aberta,
Rua da Escola Politecnica 147,
1269-001 Lisboa, Portugal
bidarra@univ-ab.pt
2
TecMinho,
Universidade do Minho,
Campus de Azurem,
4800-058 Guimaraes, Portugal
anadias@tecminho.uminho.pt

Abstract. In this paper we discuss the concept of ecological strategy in relation
to cognitive artefacts that reflect the expressive power of learners engaged in
the development of significant knowledge paths. Our experiments show that
learners strive to make sense of the fragmentary information surrounding them
and in this endeavour they may benefit from the creation of knowledge maps,
i.e. branched structures of knowledge that depart from a central node, a starting
point or a homepage. In the course of creating these fractal hyperspaces on the
Web, with integration of varied multimedia materials, the range of cognitive
strategies used during the learning process becomes evident, both at individual
and collective level. Perhaps ecological strategies may encourage a new
research approach regarding the study of knowledge construction within
complex hypermedia environments.

1 Introduction
Inspired by Resnick’s eThinking [5], we discuss in this paper the need for a
conceptual framework integrating multimedia hyperscapes [1], [4], with a new way of
thinking and a cultural perspective that go beyond the traditional “clockwork
th
approach” to reach a further “ecological approach”. Ever since the 17 Century we
have been presented with Newton’s mechanical view of the universe, nonetheless, in
the present day new ideas from ecology, ethology and evolution are influencing
scientific research in many areas. Ecological strategies are very common in the
biological world and share two common characteristics: response to local conditions
and adaptation to change. These can also be described as decentralized, simple,
flexible and robust problem solving strategies that transfer without difficulty to
networked environments.
A network is, in its essence, a tissue of collaborations of many parts that can create
a critical mass and reach certain states in an extremely effective way. Taking the
WWW network, covering the whole planet, we can say that its complexity is so big
that at the local level we do not perceive the global changes that are taking place. We
just scratch on the surface and this has consequences for our lives. Perhaps we are at
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3038, pp. 1025–1029, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

1026

J. Bidarra and A. Dias

the threshold of a new culture, no doubt very rich in information, that forces us to
read history in a non-linear way. In other words, sequential reasoning becomes
difficult as we try to catch up and order the many fragments of information that reach
us every hour, every minute, every second.
In this Web ecosystem we are becoming - perhaps our “selves” are becoming –
digital like in character. Our identities, our communications, our work is being
constructed by and through digital technology (e-mail, homepages, courseware, etc.).
Any division between people and technology is becoming more and more artificial as
we are constantly building hypermedia spaces that grow in an organic and generative
way in the course of human interactions. This is the environment where learning
occurs these days. For instance, when we have a large number of students connected
through the network, we can create activities based on ecological principles, since
these involve the participation of all the contributors and the combination of the best
solutions to solve complex problems. Also, the development of new tools, software or
digital artifacts, stimulates the creation of communities of practice (developers,
experts, students, teachers), engaged in a construction process.

2 Ecological Learning Strategies
The creation of multimedia hyperscapes [1], [4], in essence the construction of
networked or branching cognitive artefacts, tries to reflect the expressive power of
learners in the development of significant knowledge paths. As people try to make
sense of the fragmentary information surrounding them they tend to create branched
structures of knowledge that depart from a single node, a starting point or a
homepage. In the beginning there is something that triggers new thoughts, perhaps an
unexpected question or a provoking idea.
In our experiments at Universidade Aberta the construction of knowledge is
achieved through concept mapping and related cognitive activities. Since the Web
makes possible new modes of collaboration and interaction, groups of students can
work together very effectively on such tasks as gathering information, designing Web
pages, discussing relevant topics, organizing events, writing assignments, making
multimedia presentations, among other. In the course of creating fractal hyperspaces
on the Web, with integration of varied multimedia materials, the range of cognitive
strategies used by students during the learning process becomes evident, both at
individual and collective level. As a result, assessment of portfolios turns out a
straightforward task for the professor or trainer.
But reality is somehow more complex. Constructing knowledge by means of
multimedia hyperscapes represents a shift from a very centralized didactic style,
based on the teacher as the main source of knowledge, to a flexible networked
learning environment where the student must be able to construct meaningful
structures through connections to multiple sources of information. In particular, it
implies ecological habits of thinking within a vast, complex and unpredictable
environment. Immersed in a technological maze – the World Wide Web is often
confusing - new modes of interaction seem to materialize. After studying the modes
of hypermedia development used by students and teachers working as a team, relying
on cognitive and concept mapping tools, we may understand the (varied) mechanisms
used by learners to dominate the complexity of the vast available resources.

Ecological Strategies and Knowledge Mapping

1027

Furthermore, the Web may also be compared to natural ecosystems because it has
no centralized decision-making device. Paradoxically, there is no apparent leadership
to tell learners what to do but the ecologies of the Web make possible the use of
information and knowledge to attain effective global results.
In this context is important to distinguish between knowledge and information;
according to Salomon [6]:
–
–
–
–
–

Information is discrete, knowledge is arranged in networks with meaningful
connections between the nodes.
Information can be transmitted as is; knowledge needs to be constructed as a web
of meaningful connections.
Information need not be contextualized; knowledge is always part of a context.
Information requires clarity; the construction of knowledge is facilitated by
ambiguity, conflict and uncertainty.
Mastery of information can be demonstrated by its re-production; mastery of
knowledge is demonstrated by its novel applications. (p. 4)

Eventually a greater problem emerges: how do we integrate interaction processes,
authoring approaches and rich elements of hypermedia information in order to
improve the effectiveness of educational environments? Are ecological strategies the
answer to the mounting complexity of current learning systems?

3 Designing Knowledge Hyperscapes
Ecological learning strategies may be supported by the construction of multimedia
hyperscapes; in this regard we must consider that Web design activities:
• introduce the notion of hyperlinked knowledge spaces enriched with digital
multimedia (i. e. establishes the concept of a complex ecosystem);
• suggest a potential for the development of highly interactive constructivist
learning environments (i. e. enables learner’s response to given situations);
• permit the creation and growth of networked learning communities using
synchronous and asynchronous communication devices (i. e. facilitates
adaptation to new or changing conditions).
Within our learning activities at Universidade Aberta we are developing models
that enable the construction of hyperscapes through knowledge mapping. This
technique was developed for representing knowledge in graphs that constitute treelike structures [2], [3]. These consist of nodes and links, where nodes represent
concepts and links represent the relations between concepts. Concepts, and sometimes
links, are labeled and may be categorized. The developing patterns of association and
branching create fractal structures. Like clouds or trees, they form physical structures
that do not possess a defined form; yet in fractal structures we can always describe
other levels or scales of its structure where we always find the same basic elements
(self-similarity). Fractal geometry establishes algorithms to describe/create fractal
structures but these are not relevant at this time. Knowledge maps or hyperscapes may
have the aspect of fractal structures (Fig. 1).

1028

J. Bidarra and A. Dias
	
	 Pedagogia
	 Apoios Institucionais
	 Recursos Externos

	

	
	
	
	

	
	 Modelo

	 Projecto

	
	 A Ideia
	 Story Line
	 A Sinopse

	

	
	 Ideia/Imagem
	 Grelha

	
	

	 Conceitos
	 Audio
	 Scripto

	

	

	 Escolha da Equipa
Realizadores
	 Os Surrealistas

	 Linguagens

	

O Papel do Realizador

	 Visual
	 Audiovisual
	 Scriptovisual

	 Estilo

	 Audio-Scripto-Visual
	 Teoria de Sistemas

	 Elenco

	

	

	
	 Escala de Planos

	

	
	

	
	 Caracteres

	 Modelo Comunicativo

	 Modelos

	 Modelo de Lasswell

	 Montagem
	

	

	 Mass Media

	 Meios

	

	 Self Media

	 Efeitos Especiais

	 Geral

	

	

	

	 Funcionalidade
	 Teoria da Imagem

	

	 Tom

	 Documental
	 Comercial

	 Luminosidade

Qualidades da cor

	 Tipos

	

	 Educacional
	 Interactivo

VIDEO-GRAFIAS

	 Contraste de Cor em si

	

	 Contraste Claro-Escuro

17-10-1999 - v12

	

	 Contraste Quente-Frio

	 Sinopse
	

	 Contraste de Cores Complementares

Contrastes da cor

	

	

	
	

	 Contraste Sucessivo

	 Cor

	 Contraste de Qualidade

	

	 Contraste de Quantidade

	

	 Mistura Aditiva

Imagem

	
	

Exemplos

	

	 Mistura Subtractiva

	

	
	

	
	

	

	

	 Harmonia das Cores Complementares

	 Recursos na Web

	
	

	 Campo Sonoro
	

	 Luz natural

	 Estrutura
	 Continuidade Temporal

Luz

	

	 Fontes de Luz

	
	 Efeitos Sonoros
	

	 Voz

	

	

	 Som

	 Luz artificial

	 Temperatura de cor
	
	

	 Bibliografia

	 Banda Sonora

	
	
	
	

Fig. 1. Global visualization of a branched knowledge structure created with a mapping tool
(MindManager™).

While recognizing the value of knowledge mapping, we were able to witness in our
experiments that authoring with hypermedia tools is a rather difficult task for most
people. Content creation, whatever the form and technology used, is a huge challenge
for the average person and this explains why we have professional Web designers,
movie makers, writers and musicians. Nevertheless, we believe that future scientists
will also be artists – they will go beyond the “exact words” to reverberate across the
culture shared with their audience. By establishing the right context we may have
more success in recreating each scientist’s own experience. The way to establish
context, as we propose here, is through ecological thinking and the construction of
multimedia hyperscapes.

4 Future Learning Environments
We have focused on the previous section on the creation of multimedia hyperscapes
departing from an ecological thinking position. Basically, when we have a number of
learners connected over the network we can create activities based on ecological
principles that involve the evaluation of all the relevant information and the
combination of the best solutions to solve complex problems within a suitable time.

Ecological Strategies and Knowledge Mapping

1029

The preliminary findings of our research suggest that activities leading to the mapping
of concepts are effective to motivate students and increase the level of interaction
with learning resources. We believe that any subject matter will be mastered more
readily and more thoroughly when students become able to derive intrinsic rewards
from dealing with complex domains. On the other hand, ecological ideas are possible
to apply only within a set environment with a specific group of people trying to solve
relevant problems, transforming information into knowledge.
Nonetheless, the construction of knowledge is a problem of conceptual
development based on an evolutionary process with a rather unpredictable outcome.
Implicit in this process are pro-active learning strategies, the collaboration with peers
and other students and the adoption of a bold perspective concerning the problems to
solve. In this context knowledge representations may take many forms. For instance,
“chaotic” elements that enter the processes in creative activities (e.g. generation of
ideas) have to be managed ad hoc, according to each learner’s path and progression,
to arrive at a final conceptual representation that is valid. This does not mean that a
less professional approach is applied but that a great deal of the “authority” usually
attributed to the teacher is not possible or desirable. This is a problematic notion that
certainly points to a clear paradigm change in education.
Every time ecological strategies are chosen, decisions are based on emerging
information, not on fixed or planned solutions. As the learner’s environment changes,
ecological strategies adjust and deliver new solutions adapted to new circumstances.
Our challenge now is to find out how hypermedia mapping tools enable students to
engage with their subject matter while working in communities of practice and
adopting a symbolic world that will continue to provide curiosity and interest.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.

5.
6.

Bidarra, J., N. Guimarães, P. Kommers (2001). Handling Hypermedia Complexity: Fractal
Hyperscapes and Mind Mapping. CINTEC 2001, Aveiro.
Buzan, T. (1995). The MindMap Book (2 ed.), BBC Books, London, UK.
Gaines, B. R., Shaw, M. L. G. (1995). Concept Maps as Hypermedia Components. URL:
http://ksi.cpsc.ucalgary.ca/articles/ConceptMaps/CMa.html. Accessed February 1998)
Guimarães, N., T. Chambel, J. Bidarra (2000). From Cognitive Maps to Hypervideo:
Supporting Flexible and Rich Learner-Centred Environments. Interactive Multimedia
Electronic Journal of Computer-Enhanced Learning (Wake Forest University – USA).
URL: http://imej.wfu.edu/articles/2000/2/03/index.asp. Accessed October 2000.
Resnick, M. (2002). Thinking Like a Tree (and Other Forms of Ecological Thinking).
URL: http://llk.media.mit.edu/projects/eThinking/tree.html. Accessed June 2002.
Salomon, G. (2000). It's Not Just the Tool, But the Educational Rationale that Counts.
Keynote Speech, ED-MEDIA 2000, Montreal.

