A Multiscale Virtual Reality Approach to
Chemical Experiments
Antonio Riganelli1 , Osvaldo Gervasi2 , Antonio Lagana`1, and
Margarita Albertı`3
1

Department of Chemistry, University of Perugia, Via Elce di Sotto, 8,
06123 Perugia, Italy
{lag,auto}@dyn.unipg.it
2
Department of Mathematics and Informatics, University of Perugia,
Via Vanvitelli, 1, 06123 Perugia, Italy
osvaldo@unipg.it
http://ogervasi.unipg.it
3
Department of Physical Chemistry, University of Barcelona,
Marti i Franques, 1, 08028 Barcelona, Spain

Abstract. A multiscale virtual reality approach to chemical experiments has been implemented using VRML, CML and Java technologies.
Three case studies of increasing difficulty are examined to the end of
dealing with different combinations of human and molecular scale virtual reality approaches.

1

Introduction

Among natural sciences Chemistry is by definition a phenomenological discipline
rationalized in terms of an invisible reality (atoms and molecules) whose properties and rules are based on the first principles of physics. This has fostered, in
the past, the development of chemical models and, in recent times, of chemical
simulations. More recently, thanks to the development of high performance concurrent platforms, the role of simulations in chemical investigation has rapidly
increased and research has moved from simple to complex systems and from
abstract to realistic models embracing full dimensional theoretical treatments
which include both human (meter) and molecular (nanometer) scales. However,
most often, the related computational apparatus is so heavy and the feedback so
poor that the insight obtained from a simulation is very limited even if supported
by traditional post-processing visual representations[1].
Analogues of natural phenomena and visual representations have always
played a crucial role in the development of science, in general, and of chemistry, in particular[2, 3]. The most recent step of this ongoing process of making
analogues of the real world is the use of virtual reality, VR (see for example refs.
[4–7]), at both meter and nanometer level. The present computational capacity
(in particular, massively parallel and grid computing) makes it possible, in fact,
P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2658, pp. 324−330, 2003.
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

A Multiscale Virtual Reality Approach

325

to link the heavy number crunching activity of a simulation with realistic sensorial perceptions of the user at both levels in order to enhance his/her insight
and intuition. To this end, the virtual experiment (human virtual reality, HVR)
and the simulated interaction between atoms and molecules (molecular virtual
reality, MVR) can be combined together in a multiscale approach.
Along this line we are building some virtual chemical experiments three of
which are described in this paper. In Section 2 we analyze the computational
tools used and the objects defined for assembling the HVR and the MVR environments. In Section 3 we describe in some detail the HVR components of the
three chemical experiments. In Section 4 an MVR component of a virtual reality
simulation of the proposed experiments is discussed.

2

Tools and Objects for the HVR and MVR

Contrary to conventional visualization paradigms, the virtual reality ones when
applied to a chemical laboratory (see for examplet Ref.[8] for a multimedia product used for teaching laboratory practices) allow the user to visualize, manipulate
and interact with the computer generated structures and materials of the experimental setup being used and of the processes being considered. This is obtained
by introducing some elements of immersive VR. These elements make the user
an active component of the virtual scene especially if supported by suitable immersive devices like the Head Mounted Display (HMD), the Tracking Devices
and/or the Data Gloves.
In the work reported in this paper VR applications are implemented using a
Window of World (WoW)[9] approach based on the following tools:
VRML:[10, 11] to represent the Molecular Virtual World and to enable
its navigation using suitable VRML Web browsers[12]. A migration to
X3D[13] is planned for the near future.
Java:[14] to automate the generation of the necessary VRML code from the
data produced by the computational engines used in the simulation and
to assemble a dynamical representation of the Molecular Virtual World.
Along this line a set of specific Java classes has been created to associate
the proper chemical and visual properties (like size and color) to each
atom. The simulation provides a description of the system considered
in terms of the number of the constituting atoms and bonds. For each
atom the chemical symbol, the spatial coordinates of each considered
arrangement, the number and the type of bonds are specified. The Java
program recognizes the atoms from the chemical symbol, extracts its
chemical and visual properties and generates the VRML code for the
dynamical rendering of the Molecular Virtual World.
CML:[15] to deal properly, in conjunction with XML[16], with the representation of the physical and chemical properties of the intervening atoms
and molecules.

326

A. Riganelli et al.

Using the above mentioned tools a typical HVR chemical laboratory environment was built. A key component of such a virtual chemical laboratory is given
in Fig. 1 where a laboratory bench provided with a fume-hood is shown. In
the figure also some laboratory basic tools are shown. In this virtual laboratory
the user can walk-by, use the various components and perform the implemented
experiments (as described in Section 3).

3

The Chemical Experiments

The up-to-date implemented experiments are the following.
The first experiment deals with the measurement of the dependence of the
volume of a gas from the pressure at constant temperature (Boyle law) [17]. The
related HVR environment is the one in which the user adjusts the height of a
mercury container connected by a rubber pipe to an air filled burette. By placing
the container at various heights one obtains an imbalance in the observed levels
of mercury (and therefore a larger or a smaller pressure) as well as a change in the
air volume in the burette. By plotting the measured gas volume as a function of
the pressure exerted on it, one can work out the proportionality constant that is
related to the Boltzmann constant kB [18]. The rationalization of the experiment
at MVR level is given by a molecular dynamics application (the same used also
for the other experiments and illustrated in Section 4). Using that application
the behaviour of the gas + liquid Hg system is mimicked.
The second experiment deals with flame spectroscopy [19, 20]. The colour of
the flame depends on the emission spectrum of the substance added to it. In
the HVR environment the user first cleans a wire loop of platinum or nickelchromium by dipping it into a vessel containing hydrochloric or nitric acid and
then he/she immerges it into the powder or the solution of an ionic (metal) salt.
The loop is finally placed in the clear or blue part of the flame and the resulting
colour is observed. A spectroscopic data base allows the individualization of the
colours associated with a given element and the processes occurring inside the
flame is simulated using a VMR component based on molecular dynamics.
The third experiment is concerned with an expansion jet of a given gas. In the
HVR environment a gas is allowed to flow through a valve from a high pressure
chamber into a low pressure region. This generates an expansion regime within
which several physical and chemical processes can occur including non reactive
energy transfer, reactive processes, recombinations, electronic transitions, etc..
In this case too, the VMR component is simulated using a set of molecular
dynamics programs.
Accordingly, three specific virtual experimental apparatuses were built. These
are:
a) A mercury containing container connected to a burette through a rubber
pipe;
b) A platinum wire loop;
c) A high pressure chamber connected to an expansion vessel through an
air valve.

A Multiscale Virtual Reality Approach

327

Fig. 1. An HVR illustration of a laboratory bench provided by a fume-hood and some
basic tools

328

A. Riganelli et al.

Fig. 2. An MVR representation of a typical benzene-Ar3 cluster

4

The Molecular Dynamics Simulation

As already mentioned, the MVR component of the chemical experiments considered in the present paper is based on the molecular dynamics suite of codes
DL POLY [21]. DL POLY is organized as a distributable molecular dynamics
simulation package of subroutines, programs and data files allowing the study of
macromolecules, polymers, ionic systems and solutions. We use for our purposes
its most recent version DL POLY 2 (version 2.13). This version of DL POLY
includes a Graphical User Interface, written in Java, offering additional functionalities enhancing its usage in an MVR context.

A Multiscale Virtual Reality Approach

329

For illustrative purposes we discuss here the use of DL POLY for the creation
of an Ar seeded neutral benzene jet. This system is of particular interest since
only a few benzene-rare gasn isomers can coexist during the lifetime of the cluster
in the expansion jet. In connection with the relative abundances measured in
the experiment, the dynamical simulation should predict structural transitions
occurring during the cooling process.
Dynamical calculations are, as usual, carried out by expressing the interaction
in terms of components having simple two-body well-known functional forms
(like, for instance, the Lennard-Jones 12-6 or the Morse ones [22]). To overcome
the limitations of the pairwise additive formulation of the potential that, as an
example, makes it difficult to describe properly the interaction for geometries
other than the most stable one, especially near the in-plane configurations [23],
we have recently adopted also a new-semiempirical potential describing in a more
realistic way the interaction between the benzene and the rare gas atoms [24].
Up to date, most of the runs have been carried out by considering clusters
with two and three Ar atoms. A picture of a typical clustering situation for a
three Ar atom system is illustrated in Fig. 2. The figure shows that a suitable
geometry is that of three Ar atoms sitting on the same (upper, in the figure)
side of the benzene molecule in a quite asymmetric configuration (this cannot
be properly perceived in a single shot picture like Fig. 2 while it can be fully
appreciated in an MVR environment in which the observer can move around the
molecule).

5

Conclusions

The aim of the paper is to show how is possible to use virtual reality approaches
to describe a chemical experiment at both a human and a molecular level using
a virtual reality approach. To this end a multiscale virtual reality approach has
been adopted to deal with the description of the physical environment, HVR
scale, and with the molecular environment, MVR scale. The main features of
the three experiments of different complexity and of the common molecular
dynamics engine have been outlined in the paper. The application is still in
a prototype stage. In spite of that, however, it has already shown to be very
effective. This has prompted us to plan its porting on a grid platform in order
to exploit its full potentiality.

Acknowledgments
This research has been financially supported by MIUR, CNR and ASI as well as
by the D23 Action (Metachem) of COST in Chemistry. M.A. also acknowledges
the financial support from the Ministerio de Educacion, Cultura y Deporte:
PR2002-0014), the Spanish DGICYT (PB97-0919 and BQU2001-3018) and the
Generalitat de Catalunya (CUR 20001SGR-00041).

330

A. Riganelli et al.

References
1. Wolff, R.S., Yaeger, L.: Visualization of Natural Phenomena. Springer-Verlag NewYork (1993)
2. Maldonado, T.: Reale e Virtuale. Feltrinelli, Milano (1994)
3. Zare, N.R.: Visualizing Chemistry. Journal of Chemical Education, Vol. 79 (2002)
1290-1291
4. Casher, O., Leach, C., Page, C.S., Rezpa, H.S.: Virtual reality modelling language
(VRML) in Chemistry. Chemistry in Britain, Vol. 34 (1998) 26-31
5. Krieger, J.H: Doing Chemistry in a virtual world. Chemical & Engineering News
(1996) 35-41
´ Computer-Assisted
6. Ruiz, I.R., Espinosa, E.L., Garcia, G.C., G´omez-Nieto, M.A.:
Learning of Chemical Experiments through a 3D Virtual Laboratory. Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, Vol. 2329 (2002) 704-712
7. Garratt, J., Clow, D., Hodgson, A., and Tomlinson, A.: Computer Simulation and
Chemical Education - A review of Project eLABorate. Chemistry Education Review, Vol. 14 (1999) 51-73 (ISSN 0972-0316).
8. Brattan, D. Jevons, O.M., and Rest, A.J. (Eds): Practical Laboratory
Chemistry, Series of 19 CD ROM Programmes for teaching laboratory skills. Chemistry Video Consortium, Southampton, October 1999
(http://www.soton.ac.uk/ chemweb/cvc/ and http://www.emf-v.com).
9. http://vr.isdale.com/WhatIsVR.htm
10. Ames, A., L., Nadeau, D., R., Moreland, J., L.: VRML 2.0 Sourcebook. Wiley
Computer Publishing, New York Tokio (1997)
11. Hartman, J., Wernecke, J.: VRML 2.0 Handbook: building moving worlds on the
web. Addison Wesley (1996)
12. OpenSource cross-platform VRML browsers:
OpenVRML (http://www.openvrml.org); FreeWRL
(http://freewrl.sourceforge.net);
Vendor VRML browsers:
Cortona from Parallel Graphics (http://www.parallelgraphics.com/cortona/);
Contact from Blaxxun (http://developer.blaxxun.com/); Cosmo Software from
Computer Associates (http://www.cai.com/cosmo)
13. X3D Consortium: http://www.x3d.org
14. Flanagan, D.: Java in a Nutshell. O’Reilly (1999)
15. Chemistry Markup Language: http://www.xml-cml.org
16. EXtensible Markup Language: http://www.xml.org
17. Riganelli, A., Pacifici, L., Gervasi, O., Lagan`a, A., Workshop on Multimedia in
Chemistry Education, Perugia, (2002)
18. http://www.chm.davidson.edu/ChemistryApplets/GasLaws/BoylesLaw.html
19. McKelvey, G.M., Gilbert, G.L., McWherter, C.: Flame Tests that Are Portable,
Storable, and Easy to Use. Journal of Chemical Education, Vol. 75 (1998) 55-56
20. http://www.spectroscopynow.com
21. Smith, W., Forester, T.R., J., Molecular Graphics, Vol. 14 (1996) 136-141;
http://www.dl.ac.uk/TCS/Software/DL POLY/
22. Stone, A.: The Theory of Intermolecular forces. Oxford University Press, Oxford
(1996)
23. Amos, A.T., Palmer, T.F., Walters, A., Burrows, B.L., Chem. Phys. Letters, Vol.
172 (1990) 503-508
24. Pirani, F., Cappelletti, D., Liuti, G., Chem. Phys. Letters, Vol. 350 (2001) 286-289

