B-Spline Curve Fitting Using Dominant Points*
Hyungjun Park1 and Joo-Haeng Lee2
1

Chosun University, Gwangju 501-759, Korea
hzpark@chosun.ac.kr
2 Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute, Daejeon 305-350, Korea
joohaeng@etri.re.kr

Abstract. Motivated by an insight that properly selected points, called dominant points, can play an important role in producing better curve approximation,
we propose a new approach for B-spline curve fitting to a sequence of points.
The approach is substantially different from the conventional ones in knot
placement and dominant point selection. It can generate a B-spline curve in
good quality with less deviation. Adopted in the error-bounded curve approximation, it can play an important role in generating B-spline curves with much
less control points.

1 Previous Work
Least-squares B-spline curve fitting has been used as a basic tool to construct a Bspline curve c(t ) from points pi (i=0,..,m), which takes three steps: parameterization,
knot placement, and the least-squares minimization [1]. In parameterization, we select
the parameters ti of the points p i . The chord length or centripetal methods have been
widely adopted for this task. In knot placement, we determine a knot vector

{

}

T = t0 , t1 ,..., tn + p −1 , tn + p after specifying the order (degree+1) p and the index n. In the

least-squares minimization, we determine control points b j (j=0,..,n) of a B-spline
curve c(t ) by minimizing the least-squares error E (b 0 ,.., b n ) =

∑

m
i =0

c( ti ) − pi

2

. This

minimization problem is transformed into the problem of solving a linear system. The
knots are determined to reflect the distribution of the parameters. The interior knots
ti of the knot vector T can be spaced as follows [1]:
t p + i −1

i + p −2
⎧ 1
t j for m = n
⎪
j =i
= ⎨ p −1
⎪ (1 − u ) t + ut for m > n
k −1
k
⎩

∑

(i = 1,.., n − p + 1)

(1)

where k = int(i × d ) , d = ( m + 1) (n − p + 2) , and u = i × d − k . This is called the averaging technique (AVG) for m = n , and the knot placement technique (KTP) for m > n .
These techniques give a stable system of equations [1]. Nonetheless, not all stable
equations yield acceptable curves. When m is nearly greater than n ( | m − n | is small),
*

This work was supported in part by research funds from Chosun University, 2004.

V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part II, LNCS 3992, pp. 362 – 366, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

B-Spline Curve Fitting Using Dominant Points

363

it is liable to generate undesirable results. To avoid this, Piegl and Tiller [2] suggested
another knot placement technique (NKTP).

2 Proposed Approach
The proposed approach takes four main steps: parameterization, dominant point selection, knot placement, and least-squares minimization. The approach is substantially
different from the conventional ones in knot placement and dominant point selection.
2.1 Determination of Knots

Consider that dominant points d j ( j = 0,.., n) have been selected among the given
points p k (k=0,..,m). Generally, n is not greater than m ( n ≤ m ). With the points d j ,
interior knots ti can be computed as follows:
t p + i −1 =

1
p −1

∑

i + p −2
j =i

tf ( j)

(i = 1,.., n − p + 1)

(2)

where tk are the parameters of the points p k and f ( j ) is a simple function that returns the index of the point p k corresponding to a dominant point d j . The knots are
computed by averaging the parameters of the dominant points, so the knot vector
coincides with the one for B-spline curve interpolation to the dominant points [1].
2.2 Selection of Dominant Points

Eventually, the quality of the resulting curve depends on how to select dominant
points d j (j=0,..,n) among the points pi (i=0,..,m). We can devise an algorithm realizing that fewer dominant points are chosen at flat regions but more at complex regions. Its main steps are given as follows:
(1) Set nd = −1 where nd denotes the highest index of current dominant points.
(2) Select seed points from the point set, and store them in a list S in decreasing
order of significance. While S ≠ ∅ AND nd < n , pop a point from the list S,
make it a new dominant point, and nd ← nd + 1 .
(3) While nd < n , select dominant points d j adaptively as follows:

(3.1) Find two successive dominant points d k = p s and d k +1 = p e ( | e − s |> 1 )
whose corresponding segment incurs the largest deviation.
(3.2) Choose a point p w ( s < w < e) as a new dominant point, and nd ← nd + 1 .
We herein consider two kinds of seed points: two end points and local curvature
maximum points (LCM). We detect LCM points from the curvatures estimated at the
given points. Two end points are the most significant. For LCM points, the greater
their curvatures are, the more significant they are.

364

H. Park and J.-H. Lee

With the current dominant points, we can generate a current curve by knot placement and least-squares minimization. For two neighboring dominant points d j = p s
and d j +1 = pe , we can build a segment S s ,e = {p k | k = s,.., e} . Among the segments
consisting of at least three points, we find the segment with the largest deviation to
the current curve. We then choose a new dominant point from the segment. A simple
approach for the choice is to select the median of the points of the segment, but a
more promising approach is to select a point p w that minimizes | λs, w − λw,e | for
s < w < e where λs ,e denotes the shape complexity of a segment S s ,e that can be esti-

mated by combining the total curvature and the arc length of the segment.

3 Experimental Results
Fig. 1 shows cubic B-spline curve fitting to a point set that consists of 251 points. The
points are enclosed in an 84 × 126 rectangle. In Fig. 1(d), KTP selects the knots such
that each knot span contains almost the same number of parameters. In Fig. 1(e),
NKTP shows a similar trend except at the first and the last knot spans. In Figs. 1(c)
and 1(f), the proposed approach creates fewer dominant points (curve segments) at
flat regions but more at complex regions.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Fig. 1. B-spline curve fitting: (a) point set with 10 seed points; (b) curve obtained using 10 seed
points as dominant points; (c) point set with 31 dominant points; (d) curve obtained by KTP
(n=31); (e) curve obtained by NKTP (n=31); (f) curve obtained with 31 dominant points

B-Spline Curve Fitting Using Dominant Points

(a)

365

(b)

Fig. 2. Plots for comparison: (a) Deviation plot; (b) Plot of the number of control points

Fig. 2(a) shows the deviation caused by B-spline curve fitting to the point set in
Fig. 1(a). The deviation is computed as we increase the number of control points from
16 to 251. Deviations for more than 101 control points were omitted from the plot
since they are not differentiable visually. The deviation caused by the proposed approach is 69% less than the one caused by the approach using KTP, and the deviation
caused by the approach using NKTP is nearly the same as (actually 3% greater than)
the one caused by KTP. Additionally, we adopted three approaches KTP, NKTP, and
DOM in the incremental method for the error-bounded curve approximation [3].
DOM denotes the proposed approach. The incremental method starts with few control
points and adds control points repeatedly to maintain the error bound [1,3]. We
compared the three approaches by the number of control points required to approximate the point set within a tolerance. Fig. 2(b) shows the comparison result of the
number of required control points. Note that DOM outperforms the others in data
reduction.

4 Concluding Remarks
Because of the page limit of the paper, we had to shorten the description of the proposed approach to the minimum. The approach can realize the concept of adaptive
refinement that fewer curve segments are generated at flat regions but more at complex regions. It can generate a B-spline curve in good quality with less deviation.
Adopted in the error-bounded curve approximation, the approach can play an important role in generating B-spline curves with much less control points.
There still remain important issues not covered in this paper: properties of the knot
placement using dominant points; non-deterministic algorithms such as genetic algorithms for the optimal selection of dominant points; expansion of the proposed approach to B-spline surface fitting. We expect that all the issues will be handled by the
future research.

366

H. Park and J.-H. Lee

References
1. Piegl, L., Tiller, W.: The NURBS Book. Springer-Verlag, New York (1995)
2. Piegl, L., Tiller, W.: Surface Approximation to Scanned Data. The Visual Computer 16
(2000) 386-395
3. Park, H.: An Error-Bounded Approximate Method for Representing Planar Curves in BSplines. Computer Aided Geometric Design 21 (2004) 479-497

