Texture Alignment in Simple Shear
Fr´ed´eric Dufour1 , Hans M¨
uhlhaus2 , and Louis Moresi3
1

2

Laboratoire de G´enie Civil de Nantes – Saint-Nazaire
1 rue de la No¨e, 44321 Nantes Cedex, France
frederic.dufour@ec-nantes.fr
Queensland University, Advanced Centre for Earthquakes Studies
St Lucia, QLD 4072, Australia
3
MONASH University
PO Box 28M, Vic 3800, Australia

Abstract. We illustrate the ﬂow behaviour of ﬂuids with isotropic
and anisotropic microstructure (internal length, layering with bending
stiﬀness) by means of numerical simulations of silo discharge and ﬂow
alignment in simple shear. The Cosserat theory is used to provide an
internal length in the constitutive model through bending stiﬀness to
describe isotropic microstructure and this theory is coupled to a director
theory to add speciﬁc orientation of grains to describe anisotropic
microstructure. The numerical solution is based on an implicit form of
the Material Point Method developed by Moresi et al. [1].
Keywords: director theory, Cosserat theory, grain ﬂow, Lagrangian
integration points

1

Introduction

The mechanics of granular materials has intrigued physicists and engineers for
well over two centuries. At low strain rates, particulates such as sand or cereals
behave like solids, but at high strain rates, the behaviour is ﬂuid or gas like.
Computer simulations and speciﬁcally discrete element simulations [2] are
an important tool for exploring the fundamental behaviours of granular ﬂows,
ﬂow regimes, phase transitions, ﬂuctuations etc. However computational requirements set strong limitations to the size of discrete element models. The much
simpler and (where applicable) much more eﬃcient continuum models for granular ﬂows are valid when the typical grain size is much smaller than characteristic
structural dimensions e.g. the outlet size in silo ﬂows. Cosserat continuum theory [3] considers some of the salient features of the discrete microstructure (e.g.
grain size, relative rotation between microstructure and the continuum) within
the framework of a continuum theory. Such a theory ﬁts between detailed discrete theories and the usual continuum theory.
The Cosserat- or micropolar theory may be employed for a variety of applications involving the need to describe the heterogenous microstructure of the
material such as granular materials [4], layered materials [5] or crystals [6] within
the framework of a continuum theory.
P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2659, pp. 837–844, 2003.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

838

F. Dufour, H. M¨
uhlhaus, and L. Moresi

This class of theories can be implemented in the context of a classical ﬁnite
element method (FEM). However, very large deformations are sometimes diﬃcult to handle elegantly within the FEM because mesh distortion and remeshing
can quickly present severe diﬃculties. The version of the Material Point Method
(MPM, [7] and [8]) applied here combines the versatility of the standard FEM
with the geometrical ﬂexibility of pure particle schemes such as the Smooth
Particle Hydrodynanmics (SPH, [9]).
In MPM Lagrangian integration points move through a spatially ﬁxed Eulerian mesh. MPM is inspired by particle-in-cell (PIC) ﬁnite diﬀerence methods,
originally designed for ﬂuid mechanics, in which ﬂuid velocities are solved on
the mesh, and material strains and material history variables are recorded by
Lagrangian particles. These particles serve as integration points for the stiﬀness matrix and force vectors. The MPM method applied here is implicit [1] as
opposed to the explicit form proposed by Sulsky et al. [10].
We show simple simulations to illustrate the performance of the numerical
scheme and the constitutive theory.

2

Mathematical Formulation

2.1

Cosserat Deformation Measures

We assign a local rigid cross to every material point (x1 , x2 , x3 ) of the body
in a Cartesian coordinate system (X1 , X2 , X3 ). During deformation, the rigid
crosses rotate at a rate ωic about their axis i and are translated according to
the conventional linear velocity vector u. The angular velocity ωic is considered
to be independent of u and diﬀers from the angular velocity of an inﬁnitesimal
volume element of the continuum ωi ,
ωi = −

1
2

ijk Wjk

(1)

where

1
(2)
(uj,k − uk,j )
2
In (1) ijk designates the permutation symbol, and in (2) (.),k ≡ ∂(.)/∂xk are
partial derivatives.
In the classical theory the stretching tensor is given by:
Wjk =

Dij =

1
(ui,j + uj,i )
2

(3)

In the Cosserat theory, as a rotational parameter has been added, in addition to
the classical strain rate tensor D, there is an additional rate measure,
ωirel = ωi − ωic

(4)

which represents the relative angular velocity between the material element and
the associated rigid coordinate cross. In this case, the rate of the deformation

Texture Alignment in Simple Shear

839

tensor can be expressed by the rate of the distortion tensor, γ,

where

γij = ui,j − Wijc

(5)

Wijc = −

(6)

c
kij ωk

and by the tensor representing the measure of relative angular velocity between
the neighbouring rigid crosses,
c
κij = ωi,j

(7)

The conventional strain rate tensor can be expressed as the symmetrical part of
the rate of the distortion tensor,
1
(γij + γji )
2

Dij =

(8)

and the relative angular velocity as the antisymmetrical part
Wijrel =

1
(γij − γji )
2

(9)

We have 2 deformation rate measures i.e. γ and κ. Both measures are objective.
In a rotating observer frame γ and κ are obtained as QγQT and QκQT where
QQT = 1 describes the rotation of the moving -with respect to the ﬁxed-observer
frame.
2.2

Constitutive Relationships for Granular Materials

In a 2D conventional continuum an isotropic material is characterised by a bulk
viscosity B and a shear viscosity η, for a Cosserat continuum we also have a
Cosserat shear viscosity η c and a bending viscosity M . The constitutive relation
for a generalised Newtonian ﬂuid can be written in the usual pseudo-vector form:
σ = ΛD

(10)

where the stress vector components are:
σ T = {σxx , σyy , σxy , σyx , µzx , µzy }

(11)

the deformation vector components are:
DT = {γxx , γyy , γxy , γyx , κzx , κzy }
and the matrix Λ is expressed as:

B+η B−η




B+η











symm.

0
0
0
0
η + ηc η − ηc
η + ηc

0
0
0
0
M

0
0
0
0
0
M

(12)
















(13)

840

F. Dufour, H. M¨
uhlhaus, and L. Moresi

For benchmarking purposes, we use the simplest possible realisation of a granular, viscous medium. In the granular-elasticity model of Choi and M¨
uhlhaus [11]
we replace the contact stiﬀnesses Kn and Km and relative displacements by contact dashpots ηn and ηm and relative velocities and relative rotation rates and
obtain the relationships
1−n
k(ηn + ηm )
4π
1−n
ηc =
kηm
2π
1−n
kηn
B=
2π
c 2
M = 2η R
η=

2.3

(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)

Director Theory

The salient mechanical feature of layered geomaterials is the existence of a characteristic orientation given by the normal vector ﬁeld ni (xk , t) of the layer planes,
where (x1 , x2 , x3 ) are Cartesian coordinates, and t is the time. We assume linear
viscous behaviour and designate with η the normal viscosity and ηs the shear
viscosity in the layer planes normal to ni . The orientation of the normal vector, or director as it is sometimes called in the literature on oriented materials,
changes with deformation. Using a standard result of continuum mechanics, the
evolution of the director of the layers is described by
n˙ i = Wijn nj where Wijn = Wij − (Dki λkj − Dkj λki )
and λij = ni nj

(18)

where L = D + W is the velocity gradient, D is the stretching and W is the
spin. The superscript n distinguishes the spin W n of the director N from the
spin W of an inﬁnitesimal volume element dV of the continuum.
2.4

Speciﬁc Viscous Relationships

We consider layered materials. The layering may be in the form of an alternating
sequence of hard and soft materials or in the form of a superposition of layers of
equal width of one and the same material, which are weakly bonded along the
interface. In the following simple model for a layered viscous material we correct
the isotropic part 2ηDij of the model by means of the tensor Λ to consider the
mechanical eﬀect of the layering; thus
σij = 2ηDij − 2(η − ηs )Λijlm Dlm − pδij

(19)

where p is the pressure, D designates the deviator of D (i.e. D = D − tr(D)),
and
Λijkl =

1
(ni nk δlj + nj nk δil + ni nl δkj + nj nl δik ) − 2ni nj nk nl
2

(20)

Texture Alignment in Simple Shear

3
3.1

841

Applications
Silo Discharge

We now consider the discharge of a Cosserat material from a model silo. In this
case we are interested in the inﬂuence of the internal length parameter on the
discharge velocity of a Cosserat ﬂuid as described by (10–13)
Figure 1 shows the geometry of the model as well as diﬀerent snapshots along
the computations. Heavy lines are free-slip boundaries. Flow is only due to the
downward gravity ﬁeld. The grid drawn on the ﬂowing material is a “dye” to
record deformation – it does not aﬀect the material properties. Corridors along
the edges provide space where upward ﬂow of the passive background material
can take place to equilibrate the pressure due to the downward ﬂow of the
Cosserat viscous material. The mechanical characteristics of each material are
summarized in Fig. 2.
In Fig. 3 we plot the volume ﬂowing out the reservoir versus time and for
diﬀerent values of the ratio α = R/a where a is the silo aperture. The ﬂow rate
is almost identical for all values of α (Fig. 3d and 3e) larger than the aperture
(1.0) which corresponds, in the elastic case, to a situation in which no ﬂow can
occur. Note that in purely viscous materials static equilibrium states do not
exist, ensuring that stable arches do not form. For 0 ≤ α ≤ 1.0, the smaller the
internal length the faster the outﬂow. As for the elastic case the internal length
provides a bending stiﬀness which slows down the ﬂow.

Fig. 1. Snapshots of the model. (a) Initial conditions, (b) t = 4.75 10−4 sec., (c)
t = 1.42 10−3 sec., (d) t = 2.85 10−3 sec. and (e) t = 3.8 10−3 sec.

Internal length
Shear viscosity
Bulk viscosity
Density

Granular material Background
R
0
1000
1
+∞
+∞
106
0

Fig. 2. Constant values.

842

F. Dufour, H. M¨
uhlhaus, and L. Moresi

0.8

Outflow volume (m3)

(a)

(b) (c)
(d)

0.6

(e)

0.4

0.2

0
0

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.1

Time (sec.)

Fig. 3. Outgoing volume for (a) α=0, (b) α=1/3, (c) α=2/3, (d) α=5/3 and (e) α=10/3

3.2

Self-Alignment

In this example the ﬂow of anisotropic particles (pencil-shaped) is modelled in
an inﬁnite shearlayer. The normal viscosity η is set to 1000 Pa.s and the shear
viscosity ηs to 500 Pa.s. Each particle has an internal length R of 0.2 m. We
specify periodic boundary conditions along the vertical lines to model the inﬁnite
dimension in the shear direction. Along the horizontal lines the cosserat rotation
and the normal velocity are set to zero and we specify a shear stress of 104 Pa
on top and −104 Pa at the bottom.
Initially (Fig. 4a), a random director orientation between − π2 and π2 is set to
each particle. Thus the initial behaviour is isotropic. Particles along the central
vertical line are ”dyed” to track the material motion through time (Fig. 4). To
each conﬁguration (a), (b) and (c) corresponds a plot (a’), (b’) and (c’) of the
isovalues of nx . On the ﬁrst proﬁle (Fig. 4a’), we get a unique isovalue 0.64
which corresponds to average value of the cosinus of the orientation angle of the
director.
While the shear stress is applied, grains are reorientated parallely to the
shear direction (Fig. 4b’). Once they reach the weakest orientation (nx = 0),
they remain in that position. As shown on plot 4c’, the material is now strongly
anisotropic due to the preferential orientation of interpolation points.

4

Conclusions

The Cosserat model shows the internal length eﬀect on ﬂow velocity. The
Cosserat theory coupled with the director theory in the shear model can explain qualitatively the anisotropy induced during strong shearing, for example
in a silo discharge of non-spherical grains.

Texture Alignment in Simple Shear

(a)

(b)

(c)

(a')

(b')

(c')

843

Fig. 4. (a) Initial conditions with random particle orientation, (b) beginning of the
anisotropic behaviour and (c) the material is oriented. Plots (a’), (b’) and (c’) are the
isovalues of the director orientation respectively corresponding to conﬁguration (a), (b)
and (c)

References
1. L. Moresi, F. Dufour, and H.-B. M¨
uhlhaus. A lagrangian integration point ﬁnite element method for large deformation modeling of viscoelastic geomaterials. Journal
of Computational Physics, In press, 2002.
2. H. Sakaguchi and H.-B. M¨
uhlhaus. Mesh free modelling of failure and localization
in brittle materials. In Deformation and Progressive Failure in Geomechanics,
pages 15–21. Pergamon, 1997.
3. E. Cosserat and F. Cosserat. Th´eorie des corps d´
eformables. Hermann, Paris,
1909.
4. H.-B. M¨
uhlhaus, R. de Borst, and E.C. Aifantis. Constitutive models and numerical
analysis for inelastic materials with microstrucutre. In Booker Eds. Beer and
Carter, editors, Computer Methods and Advances in Geomechanics, pages 377–
385, Rotterdam, 1991. Balkema.
5. D.P. Adhikary, H.-B. M¨
uhlhaus, and A.V. Dyskin. Modeling the large deformations in stratiﬁed media-the cosserat continuum approach. Mechanics of CohesiveFrictional Materials, 4:195–213, 1999.
6. S. Forrest, G. Cailletaud, and R. Sievert. A cosserat theory for elastoviscoplastic
single crytals at ﬁnite deformation. Archives of Mechanics, 49(4):705–736, 1997.
7. L. Moresi, H.-B. M¨
uhlhaus, and F. Dufour. Particle-in-cell solutions for creeping
viscous ﬂows with internal interfaces. In H.-B. M¨
uhlhaus, A. Dyskin, and E. Pasternak, editors, In Bifurcation and Localization in Soils and Rocks, pages 345–353,
Rotterdam, 2001. Balkema.
8. L. Moresi, H.-B. M¨
uhlhaus, and F. Dufour. Viscoelastic formulation for modelling
of plate tectonics. In H.-B. M¨
uhlhaus, A. Dyskin, and E. Pasternak, editors, In
Bifurcation and Localization in Soils and Rocks, pages 337–343, Rotterdam, 2001.
Balkema.

844

F. Dufour, H. M¨
uhlhaus, and L. Moresi

9. J.J. Monaghan. Smoothed particle hydrodynamics. Annual Review of Astronomy
and Astrophysics, 30:543–574, 1992.
10. D. Sulsky, Z. Chen, and H.L. Schreyer. A particle method for history-dependent
materials. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 118:179–196,
1994.
11. S.K. Choi and H.-B. M¨
uhlhaus. Distinct elements vs Cosserat theory: A comparison
for the case of an inﬁnite shearlayer, pages 315–319. Eds. Beer, Booker and Carter,
1991.

