Stock Trading System: Framework for
Development and Evaluation of Stock Trading
Strategies
2
ˇ
Jovita Nenortait˙e1 and Alminas Civilis
1

Vilnius University, Kaunas Faculty of Humanities, Department of Computer
Science, Muitines 8, 44280 Kaunas, Lithuania
2
Vilnius University, The Faculty of Mathematics and Informatics,
Naugarduko 24, 03225 Vilnius, Lithuania

Abstract. Intelligent stock trading models are becoming valuable advisors in stock markets. While developing such models a big importance is
given to its evaluation and comparison with other working models. The
paper introduces trading system for stock markets, which is adesigned
as a framework for development and evaluation of intelligent decision–
making models.

1

Introduction

There is a number of existing stock trading systems, which allow users to make
technical and fundamental analysis of stock markets’ changes, to analyze the
historical ﬂuctuations of stocks or options prices etc. Systems like WinnerStockPicks [8], NasTradingSystem [3], TradingForProﬁts [6] generate trading signals
and allow the users to make an analysis of behavior of stock market through
the application of technical analysis. Trading system UltraTradingSystem [7] for
generating of trading signals is using a balanced approach of technical analysis
and news research. All these systems miss an intelligent mechanism for decision–
making and do not allow to integrate other analytical tools and to make comparison of trading results, which were achieved by using diﬀerent trading models
and strategies. Many commercial software packages for technical analysis oﬀer
both a comprehensive programming language, and a simulation mode, where
the performance can be computed. However, most available products do not
take this very seriously, and real trading simulation with a multi–stock portfolio
is seldom possible [2].
The realization of the proposed real time trading system was developed using
MATLAB. The system allows to download real time data, develop diﬀerent
intelligent trading models, compare trading results and make a detailed analysis
of the trading results.
The paper is organized as follows: ﬁrst sections describes the system and introduces its architecture, the second section is focused on the analysis of trading
system applications for the analysis of diﬀerent strategies. This section presents
two trading strategies and discusses the analysis possibilities of the results.
Finally the conclusions and future work is given.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part I, LNCS 3991, pp. 1034–1037, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

Stock Trading System

2

1035

Stock Trading System

The development of trading system was instigated by several reasons:
– The need of framework for evaluation of stock trading algorithms and strategies.
– The need of real data management for the analysis of trading algorithms.
– The need to increase speed of computations.
The architecture of the developed trading system is presented in Fig. 1.

External Data Source

Trade Strategies
Strategy 1

Yahoo
Finance
Portal

Req . data
description

Strategy N
Recommend

...

Req . data
description

Framework

Strategy 1

DB

Data presentation
and analysis control

Fig. 1. Trading System Architecture

strategy
parameters

stock data,
profit

recommendations
(stock id, amount )

get portfolio strategy
parameters

generate
recommendations

Strategy N get portfolio strategy

generate
recommendations

...
Data a cquisition
control

perform trades
[finish]

list of selected
portfolios
Trade control

.csv

retrieve requested
stock data

[start]

Recommend

parameters

Fig. 2. Trading Scenario

Architecturally the system is divided into three parts: external data source
and two internal parts — framework and trading strategies. External data source
is only used to retrieve real time or historical stock data. The most important
part of the system is the framework. The main tasks of the framework are: to
download data from external data source; to preprocess downloaded data and
store it in the database; to prepare data according to settings of the trading
strategies; to perform trades for the created portfolios; to provide graphical user
interface for the above mentioned controls; to provide means for data analysis.
Based on a created portfolio and stock returns, data presentation and analysis
control allows to do technical analysis of the results. One of the main requirements for the developed framework was to provide common interfaces for trading
strategies and in this way to ensure easy integration of new trading strategies.
Each trading strategy has to be implemented according to the given template.
From an perspective of object oriented paradigm, each trading strategy is an
object with two main methods. One provides information about required data
quantity for given strategy and the other performs trades.
After the trade action is started the system scenario could be described in
the following steps(see Fig. 2): (1) user is asked to enter interval dates for sequential historical trades or trades are started for the current day; (2) system
for all selected portfolios determines trading strategies and asks each strategy
to issue date requests; (3) system checks for data in the database (at this moment system can inform the user about missing data and can ask to retrieve
data from external data source); (4) strategy performs calculations and returns
recommendations; (5) after the recommendations are retrieved from strategies
the framework performs trades and updates the database.

1036

ˇ
J. Nenortait˙e and A. Civilis

For the possibility to tune the analyzed strategy, framework allows for each
strategy to change strategy settings. This is made through strategy options window, which is called from the main window using ’strategy options’ button. This
feature allows to use several portfolios with the same strategy but with diﬀerent
strategy parameters, as all parameters are referenced to strategy and portfolio. This allows to analyze the importance of diﬀerent strategy parameters and
results.

3

Trading System Application for Analysis of Diﬀerent
Strategies

For the analysis of the proposed trading system and its possibilities two diﬀerent
trading models were selected: intelligent decision–making model [5] and model
of moving averages [1]. A detail presentation and evaluation of the intelligent
decision–making model for stock markets are introduced in our previous works
[4], [5]. The intelligent decision–making model combines the application of Artiﬁcial Neural Networks(ANN) and Particle Swarm Optimization(PSO) algorithm.
The second model is a well known moving averages method.
There were created two portfolios with identical coincidental parameters. For
the analysis of the models there were taken 130 stocks from SP500 index group
and time period from 01-Jan-2000 to 01-Mar-2000. The main window of introduced trading system is presented in Fig. 3.

Fig. 3. Trading Systems Main Window

Figure 3 presents trading results of two portfolios. The descriptions of the
selected portfolio are shown on the right side of the screen. Each portfolio is
described by its name, investment strategy, trade stock type (stocks or indexes),
trade start and last dates, and investment amount. The user can select what
strategy options he/she wants to use. For intelligent decision–making model user
can select the periodicity of trading, how many stocks should be recommended
for the investment, size of the sliding window, number of deltas and the size of

Stock Trading System

1037

population (nubmer of ANNs). For the analysis of the results there is possibility
to draw the graphs which allow to make detailed analysis on training of ANNs;
selection of stocks or ANN which have shown the best performance. for the
method of moving average the user is able to select the periodicity of trading,
number of recommended stocks and size of period which is used for moving
average calculation.
Trading results of each portfolio can be compared to the results of any other
selected portfolio. For example, comparison shown in the Fig. 3, shows that the
trading using intelligent decision–making model has much better performance for
the selected time period. It is important to mention, that for any implemented
trading strategy there is a possibility to create many portfolios with diﬀerent
strategy parameters. In that case, the presented stock trading system makes the
evaluation of the trading strategies easy and fast.

4

Conclusions and Future Works

Because of the limited space available, this paper is merely an introduction to the
architecture and framework provided by stock trading system. It was decided to
emphasize on presentation of the general idea. The paper gives an illustration and
explains the architecture and scenario of stock trading system. The main task of
this paper was to show that the presented stock trading system is a powerful tool
for development and tuning of intelligent decision–making models. The beneﬁts
of trading system were shown through the implementation of two models. It
was shown, that new trading models can be easily integrated, extended, and
evaluated with diﬀerent parameters for the identical data sets.

References
1. LeBaron B.: Do Moving Average Trading Rule Results Imply Nonlinearities in Foreign Exchange Markets?. Social Science Research, 1992, 1–43.
2. Hellstrom Th.: ASTA - a Tool for Development of Stock Prediction Algorithms.
Theory of Stochastic Processe, 5(21), 1999, 22-32.
3. NASTradingSystem (Swing Trading System). http://www.nastradingsystem.com/
(Accessed 15th of December 2005)
4. Nenortaite J., Simutis R.: Adapting Particle Swarm Optimization to Stock Markets. Intelligent Systems Design and Applications. 5th International Conference on
Intelligent Systems Design and Application (IEEE), 2005, 520–525.
5. Nenortaite J., Simutis R.: Stocks’ Trading System Based on the Particle Swarm
Optimization Algorithm. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 3039, 2004, 843-850.
6. Trading for Proﬁts. http://www.tradingforproﬁts.com/ (Accessed 15th of December
2005)
7. UltraTradingSystem.com http://www.ultratradingsystem.com/ (Accessed 15th of
December 2005)
8. WinnerStockPicks.com (Daily Trading System) http://www.winnerstockpicks.com/
(Accessed 15th of December 2005)

