Evolutionary Perspectives on Protein
Thermodynamics
Richard A. Goldstein
Division of Mathematical Biology, National Institute for Medical Research, Mill Hill,
London, NW7 1AA, UK
richard.goldstein@nimr.mrc.ac.uk

Abstract. While modern evolutionary theory has emphasized the role
of neutral evolution, protein biochemistry and biophysics has interpreted
the properties of proteins as largely resulting from adaptive evolution. We
demonstrate that a number of these properties can be seen as emerging
from neutral evolution acting on sequence entropy, that is, the fact that
larger numbers of viable sequences have these properties. In this paper,
we use a computational model of populations of evolving lattice proteins
to describe how the observed marginal stability of proteins as well as
their robustness to mutations can result from neutral evolution.

1

Introduction

Imagine a trained physicist from another world, who had never seen a computer before, was given one to analyze. She could disassemble it, making notes
regarding the copper wires, the small chips of silicon with particularly-placed
impurities, the ferro-magnetic material on a plastic substrate, etc. At some level,
however, we would feel that she had somehow missed the essence of the computer,
that understanding such an instrument would require a functional explanation
including the role and purpose of the memory, cpu, and storage devices. This
functional explanation is possible only because the computer has gone through
a design process which has determined an appropriate form for its intended function. Conversely, an understanding of the functioning of the computer requires
knowledge of the properties of doped semiconductors and ferro-magnetic materials, as these properties determined the constraints and opportunities given to
the computer designer.
Similarly, an understanding of organisms requires combining a mechanistic
description (the physico-chemical properties of organs, cells, proteins, DNA,
membranes) with a functional description (the role and “purpose” of the heart,
nucleus, histone, enzyme). As in the computer example, a purely mechanistic
description would miss the essence of the biological subsystems by neglecting
their functional roles, while the functional aspects cannot be understood independently of the constraints and opportunities presented by the mechanistic
properties. This duality is again based on history, in this case the process of biological evolution. As in the computer example, evolution has been able to take
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3039, pp. 718–727, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

Evolutionary Perspectives on Protein Thermodynamics

719

advantage of the physico-chemical properties of the evolving systems, investing
the resulting components with functional roles and purposes. In this instance,
however, “design” would not be the appropriate term. Rather we must consider
the evolutionary context; by analyzing biological systems in this context, we can
work to unify these separate perspectives and understand how evolution utilizes,
adopts, and changes the properties of the evolving elements while being constrained by these properties. This particular perspective leads us directly into the
heart of what makes biological systems diﬀerent from non-biological systems,
why we can talk about the “purpose” of a lung in a way we cannot talk about
the purpose of the electrons in an atom of carbon.
In this paper I focus on the properties of proteins and how they can be understood in an evolutionary context. One of the more interesting aspects of evolution
is the separation between genotype and phenotype, between the molecules that
are evolving (generally DNA) and the resulting traits that are acted on by evolutionary selection. Proteins can be seen as representing one of the lowest, simplest
levels of phenotype, providing an important model for the evolution of higher
organizational forms. Proteins are also interesting and important on their own.
Various processes that proteins perform, such as folding, are of great theoretical
interest – it is diﬃcult to construct theoretical models of protein folding that
can explain how such an enormous search problem is solved so quickly. Proteins
are also involved in almost all functions in a living system, including respiration,
signalling, replication, locomotion, transportation, etc., and are the basis of understanding these processes at a mechanistic and atomistic level. Proteins are
the most common targets of pharmaceutical intervention and are thus intrinsically important for biomedical research. In addition, much work is proceeding
trying to understand how to engineer proteins with modiﬁed or new properties
and functions.
Evolution is a complicated procedure, particularly since exceptions to any
general principle can lead to an attractive evolutionary niche. One of the more
important axes for various models involves the distinction between adaptation
and neutral evolution. It is clear that adaptation has had an important role in
evolution, in making humans and other biological systems the way that they are.
There are, in particular, episodes of adaptive evolution where change is clearly
favoured. Some systems, such as pathogens avoiding a host immune response,
are likely often undergoing adaptionist evolution. It is also clear that much, if
not most, of molecular evolution is neutral in nature, that the vast majority
of mutations that occur are either negative, slightly deleterious, or neutral, and
that the chance acceptance of neutral or slightly deleterious mutations may often
greatly exceed the smaller number of positive changes that might occur. Since the
rise of the neutral theory in the late 1960s ([1,2]) much of evolutionary theory has
been based on the emphasis of neutral evolution. In contrast, when confronted by
the almost miraculous molecular properties of living systems, biochemists have
generally thought in terms of adaptation and seen their characteristic traits
as having arisen from the “survival of the ﬁttest”. Much less work has been
performed analyzing speciﬁc proteins from a neutralist perspective.

720

R.A. Goldstein

Such a neutralist perspective is, however, important in understanding proteins for a number of reasons. Often it is possible to show that neutralism is
suﬃcient to explain the observed properties. Because neutral evolution is always
occurring, neutrality represents, when possible, the most parsimonious explanation. For this reason, adaptation is a reasonable explanation only when neutral
evolution can be eliminated. Conversely, attempts to explain features based on
neutral evolution can highlight when neutrality is not an adequate explanation,
where an adaptive mechanism might be required. In addition, neutral evolution
protects us against the so-called “Panglossian Paradigm” [3] where the current
role of a feature is used to explain how and why the feature emerged in the way
that Pangloss in Voltaire’s Candide explains how we ended up with noses in
order to support spectacles and legs in order to ﬁt into trousers. Features that
evolved based on one dynamic may end up being used for a completely diﬀerent
function. Finally, neutralist perspectives make us remember that evolution is
decidedly not an optimization process. There are well-deﬁned stochastic equations regarding the origin, ﬁxation, and elimination of genetic variation, involving
the ﬁxation of deleterious mutations as well as the elimination of favourable
mutations. Simplistic images that have been imposed on evolution, such as the
afore-mentioned “survival of the ﬁttest”, may possibly represent more the projection of our psychological need to imagine ourselves at some peak of perfection
rather than an inherent characteristic of the evolutionary process.
Another important aspect of the evolutionary process is the fact that evolution occurs in ﬁnite populations. The stochastic nature of the process results
directly from this aspect. It also is important in elimination and ﬁxation, as
subpopulations that fall from one to zero can never recover. The stochastic nature of the evolutionary process does not mean that we cannot come up with
general principles. Just as the thermodynamic notions of pressure, temperature,
and heat represent the random motions of a large ensemble of particles, so we
can generate principles based on the dynamics of populations. One important
distinction, however, is the size of the populations. There are no populations
close to Avogadro’s number. For this reason the stochastic element can never be
completely averaged away, and we are often left with tendencies and probabilities
rather than ﬁxed rules and laws.
The complicated nature of biomolecular evolution involving speciﬁcs of protein structure, function, thermodynamics, as well as population and evolutionary
dynamics, makes this area attractive for theoretical simulations. The simulations, however, have to make numerous approximations and simpliﬁcations. In
a number of publications we have described a simpliﬁed, lattice protein model
which, combined with simulations of population evolution, have provided some
interesting perspectives on why proteins are the way that they are. In this paper,
we summarize and advance these perspectives, focusing on the thermodynamic
and mutational properties of observed proteins including making connection with
relevant experiments.

Evolutionary Perspectives on Protein Thermodynamics

721

Fig. 1. Model of lattice protein

2
2.1

Models
Modelling the Evolving Proteins

The model of proteins is shown in Fig. 1. Proteins are represented as 16-monomer
polypeptides forming a self-avoiding walk on a 5 × 5 square lattice. Each amino
acid occupies exactly one lattice point. There are exactly 1081 possible conformations neglecting structures related by rotation, reﬂection, or inversion. While
a two-dimensional lattice is highly inappropriate for folding simulations – the
space of possible conformations is non-ergodic [4] – such a model allows us to
have a reasonable ratio of buried to exposed residues with a moderately-sized
protein.
The energy E(S, C) of a given sequence S in any particular conformation C
is a pairwise contact energy equal to
E(S, C) =

γ(Ai , Aj )ui,j

(1)

<i,j>

where γ(Ai , Aj ) is the interaction energy between the amino acid at locations i
and j in the sequence (such as between the serine and threonine in the upperleft corner of the protein in Fig. 1) and ui,j is equal to 1 if residues i and j
are in contact (that is, are not covalently connected but are on neighbouring
lattice points) and zero otherwise. The values of γ(Ai , Aj ) are taken from the
contact energies derived by Miyazawa and Jernigan based on a statistical analysis

722

R.A. Goldstein

of the available protein database [5]. Because of the nature of the derivation,
interactions with solvent, including entropic terms, are explicitly included in the
contact energies.
We can assume that the conformation of lowest energy is the native-state
Cns , and compute the probability that a protein at equilibrium would be in this
state
Pns =

exp(E(S, Cns /kT )
C exp(E(S, C)/kT )

(2)

which allows us to compute ∆Gfolding
∆Gfolding = −kT log

2.2

Pns
1 − Pns

(3)

Modelling Population Evolution

As mentioned before, the population dynamics are essential to any form of evolutionary simulation. In general, we start with a given population of protein
sequences, initially identical. For each sequence we calculate the various thermodynamic quantities described above. We then choose a given number of sequence
locations, chosen from an appropriate Poisson distribution, to change to another
random amino acid. The thermodynamic quantities for the resulting sequences are again calculated. We then apply truncation selection where we decide
on which sequences are to be considered viable based on whatever criteria we
choose. Non-viable sequences are eliminated from the population, and the remaining sequences are chosen at random, with replacement, to form the next
generation with the same population size.

3
3.1

Results
Protein Thermostability

It has been long observed that proteins are marginally stable with typical stabilities (-∆Gfolding ) of approximately 10 kcal/mol, equal to a few hydrogen bonds.
Two diﬀerent classes of theories have been advanced for why this occurs, both
adaptionist in nature. The ﬁrst theory is that there is a ﬁtness advantage to
marginal stability. This might be for a number of diﬀerent reasons. Protein functionality might require ﬂexibility, which might be more common in marginallystable proteins [6,7]. Marginal stability would weaken binding with ligands by
requiring an entropy loss upon binding. This might make it easier to modulate
binding aﬃnities through mutation or post-translational modiﬁcation [8,9,10].
Finally, there may be advantages to marginal stability in ensuring suﬃciently
rapid protein degradation. The second class of explanation revolves around the
need for the protein to fulﬁl multiple selective criteria including functionality,
stability, rigidity, etc. There would naturally be trade-oﬀs in these criteria, so

Evolutionary Perspectives on Protein Thermodynamics

723

that proteins can optimize stability given the constraints imposed by the other
types of selective pressure.
Given the above discussion, it becomes important to investigate whether the
observed marginal stability in proteins can result from neutral evolution. We
modelled the population dynamics of 3000 sequences, allowing the dynamics to
equilibrate for 30,000 generations and gathering data for an additional 30,000
generations [11]. At each generation, 0.2% of the sequences were mutated to an
alternative residue. Proteins were considered viable if they were “adequately”
stable, that is, with ∆Gfolding less than some “critical” ∆Gcrit . The result of
these simulations were populations of proteins that were marginally stable, with
∆Gfolding ≈ ∆Gcrit .
These results can be made intuitive if we consider the space of all possible
sequences. This space is high-dimensional (as many dimensions as the length of
the sequence) but extremely sparse (only 20 points along each dimension). The
vast bulk of this space consists of proteins that would not fold nor be stable
– unviable sequences in our model. There are regions in this space, characterized as hyperspheres, which contains sequences that are viable, that is, will fold
into a stable, functional protein. It is a characteristic of high-dimensional spaces
that the volume of objects in that space will be dominated by the periphery of
that object. (99.95% of the volume of a 150-dimensional sphere is in the outermost 5%.) If the volume of sequence space consists of foldable, stable sequences,
while the exterior of the volume consists of unfoldable, unstable sequences, the
vast majority of the sequences in this volume will be marginally foldable and
marginally stable, purely as a result of the high dimensionality. This will result whenever a) the objects in the space are roughly convex, and b) the ﬁtness
criteria are smoothly-varying in the space. If the vast majority of protein sequences are marginally stable, there is no problem explaining the observed marginal
stability without resorting to adaptionist arguments, either selective pressure
for marginal stability or optimization given constraints. Neutral evolution will
be strongly aﬀected by “sequence entropy”, the number of sequences consistent
with a given property. Sequence entropy will strongly drive protein sequences
towards marginal stability.
What of the observation that modifying proteins to increase their thermostability sometimes results in decreased function [12,13,14,15]? Firstly, this is not
necessarily always the case [16]. Secondly, if proteins evolve functionality in the
context of a natural tendency towards marginal stability, it is not surprising to
ﬁnd mechanisms for functionality that are dependent upon, or at least consistent with, marginal stability. Taverna and Goldstein modelled this behaviour
by considering competitive dynamics between three sets of lattice protein models, each with a diﬀerent mechanism of action [11]. While the exact mechanism
was unspeciﬁed, one set was modelled as requiring marginal stability, another set
requiring moderate stability, while the third required high stability. A member
of the ﬁrst set in a marginally-stable protein had exactly the same ﬁtness as a
member of the second set in a moderately-stable form, which had exactly the
same ﬁtness as a member of the third set that was highly stable. Conversely,

724

R.A. Goldstein

any member of the ﬁrst set that was not marginally stable, any member of the
second set that was not moderately stable, or any member of the third set with
other than high stability, was considered non-viable and was eliminated during
the truncation selection. After separate equilibration, the three populations were
allowed to compete against each other. In 24 out of the 25 runs, the mechanism
consistent with marginal stability became the only form in the population, with
the two other mechanisms being completely eliminated. (One run resulted in the
domination of the mechanism requiring moderate stability, emphasizing the stochastic nature of the evolutionary process.) With the absolute equivalent ﬁtness
of these three populations, the entropic forces again combined with neutral evolution to result in proteins that required marginal stability. In the non-intuitive
causality of evolution, marginal stability became required for proteins because
they were marginally stable!
This is maybe less non-intuitive than it appears. Globular proteins generally
require aqueous environments in order to fold and be stable and functional. One
could argue that cells are generally aqueous because this environment is required for the globular proteins. This would correspond to the idea that proteins
are marginally stable because this is required for protein function. In reality,
the aqueous environment came ﬁrst, and proteins evolved to function in this
milieu. Proteins require aqueous environments to function because they evolved
in aqueous environments and adapted themselves to this context. The concept
that proteins adapted mechanism consistent to their context, a marginal stability induced by neutral evolution acting through sequence entropy, is not any
more surprising.
This is not to say that marginal stability does not result from adaptation,
only that the assumption of adaptation is not required to explain the observation. Thus neutral evolution is the most parsimonious explanation, and the
observation of marginal stability does not provide any evidence for any selective
pressure for marginal stability.
3.2

Proteins and Evolutionary Robustness

Another way to consider the role of sequence entropy is to consider the role of
robustness in evolution. Fitness can be deﬁned as the average expected number
of viable oﬀspring produced. Generally these oﬀspring will be mutated forms of
the parent, and so the ﬁtness of an individual depends upon the ﬁtness of the
neighbouring genomes (sequences) in the genome (sequence) space. If mutations
are more likely to lead to non-viable oﬀspring, this reduces the ﬁtness of the
parent. If a protein depends upon being one of the few sequences with high
stability, many more mutants will have reduced stability and thus would be
non-viable. Conversely, if a protein has a mechanism consistent with marginal
stability, the probability that a mutant would have marginal stability is much
higher, ergo a higher ﬁtness.
This robustness to mutations can be seen directly, in what has been described as “the survival of the ﬂattest” [17]. It can be observed in the simulation

Evolutionary Perspectives on Protein Thermodynamics

725

of the population evolution of lattice proteins, as described above. We can consider the results of the population evolution, and observe the consequence of
random mutations. Lattice proteins that evolve based on truncation selection
(∆Gfolding < ∆Gcrit ) are surprisingly robust to mutations, so that, on average,
about half the protein sequences do not have reduced stability upon a random
mutation – even when multiple residues are changed [18]. Sequences chosen at
random, also subject to the same truncation selection, have almost no probability that a mutation would not be destabilizing. We can have two sequences
with the same initial stability, same structure, same observed properties, one
derived from population evolution, the other from being selected at random, yet
the robustness to mutation is extremely diﬀerent. In fact, the higher the stability requirement (corresponding to a more-negative ∆Gcrit ), the more likely a
mutation will have negligible eﬀect on the stability. Of all of the viable protein
sequences, population evolution selects those networks of sequences that have the
fewest non-viable neighbours. This perceived robustness of proteins to substitutions has been observed experimentally. For instance, Reddy et al. catalogued a
wide range of mutations, observing that approximately 25% actually increased
thermal stability [19].

4

Conclusion

Biochemists and molecular biologists have tended to imagine evolution as a constant march to higher and higher ﬁtness levels, while modern evolutionary theory
has increasingly emphasized randomness and neutral evolution. When confronted by a characteristic property of living systems, the response of biochemists
has been to see the “blind watchmaker” at work, and to inquire how this property increases the ﬁtness of the organisms. In reality, many of these properties
can be explained by the process of neutral evolution acting on sequence entropy,
taking advantage of the fact that many more sequences have some properties
rather than others. In previous work, we have demonstrated how this can result
in some structures much more common than others [20,21] (also see [22,23,24]),
in proteins that fold into the state of lowest free energy [25], and in work described here, proteins that are marginally stable [11,26] and naturally robust to site
mutations [18].
There are direct consequences of this perspective. For instance, the observed
robustness of proteins is interpreted as explaining that the mapping of sequence
to structure is rather robust and plastic. The alternative viewpoint provided
here is that proteins have evolved to be robust to the particular experiments
that are being performed. In general, the widespread attempts to understand the
relationship between a protein’s sequence and its resultant properties through
site mutagenesis must take into the fact that proteins have evolved so that
these mutations are less likely to change fundamental and important properties.
Proteins have, to some extent, prepared for these changes. Finally, robustness
is given as evidence why certain properties are not important for the protein. If
these properties were under strong selective pressure, it is argued, they should be

726

R.A. Goldstein

“optimized” and therefore highly susceptible to mutational change [27]. Neutral
evolution would suggest the opposite conclusion – highly important properties
would be “buﬀered” against change during mutations.
Other conclusions relate to the possibilities and opportunities of protein engineering. If protein sequences are robust to change, this suggests that there are
many options to modifying naturally-occurring sequences, in that the sequence
can be highly altered while important properties such as stability and foldability will be maintained. Conversely, the evolutionary selection of highly robust
sequences suggest that nature ﬁnds the ﬂatter peaks in the ﬁtness landscape,
even if higher (but narrower) peaks exist elsewhere. This means that it might
be possible to design proteins de novo with properties that exceed those found
by natural evolution.
Acknowledgements. The work described here was largely performed by Sridhar Govindarajan, Darin Taverna, and Paul Williams. Computer support was
provided by Kurt Hillig, Todd Raeker, and Michael Kitson. Funding was provided by NIH grant by NIH grant LM05770.

References
1. Kimura, M., Evolutionary rate at the molecular level. Nature (London) 217 (1968)
624–626
2. King, J.L., Jukes, T.H., Non-Darwinian evolution. Science 164 (1969) 788-798
3. Gould, S.J., Lewontin, R.C., The spandrels of San Marco and the Panglossian
Paradigm: A critique of the adaptationist programme. Proc. Royal Soc. London,
Series B 205 (1979) 581-598
4. Abkevich, V.I., Gutin, A.M., Shakhnovich, E.I., Impact of local and non-local
interactions on thermodynamics and kinectics of protein folding. J. Mol. Biol. 252
(1995) 460-471
5. Miyazawa, S., Jernigan, R.L., Estimation of eﬀective interresidue contact energies from protein crystal structures: Quasi-chemical approximation. Macromol. 18
(1985) 534-552
6. Wagner, G., Wuthrich, K., Correlation between the amide proton exchange rates and the denaturation temperatures in globular proteins related to the basic
pancreatic trypsin inhibitor. J. Mol. Biol. 130 (1979) 31–37
7. Tang, K.E.S., Dill, K.A., Native protein ﬂuctuations: The conformational-motion
temperature and the inverse correlation of protein ﬂexibility with protein stability.
J. Biomol. Struct. Dyn. 16 (1998) 397–411
8. Dunker, A.K., et al., Protein disorder and the evolution of molecular recognition:
Theory, predictions and observations. Paciﬁc Symp. Biocomputing 3 (1998) 473–
484
9. Wright, P.E., Dyson, H.J., Intrinsically unstructured proteins: Re-assessing the
protein structure-function paradigm. J. Mol. Biol. 293 (1999) 321–331
10. Dunker, A.K., Obradovic, Z., The protein trinity–linking function and disorder.
Nat. Biotechnol. 19 (2001) 805–806
11. Taverna, D.M., Goldstein, R.A., Why are proteins marginally stable? Proteins:
Struct., Funct., Genet. 46 (2002) 105–109

Evolutionary Perspectives on Protein Thermodynamics

727

12. Alber, T., Wozniak, J.A., A genetic screen for mutations that increase the thermalstability of phage-T4 lysozyme. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 82 (1985) 747–750
13. Bryan, P.N., et al., Proteases of enhanced stability: Characterization of a thermostable variant of subtilisin. Proteins: Struct. Funct. Genet. 1 (1986) 326–334
14. Liao, H., McKenzie, T., Hageman, R., Isolation of a thermostable enzyme variant
by cloning and selection in a thermophile. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 83 (1986)
576–580
15. Shoichet, B.K., et al., A relationship between protein stability and protein function.
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 92 (1995) 452-456
16. Giver, L., et al., Directed evolution of a thermostable esterase. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. USA 95 (1998) 12809-12813
17. Nimwegen, E.v., Crutchﬁeld, J.P., Huynes, M., Neutral evolution of mutational
robustness. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 96 (1999) 9716-9720
18. Taverna, D.M., Goldstein, R.A., Why are proteins so robust to site mutations? J.
Mol. Biol. 315 (2002) 479-484
19. Reddy, B.V.B., Datta, S., Tiwari, S., Use of propensities of amino acids to the local
structure environment to understand eﬀect of substitution mutations on protein
stability. Protein Eng’g 11 (1998) 1137-1145
20. Govindarajan, S., Goldstein, R.A., Searching for foldable protein structures using
optimized energy functions. Biopolymers 36 (1995) 43–51
21. Govindarajan, S., Goldstein, R.A., Why are some protein structures so common?
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93 (1996) 3341–3345
22. Li, H., et al., Emergence of preferred structures in a simple model of protein folding.
Science 273 (1996) 666-669
23. Shakhnovich, E.I., Protein design: a perspective from simple tractable models.
Folding & Design 3 (1998) R45-R58
24. Finkelstein, A.V., Ptitsyn, O.B., Why do globular proteins ﬁt the limited set of
folding patterns. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 50 (1987) 171–190
25. Govindarajan, S., Goldstein, R.A., On the thermodynamic hypothesis of protein
folding. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95 (1998) 5545–5549
26. Williams, P.D., Pollock, D.D., Goldstein, R.A., Evolution of functionality in lattice
proteins. J. Mol. Graphics Modell. 19 (2001) 150–156
27. Kim, D.E., Gu, H., Baker, D., The sequences of small proteins are not extensively
optimized For rapid folding by natural selection. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95
(1998) 4982-4986

