Numerical Simulations of Combined Effects of
Terrain Orography and Thermal Stratification
on Pollutant Distribution in a Town Valley
S. Kenjereš, K. Hanjalić and G. Krstović
Department of Applied Physics, Delft University of Technology
Lorentzweg 1, 2628 CJ Delft, The Netherlands
kenjeres@ws.tn.tudelft.nl; hanjalic@ws.tn.tudelft.nl,
WWW home page: http://www.ws.tn.tudelft.nl

Abstract. Combined effects of terrain orography and thermal stratification on the dispersion of pollutants in a mountainous town valley over
a diurnal cycle are numerically simulated by a time-dependent Reynoldsaveraged Navier-Stokes (T-RANS) approach. The T-RANS model was
incorporated into a finite volume NS solver for three-dimensional nonorthogonal domains, using Cartesian vector and tensor components and
collocated variable arrangement. Prior the full scale simulations, the TRANS approach was validated in test situations where the effects of
thermal stratification and terrain orography are separated, showing good
agreement with the available experimental and simulation data. Full scale
simulations were performed in a realistic orography over two diurnal cycles for two cases of the initial thermal stratification, both with a prescribed time and space variation of ground temperature and pollutant
emission - reflecting the daily activities in the town. The results confirmed that T-RANS approach can serve as a powerful tool for predicting
local environments at micro and mezzo scales.

1

Introduction

Most urban areas are continuous sources of heat and pollution as a result of
a variety of human activities, e.g. industrial processes, transportation, agriculture, etc. In addition, a high percentage of urban areas is covered with concrete
and asphalt which store and reflect incoming radiation causing a significantly
warmer surface-layer air than that of their natural surroundings. As a result,
the urban areas form a kind of local heat islands in the surrounding countryside,
Stull [9]. Urban city landscape with tall buildings and streets of different sizes
together with surrounding terrain orography create very complex local geometry.
These local boundary conditions together with an imposed initial temperature
distribution in atmosphere (thermal stratification) form a complex interactions
mechanism between heat transfer and corresponding atmospheric pollutant emission. The prediction of this complex interaction mechanism is of vital importance
for estimating possible toxic pollutant distribution that may pose a risk to human health. It is also the major prerequisite for optimum control of air quality:

2

future city planning and optimum location of industrial zones, design of city
transportation system, control of traffic and industrial activities during critical
meteorological periods, etc. Current practice relies on semi-empirical methods
and simple integral modelling of pollutant dispersion with prescribed wind conditions, whereas situations at micro and mezzo scales dominated by buoyancy
are usually beyond the reach of such models. Large eddy simulations (LES) is a
possible option, but the traditional LES are still inapplicable to large-scale problems with high Reynolds and Rayleigh numbers. A hybrid LES/RANS approach
(’ultra’ CFD problems; Hunt [2]) seems a more viable option that can provide
required detailed insights into above mentioned complex phenomena.
In this paper, we propose the transient Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes (TRANS) approach as potentially efficient, numerically robust and physically accurate method for simulation of combined effects of terrain orography and thermal
stratification on pollutant dispersion. These effects will be analysed by performing simulations of a realistic environmental problem of a medium-size valley town
with significant residential and industrial pollution. The critical periods are the
winter cloudy windless days when the lower atmosphere in the valley is capped
with an inversion layer preventing any convection through it. The air movement
and the pollutant dispersion are solely generated by the day ground heating in
surroundings and urban areas. While any realistic conditions can be imposed,
we consider at present as a part of a preliminary study, an idealised situation
with space and time sinusoidal variation of temperature and concentration, both
imitating two diurnal cycles. In order to accommodate a very complex terrain
orography, a finite-volume Navier-Stokes solver for three-dimensional flows in
structured non-orthogonal geometries, based on Cartesian vector and tensorial
components and collocated variable arrangement, was applied.
Prior the full scale simulations that include both effects - thermal stratification and terrain orography - the T-RANS approach was validated in cases of
unsteady turbulent penetrative convection of unstable mixed layer and classical
Rayleigh-Bénard convection over flat and wavy surfaces of different topology and
over a range of Ra numbers.

2

The Time-Dependent RANS (T-RANS): equations and
subscale models

This approach can be regarded as Very Large Eddy Simulations (VLES) in
which the stochastic motion is modelled using a hki − hεi − hθ 2 i algebraic
stress/flux/concentration single-point closure models as the ”subscale model”,
where hi denoted the time-resolved motion. The turbulent stress tensor, τij =
hui uj i, heat flux vector, τθi = hθui i and concentration flux vector, τci = hcui i,
were derived by truncation of the modelled RANS parent differential transport
equations by assuming weak equilibrium, i.e. (D/Dt − D)φui = 0, but retaining
all major flux production terms (all treated as time-dependent). In contrast to
Large Eddy Simulation (LES), the contribution of both modes to the turbulent
fluctuations are of the same order of magnitude.

3

Environmental fluid flows are described by standard conservation laws for
mass, momentum, energy and concentration. For the resolves (’filtered’) motion,
equations can be written in the essentially same form as for the LES:


∂hUi i
∂
∂hUi i
∂hUi i
+ hUj i
=
− τij
ν
∂t
∂xj
∂xj
∂xj
1 (hP i − Pref )
−
+ βgi (hT i − Tref )
(1)
ρ
∂xi


ν ∂hT i
∂hT i
∂
∂hT i
(2)
+ hUj i
=
− τθj
∂t
∂xj
∂xj P r ∂xj


∂hCi
∂
∂hCi
ν ∂hCi
(3)
+ hUj i
=
− τcj
∂t
∂xj
∂xj Sc ∂xj
where hi stands for resolved (implicitly filtered) quantities and τij , τθj and τcj
represent contributions due to unresolved scales to momentum, temperature and
concentration equation respectively, which were provided by the subscale model.
In the present work which is still at the preliminary stage, the adopted ’subscale’
expression are given as follows. For turbulent stresses we applied eddy viscosity
expression:


2
∂hUi i ∂hUj i
τij = −νt
+ hkiδij
+
(4)
∂xj
∂xi
3
The turbulence heat and concentration fluxes are expressed by AFM counterparts:


∂hT i
hki
∂hUi i
2
τij
τθi = −Cφ
+ ξτθj
+ ηβgi hθ i
(5)
hεi
∂xj
∂xj


∂hCi
hki
∂hUi i
(6)
τij
τci = −Cφ
+ ξτcj
hεi
∂xj
∂xj
The closure of the expressions for subscale quantities is achieved by solving the
equations for turbulence kinetic energy hki, its dissipation rate hεi and temperature variance hθ 2 i, resulting in three-equation model hki − hεi − hθ 2 i, Kenjereš
and Hanjalić [4]:
Dhki
= Dk + Pk + Gk − hεi
Dt
Dhεi
= Dε + Pε1 + Pε2 + Gε − Y
Dt
Dhθ2 i
= Dθ + Pθ − hεθ i
Dt

3
3.1

(7)

Results
Unsteady turbulent penetrative convection of unstable mixed
layer

The ability of the proposed ASM/AFM/ACM subscale model to reproduce correctly the flows with a strong thermal stratification was first tested on unsteady

4

Fig. 1. Time evolution of vertical temperature profiles in a mixed layer heated from
below -left, Normalised vertical heat flux in a mixed layer heated from below- right:
comparison between experiments and simulations.

turbulent penetrative convection of an unstable mixed layer. Due to heating
from bellow, the initially stable environment in the near-ground region becomes
unstable and interactions between stable and unstable regions occur. With further intensification of the heat transfer in the vertical direction, the location of
the interface between the two regions moves up with time, causing the mixed
turbulent ground layer to grow into a stable region. Another feature of the phenomenon is the entrainment of overlaying non-turbulent fluid into mixed layer
causing very steep gradients at the interface as well as a reversal of the sign of
the heat flux as a result of the compensating cooling of the fluid in the stable
region, Nieuwstadt et al. [7]. These features explain why turbulent penetrative convection represents a very challenging test case for turbulence models,
Mahrt [6]. Fig. 1a shows the time evolution of temperature profiles obtained
with ASM/AFM model. The experimental data ( Deardorff et al.[1]; Willis and
Deardorf [10]) are very well reproduced in the middle as well as at the upper edge
of the mixed layer. A further simplification of turbulent heat flux to anisotropic
eddy diffusivity model (denoted with GGDH), which basically excludes temperature variance from consideration, resulted in serious deterioration of the
predicted results. This confirms that the AFM representation of θui is the minimum level of modelling which can provide close agreement with experimental
temperature profiles. The predicted vertical heat flux suitably scaled with the
1/3
inversion height and the product of the buoyancy velocity (w∗ =(βgQs Zinv ) )
and temperature (T∗ =Qs /w∗ ), shows also excellent agreement with several sets

5

Fig. 2. Vertical velocity hW i and temperature hT i distributions in turbulent thermal
convection over a terrain with 3D regular waviness, SB (x, y)= 0.1 cos(xπ) cos(yπ),
Ra=107 , P r=0.71; above- τ ∗ =50, below- τ ∗ =200.

of laboratory and field measurements, and with LES data of Schmidt and Schumann [8], Fig. 1b.
3.2

Transient Rayleigh-Bénard convection over horizontal wavy
walls

The potential of the T-RANS approach to capture the effects of bottom wall
topology was verified against the DNS and LES results of Krettenauer and
Schumann [5] for turbulent convection over wavy terrain - both under identical conditions. Their main finding was that the total heat transfer was only
slightly affected by terrain orography compared to flat bottom wall situation.
The gross feature of the flow statistics, such as profiles of turbulence fluxes and
variance were not very sensitive to the variation of the bottom wall topology.
On the other hand, they reported that the motion structure persisted considerably longer over the wavy terrain than over flat surfaces. While the Krettenauer
and Schumann [5] were interested mainly in the final turbulence statistics under
steady conditions, we extended our study to time evolution of turbulence quantities and large coherent structures. The effect of the horizontal wavy wall on
the mean
p properties hW, T i is presented in Fig. 2. At the initial stage of heating,
τ ∗ = βg∆T /H = 50, all quantities show a regular flow pattern determined by
the wall configuration. The plumes raise from the surface peaks and sink into
the surface valleys, portraying 25 characteristic locations. At τ ∗ =200 the initial
organisation of the flow cannot be observed anymore. Thermal plumes occupy
a significantly larger space and not only the regions close to the bottom surface
peaks, as found in the initial phase of flow development, Hanjalić and Kenjereš
[3].

6
Residential area
Conc
0.5C




 

 
 

Temp +2
Time Tg

24 hours

24hours
 
  Time
-2

Z

 	
 	
 To+
	
	 ∆ T
 	
 	
		
 	
 	
		
 	
 	
		
 	
 	
		
 	
 	
		
 	
 	 To
		
Temp

Industrial area

Temp
Tg

Conc

C 
+1
 
 
  24hours
 
  Time






 





 

Time
24 hours

-1

Fig. 3. Specification of imposed boundary and initial conditions for a middle-size town
located in a mountain area; Two distinct areas (industrial and residential) are represented by different pollution emission (C = 100 and 50% respectively) and different
heat source intensities ( Tground = ±1 and ±2 respectively); Initial thermal stratification is also presented.

3.3

Air circulation and pollutant dispersion in a town valley

Next, we considered a medium-size town, situated in a mountain valley, with
distinct residential and industrial zones. These two zones are represented by
different pollution emission (C=50% and 100% respectively) and different heat
source intensities (Tground =±2 and ±1 respectively) from surrounding areas,
over two diurnal cycles, Fig. 3. Simulated domain covers an area of 12 × 10 × 2.5
km, which was represented by an averaged mesh size of 100 m in each direction.
Two consecutive diurnal cycles were simulated (0-24h, day (I) and day (II))
with a time step of 2.5min. Wall functions were applied for the ground plane. At
the top boundary, we prescribed constant temperature and assumed symmetry
boundary condition for the velocity. The side boundaries were artificially extended and treated as symmetries for all variables. Two different situation with
respect to imposed thermal stratification were analysed. The imposed vertical
profile of potential temperature is uniform in lower level and with identical linear
distribution (∆T = 4) in upper level. The base of the inversion layer (the switch
from uniform to linear temperature) is located at z/H=2/3 (≈ 1600m from the
valley deepest point) for the first case and at z/H=1/3 (≈ 800m) for the second
case. The domain height (H) and the characteristic initial temperature gradients
(or surface fluxes) give very high values of Rayleigh number, i.e. O(1017 ).
Since the experimental measurements were not available for quantitative validation of presented simulations, no verification is possible. Instead, we present some
results that illustrate features of interest to environmental studies. The time evolution of the potential temperature distribution in a characteristic vertical plane
that crosses both the residential and industrial zones, for two different stratifications, is shown in Fig. 4. In the initial stage of heating, strong thermal plumes
appear, originating both from locally increased rate of heating (for industrial and
residential zones) as well as from the hill orography. As time progresses, strong
mixing in the lower layer is observed. At the beginning of the new cycle, due
to nocturnal cooling, upper inversion layer is again moved towards the ground.

7

Fig. 4. Potential temperature distributions at characteristic location where both residential and industrial zone are present, for different time instants, τ =1 p.m., 6 p.m.
(day I), 10 a.m. (day II): left- weak stratification, right- strong stratification.

As seen, stronger stratification causes significant damping of the thermal plume
and transport activities, Fig. 5.
Same conclusion can be drawn from Fig. 6 where instantaneous trajectories in
one vertical (residential+industrial zones) and two horizontal (at inversion layer
location and at 50m above the ground) planes. Since the capping inversion is
closer to ground in the second case, vertical motion is significantly suppressed
and the number of distinct thermal plumes is significantly larger in plane at
50m from ground than for the weak stratification conditions. Numerical simulation also revealed interesting phenomena of up/down-slope inertial motions few
hours after offset of heating/cooling of ground, as shown in Fig. 7. Finally, the

Fig. 5. Concentration distributions at characteristic location where both residential
and industrial zone are present, for different time instants, τ =1 p.m., 6 p.m. (day I),
10 a.m. (day II): left- weak stratification, right- strong stratification.

8

Fig. 6. Instantaneous trajectories in characteristic vertical plane (over residential and
industrial zones) and two horizontal planes: first- at top of inversion layer, second- 50m
from ground; τ =6 p.m., day II, case with weak stratification: left- weak stratification,
right- strong stratification.

Fig. 7. Velocity vectors and horizontal velocity component profiles indicating an inertial motion, 2hrs after onset of heating/cooling, day (II), case with weak stratification:
left- up-slope motion, right- down-slope motion.

9

Fig. 8. Time evolution of concentration (hCi=0.01), τ = 1 p.m., 6 p.m., day (I), 10
p.m., day (II) respectively; left- weak stratification, right- strong stratification.

three-dimensional concentration fields, represented by a characteristic concentration isosurface, are presented in Fig. 8. As expected, stronger stratification
reduces convective transport resulting in an increase of pollutant concentrations
over residential and industrial zones.

4

Conclusions

Numerical simulations of combined effects of terrain orography and thermal
stratification on pollutant dispersion in a town valley were performed using
the time-dependent Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes method (T-RANS). The
approach can be regarded as very large eddy simulation, with a single-point
closure playing the role of the ’subscale’ model. In comparison with the conventional LES, the model of the unresolved motion (here a reduced algebraic
hθui , cui , k − ε − θ2 i model) covers a much larger part of turbulence spectrum
whereas the large deterministic structure was fully resolved. Validation of the
proposed T-RANS approach was performed for situations where the effects of
thermal stratification and terrain orography were separated, and for which a
good experimental and numerical database exist. Unsteady turbulent penetrative convection of unstable mixed layer and convection over horizontal wavy
walls demonstrated a very good predictive potential of the proposed approach.
The full scale simulations of pollutant dispersion in a town valley with distinct
residential and industrial zones under differently imposed thermal stratification,
portrayed qualitatively very reasonable results and at the same time confirmed

10

numerical efficiency and robustness of the proposed approach. We believe that
the T-RANS can be used as a potentially powerful and efficient tool for prediction of local environments.

References
1. Deardorff, J. W. and Willis, G. E. and Lilly, D. K.: Laboratory investigation of
non-steady penetrative convection. J. Fluid Mech., 35, (1969) 7–31,
2. Hunt, J.C.R.: UltraCFD for Computing Very Complex Flows. ERCOFTAC Bulletin, No.45, (2000) 22–23
3. Hanjalić, K. and Kenjereš, S.: T-RANS simulations of deterministic eddy structure in flows driven by thermal buoyancy and Lorentz force. Flow Turbulence and
Combustion (in press)
4. Kenjereš, S. and Hanjalić, K.: Transient analysis of Rayleigh-Bénard convection
with a RANS model. Int. J. Heat and Fluid Flow, 20 (1999) 329–340
5. Krettenauer, K. and Schumann, U.: Numerical simulation of turbulent convection
over wavy terrain. J. Fluid Mech., 237 (1992) 261–299
6. Mahrt, L.: Stratified Atmospheric Boundary Layers and Breakdown of Models.
Theoret. Comput. Fluid Dynamics, 11 (1998) 263–279
7. Nieuwstadt, F. T. M. and Mason, P. J. and Moeng, C. H. and Schumann, U.: Largeeddy simulation of the convective boundary layer: A comparison of four computer
codes. Proceedings of the 8th Turbulent Shear Flow Symposium, Munich, Germany
(1991) 1.4.1–1.4.6
8. Schmidt, H. and Schumann, U.: Coherent structure of the convective boundary
layer derived from large-eddy simulations. J. Fluid Mech., 200 (1989) 511–562
9. Stull, R. B.: An Introduction to Boundary Layer Meteorology. Kluwer Academic
Publishers (1988)
10. Willis, G. E. and Deardorff, J. W.: Laboratory Model of Unstable Planetary Boundary Layer. J. Atmos. Sci., 31 (1974) 1297–1307

