Non-equilibrium Thermodynamics, Thermomechanics,
Geodynamics
Klaus Regenauer-Lieb1,2, Bruce Hobbs1, Alison Ord1, and Dave A. Yuen3
2

1
CSIRO Exploration and Mining, PO Box 1130, Bentley, WA 6102, Australia
School of Earth and Geographical Sciences, The University of Western Australia, Perth, WA
6009, Australia
3
Dept. of Geology and Geophysics and Minnesota Supercomputing Institute, Univ. of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455-0219, U.S.A
{Alison.Ord,Bruce.Hobbs,klaus.regenauer-lieb}@csiro.au,
daveyuen@gmail.com

Abstract. The subject of non-equilibrium thermodynamics is now quite old,
dating back to Prigogine, Biot and Truesdell in the 1950’s and 1960’s. It has
had a resurgence in the physical sciences in the past five years largely due to a
consolidation of ideas on thermodynamics as a whole and to advances in
computer speeds. Non-equilibrium thermodynamics has now advanced to a
stage where it forms an umbrella approach to understanding and modelling
coupled phenomena in Earth Sciences. Currently, approaches are pioneered
independently in geodynamics, seismology, material sciences (solid
mechanics), atmospheric and marine sciences (fluid dynamics) and the
chemical sciences. We present a first attempt at consolidating some ideas and
show a simple example with potential significance for geodynamics, structural
geology and seismology.
Keywords: Thermodynamics, Geodynamics, Structural Geology, Slow
Earthquakes.

1 Introduction
In this contribution we advance new approaches for the problem of deformation of
geological solids and attempt to develop a common framework for the different
approaches [1-4]. The application of thermodynamics to the plastic deformation of
solids requires special caution in a number of respects [5]. First, plastic deformation is
essentially irreversible. It is hence important to define a reference state from which
deviations define a driving force. Second, plastic deformation depends sensitively on
shear stresses, and it leads to shape changes and not just volume changes. While
volumetric strain is easily defined as a state variable, the definition of a nonvolumetric strain as a state variable is not straight forward. Third, in plasticity, the
number of relevant material parameters may far exceed the number of
macroscopically observable relations; the use of energy, volume, etc., as "state
variables" then may become meaningless.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part I, LNCS 4487, pp. 62–69, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Non-equilibrium Thermodynamics, Thermomechanics, Geodynamics

63

In the light of these difficulties it is obvious that thermodynamic approaches to
continuum mechanics have, in the past, been replaced by constitutive approaches.
These have up to now neglected the basic principles of thermodynamics. However,
recently, significant progress has been made for understanding the plastic deformation
of soils where all three cautions can be addressed rigorously [6]. Continuum
mechanics can be recast and verified on the basis of thermodynamics for isothermal
deformation. For soils the influence of the state variable temperature, is thought to be
negligible. It is hence possible, to formulate, to first order, a theory of plastic
deformation without local gradients in temperature, which must arise naturally
through the process of dissipation.
1.1 Isothermal Thermomechanics
Thermomechanics has been pushed forward as a robust theory in the 70s [7]
continuing earlier breakthroughs in thermodynamics of chemical systems. However,
since then the topic of thermomechanics of continua was not considered forefront of
continuum mechanics. Recently, thermomechanics has been rediscovered [8]. Modern
thermomechanical approaches assume that there is no heat flow, thus allowing a very
concise treatment of the basic underlying principles. Thermomechanics addresses
only the second law of thermodynamics as an overarching constraint to deformation.
This solves the reference state for irreversible deformation by constraints on energy.
The strain energy rate density is defined as the double dot product (scalar product)
of the applied stress σ and the strain rate tensor thus the local power (work rate) of a
reference volume [9].

 +Φ.
σ : ε = Ψ

(1)

where Ψ is the Helmholtz free energy function and Φ is the rate of dissipation per unit
volume. In the isothermal case the Clausius-Duhem Inequality (second law of
thermodynamics) collapses to:

Φ≥0.

(2)

The Clausius-Duhem Inequality can hence be understood as the isothermal thermalmechanical stability condition. Note, that the Clausius-Duhem Inequality has a
broader meaning in that not only the mechanical dissipation is positive but that the
thermal conduction is positive. Combining eqns. (1) and (2) it follows that the
thermomechanical equilibrium state is constrained by the condition that the rate of
change of the Helmholtz free energy is smaller than the local strain energy rate
density [5].

 ≤ σ : ε .
Ψ

(3)

The equality holds for isentropic (elastic) deformation while plastic deformation
causes dissipation.
The second caution of a definition of a strain measure as a differential function of
the free energy is solved by expanding the local strain rate energy density into
dissipative and non-dissipative microstrains αk assuming a summation over k of the
various microstructural processes

64

K. Regenauer-Lieb et al.

σ : ε =

∂Ψ
∂Ψ
∂Φ
: ε + k : α k + k : α k .
∂ε
∂α
∂α

(4)

In the same framework the Cauchy stress tensor can be defined as a partial derivative
of the Helmholtz free energy.

σ≡

∂Ψ
;
∂ε

(5)

and the small strain tensor as the partial derivative of the Gibbs free energy:

ε≡

∂G
.
∂σ

(6)

The partial derivatives of the Helmholtz free energy (equation 4) and the dissipation
potential over their microstrains and microstrain rates, respectively, define the
recoverable elastic small strain measure and the dissipative small strain measure, thus
giving the familiar additive elasto-dissipative strain rate decomposition [10].

ε =

∂ 2G
∂ 2G

:
σ
+
: α k = ε elastic + ε diss .
2
k
∂σ
∂σ∂α

(7)

The third caution put forward by Kocks et al. [5] is the caution that the number of
necessary material parameters for interpreting the strongly nonlinear system can
exceed the number of available equations. For isothermal approximations (e.g. soil)
this does not appear to be the case [6]. For the more general application to nonisothermal cases it is a challenge to modern computational approaches. Nowadays,
such complex non-linear systems can readily be analyzed by computational methods.
1.2 Non-isothermal Thermomechanics
Temperature needs to be added as a state-variable, therefore we have to consider a full
thermodynamic approach where heat Q is allowed to flow into the reference volume.
Integrating the strain energy rate density in equation (1) with respect to time, we
obtain the mechanical work W done in the volume element. The first law of
thermodynamics states that in a closed system the increment of specific internal
energy δU of the reference volume is the sum of the increment of heat δQ flowing
into the solid and the increment of mechanical work δW done on the solid.

δU = δ Q + δW

.

(8)

The internal energy is also defined by:

U ≡ Ψ (T , α j ) + sT ,

(9)

Non-equilibrium Thermodynamics, Thermomechanics, Geodynamics

where the internal energy is now written in terms of entropy
variables other than temperature T. The entropy is defined by:

s≡−

65

s and αj are state

∂Ψ
,
∂T

(10)

The first law is often expressed in irreversible thermodynamics in terms of the
equivalent time derivatives rather than using virtual variations. Taking the material
time derivative (in our notation D/Dt) of the entropy we obtain

Ds
∂ 2 Ψ DT
∂ 2 Ψ Dα j
,
=− 2
−
Dt
∂T Dt ∂T ∂α j Dt

(11)

where the specific heat cα is defined as:

∂ 2Ψ
cα ≡ −T
.
∂T 2

(12)

 = Ψ / ρ ),
We switch from a unit volume based to a unit mass based framework ( Ψ
the entropy flux is then related to the heat by:

ρT

 Dα j
Ds
DT
∂ 2Ψ
.
= ρ cα
− ρT
Dt
Dt
∂T ∂α j Dt

(13)

Considering equations (8-10) and rearranging terms we can now write the heat
equation as [11].

ρ cα

 Dα j
DT ⎛
∂Ψ
= ⎜ σ : ε − ρ
Dt ⎜⎝
∂α j Dt

 Dα j
⎞
∂ 2Ψ
+ qi ,
⎟⎟ + ρT
∂T ∂α j Dt
⎠

(14)

where the first term described by the bracket on the right side is the mechanical
dissipation potential Φ defined in equation (1), the second term is the isentropic
thermal-mechanical coupling term and qi is the heat flux.
This equation is a generalized thermodynamic formulation without specification of
the mode of mechanical dissipative and stored microstrain-processes, as well as the
particular mechanism heat is transferred. It describes the importance of two important
thermal-mechanical feedback effects within the energy equation. The first bracketed
term on the right side, the dissipated energy, is also known as the shear heating term,
and the second term is the important feedback given by the stored energy. While this
equation is generally applicable we will now go on and illustrate the application of the
method in a simple example for a specific case study, simplifying what we believe to
be the most essential case in geodynamics.

66

K. Regenauer-Lieb et al.

1.3 Simplified Thermodynamic Approach for Geodynamics
In terms of non-dissipative processes producing elastic strain we only consider
thermal expansion and elastic deformation:

⎛ 1 + ν Dσ ′ ν Dp
DT ⎞
+
+α
δ ij ⎟ .
ε elastic = ⎜
E Dt
Dt ⎠
⎝ E Dt

(15)

where E is Young’s modulus , ν is Poisson ratio and and α is the coefficient of
thermal expansion. σ ′ is the objective co-rotational stress tensor and δij is the
Kronecker delta. For the dissipative processes in equation (7) we assume only two
basic micro-mechanisms causing macroscopic dissipative strains:

⎛
⎛ σ′ ⎞
⎛ Q ⎞⎞
ε diss = ⎜ ε pl
+ ⎜ Aσ ′ J 2n −1 exp ⎜ −
⎟
⎟⎟ .
⎝ RT ⎠ ⎠creep
⎝ 2τ ⎠ plastic ⎝

(16)

The plastic yield stress is τ and is here assumed to be linearly dependent on pressure;
A and n are power-law material constants, Q is the activation enthalpy and R is the
universal gas constant. J2 is second invariant of the deviatoric stress tensor σ ′ .
The crucial step for a computational approach producing patterns out of nonlinear
thermodynamic feedback processes is common to all ab-initio style calculations.
Here, the method is applied to homogenized microstrain processes in a continuum
approach upscaled for geodynamics. The key is to solve the triplet of equilibrium
equations, continuity, momentum and heat in a fully coupled way. Without coupling
there is no pattern development. The computational strategy, the convergence
requirements, and the time stepping routine are laid out in different paper [12]. Here
we will just point out the two key feedback loops appearing in the form of the energy
equation (14) which now reads:

ρ cP

DT
Dp
= σ : ε diss + α T
+ ρ cPκ∇ 2T .
Dt
Dt

(17)

Discussing this specific simplification of equation (13) from back to front we now
only consider for qi the phonon part of heat conduction with thermal diffusivity κ ,
cP is the specific heat at constant pressure. For the isentropic feedback term we only
consider the state variable pressure p including the thermal-elastic feedback loop and
in the first term on the right we consider that all dissipated work is released as heat.
This is of course an extreme mathematical idealization of a real material. For most
materials the shear heating efficiency appears to be around 85% and 95% for large
strain [13]. The remaining 5-15% clearly require incorporation of additional feedback
loops in the expansion of the second term of equation (14), thereby diminishing the
energy available for shear heating feedback by the same amount [1, 3]. This feedback
is important for very shallow crustal conditions. We only described deeper crustal
conditions. A surprising dynamics, not recorded in classical quasi-static continuum
mechanical approaches, is based on the physics of two feedback loops.

Non-equilibrium Thermodynamics, Thermomechanics, Geodynamics

67

2 Feedback Loops
With this formulation we have encapsulated two basic thermodynamics feedback
processes into the energy equation, based on the two state variables temperature and
pressure, these are: 1) Thermal expansion feedback dependent on elasto-plastic
(semi-brittle, p-dependent) displacements; 2) Shear heating feedback dependent on
elasto-visco-plastic (ductile, T-dependent) displacements [14].

3 Model
The model setup is a very basic one. We consider an isothermal quartz-feldspar
composite slab with random thermal perturbations and extend it by a factor of 4 from
3.3 x 12 km to 13.2 x 3 km. This is considered to be a generic slice of a continental
crust, where the individual p-T conditions correspond to a particular depth. Since the
pressure and temperature increases in the crust with depth, the pressure sensitive
brittle feedback mechanism is suppressed for higher starting model temperatures.
Random temperature perturbations with a maximum amplitude of 70 K are assumed
at the start of the extension and they diffuse during deformation and self-organize into
a characteristic pattern controlled by the two feedback loops. Owing to the pure shear
boundary conditions, the feldspar and quartz layers are expected to assume a shape
shown in Figure 1, either through plastic deformation or viscous creep or both,
depending on the base temperature/pressure assumed at the start of the model run. No
internal structure is expected in the absence of thermal-mechanical feedback.
3.3 km

13.2 km

Extension
Before

Quartz

After
Feldspar
velocity

0.5 cm/yr

Quartz

Fig. 1. Pure shear extension of an isothermal composite piece of continental crust. Without
thermal-mechanical feedback random thermal perturbation have no effect and both feldspar and
quartz are extended homogenously as shown.

68

K. Regenauer-Lieb et al.

4 Results
The resulting patterns deviate significantly from the expected patterns for a standard
continuum mechanics solution. Figure 2 clearly shows three significantly different
mechanical regimes.
We have shown here an example of the new approach originally designed for
geodynamic simulations [14]. The rich spatial patterns developing out of an originally
unpatterned state are typical for thermodynamic feedback. The 500K case, in
particular, is accompanied by a dynamic pattern of creep/plastic slip events, which
could throw a light on the dynamic events underlying the source region of major
earthquakes such as the recent Sumatra event [15].
430 Kelvin Extension

500 Kelvin Extension

530 Kelvin Extension

Fig. 2. Only the final pattern after extension is shown. With feedback random temperature
perturbation have a significant effect on the deformation. Three mechanical regimes are
identified. At 430K brittle, thermal-expansion feedback dominates, at 530K ductile shearheating feedback dominates. Mixed-mode brittle/ductile feedback produces the richest pattern
at around 500K.

5 Summary and Outlook
Computer sciences are now allowing us to tackle problems that have previously been
out of reach of exact analytical approaches. This revolutionizes new non-equilibrium

Non-equilibrium Thermodynamics, Thermomechanics, Geodynamics

69

thermodynamic approaches for coupling chemistry and mechanics (both fluid and
solid). We have shown here a promising research path with the potential to bridge
seismology, geodynamics, geomechanics and materials sciences in the near future.
Acknowledgments. Pmd*CRC, CSIRO, UWA , DAY acknowledges support from ITR
and CSEDI programs of National Science Foundation.

References
1. Y. Ben-Zion, V. Lyakhovsky: Analysis of Aftershocks in a Lithospheric Model with
Seismogenic Zone Governed by Damage Rheology, Geophysical Journal International
165, 197 (2006).
2. I. F. Collins: The concept of stored plastic work or frozen elastic energy in soil mechnics,
Geotechnique 55, 373 (2005).
3. D. Bercovici, Y. Ricard: Energetics of a two-phase model of lithospheric damage, shear
localization and plate-boundary formation, Geophysical Journal International 152, 581
(2003).
4. B. Hobbs, K. Regenauer-Lieb, A. Ord: The thermodynamics of folding in the middle to
lower crust, Geology 35, 175 (2007).
5. U. F. Kocks, A. S. Argon, M. F. Ashby, Thermodynamics and kinetics of slip (Pergamon
Press, Oxford, 1975), pp. 293.
6. I. F. Collins: Elastic/plastic models for soils and sands, International Journal of Mechanical
Sciences 47, 493 (2005).
7. H. Ziegler, An Introducton to thermomechanics (North-Holland Publishing Company,
Amsterdam, ed. 2nd Edition, 1983), pp. 358.
8. I. F. Collins, G. T. Houlsby: Application of thermomechanical principles to the modelling
of geotechnical materials, Proceedings - Royal Society of London, A 453 1964, 1975
(1997).
9. I. F. Collins, P. A. Kelly: A thermomechanical analysis of a family of soil models,
Geotechnique 52, 507 (2002).
10. S. Nemat-Nasser: Decomposition of strain measures and their rates in finite deformation
elasto-plasticity, International Journal of Solids and Structures 15, 155 (1979).
11. A. Chrysochoos, R. Peyroux: Modelisation numerique des couplages en thermomecanique
des solides, Revue europeene des element finis 6, 673 (1997).
12. K. Regenauer-Lieb, D. A. Yuen: Positive feedback of interacting ductile faults from
coupling of equation of state, rheology and thermal-mechanics, Physics of Earth and
Planetary Interiors 142, 113 (2004).
13. A. Chrysochoos, O. Maisonneuve, G. Martin, H. Caumon, J. C. Chezeaux: Plastic and
dissipated work and stored energy, Nuclear Engineering and Design 114, 323 (1989).
14. K. Regenauer-Lieb, R. Weinberg, G. Rosenbaum: The effect of energy feedbacks on
continental strength, Nature 442, 67 (2006).
15. K. Regenauer-Lieb, D. Yuen: Quartz Rheology and short time-scale crustal instabilities,
Pure and Applied Geophysics 163 (1915-1932, 2006).

