Hierarchical Infrastructure for Large-Scale
Distributed Privacy-Preserving Data Mining
Jinlong Wang, Congfu Xu, Huifeng Shen, and Yunhe Pan
Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, 310027, China
zjupaper@yahoo.com
xucongfu@cs.zju.edu.cn
yaekee@hotmail.com
panyh@sun.zju.edu.cn

Abstract. Data Mining is often required to be performed among a number of groups of sites, where the precondition is that no privacy of any
site should be leaked out to other sites. In this paper, a hierarchical
infrastructure is proposed for large-scale distributed Privacy Preserving
Data Mining (PPDM) utilizing a synergy between P2P and Grid. The
proposed architecture is characterized with (1) its ability for preserving the privacy in data mining; (2) its ability for decentralized control;
(3) its dynamic and scalable ability; (4) its global asynchrony and local communication ability. An algorithm is described to show how to
process large-scale distributed PPDM based on the infrastructure. The
remarks in the end show the eﬀectiveness and advantages of the proposed
infrastructure for large-scale distributed PPDM.

1

Introduction

Nowadays, data mining is one of the most important topics in large-scale
distributed domains such as military, commerce and health-care etc. In the meanwhile, data privacy becomes a major concern that threatens the widespread deployment of data mining systems. This leads to a new sub-area of data mining —
privacy-preserving data mining (PPDM) [1] in large-scale distributed systems.
In this paper, we propose a hierarchical infrastructure for large-scale distributed PPDM. It synthesizes both Grid and P2P, and constructs a hierarchical
architecture (super computers in the top level based on Grid [2], desktop computers and other pervasive computers in the bottom level, organized with P2P
[3], which could thus help to ensure Grid scalability). In this way, it can achieve
higher performance and satisfy the requirements of the reality better.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: section 2 describes the
hierarchical infrastructure. Section 3 discusses the privacy preserving technology
and cryptographic primitives. Section 4 gives a large-scale distributed PPDM
algorithm based on the hierarchical infrastructure. Finally, we conclude with
some remarks in the end.
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3516, pp. 1020–1023, 2005.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

Hierarchical Infrastructure for Large-Scale Distributed PPDM

2

1021

Hierarchical Infrastructure

The main purpose of the infrastructure is to supply a platform for large-scale
distributed PPDM. The overall framework is shown as Fig1 below.

Fig. 1. Overall Framework of Architecture

Just as the scenario of Fig1, each peer (regular peer and super-peer) owns
privacy database (PDB) which may not be open to other peers, shared database
(SDB) which may be shared by other peers, and dynamic hash table (DHT)
which is the table of route, indicating those peers the messages will be sent
to. All of peers are organized into disjoint virtual groups (also called virtual
organizers, VOs) by a series of protocols. Each VO maintains its own overlay
network, including one or more super-peers, which are a subset of peers according
to their computing resources and the data volume they store. These super-peers
constitute a top-level overlay network (Grid [2]).
A VO may join and leave the system as a whole. In a VO, the numbers of peers
can be dynamically changed by peers joining and leaving in any time. When a
peer joins the system, it registers with one of existing peers. A peer can only have
one connection to another peer higher in the hierarchy to register with, but be
registered with many lower level peers. A peer communicates with its upper and
lower peers through DHT. When a peer leaves the system, its lower peers must
be informed to dynamically adjust the network topology to keep the hierarchical
relations. The hierarchical protocol makes the larger scalable systems possible
and can support the diversity of the cryptographical primitives.
Since the classiﬁcation of group is according to the node distances and functions, there will be much more frequent communication among the same group
than the one between groups. And, in a VO, we make use of asymmetrical bidirectional patterns to improve communication eﬃciency. Upward communication
transfers all types of information, including system messages (peers joining or
leaving) and data messages (data updating) to update up-peers, the downward
communication transfers only system messages to adjust to the dynamic topology changes. In this way, the architecture can use the bandwidth more eﬀectively,
gain the advantages over Grid or P2P respectively, and thus suit a great variety
of network environments better.

1022

3

J. Wang et al.

Privacy-Preserving and Cryptographic Primitives

Based on the hierarchical architecture, multiplicity of privacy-preserving methods can be used. Literature [4] provides an overview of the new and rapidly
emerging research area of PPDM. Making use of these methods, we can protect
sensitive raw data and knowledge.
Within the diﬀerent groups, we can utilize various cryptographic methods.
Even in the same group, diversity of the security methods can also be sustained
based on the demands.
In intra-group, the peers receive the messages below and in the same subset
with them, but not directly mine the peers below and adjacent to them, which
protects the privacy of the raw data. At the same time, the peers can modulate
the messages sent to protect their sensitive knowledge. Based on the peer adjacent to it, we can shield the individual data sources to the peers not adjacent
to it.
In the top level, the super-peers can use the cryptograph-based techniques
to encrypt their private data. And none of peers are willing to disclose their
own outputs to anyone else. With the cryptographic primitives, individuals and
sources are protected.

4

Large-Scale Distributed PPDM on the Architecture

In this section, we apply the architecture to PPDM in large-scale distributed
systems. In the interest of clarity, we consider the system where each group
comprises a super-peer.
Just as the above scenario of Fig1, within each group, the super-peers are in
charge of the hierarchical information of various sharing resources, each superpeer manages a range of peers, which may be the super-peer’s neighbor or in the
same subnet with it. Regular peers collaboratively mine data in P2P.
In P2P, for each peer, it receives the information from other peers, and then
processes these information together with its PDB. After that, it will update
its own PDB and transform the message sent to the SDB according to security
strategies. Next, through its own DHT, it sends relevant fresh information in
its SDB to other up-peers adjacent to it for furthering processing. In this way,
the peer in the infrastructure consists of the knowledge mined from those peers
below and in the same subnet with it. Layer upon layer, the super-peer comprises
the up-to-date knowledge mined from the same group. Finally, in the top level,
on the basis of the cryptograph-based techniques, we can process data mining
with the Knowledge Grid [5] among the super-peers. The large-scale distributed
PPDM algorithm based on the architecture is depicted as the algorithm 1.
Within the hierarchical distributed architecture, the communication cost is
evidently reduced to a large extent by never transmitting all data values but
transmitting incremental and updated information. This approach does not require CPU and I/O costs signiﬁcantly higher than a similar approach and its
communication may be lower.

Hierarchical Infrastructure for Large-Scale Distributed PPDM

1023

Algorithm 1: large-scale distributed PPDM
Data: Peers set P = {pi |i ∈ N }(the peers constitutes the hierarchical infrastructure), and their own local databases.
Result: The knowledge mined from the hierarchical infrastructure.
begin
while TRUE do
Step 1. Peers pi mines its local data and make use of the messages
inputted from other peers;
if pi is super peer then
break;
Step 2. Every pi modulates its knowledge on the basis of demand, hides
the sensitive knowledge and sends its encrypted data and knowledge to
up-peer pj in DHT adjacent to pi ;
Process PPDM among super-peers through Knowledge Grid.
end

5

Conclusions

In this paper, we present a dynamic, hierarchical infrastructure for PPDM in
large-scale loosely connected and constantly evolving environments. The bidirectional communication method can save more bandwidth. By adopting asynchrony communication pattern, our infrastructure avoids centralized control and
improves the ability in suiting dynamic changes in current commercial network
environment. In particular, by virtue of the hierarchial model based on P2PGrid, we can supply diversities of strategies for preserving both the privacy data
sources and the sensitive knowledge. This property is especially important in
industry, business and scientiﬁc applications.

Acknowledgements
This paper was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China (No.
60402010) and the Advanced Research Project sponsored by China Defense
Ministry (No. 413150804, 41101010207), and was partially supported by the
Aerospace Research Foundation sponsored by China Aerospace Science and Industry Corporation (No. 2003-HT-ZJDX-13).

References
1. R. Agrawal, R. Srikant. Privacy-preserving data mining. SIGMOD 2000.
2. I. Foster, C. Kesselman, S. Tuecke. The Anatomy of the Grid: Enabling Scalable
Virtual Organizations. International J. Supercomputer Applications, 15(3), 2001.
3. M. P. Singh. Peer-to-Peer Computing for information systems. AP2PC 2002.
4. V S. Verykios, E. Bertino, I N. Fovino, L P. Provenza, Y. Saygin, Y. Theodoridis.
State-of-the-art in Privacy Preserving Data Mining. SIGMOD Record 2004, 33(1).
5. M. Cannataro, D. Talia. KNOWLEDGE GRID: An Architecture for Distributed
Knowledge Discovery. Communications of the ACM, January 2003 46(1) 89-93.

