Blood Flow at Arterial Branches: Complexities
to Resolve for the Angioplasty Suite
P.D. Richardson1, I.V. Pivkin2 , G.E. Karniadakis2, and D.H. Laidlaw3
1

Division of Engineering
Division of Applied Mathematics
3
Department of Computer Science
Brown University, Providence, RI 02912, USA
2

Abstract. This paper presents a case of interdisciplinary collaboration
in building and using a set of tools to compute the flows in a branched
artery, to compare them with prior physical flow visualization, and to
interpret them with further users in mind. The geometry was taken for a
typical epicardial coronary artery with a side branch. The incompressible
Navier-Stokes equations were solved with the hybrid spectral/hp element
solver Nektar. Some simulations were visualized in the CAVE, an immersive 3D stereo display environment, and selected features are described
and interpreted.

1

Introduction

Two papers by Colin Caro and his colleagues in the 1970s [1, 2] led to a large
increase of interest in the possible role of ﬂuid dynamics in the development
of atherosclerosis in arteries, and the consequent impact of this focal and local
vessel disease. This disease evolves over time to be critical in chronic conditions
such as claudication (from ischemic eﬀects in the legs), transient ischemic eﬀects
in the brain (often followed within 6 months or so by thrombotic strokes), and
myocardial infarctions due to obstruction in coronary arteries. The local pathology of atherosclerotic plaques is widely found in many arterial locations, in vessel
sizes ranging from the aorta down to arteries a tenth or so of the aortic diameter [3, 4]. A pathological ﬁnding, that prompted Caro et al to suggest a role of
local variations in blood ﬂow patterns, is that the distribution of such atherosclerotic lesions on blood vessel walls is not random, but has higher frequency of
incidence closely downstream of arterial branches [1, 2]. Clinically the acute and
locally-focussed treatment of coronary artery disease is undertaken widely in the
angioplasty suite. Cylindrical balloons are introduced to coronary arteries and
inﬂated to open up stenotic sections. Often a physical prop, a stent, is inserted
by balloon to hold open a section that had been stenosed (bottlenecked) by the
disease. More recently, a catheter-based device has been approved for using a
ﬁne wire with a coiled tip to be screwed into a thrombus in the carotid artery
and withdraw it, to clear a passage for blood ﬂow there.
Despite many advances made in understanding cell structure and function in
the past 30 years, especially regarding transmembrane channels, receptors and
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part III, LNCS 3993, pp. 538–545, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

Blood Flow at Arterial Branches

539

the cytoskeleton, as well as in arterial vessel mechanics and function, including
the concept of the vulnerable plaque, on the one hand, and many ﬂow computation and visualization studies in branched and curved tubes on the other hand,
no clear closure to the question of why plaques develop spatially non-randomly
on arterial walls has been achieved. Even in the ﬂow computations and visualizations, little progress has been made in investigating how well the observations
can be explained by combination of prior knowledge of speciﬁc ﬂow situations,
examined for their breadth by comparison with speciﬁc examples. In this paper
some selected examinations of the ﬂow in a circular tube in the vicinity of a side
branch are described and discussed, ﬁrst from using regular ﬂow visualization
with dye streams and secondly using post-processing of computed ﬂows; the latter embrace tube geometric modiﬁcations not achieved in regular physical ﬂow
visualization.

2

Physical Flow Visualization for Branched Tubes

Branched tubes were fabricated by machining - drilling, reaming, and chloroformpolishing - of 3mm-diameter straight holes in clear PMMA ﬂat-sided blocks,
with 1.5mm-diameter side-branches introduced with axes intersecting those of
the primary holes and, in diﬀerent blocks, having the side branches with their
axes at 45 or 90 degrees from the downstream direction of the main 3mm holes.
Directly upstream of the blocks, and with their central axes and internal diameter
matching the 3mm hole in the block, there were two short tube sections each
of which had one small hole permitting a dye stream to be added to the ﬂow,
and capable of being rotated so the dye streams from each could be admitted
at a selected and measured circumferential angle relative to that of the axis
of the side branch downstream. Careful ﬁtting, including use of O-ring seals,
assured that the angle of each dye stream could be altered as desired without
leaks occuring. Photographs of ﬂow patterns as shown by dye ﬂows were taken
with a 35mm Pentax camera having a macro lens.
A typical steady-ﬂow visualization is shown in Figure 1. The ﬂow, passing from
left to right, comes very close to the tube junction before showing any alteration
from straight laminar ﬂow. In the region where the ﬂow divides the dye streams
broaden; because the dye streams have a ﬁnite diameter as they approach, this
makes clear that the ﬂow develops a diﬀerent direction close to the wall than at
small distances radially inwards. Broadly speaking, one expects the ﬂow close
to the wall, having relatively little momentum, to be more sensitive to the local
pressure gradient than portions of the ﬂow closer to the center of the stream. The
pressure gradient is expected to have components both across the main tube and
along it. The transverse component is due to distribution of the reaction force
associated with providing the momentum for the portion of the ﬂow going down
the side branch. The longitudinal component of pressure gradient is associated
with the divergence of streamlines, and the corresponding deceleration of the
portion of the ﬂuid stream entering the exit section of the 3mm-diameter tube.
This divergence reminds one of a classic solution in ﬂuid dynamics, that of steady

540

P.D. Richardson et al.

Fig. 1. Steady flow in a tube with a side branch. Visualization illustrating a case with
flow separation opposite a side branch.

ﬂow in a conical, diverging tube, and it is interesting that this comparison leads
to a prediction of ﬂow conditions - basically a range of values of the side-branch
ﬂow rate divided by the downstream main-tube ﬂow rate, as a function of the
Reynolds number of the ﬂow upstream of the branch - for which ﬂow separation
on the side of the main-tube wall opposite the side-branch, and continuing some
distance downstream, is observed. This was reported ﬁrst as a correlation [5]
in 1985 and subsequently with an outline of the analysis [6] at a conference of
ﬂows in large blood-vessels held in 1989. Our own computations have conﬁrmed
this behavior. Associated with a separated ﬂow there is a signiﬁcant change in
the shear stress in the ﬂow at the wall, and the prospective impact of this on
lipid transport between a blood stream and a vessel wall in this region - which
happens to be where atherosclerotic plaques are found more frequently - was
discussed by Caro et al [1, 2].
When the inﬂow was made pulsatile, the dividing line (between having ﬂow
separation or not on the portion of the wall opposite and downstream of the
opening into the side branch) broadened into a wedge shape: above the upper
line of the wedge the ﬂow was separated there throughout a pulsation, in between
the two lines the ﬂow was episodically separated/attached through a pulsation,
and below the lower line the ﬂow did not separate at any time during the cycle
of a pulsation. The lines came together when the inﬂow Reynolds number at the
upstream portion of the branched tube approached 1,000.
Crossing to the side where the side branch entrance is, the sharp transition of
the wall for ﬂow coming along the upstream wall to the side branch leads to a
ﬂow separation in the corresponding portion of the entrance section of the side
branch over a wider range of ﬂow conditions. This was visible with regular ﬂow
visualization, as illustrated in Figures 2(a) and 2(b), where a branch at 45 degrees was examined - this made it easier to photograph the ﬂow from what is the
lower-left position in Figure 2(a) to provide Figure 2(b) than would have been
the case with a 90-degree branch. Two dyestreams of diﬀerent colors were applied
upstream, and the dye tracks show the dye swerving to enter the side branch in
the mid-position across it entrance mouth as seen in Figures 2(a) and 2(b), the

Blood Flow at Arterial Branches

541

Fig. 2. Steady flow in a tube with a side branch: flow separation in the side branch.
(a) Visualization from a side. (b) Visualization from under side branch.

dyestreams approach each other on the underside of the side branch roughly two
diameters downstream of the entrance and then each divides, some moving retrograde by the wall and towards the entrance and some continuing downstream.
The retrograde ﬂow, on coming very close to the entrance, passes under the ﬂow
which has separated at the upstream edge and is carried downstream in the side
branch. The length of this region with reversed ﬂow was observed to increase down
the side branch as the Reynolds number of the ﬂow in the side branch increased.

3

Visualization of Branched-Tube Flows Derived from
Computations

We have made computations for ﬂows, steady and unsteady in branched tubes
similar to, and also modiﬁed from, those use in the earlier experiments. One
modiﬁcation was to provide curvature to the axes of the tube section, to study
more some details of the ﬂow that would be expected in epicardial coronary
arteries, which ride in grooves on the curved external suface of the heart. It has
been known for several decades following the work of Dean [7] that a secondary
motion is found in steady ﬂow in curved tubes.
We thought it would be interesting to examine vortex lines in the ﬂow, and
developed some by putting seed points in the ﬂow, computing the local vorticity,
marching a small distance in the direction in which it pointed, computing the
local vorticity at that point, revising the direction in which to march to the next
point, and continued for a few thousand small steps before stopping arbitrarily.
If a seed point fell at the edge of the ﬂow ﬁeld and marching produced a straight
line, this was terminated much sooner as an artefact. (In any case, because of the
arbitrariness of seed locations and of terminations there would be some lines that
appeared to start and ﬁnish in the ﬂow, another minor artefact). To visualize
the lines they were each sheathed visually with a thin uniform tube, and then
displayed as in Figure 3(a). As expected, the central core of the ﬂow showed
many similar lines in tight coilings traced in each such sequence, with those in

542

P.D. Richardson et al.

Fig. 3. Steady flow in a tube with a side branch: sample vortex lines from computed
flows. (a) Starter tracking points seeded throughout flows in tube. (b) Sheath, of 0.1
mean velocity magnitude surface, inserted to make only vortex lines close to wall
distinct.

the outer 10 per cent or so of the radius being inclined diﬀerently. To reduce the
visual distraction from the inner coiling, an opaque sheath (with some specular
reﬂectivity) was created where the magnitude of the local velocity was 0.1 of
the mean velocity in the inﬂow. A typical resulting image, again close to the
side branch, is shown in Figure 3(b). A feature observed here is the formation
of ’hairpins’ in a few of the vortex lines. These are evocative of similar hairpins
that form in laminar boundary layers as part of the process of transition to
turbulence, and for any given Reynolds number the likelihood of their being
stimulated is increased when there is an ’adverse’ pressure gradient, as occurs in
this region. This hairpin shape was not observed to evolve downstream, where
the pressure gradient stopped being ’adverse’, and in this case no early transition
to turbulence was indicated. However, it was very interesting to see this, which
physical ﬂow visualization was extremely unlikely to catch. It was present in this
case only on the side where the vessel wall had negative Gaussian curvature, it
was looked for on the opposite side (not shown) but was not present there.
The presence of the reverse ﬂow region at the upstream side of the side branch,
under a locally separated ﬂow entering the side branch from the upstream supply,
was made visible by retaining the sheathing of regions by local magnitudes of 0.1
mean velocity. Use of the magnitude ignores the local direction of ﬂow. Figure 4
shows a close-up of the region close to the entrance in to a 45-degree branch,
and in this Figure the position of the tube walls has not been ghosted in. Visible
in this Figure is an object like a ﬁnless ﬁsh. Because the ﬂow velocity changes
direction between its upper surface and the main ﬂow coming into the side
branch, there is a seeming gap between them where the local velocity is changing
direction and is therefore slow enough to be at less than 0.1 of the entering mean
ﬂow. Similarly, to the left of the underside of the ’ﬁnless ﬁsh’ there is a region
where the local velocity is less than 0.1, and the location of the tube wall is
separated from the visible surface of the ’ﬁsh’. With this understanding, the
similarity of the phenomenon of a reversed ﬂow region displayed in the images

Blood Flow at Arterial Branches

543

Fig. 4. Steady flow in a tube with a side branch: surfaces of 0.1 mean velocity magnitude surface shown. Detail near entry to side branch, with ’finless fish’ showing part
of reverse flow region.

in Figures 2(a) and 2(b) and Figure 4 can be appreciated, in the region just
downstream of the lip of the side branch. This is undoubtedly of relevance to
tubing geometries in manufactured equipment. Arteries are somewhat rounded
locally in this region, and it is likely that the Reynolds number of the approaching
ﬂow has to be large enough, or accelerated rapidly enough, for a similar ﬂow
separation over a reverse ﬂow region to be present there.
Another feature of the ﬂow in regions aﬀected by a side-branch in tubing geometry is secondary motion. Dean-type secondary motions in curved tubes are
already well known, and are driven basically by an imbalance of centrifugal forces
in them. The secondary motion involves ﬂow across the diameter of the tube, in
the plane of its curvature, and running from the tube wall at the inside of the
curve to the outside of the curve, with a compensating ﬂow (to satisfy continuity
requirements) close to the wall surfaces that bracket the plane of the curvature.
Thus the ﬂow moves around in a ”D” shape at each side of the plane of the tube
curvature. The secondary ﬂow requires a ﬁnite arc of curvature to develop into
its full strength: however, this is a fraction of a radian. Even with straight tube
sections, the diversion of part of a straight-ﬂowing stream through an angle into a
side branch involves a ﬁnite period where there can be an imbalance of centrifugal
forces across curved streamlines, and a turn of the order of a radian. Flow visualizations (not shown here) suggest that a pair of counter-rotating secondary-ﬂow
cores are present for some diameters downstream in a side-branch tube. There
may be some in the downstream continuation of the main tube too, especially if
there is ﬂow separation opposite the side branch, as the separation region may be
occupied by a horse-shoe vortex. Dean-type secondary motions can persist even
in the presence of some pulsatility in the ﬂow, and indeed there is some evidence
that pulsatility added to a Dean-type secondary motion may increase the mean
mass or heat transfer coeﬃcient in a curved tube [8] compared with a straight
tube having the same ﬂow through it. Such an increase in mean transfer rates
likely involves even larger variations in local transfer coeﬃcients at diﬀerent circumferential locations. Because the development of atherosclerotic lesions may be

544

P.D. Richardson et al.

Fig. 5. Secondary flow patterns in main tube from our computations, successively (i)
at one tube diameter upstream of intersection of tubing axes (ii) at intersection point of
tubing axes (iii) one diameter downstream (iv) three diameters downstream, together
showing range of slewing-round of the secondary flow by the flow exiting down the side
branch.

aﬀected by local convective lipid transport coeﬃcients, this needs to be examined
in greater detail. With space limitations here, we demonstrate one feature relating
to secondary ﬂows and a side branch.
In Figure 5 we show a sequence of patterns of secondary ﬂow in the main
tube ﬂow, starting one tube-diameter upstream of the point where the axis of
the side branch meets the axis of the main tube; at this position the secondary
ﬂow is almost identical to that in a curved tube without a side branch. The next
secondary ﬂow pattern is at the meeting point of the vessel axes; to the right on
this pattern there are streamlines converging towards 3 o’clock, corresponding
to contribution to the ﬂow into the side branch, and the vorticity core that had
been on the left in the previous ﬂow slewed round roughly 45 degrees clockwise. One diameter further downstream in the main branch the slewing of the
vortex structures persists, but with the outﬂow to the side branch now passed
the second vortex core begins to reorganize. By three diameters downstream of
the meeting-point of the vessel axes the secondary streamlines are close to normal again. Because this variation of the secondary ﬂow - uniquely made visible
by examining the computed ﬂows - will be accompanied by local variations of
the mass transport rate at the wall in a way unlikely to be symmetric about
the midplane through the parent artery and its side branch, some resolution of
the possible role of local transport of lipids may be determined by examining
pathological specimens for helical slewing of the atheroma that develop over the
range in a parent vessel (such as the left anterior descending coronary artery),
downstream of a side branch, in which the secondary ﬂow itself is slewed. Additionally, observations can be made from use of intravascular ultrasound in the
angioplasty suite to similar purpose. With pulsatile ﬂows, as was well demonstrable by viewing streamline patterns close to the wall in a CAVE, the secondary
ﬂow is strongly sensitive to the accelerating phase in its response.

4

Discussion and Conclusions

Prior experimental work, of which some previously unpublished ﬂow visualization (by the senior author with J. Christo) is included here, posed several

Blood Flow at Arterial Branches

545

problems about ﬂow in branched tubes and application to human arteries in
which atherosclerosis has critical clinical impact. Our studies, of which a segment is described here, have utilized the computational and visualization framework already detailed by Sobel et al [9] to examine pulsatile ﬂow in models of
branched arteries and, in particular, to search for and examine particular features of interest such as conditions for ﬂow separation opposite the entrance to
a side branch, ﬂow separation over the lip of a side branch, local instability, and
alteration in secondary ﬂow patterns in a curved tube near a side branch.
In conclusion, this paper illustrates how computational ﬂuid dynamics together with computer visualization form a useful complement to physical experiments and, when broader knowledge of ﬂuid dynamics is also applied, help to
make orderly and systematic interpretation of complex phenomena.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by NSF (CNS-0427374, CCR-0086065).

References
1. C. Caro, J.M. Fitz-Gerald, and R.C. Schroter. Arterial wall shear and distribution
of early atheroma in man. Nature, 223:1159–1161, 1969.
2. C. Caro, J.M. Fitz-Gerald, and R.C. Schroter. Atheroma and wall shear. Observations, correlations, and a proposal for a shear-dependent mass transfer mechanism
for atherogenesis. Proc. Roy. Soc. B, 177:109–159, 1971.
3. N. Woolf. Pathology of atherosclerosis. Butterworth Scientific, London, 1982.
4. M. J. Davies. Atlas of coronary artery disease. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia PA,
1998.
5. J.L. Christo and P.D. Richardson. Flow in a tube with a side branch. In Proc 11th
Annual North East Bioengineering Conf., pages 139–142, 1985.
6. P.D. Richardson and J. Christo. Flow separation opposite a side branch. In D. Liepsch, editor, Biofluid Mechanics: Blood Flow in Large Vessels, 1990.
7. W.R. Dean. The streamline motion of a fluid in a curved pipe. Phil. Mag., (7th
Ser) 4:208–233, 1927.
8. K. Tanishita, K. Nakano, P.D. Richardson, P.M. Galletti, M. Sugwara, and Y. Sakurai. Augmentation of gas transfer with pulsatile flow in the coiled tube membrane
oxygenator design. Trans. Amer. Soc. Artif. Organs, 26:561–565, 1980.
9. J.S. Sobel, A.S. Forsberg, D.H. Laidlaw, R.C. Zeleznik, D.F. Keefe, I. Pivkin, G.E.
Karniadakis, P. Richardson, and S. Swartz. Particle flurries - synoptic 3d pulsatile
flow visualization. IEEE Comp. Graph. Appl., 24(2):76–85, 2004.

