Modelling and Sampling Ramified Objects with
Substructure-Based Method
Weiwei Yin1 , Marc Jaeger2 , Jun Teng1 ,
and Bao-Gang Hu1
1

Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
CIRAD, AMAP, France
{wwyin, jaeger, jteng, hubg}@liama.ia.ac.cn
http://liama.ia.ac.cn

Abstract. This paper describes a technique that speeds up both the
modelling and the sampling processes for a ramiﬁed object. By introducing the notion of substructure, we divide the ramiﬁed object into
a set of ordered substructures, among which only a part of basic substructures is selected for implicit modelling and point sampling. Other
substructures or even the whole object can then be directly instantiated
and sampled by simple transformation and replication without resorting
to the repetitive modelling and sampling processes.

1

Introduction

Smooth blending junctions and complex structures are two distinct characters for
many ramiﬁed objects. Some parametric approaches [1] [9] have been explored
to model and visualize such objects. While, implicit methods [2] [3] which we
would prefer more, well exhibit the local details in ramiﬁcation due to their
unmatched advantages in generating smooth blending surface.
However, implicit surface has its own diﬃculty in generating sampling points
and surface reconstruction when rendering. Bloomenthal and Wyvill ﬁrst proposed to use scattered seed points to sample implicit surface in [2]. After that,
more attentions were paid on the physically based sampling algorithms in [4] [5].
Witkin implemented a quite complete particle system to sample blobby spheres
and cylinders in [6].
In this paper, we do aim to eﬃciently model and sample such ramiﬁed object with smooth blending junctions. With the precondition that the ramiﬁed
object can be hierarchically organized, we recursively divide the object into a
set of ordered substructures, among which only a part of basic substructures
is selected as the new target for implicitly modelling and basic point sampling.
Other substructures or even the whole object can then be directly instantiated
and sampled by transforming and replicating sampling points of the new target
without real geometric modelling and sampling processes.
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3515, pp. 322–326, 2005.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

Modelling and Sampling Ramiﬁed Objects with Substructure-Based Method

2

323

Object Decomposition

We consider a ramiﬁed object consisting of a main branch and several lateral
branches, which may have other lateral branches on them. Based on the botanical
knowledge, we separate the lateral branch from the main axis and divide this
ramiﬁed object into several types of similar subparts (substructures) [7]. Each
substructure is assigned a hierarchical order and redivided in the same way until
it reaches the basic form Subbasic as:
Subbasic = {Axis + Skeleton0 + · · · + Skeletoni + · · · + Skeletonm }

(1)

where Skeletoni denotes a single lateral branch attached to the main axis Axis
and can not be redivided.
An example of two-step decomposition for a ramiﬁed object is shown in the
following equations:
Ojbect = {Axismain + Sub1 + · · · + Subi + · · · + Subn }

(2)

Subi = {Axisimain + Subi1 + · · · + Subij + · · · + Subik }

(3)

where Axismain and Axisimain , represented by a single branch, denote the
corresponding main branches, Subi denotes the substructure in hierarchy 1,
Subij denotes the substructures in hierarchy 2 that constitute Subi in hierarchy 1.
Since our decomposition is fully based on the connective relationship between
the main axis and the lateral branch, a neighborhood graph for substructures
either of the upper-lower hierarchies or among the same hierarchy can be easily
built up. Additionally, level of detail (LOD) techniques can be conveniently
applied in such deﬁned system because all substructures in each order can be
quickly reached and retrieved through the neighborhood graph.

3

Implicit Modelling

A common and intuitive method for modelling smoothly blending surface is
based on the underlying skeletons [2] [3]. A skeleton-based implicit surface is
deﬁned as a set of points P (x, y, z) as follows:
Surf ace = {P (x, y, z) ∈

3

| f (P ) = 0}

(4)

where f (x, y, z) is a ﬁeld function deﬁned by the skeleton.
For a branching structure consisting of skeletons si (i = 1, · · · , n) with the associated ﬁeld functions fi (i = 1, · · · , n), we deﬁne such a skeleton-based implicit
surface and apply blending techniques, for instance the simplest sum operation
n
f (P ) = i=1 fi (P ), to generate smooth blending surface.

324

4

W. Yin et al.

Point Sampling

The basic idea of point sampling is inspired by Witkin [6], who generated a
well distributed sample of particles while had high computational cost when
the sampling particle number was huge. In order to improve sampling eﬃciency
as well as remain the high sampling density, we propose a substructure-based
method, which uses a part of the ramiﬁed object instead of the whole one as the
sampling target. Since the target is shrunk and simpliﬁed, the sampling particle
number is reduced, followed by the computational complexity.
Six steps are included in our substructure-based sampling method and each
step is brieﬂy described in the following:
Step 1. Deﬁne a new target by selecting a representation from each type of
basic substructures.
Step 2. Model the new target with skeleton-based implicit surfaces.
Step 3. Apply Witkin’s sampling algorithm [6] to the implicitly modelled surfaces of the new target. Relevant information of sampled particles, including 3D positions and surface normals, is stored.
Step 4. Instantiate other substructures and the whole object by directly involving and linear geometric transforming the sampled points of the new
target.
Step 5. Detect ramiform particles which come from diﬀerent substructures and
penetrate each other as shown in Fig.1 (left). A particle P (x, y, z) is
considered as a ramiform particle only when
– It is inside the ramiﬁcation area between substructures, and
– The ﬁeld function value at it satisﬁes: |f (P )| > ε
where ε is a very small positive number.
Step 6. Delete all ramiform particles and apply Witkin’s sampling algorithm
again to the skeletons which lie inside the corresponding ramiﬁcation.
A new blending surface will be quickly generated as shown in Fig.1
(left-center).
Non-ramiform particles are considered static on their own position. Sampling
time and computational cost are greatly reduced without managing all particles
at each iteration even if the total number of the particles is very huge. Moreover,
since only ramiﬁcations existing between upper-lower substructures are considered, no unwanted blending will exist between actually non-connected branches.

5

Implementation and Results

The techniques described in this paper have been implemented in C++ code.
The groundwork of our present experiments is the GreenLab Model [8] whose
output is a set of hierarchically structured line skeletons. A simple exponential
function is deﬁned as the ﬁeld function fi for the i th line skeleton:
fi (P ) = exp[−

di (P )2
+ 1] − 1
Ri2

(5)

Modelling and Sampling Ramiﬁed Objects with Substructure-Based Method

325

where di (P ) is the algebraic distance of point P (x, y, z) to the i th skeleton.
Ri , a radius parameter, may be a constant for a constant-radius branch or be
computed by certain linear variable function for a tapered branch.
Some simple examples are shown below. A substructure composed of two
kinds of basic forms is shown in Fig.1 (center). Moreover, with the original one
shown in Fig.1 (right-center), the result of adding a new branch in Fig.1 (right)
is quickly achieved with no need to sample all the skeletons again.

Fig. 1. Left-Right: Before merging (left); After merging (left-center); An example of
substructures (center); Before adding a new branch (right-center); After adding a new
branch (right)

6

Conclusions and Future Work

In this work, we have proposed a substructure-based method to implicitly model
and sample ramiﬁed objects. With the shrunk and simpliﬁed target and the utilization of substructures, both the modelling and sampling processes are sped up
and repetitious works for modelling and sampling the same type of substructures
are avoided. As for the future works, the proposed method will be applied to
real ramiﬁed objects. A texture algorithm for sampling particles is also required.

Acknowledgement
This work is supported in part by the national Natural Science Foundation of
China (#60073007, #60473110) and by China 863 Program (#2002AA241221).

References
1. Bloomenthal, J.: Modeling the Mighty Maple. In: Proc.SIGGRAPH’85, Vol. 19.
(1985) 305–311
2. Bloomenthal, J., Wyvill, B.: Interative Techniques for Implicit Modeling. In: Computer Graphics Forum, Vol. 24. (1990) 109–116
3. Bloomenthal, J., Shoemake, K.: Convolution Surfaces. In: Proc.SIGGRAPH’91,
Vol. 25. (1991) 251–256
4. Turk, G.: Generating Textures on Arbitrary Surfaces Using Reaction-Diﬀusion. In:
ACM TOG, Vol. 25. (1991) 289–298
5. de Figueiredo, L.H., Gomes, J.: Sampling Implicit Objects with Physically-Based
Particle Systems. In: Computer Graphics, Vol. 20. (1996) 365–376

326

W. Yin et al.

6. Witkin, A.P., Heckbert, P.S.: Using Particles to Sample and Control Implicit Surfaces. In: Proc.SIGGRAPH’94. (1994) 269-277
7. Yan, H.P., Barczi, J.F., de Reﬀye, P., Hu, B.-G.: Fast Algorithms of Plant Computation Based on Substructure Instances. In: Proc.the 10th International Conference
in Central Europe on Computer Graphics’02, Vol, 10. (2002) 145–153
8. Yan, H.P., Kang, M.Z., de Reﬀye, P., Dingkuhn, M.: A Dynamic Architectural Plant
Model Simulating Resource-Dependent Growth. In: Annals of Botany, Vol, 1. (2004)
591–602
9. Felkel, P., Kanitsar, A., Fuhrmann, A., Wegenkittl, R.: Surface Models of Tube
Trees. In: Computer Graphics International’04. (2004) 70–77

