Theory of Evolutionary Algorithm: A View
from Thermodynamics
Yuanxiang Li1 , Weiwu Wang1 , Xianjun Shen2 , Weiqin Ying1 , and Bojin Zheng3
1

State Key Lab of Software Engineering
Wuhan University, Wuhan, China, 430072
{yxli@whu.edu.cn,wangww@mail.whut.edu.cn,weiqinying@yahoo.com.cn}
2
Department of Computer Science
Central China Normal University, Wuhan, China, 430079
xjshen@mail.ccnu.edu.cn
3
College of Computer Science
South-Central University For Nationalities, Wuhan, China, 430074
zhengbojin@gmail.com

Abstract. It is recognized that evolutionary algorithms are inspired
from evolutionary biology. In this paper, we set up a thermodynamic
model of evolutionary algorithm. This model is intuitive and has a solid
foundation in thermodynamics. It is our ﬁrst step towards a uniﬁed theory of evolutionary algorithms.
Keywords: Evolutionary Algorithm, Thermodynamics, Thermodynamic
Model of Evolutionary Algorithm.

1

Introduction

The term Evolutionary Algorithm (EA) stands for a family of stochastic problem
solvers based on principles that can be found in biological evolution. Within this
paradigm, achieving a solution to a given problem is seen as a survival task:
possible solutions compete with the others for survival, and this competition
is the driving force behind the progress that supposedly leads to an optimal
solution [1].
There are numerous successful applications of EA in business and industry, but
such successes are not fully understood. It has been proposed a lot of theories such
as schema theory [2], Markov chains theory [3], dimensional analysis [4], order statistics [5], quantitative genetics [6], quadratic dynamical systems [7] and statistical
physics [8]. But the problem of these theories is either that they are too complicated to understand or they do not apply to algorithms that are widely used. Is
there an intuitive and uniﬁed theory of EA? In this paper, we present our preliminary result of this research. It is the thermodynamic model of EA.

2

Basis of Thermodynamics

Thermodynamics is a branch of physics which deals with the energy and work
of a system. Thermodynamics deals only with the large scale response of the
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 1179–1182, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

1180

Y. Li et al.

system. Small scale interactions are described by kinetic theory. These both
theories compliment the other; some principles are more easily understood in
terms of thermodynamics and some other principles are more easily explained
by kinetic theory. The association between thermodynamics and kinetic theory
can be derived by statistical mechanics.
2.1

Thermodynamic System

A thermodynamic system is a quantity of matter of ﬁxed identity, around which
we can draw a boundary. The boundaries may be ﬁxed or moveable. Work or
heat can be transferred across the system boundary. Everything outside the
boundary is called the surroundings.
2.2

The Zeroth Law

The zeroth law of thermodynamics begins with a simple deﬁnition of thermodynamic equilibrium. Thermodynamic equilibrium can be observed as follow: if
two of these objects are brought into physical contact there is initially a change
in the property of both objects, but, eventually, the change in property stops.
The objects are said to be in thermodynamic equilibrium.
2.3

The First Law

The ﬁrst law of thermodynamics is the application of the conservation of energy
principle to heat and thermodynamic processes. Any thermodynamic system in
an equilibrium state possesses a state variable called the internal energy. Between
any two equilibrium states, the change in internal energy is equal to the diﬀerence
of heat transfer into the system and work done by the system.
There are three ways that heat may be transferred between substances at
diﬀerent temperatures: conduction, convection, and radiation. The ﬂow of heat
by conduction occurs via collisions between molecules in the substance and the
subsequent transfer of translational kinetic energy. Convection is the ﬂow of heat
through a bulk, macroscopic movement of matter from a hot region to a cool
region, as opposed to the microscopic transfer of heat between molecules involved
with conduction. The third and last form of heat transfer is radiation, which in
this context means light. For example, from the sun to the earth through mostly
empty space - such a transfer cannot occur via convection nor conduction, which
require the movement of material from one place to another or the collisions of
molecules within the material. From above, the change of internal energy is
caused by the changes of micro states of molecules.
2.4

The Second Law

The ﬁrst law of thermodynamics allows for many possible states of a system to
exist. But, experience indicates that only certain states occur. This leads to the
second law of thermodynamics and the deﬁnition of another state variable called

Theory of Evolutionary Algorithm: A View from Thermodynamics

1181

entropy. Entropy can be deﬁned as a measure of the multiplicity of a system.
For a system of a large number of molecules, like a mole of molecules, the most
probable state will be found in the state of highest multiplicity. Accordingly, the
distribution at the time is the maximum entropy distribution.

3

Thermodynamic Model of Evolutionary Algorithm

There are many similarities between thermodynamic system and EA population.
Firstly, a thermodynamic system is made up by a number of molecules, while
the EA population is also made up by a number of individuals. Secondly both
the molecules and individuals work randomly.
In the thermodynamic model of EA, a population is a thermodynamic system.
An individual is a molecule. The chromosome of the individual presents the micro
state of the molecule. The energy of the molecule is the ﬁtness of the individual,
which is decided by the problem. The sum of all individual ﬁtness is the ﬁtness
of the population. It is the internal energy of the system.
For a minimization problem, the task is to ﬁnd the micro state of the molecule
with the lowest energy, which is referred as the ground state. For a given micro
state, it is easy to assign an energy, but it is hard to construct a micro state for
a given energy. The way to ﬁnd the ground state is using the search operator.
There are two kinds of search operators in EA, especially for GA. One is
mutation. The other is crossover. In the thermodynamic model of EA, mutation
is similar to radiation and crossover is similar to conduction. Both mutation and
crossover are means of heat transferring.
The survival strategy and update strategy in the thermodynamic model of EA
are the applications of the conservation of energy principle and the conservation
of mass principle. Before the application of search operator, the parents, who
are selected by selection operator according to the distribution of individuals,
possess some amount of energy. After the application of search operator, the
children possess other amount of energy. The survivals are the whole of parent
or the whole of children who possess less energy. The winers take place of the
losers. The replacement leads to a new distribution of individuals and a new
state of the system. The change of system state leads to the change of system
energy. The change of system energy is the work done by the algorithm.
If the given time of running is long enough, the population and algorithm get
into thermodynamic equilibrium. We can analyze the property, performance and
eﬃciency of the algorithm by the termination state of the population.
The summary of thermodynamic model of evolutionary algorithm is show in
Tab.1.

4

Future Work

In this paper, we set up a thermodynamic model of EA. It has a solid foundation
in thermodynamics. It can be taken as a reference model of EA to compare the

1182

Y. Li et al.
Table 1. Summary of thermodynamic model of evolutionary algorithm
EA
population
individual
chromosome
ﬁtness function
individual ﬁtness
population ﬁtness
selection
crossover
mutation
optimal solution

Thermodynamics
system
molecule
micro state
energy function
molecular energy
internal energy
distribution
conduction
radiation
ground state

diﬀerence between EAs. In the future, we hope we can propose a uniﬁed theory
of EA based on the thermodynamic model of EA.

Acknowledgment
This paper was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
under Grant No.60473014, and the Specialized Research Fund for the Doctoral
Program of Higher Education of China under Grant No.20030486049.

References
1. Eiben, A.E., Rudolph, G.: Theory of evolutionary algorithms: a bird’s eye view.
Theoretical Computer Science 229(1–2) (1999) 3–9
2. Holland, J.: Adaptation in Natural and Artiﬁcial Systems. University of Michigan
Press, Ann Arbor, USA (1975)
3. Nix, A.E., Vose, M.D.: Modeling genetic algorithms with markov chains. Annals of
Mathematics and Artiﬁcial Intelligence 5(1) (1992) 79–88
4. Goldberg, D., Deb, K., Thierens, D.: Toward a better understanding of mixing in genetic algorithms. Journal of the Society for Instrumentation and Control Engeering
32(1) (1993) 10–16
5. Beyer, H.G.: Toward a theory of evolution strategies: the (μ,λ)-theory. Evolutionary
Computation 2(4) (1994) 381–407
6. M¨
uhlenbein, H., Schlierkamp-Voosen, D.: Predictive models for the breeder genetic
algorithm I: Continuous parameter optimization. Evolutionary Computation 1(1)
(1993) 25–49
7. Vose, M.D., Liepins, G.E.: Punctuated equilibria in genetic search. Complex Systems
5(1) (1991) 31–44
8. Pr¨
ugel-Bennett, A., Shapiro, J.L.: An analysis of genetic algorithms using statistical
mechanics. Physical Review Letters 72 (1994) 1305–1309

