An ID-Based Random Key Pre-distribution Scheme for
Wireless Sensor Networks*
Tran Thanh Dai and Choong Seon Hong**
Networking Lab, Department of Computer Engineering, Kyung Hee University, Korea
daitt@networking.khu.ac.kr, cshong@khu.ac.kr

Abstract. When wireless senor networks (WSNs) are deployed in hostile areas,
they indeed need to be secured by security mechanisms. To do this, cryptographic keys must be agreed on by communicating nodes. Unluckily, due to
resource constraints, the key agreement problem in wireless sensor networks
becomes quite intricate. In this paper, we propose a new ID-based random key
pre-distribution scheme that is comparable to Du et al.’s scheme [2] in terms of
network resiliency and memory usage. On the other hand, our later analysis
shows that our scheme outperforms Du et al.’s scheme in terms of computational and communication overhead.
Keywords: ID-based, random key pre-distribution, key agreement, security,
wireless sensor networks.

1 Introduction
There has been a trend that WSNs have been getting mature together with wider and
wider applications and deployments. In such trend, providing security services based
on solving the key agreement problem becomes one of the major concerns. Unfortunately, due to resource constraints of WSNs, such problem becomes quite intricate.
Motivated by such challenge, in this paper, we propose a highly resilient, robust,
resource-efficient, and ID-based random key pre-distribution scheme. Our scheme as
analyzed later is much like Du et al.’s scheme [2] (Du’s scheme) regarding network
resiliency with the same memory cost. Moreover, our scheme significantly improves
resource usage relating to computational and communication overhead compared to
Du’s scheme. The rest of this paper is organized as follows: section 2 mentions the
related work; section 3 describes our ID-based random key pre-distribution scheme;
section 4 analyzes the resiliency of our scheme against node capture attack and presents the performance analysis in terms of memory usage, communication overhead,
and computational overhead; section 5 concludes the paper and states our future work.

2 Related Work
Matsumoto and Imai proposed an efficient scheme (IM scheme) for the key
agreement problem between two entities [1]. Fig. 1 illustrates how a pairwise
*
**

This work was supported by MIC and ITRC Project.
Corresponding author.

Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 590–593, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

An ID-Based Random Key Pre-distribution Scheme for WSNs

591

key K ij = K ji is generated where N - maximum number of deployable
nodes; m = log 2 ( N ) - number of bits used to represent an effective ID of each entity; l

- number of (m × m) symmetric matrices M ω s over finite field GF (2) ; yi (i = 1, N ) -

m-dimensional vector, effective ID of node Si; yi (i = 1, N ) - m-dimensional vector,
effective ID of node Si.

Fig. 1. Pairwise key generating in MI scheme

3 ID-Based Multiple Space Key Pre-distribution Scheme
3.1 Keying Material Pre-distribution Phase

During this phase, we have to pre-distribute keying material to each node such that
after deployment neighboring nodes can derive a pairwise key between them using
this material. This phase is performed as follows. First, a central server generates λ
key spaces. Each key space Ωi consists of l (m × m) symmetric matrices M iω s as
defined in IM scheme. Then, we randomly choose μ distinct key spaces from key
spaces for each node. For each space chosen by node Sj, we first compute keying
material Φ ji and then store it at this node. Therefore, each node Sj has distinct values
of Φ ji s. Using MI scheme; two nodes can derive a pairwise key if they have both
chosen a common key space.
3.2 Pairwise Key Establishment Phase

After deployment, each node needs to discover whether it shares any key space with
its neighbors. Suppose that nodes Si and Sj are neighbors, then they instantly broadcast
a message containing the following information: each node’s effective ID and the
indices of the key spaces it carries. If they figure out that they have an identical index
of a key space (or identical key space Ω s ), they can easily compute their pairwise key
using MI scheme. Conversely, there is the case that two nodes who even are
neighbors could not establish a pairwise key. To tackle this problem, the method presented in [2] could be utilized. Due to the limited size of paper, we do not discuss in
detail here.

592

T.T. Dai and C.S. Hong

4 Security and Performance Analysis
Our security evaluation is conducted by finding the answer to two questions: (i) Given
that b nodes are captured, what is the probability that at least one key space is broken?
(ii) Given that b nodes are captured, what fraction of the additional communications
(communications among un-captured nodes) also becomes compromised? These two
questions are already answered in [2]. The answer to the first question is as follows:
k

⎛b ⎞⎛ μ ⎞ ⎛ μ ⎞
P(at least one space is broken|Cb ) = λ ∑ ⎜ ⎟ ⎜ ⎟ ⎜ 1 − ⎟
λ⎠
k =m ⎝ k ⎠ ⎝ λ ⎠ ⎝
b

b −k

.

(1)

The answer to the second question is the following equality:
k

⎛b ⎞⎛ μ ⎞ ⎛ μ ⎞
P( s is broken|Cb ) = ∑ ⎜ ⎟⎜ ⎟ ⎜1 − ⎟
λ⎠
k =m ⎝ k ⎠ ⎝ λ ⎠ ⎝
b

b−k

.

(2)

where s denotes an additional secure communication link.
To analyze our scheme performance, we evaluate its memory usage, communication overhead, and computational overhead using Du’s scheme as a benchmark. For
each key space, according to MI scheme, each node Si has to spend m × l bits on storing the value of Φ i . Thus the total memory usage (KB) for each node with μ chosen

m×l × μ
. This value is exactly identical to the memory consumption
8 ×1024
of Du’s scheme. Concerning the communication overheads of our scheme and Du’s
scheme, we draw a self-explanatory comparison as shown in fig. 2.

key spaces is:

Extra comm. overhead of each node in [2]
compared to our scheme (Byte)

30
k
k
k
k
k

25

=
=
=
=
=

64 bits
80 bits
96 bits
112 bits
128 bits

20

15

10

5

0
50

60

70

80
90
100
m - collusion threshold

110

120

130

Fig. 2. Extra communication overhead of each node in [2] compared to our scheme

Regarding computational overhead, to compute a pairwise key, each node of our
scheme needs to perform a multiplication of a (l × m) matrix and an (m ×1) effective
ID. Therefore, each node needs l × m single-precision multiplications while each
node in [2] needs to do 2 × (m − 1) × l 2 single-precision multiplications. It follows that
the computational overhead of our scheme is far less than that in [2]. The numbers in
fig. 3 reinforce our argument.

An ID-Based Random Key Pre-distribution Scheme for WSNs

593

5

18

x 10

Our scheme
Du et at's scheme

Computational overhead
Number of single-precision multiplications

16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
60

70

80

90
100
l - k ey length

110

120

130

Fig. 3. Computational overhead in each node with various key lengths

5 Conclusions and Future Work
This paper proposes a new key pre-distribution scheme for WSNs that can be considered as a refinement of two types of schemes: ID-based key pre-distribution scheme
and random key pre-distribution scheme. As a result, our scheme possesses a number
of attractive properties. First, our scheme is scalable and flexible in terms of network
size. Second, our scheme substantially improves network resiliency against node
capture attack compared to schemes [3], [4] and are comparable to Du’s scheme. The
performance of our scheme is also investigated to show its efficiency. Accordingly,
our scheme is the same as Du’s scheme in terms of memory usage. Moreover, our
scheme is more efficient than Du’s scheme concerning communication overhead.
Finally, computational overhead of our scheme is argued to be far less than that of
Du’s scheme. However, our scheme is still vulnerable to node replication attack and
key-swapping collusion attack. Therefore, in our future work, we would like to explore additional mechanisms to efficiently and radically thwart these attacks.

References
1. Matsumoto, T., Imai, H.: On the Key Predistribution System: A Practical Solution to the
Key Distribution Problem. CRYPTO’87, LNCS Vol. 293, 8(1987)185-193
2. Du, W., Deng, J., Han, Y.S., Varshney, P.K., Katz, J., Khalili, A.: A pairwise key predistribution scheme for wireless sensor networks. ACM Trans. Info. Sys. Sec., Vol. 8, No. 2,
5(2005)228-258
3. Eschenauer, L., Gligor, V.D.: A key-management scheme for distributed sensor networks.
Proc. of the 9th ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security, 11(2002)
41-47
4. Chan, H., Perrig, A., Song, D.: Random key predistribution schemes for sensor networks.
Proc. IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, 5(2003)197-213

