Targeted Observations for Atmospheric
Chemistry and Transport Models
Adrian Sandu
Department of Computer Science, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University, Blacksburg, VA 24061
sandu@cs.vt.edu

Abstract. The aim of this paper is to address computational aspects
of the targeted observations problem for atmospheric chemical transport
models. The fundamental question being asked is where to place the
observations such that, after data assimilation, the uncertainty in the
resulting state is minimized. Our approach is based on reducing the system along the subspace deﬁned by the dominant singular vectors, and
computing the locations of maximal inﬂuence on the veriﬁcation area.
Numerical results presented for a simulation of atmospheric pollution in
East Asia in March 2001 show that the optimal location of observations
depends on the pattern of the ﬂow but is diﬀerent for diﬀerent chemical species. Targeted observations have been previously considered in
the context of numerical weather prediction. This work is, to the best of
our knowledge, the ﬁrst eﬀort to study targeted observations in the context of chemical transport modeling. The distinguishing feature of these
models is the presence of stiﬀ chemical interactions.
Keywords: Chemical transport models, data assimilation, adjoint models, singular vectors, targeted observations.

1

Introduction

Our ability to anticipate and manage changes in atmospheric pollutant concentrations relies on an accurate representation of the chemical state of the
atmosphere. As our fundamental understanding of atmospheric chemistry advances, novel computational tools are needed to integrate observational data
and models together to provide the best, physically consistent estimate of the
evolving chemical state of the atmosphere. Such an analysis state better deﬁnes
the spatial and temporal ﬁelds of key chemical components in relation to their
sources and sinks. This information is critical in designing cost-eﬀective emission
control strategies for improved air quality, for the interpretation of observational
data such as those obtained during intensive ﬁeld campaigns, and to the execution of air-quality forecasting.
Data assimilation is the process of integrating observational data and model
predictions in order to provide an optimal analysis of the state of the system
(here, the atmosphere) and/or optimal estimates of important model parameters (e.g., the strength of the anthropogenic emissions that drive the pollutant
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part I, LNCS 3991, pp. 712–719, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

Targeted Observations for Atmospheric Chemistry and Transport Models

713

concentrations in the atmosphere). In a variational approach data assimilation
is formulated as an optimization problem where the model parameters are estimated such that the mismatch between model predictions and observations
is minimized. In atmospheric applications data assimilation is typically used to
ﬁnd the optimal initial state of the system; the resulting parameter estimation
problems have millions of control variables.
The objective of this work is to develop techniques for optimal placement of
observations in chemical transport modeling. Adaptive observations placed in
well-chosen locations can reduce the initial condition uncertainties and decrease
forecast errors. A number of methods were proposed to “target observations”,
i.e. to select areas where additional observations are expected to improve considerably the skill of a given forecast. Our proposed approach uses singular vectors
to identify the most sensitive regions of the atmospheric ﬂow and to optimally
conﬁgure the observational network. The observations are placed in locations
that have a maximal perturbation energy impact on the veriﬁcation area at the
veriﬁcation time.
Singular vectors (SVs) are the directions of fastest error growth over a ﬁnite
time interval [10, 14]. Buizza and Montani [1] showed that SVs can identify the
most sensitive regions of the atmosphere for targeted observations. Majudmar
et al.[12] compare the SV approach for observation targeting to the ensemble
transform Kalman ﬁlter. D˘
aescu and Navon [5] discuss the adaptive observation
problem in the context of 4D-Var data assimilation. Estimation of the optimal
placement of adaptive observations is also discussed in [7, 11]. Leutbecher [9]
derives optimal locations of observations by minimizing the variance of the assimilated ﬁeld; a computationally tractable problem is obtained by projecting
the covariance on the subspace of the dominant singular vectors.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we introduce the chemical
transport models and the concept of singular vectors as the directions of maximal energy growth. Section 3 discusses a maximum energy impact criterion for
placing the observations. Numerical results from a simulation of air pollution in
East Asia are shown in Section 4. Section 5 summarizes the main ﬁndings of this
work.

2
2.1

Background
3D Chemical-Transport Models

Chemical transport models solve the mass-balance equations for concentrations
of trace species in order to determine the fate of pollutants in the atmosphere
[16]. Let ci be the mole-fraction concentration of chemical species i, Qi be the
rate of surface emissions, Ei be the rate of elevated emissions and fi be the rate
of chemical transformations. Further, u is the wind ﬁeld vector, K the turbulent
diﬀusivity tensor, and ρ is the air density. The evolution of ci is described by
the following equations
∂ci
1
1
= −u · ∇ci + ∇ · (ρK∇ci ) + fi (ρc) + Ei ,
∂t
ρ
ρ

t0 ≤ t ≤ t v ,

714

A. Sandu

ci (t0 , x) = c0i (x) ,
for x ∈ Γ in ,

ci (t, x) = cin
i (t, x)
K

∂ci
= Videp ci − Qi
∂n

for

K

∂ci
=0
∂n

x ∈ Γ ground ,

for x ∈ Γ out ,

(1)

for all 1 ≤ i ≤ Nspec .

Here Γ denotes the domain boundary (composed of the inﬂow, outﬂow, and
ground level parts) and x is the spatial location within the domain. We will use
M to denote the solution operator of the model (1). The state is propagated
forward in time from the “initial” time t0 to the “veriﬁcation” time tv (i.e., the
ﬁnal time of interest)
c(tv ) = Mt0 →tv (c(t0 )) .

(2)

Perturbations (small errors) evolve according to the tangent linear model (TLM)
δc(tv ) = Mto →tv δc(t0 ) ,

(3)

and adjoint variables according to the adjoint model
λ(t0 ) = M∗tv →to λ(tv ) .

(4)

Here M and M ∗ denote the solution operators of the two linearized models. A
detailed description of chemical transport models, and the corresponding tangent
linear and adjoint models, is given in [17].
Our main interest is to minimize the forecast uncertainty over a well deﬁned
area (the “veriﬁcation domain” Ωv ⊂ Ω) at a well deﬁned time (the “veriﬁcation
time” tv ). We deﬁne a spatial restriction operator G from the entire model
domain to the veriﬁcation domain:
G:Ω⊂
2.2

n

−→ Ωv ⊂

nv

,

nv

n.

(5)

Singular Vectors

Singular vectors (SVs) determine the most rapidly growing perturbations in the
atmosphere. The magnitude of the perturbation at the initial time t0 is measured
in the L2 norm deﬁned by a symmetric positive deﬁnite matrix E
δc(t0 )

2
E

= δc(t0 ) , E δc(t0 )

.

(6)

Similarly, the perturbation magnitude at the veriﬁcation time tv is measured in
a norm deﬁned by a positive deﬁnite matrix F
δc(tv )

2
F

= δc(tv ) , F δc(tv )

.

(7)

We call the norms (6) and (7) squared the “perturbation energies”. The ratio
between perturbation energies at tv (over the veriﬁcation domain) and at t0
(over the entire domain) oﬀers a measure of error growth:
σ2 =

δc(t0 ), M∗tv →to G∗ F G Mto →tv δc(t0 )
G δc(tv ) 2F
=
δc(t0 ) 2E
δx(t0 ), Eδc(t0 )

(8)

Targeted Observations for Atmospheric Chemistry and Transport Models

715

In (8) we use the fact that perturbations evolve in time according to the dynamics
of the tangent linear model (3).
SVs are deﬁned as the directions of maximal error growth, i.e. the vectors
sk (t0 ) that maximize the ratio σ 2 in equation (8). These directions are the solutions of the generalized eigenvalue problem
M∗tv →to G∗ F G Mto →tv sk (t0 ) = σk2 E sk (t0 ) .

(9)

The left side of (9) involves one integration with the tangent linear model followed
by one integration with the adjoint model. The eigenvalue problem (9) can be
solved eﬃciently using the software package ARPACK [8].
Using the square root of the the symmetric positive deﬁnite matrix E the
generalized eigenvalue problem (9) can be reduced to a simple eigenvalue problem
E− 2 M∗tv →to G∗ FG Mto →tv E− 2 vk = σk2 vk (t0 ) ,
1

1

1

vk = E 2 sk (t0 ) .

(10)

Furthermore, vk (t0 ) are the left singular vectors in the singular value decomposition
F 2 G Mto →tv E− 2 = U ·Σ·V T
1

1

where Σ = diagk {σk } ,

1

σk uk = F 2 G sk (tv ) .
(11)

The SVs sk are E-orthogonal at t0 and F-orthogonal at tv
sk (t0 ), Esj (t0 ) = 0

for j = k .
(12)
The equations (11) and (12) justify the name of “singular vectors”. The singular
value decomposition of the linear operator Mt0 →tv , with the E scalar product
at t0 and the F scalar product at tv , has the left singular vectors sk (t0 ) and the
right singular vectors sk (tv ). The singular values σk are the error ampliﬁcation
factors along each direction sk .
The computation of singular vectors in the presence of stiﬀ chemistry is discussed in [17], where computational challenges are reported related to the loss
of symmetry due to the stiﬀ nature of equations.
2.3

and

Gsk (tv ), FGsj (tv ) = 0

Perturbation Norms

In numerical weather prediction models variables have diﬀerent physical meanings (wind velocity, temperature, air density, etc). The energy norms correspond
to physical total energy, potential enstrophy, etc. Such norms provide a uniﬁed
measure for the magnitude of perturbations in variables of diﬀerent types.
In chemical transport models variables are concentrations of chemical species.
Since all variables have the same physical meaning, and similar units, we expect
that simple L2 norms in (6) and (7) will provide a reasonable measure of the
“magnitude of the perturbation”. Since concentrations of diﬀerent species vary
by many orders of magnitude we expect that the perturbations of the more
abundant species (e.g., CO) will dominate the total perturbation norms. To
have a balanced account for the inﬂuence of all species it is of interest to consider

716

A. Sandu

the directions of maximal relative error growth. For practical reasons [17] it is
advantageous to approximate the relative errors by the absolute errors δcsijk
s
scaled by “typical” concentration values wijk
at each time instant. Therefore
the choice of matrices in the norms (6) and (7) is
s
(t)
W (t) = diagi,j,k,s wi,j,k

E = W (t0 )−2 ,

,

F = W (tv )−2 .

s
One reason for this approximation is that the “typical” concentrations wi,j,k
can
be chosen to be bounded away from zero. More importantly, having the weights
independent of the system state c keeps the maximization problem equivalent
to a generalized eigenvalue problem.

3

Targeted Chemical Observations

We now determine those locations where perturbations have the largest energy
impact over the veriﬁcation area. For this, consider an initial perturbation vector
δk equal to zero everywhere, except for one component at a given location where
its value is 1. The index k spans all variables in the system, and a particular
value of k identiﬁes a single chemical component and a single location.
A certain species at a certain location is perturbed (or, equivalently, is observed, and therefore the perturbation is reduced). This vector can be written
in terms of the singular vectors
s
=
δi,j,k

αm sm (t0 ) ,
m

where the expansion coeﬃcients can be obtained by the orthogonality relations
of the singular vectors
s

s
αm = δi,j,k
, E sm (t0 ) = (E sm (t0 ))i,j,k

The vector of perturbations at the ﬁnal time is
δc(tv ) =

αm Mto →tv sm (t0 ) =
m

αm σm sm (tv ) .
m

Using the orthogonality of the singular vectors at the ﬁnal time in the F-norm
we have that the total perturbation energy is
s
= Gδc(tv ) , FGδc(tv ) =
Ei,j,k

s

2 2
σm
αm =
m

2
(E sm (t0 ))i,j,k
σm

2

m

A vector which has each component equal to the energy impact of the corresponding delta initial perturbation is therefore:
2
σm
(E sm (t0 ))2 =

E=
m

2
ζm
.
m

(13)

Targeted Observations for Atmospheric Chemistry and Transport Models

717

The squares of the vectors are considered in an element by element sense. Clearly
this sum can be well approximated by the ﬁrst several terms which correspond
to the dominant singular values.
The observations should be located at those points where the energetic impact
over the veriﬁcation area is the largest. These points are easily identiﬁed as they
are the largest entries of the E vector.

4

Numerical Results

The numerical tests use the state-of-the-art regional atmospheric chemical transport model STEM [2]. The simulation covers a region of 7200 km × 4800 km in
East Asia and the simulated conditions correspond to March 2001. More details
about the forward model simulation conditions and comparison with observations are available in [2].
The computational grid has nx × ny × nz nodes with nx =30, ny =20, nx =18,
and a horizontal resolution of 240 km × 240 km. The chemical mechanism is
SAPRC-99 [3] which considers the gas-phase atmospheric reactions of volatile
organic and nitrogen oxides in urban and regional settings. The adjoint of the
comprehensive model STEM is discussed in detailed in [16]. Both the forward
and adjoint chemical models are implemented using KPP [4, 6, 15]. The forward
and adjoint models are parallelized using PAQMSG [13]. ARPACK [8] was used
to solve the symmetric generalized eigenvalue problems and compute the singular
vectors.
We are interested in minimizing the uncertainty in the prediction of ground
level ozone concentrations above Korea at 0 GMT March 4, 2001 (shaded area
in Figure 1). Thus the “veriﬁcation area” is Korea, and the “veriﬁcation time” is

4

50

O3
NO2
CO
HCHO

Altitude [Km]

Latitude [deg N]

3

40

2

O3
NO2
CO
HCHO

30

1

20
100

105

110

115

120

125

Longitude [deg E]

130

135

0
100

105

110

115

120

125

130

135

Longitude [deg E]

Fig. 1. Optimal placement of chemical observations using the maximum energy impact
criterion. Observations of O3 , N O2 , HCHO, and CO are shown. The veriﬁcation is
ground level ozone over Korea (shaded area) at 0 GMT March 4, 2001. The observations
are taken at 6h (circle), 12h (diamond), 18h (downward triangle), 24h (square), 36h
(pentagon), and 48h (upward triangle) before veriﬁcation time.

718

A. Sandu

0 GMT March 4 2001. Most of the uncertainty in the veriﬁcation region at the
ﬁnal time is determined by the uncertainty along the dominant singular vectors
at the initial time. The uncertainty (error) growth rates along each direction are
given by the corresponding singular values.
In order to improve predictions within the veriﬁcation region observations are
needed in areas of maximal perturbation impact, determined using the dominant
singular vectors. The optimal location of chemical observations at 6h, 12h, 18h,
24h, and 48h before the veriﬁcation time is illustrated in Figure 1. As expected
the optimal location of observations changes in time and drifts away from the
veriﬁcation area for longer intervals. Due to the diﬀerent roles played by diﬀerent
chemical species in ozone formation, the optimal location of O3 measurements is
diﬀerent than the optimal location of N O2 or HCHO observations. For example
O3 can be formed in the presence of N O2 emissions and then transported over
long distances. In contrast, the HCHO lifetime is short and it can produce O3
only locally.

5

Conclusions

The integration of observations and model predictions through data assimilation
is essential for improved forecast capabilities in numerical weather prediction
and in air pollution simulations. Atmospheric data assimilation is a parameter
estimation problem with millions of degrees of freedom: the optimal analysis
state of the atmosphere is found by minimizing the mismatch between model
predictions and observations.
This paper develops a computationally tractable approach to target atmospheric chemical observations. The fundamental question being asked is where
to place the observations such that, after data assimilation, the uncertainty in
the resulting state is minimized. Our approach is based on reducing the system
along the subspace deﬁned by the dominant singular vectors, and placing the
observations are placed in those locations that have a maximal perturbation
energy impact on the veriﬁcation area at the veriﬁcation time. Numerical results
presented for a simulation of atmospheric pollution in East Asia in March 2001
show that the optimal location of observations depends on the pattern of the
ﬂow but is diﬀerent for diﬀerent chemical species.
Targeted observations have been previously considered in the context of numerical weather prediction. This work is, to the best of our knowledge, the ﬁrst
eﬀort to target chemical observations in the context of reactive atmospheric ﬂow
models.
Acknowledgments. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation
through the awards NSF ITR AP&IM 0205198, NSF CAREER ACI–0413872,
and NSF CCF–0515170, by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and by the Texas Environmental Research Consortium (TERC).
We would like to thank Virginia Tech’s Laboratory for Advanced Scientiﬁc Computing (LASCA) for the use of the Anantham cluster.

Targeted Observations for Atmospheric Chemistry and Transport Models

719

References
1. R. Buizza and A. Montani. Targeting observations using singular vectors. Journal
of the Atmospheric Sciences, 56:2965–2985, 1999.
2. G.R. Carmichael et al. Regional-scale chemical transport modeling in support of
the analysis of observations obtained during the TRACE-P experiment. Journal
of Geophysical Research, 108:10649–10671, 2003.
3. W.P.L. Carter. Implementation of the SAPRC-99 chemical mechanism into the
Models-3 framework. Technical report, United States Environmental Protection
Agency, January 2000.
4. D.N. Daescu, A. Sandu, and G.R. Carmichael. Direct and adjoint sensitivity analysis of chemical kinetic systems with KPP: I – numerical validation and applications.
Atmospheric Environment, 37:5097–5114, 2003.
5. D.N. Daescu and I.M. Navon. Adaptive observations in the context of 4d-Var data
assimilation. Meteorology and Atmospheric Physics, 84(4):205–226, 2004.
6. V. Damian, A. Sandu, M. Damian, F. Potra, and G.R. Carmichael. The kinetic preprocessor KPP - a software environment for solving chemical kinetics. Computers
and Chemical Engineering, 26:1567–1579, 2002.
7. R. Gelaro, R. Buizza, T.N. Palmer, and E. Klinker. Sensitivity analysis of forecast
errors and the construction of optimal perturbations using singular vectors. Journal
of the Atmospheric Sciences, 55:1012–1037, 1998.
8. R. Lehoucq, K. Maschhoﬀ, D. Sorensen, and C. Yang. ARPACK software home
page. http:// www.caam.rice.edu/ software/ ARPACK.
9. M. Leutbecher. A reduced rank estimate of forecast error variance changes due to
intermittent modiﬁcations of the observing network. Journal of the Atmospheric
Sciences, 60:729–742, 2003.
10. E.N. Lorenz. A study of the predictability of a 28 variable atmospheric model.
Tellus, 17:321–333, 1965.
11. E.N. Lorenz and K.A. Emanuel. Optimal sites for supplementary observations:
simulation with a small model. Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences, 55:399–414,
1998.
12. S.J. Majumdar, C.H. Bishop, R. Buizza, and R. Gelaro. A comparison of ensemble
transform Kalman ﬁlter targeting guidance with ECMWF and NRL total-energy
singular vector guidance. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society,
128:2527–2549, 2002.
13. P. Miehe, A. Sandu, G.R. Carmichael, Y. Tang, and D. Daescu. A communication
library for the parallelization of air quality models on structured grids. Atmospheric
Environment, 36:3917–3930, 2002.
14. F. Molteni and T.N. Palmer. Predictability and ﬁnite-time instability of the Northern winter circulation. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society,
119:269–298, 1993.
15. A. Sandu, D. Daescu, and G.R. Carmichael. Direct and adjoint sensitivity analysis
of chemical kinetic systems with KPP: I – Theory and software tools. Atmospheric
Environment, 37:5083–5096, 2003.
16. A. Sandu, D. Daescu, G.R. Carmichael, and T. Chai. Adjoint sensitivity analysis
of regional air quality models. Journal of Computational Physics, 204:222–252,
2005.
17. W. Liao, A. Sandu, G.R. Carmichael, and T. Chai. Total Energy Singular Vector
Analysis for Atmospheric Chemical Transport Models. Monthly Weather Review,
accepted, 2005.

