Hierarchical Neural Network Based
Compression of ECG Signals
Bekir Karlik
Department of Computer Engineering, University of Bahrain, P.O. Box: 32038,
Kingdom of Bahrain
bkarlik@itc.uob.bh

Abstract. Electrocardiogram (ECG) data compression algorithm is needed that
will reduce the amount of data to be transmitted, stored and analyzed, but
without losing the clinical information content. An example of application of
hierarchical neural network structure is described for compression of ECG
signals. Then results of this lossy compression method were compared with two
efficient compression methods that are fractal based and wavelet based
compressions.

1 Introduction
ECG signals are electrical measurements of heartbeat rhythms. The continuing
proliferation of computerized electrocardiogram (ECG) processing systems along with
the increased feature performance requirements and demand for lower cost medical
care have mandated reliable, accurate, and more efficient ECG data compression
techniques. The practical importance of ECG data compression has become evident in
many aspects of computerized electrocardiography including: a)increased storage
capacity of ECG’s as databases for subsequent comparison or evaluation, b)
feasibility of transmitting real-time ECG’s over the public phone network, c)
implementation of cost effective real-time rhythm algorithms, d)economical rapid
transmission of off-line ECG’s over public phone lines to a remote interpretation
center, and e) improved functionality of ambulatory ECG monitors and recorders [1].
Recently some of the frequency domain techniques offer good compression
ratios, generally at the expense of more computations [1, 2, 3]. G.E. Oien et al.
proposed a fast compression method for ECG signal [4]. But this one also still has
more computation, and has not high compression ratio. I. Provaznik and J.
Kozumplik’s method has good compression ratio and reconstructed [5]. But it has
more computation than Oien’s work and this work.
In this work, utilizing hierarchical neural networks ECG data compression is
done by software. In teaching mode, ECG signals are applied both input and output of
ANN structure by using the principle of ANN work. So, obtained weight parameters
provided a base for next ECG samples. Also two efficient methods of data
compression, wavelet and fractal based compression (proposed in reference [4-5])
were compared with proposed method. This direct data compression technique for
ECG signals has shown a more efficient performance than the transformation

P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2657, pp. 371–377, 2003.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

372

B. Karlik

techniques in regard particularly to processing speed and generally to compression
ratio.

2 Background of ECG Signal Compression
The main goal of any compression technique is to achieve maximum data volume
reduction while preserving the significant signal morphology features upon
reconstruction. Conceptually, data compression is the process of detecting and
eliminating redundancies in a given data set. Redundancy in a digital signal exists
whenever adjacent signal samples are statistically dependent and/or the quantized
signal amplitudes do not occur with equal probability. However, the first step towards
ECG data compression is the selection of minimum sampling rate and word length
consequently further compression of the ECG signal can be achieved by exploiting the
known statistical properties of the signal.
While it is done any comparison among ECG data compression techniques,
the following properties are determined:
1) Signal sampling frequency (f0):
In analog/digital converter utilized to convert ECG signals to digital the
sampling frequency can be different frequencies in accordance with purpose but
generally has been selected at 500 Hz.
2) Bit numbers in digital samples (p,”precision”):
Bit numbers which show resolution of stored ECG data can be 8 or 12 bits.
3) Compression ratio (CR):
This is one of the important parameters in data compression algorithms and
the large value of this ratio shows success of any algorithm.
CR =

The number of samples before compression
The number of samples after compression

(1)

4) Performance index (PRD, “Percent Root Mean Square Difference”):
PRD is other one of the important parameters of any algorithms and the small
value of PRD shows success of algorithm.

∑[ X
n

PRD =

i =1

org

( i) − X rec ( i) ]

∑[ X
n

i =1

org

( i) ]

2

2

⋅ 100

(2)

where Xorg and Xrec are samples of the original and reconstructed data sequences.
5) The higher speed of any algorithm is, the quicker the process can be done and realtime studies can be done.
6) Most of the databases utilized in evaluating ECG compression algorithms are non
standard. However the algorithm results can be different in accordance with databases.

Hierarchical Neural Network Based Compression of ECG Signals

373

2.1 Neural Networks Based ECG Signal Compression
Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) can use for 1D or 2D signal compression and
reconstruction [6-7]. The basic back-propagation network can be further extended to
construct a hierarchical neural network by adding two more hidden layers into the
existing network, in which the three hidden layers are termed as combiner layer,
compressor layer and decombiner layer. The structure can be shown in Figure 1. The
idea is to exploit correlation between pixels by inner hidden layer and to exploit
correlation between blocks of pixels by outer hidden layers. From input layer to
combiner layer and decombiner layer to output layer, local connections are designed,
which has the same effect as M fully connected neural sub-networks.

Training of such a neural network can be conducted in terms of: (i) Outer Loop Neural
Network (OLNN) Training; (ii) Inner Loop Neural Network (ILNN) Training; and (iii)
Coupling weight allocation for the Overall Neural Network
Fig. 1. The structure hierarchical neural network

2.2 Fractal Based ECG Signal Compression
Fractal compression exploit block wise self-similarity in the signal, which is split into
non-overlapping range blocks to be coded. Each range is approximated by the
decimated and nonlinearly transformed domain which is the most similar to the range,
out of all the domain candidates in the signal [8].
Formally, a signal x (M samples long) is thus encoded as the collage Tx of an
affine contractive map T: X ; RQ ; 5M. T consists of a linear part L: X ; DQG
an offset t:

374

B. Karlik
Nr

Tx = Lx + t = (∑ α
n =1

(n)
2

Nr

Pn On Dn Fd ( n ) ) x + ∑ α 1( n ) Pn b1( n )

(3)

n =1

where Nr is the number of ranges. Fd(n): X RDn fetches the best domain for range n.
Dn: RDn
RBn decimates this domain to range length Bn by simple averaging
(Dn/Bn=2). On: RBn
RBn orthogonalizes the decimated domain with respect to the
(n)
offset basis vector b1 , a constant (DC) block. Pn: RBn ; SODFHV WKH VXP RI RIIVHW

and transformed domain in range position n. Here, α 1 , α 2 are scaling for the
offset and transformed domain respectively. The code for each range now consists of
(n)

(n)

α 1( n ) , α 2( n ) , and d(n). The decoded signal is the attractor of T;
K −1

xT = ∑ Lk t

(4)

k =0

where K is big enough to ensure convergence. The decoded attractor will be almost
identical to encoder collage approximation (by the Collage Theorem [8]).

2.3 Wavelet Based ECG Signal Compression
The wavelet coefficients are computed in float point operation arithmetic. To store the
data efficiently and increase compression ratio, the coefficients are represented as
integers with predefined word length. A quantization step corresponds to range of
coefficients values for fixed word length and implies resulting error.
The dyadic discrete time wavelet transform (DTWT) of a finite sequence
{x(i) L «1` ZKHUH 1 M, can be evaluated as cyclic convolution;

y (m, n) = DFT N−,12m [ X ( k ) H m ( k )]

(5)

where m=1,2,…,M; n=0,1,…,N/2m-1; k=0,1,…,N-1; X(k)=DFT[X(i)] and
Hm(k)=(2m)1/2G*(2mk) is a sampled frequency characteristic of m-th filter that
corresponds to a proper expanded mother wavelet. N,2m index means N-point inverse
discrete Fourier transform where every 2m-th sample of output signal y(m,n) is chosen.
Use of orthogonal set of wavelets is necessary to transform the signal without any
error. In this study, Meyer’s wavelets that are originally defined in frequency domain
as described in [9], is used.

3 Results
In this work, using hierarchical neural network compression and reconstructed of the
some ECG’s are done. These ECG’s are from MIT/BIH database tapes 100, 107 and
109. Tapes 100, 107 and 109 are respectively normal, paced beat and left bundle

Hierarchical Neural Network Based Compression of ECG Signals

375

branch block ECG’s. Original data sampled at 360 Hz and this sampling rate is
decreased to 200 Hz in this work.
Compression processing which is run on computer in Borland C is provided,
as above mentioned, with 200 input nodes, 10 and 5 hidden nodes and 200 output
nodes. At the same time, these values give compression ratio, i.e. 20:1 and 40:1.
Therefore the utilized ANN structures are as 200:10:200 and 200:5:200. Generally, 20
cycles from ECG’s are used in training process. As above mentioned, learning
coefficient (e) and momentum (a) must be selected to minimize the error in training
process.
Reconstructed processing for compressed ECG is provided with 10 input
nodes (because of 10 hidden nodes in compression) or 5 input nodes (because of 5
hidden nodes in compression) and 200 output nodes. For normal ECG, original and
reconstructed ECG is shown in Figure 2. An advantage of this technique is to
compress large numbers of data, i.e. 10 cycles (samples) from ECG’s are used for
training and 100 cycles (samples) can be compressed.

Fig. 2. Graphics of the original and reconstructed ECG from MIT/BIH tapes 100 for 10 hidden
nodes, and graphics of difference (5 times) between them

Later the other two methods, which are fractal and wavelet based using
domain clusters in each case, have compared and evaluated the results with ANN
method for the normal ECG signal, it can be seen in Figure 3 and 4. In most cases, the
three methods which are neural network, fractal and wavelet, gave very similar
average PRD results as 2.77%, 3.2%, and 3.0% respectively.

376

B. Karlik

Fig. 3. Resulted values of compression ratio

Fig. 4. Reconstructed ECG signals for (a) neural network (b) fractal and (c) wavelet

Hierarchical Neural Network Based Compression of ECG Signals

377

4 Conclusion
A hierarchical neural network compression has demonstrated on ECG signals. It is
also compared with the two efficient compression methods. Comparing the results
with these methods, it can be seen that proposed method is very useful for the either
compression ECG and the other biomedical signals. But this neural network method
needs long time training for compression. So, this disadvantage should be reduced by
using short training time algorithm.
The fractal method has the benefit of fast decoding, but the basic encoder is
slow. However, using domain clustering to reduce searching one obtains two decades
of complexity reduction without any fatal quality loss. This method should be
improved by more optimal parameter representation.
The wavelet-based method can be used and considered as a special case of
sub band signal processing. The use of orthonormal base of functions can sufficiently
meet the requirement of exact reconstruction. Its quantization step corresponds to the
range of coefficients values for fixed word length and implies resulting error.

References
1. Jalaleddine, S.T.S. et al., ECG Data Compression Techniques – A Unified Approach, IEEE
Transactions on Biomedical Eng., Vol. BME-37, pp. 329–343, April (1990)
2. Allen, V.A. and Belina, J., ECG Data Compression Using the Discrete Cosine Transform
(DCT), Computers in Cardiology Proceedings, (1992)
3. Thakor, N. et al, A Multi-resolution Wavelet-based ECG Data Compression Algorithm,
IEEE Computer Society Press, pp.393–396, (1993)
4. Oien, G.E. et al., “Fast Fractal-Based ECG Signal Compression”, CD-ROM Proceedings of
the 18th Annual International Conference IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology
Society, 31 October–3 November 1996, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
5. Provaznik, I. and Kozumplik, J., Wavelet-Based Compression of ECG Signals, CD-ROM
Proceedings of the 18th Annual International Conference IEEE Engineering in Medicine
and Biology Society, 31 October–3 November 1996, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
6. Karlik, B., Aydin, S., Kilic, I., Comparing Artificial Neural Network (ANN) Image
Compression Technique with Different Image Compression Techniques, Mathematical &
Computational Applications, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 165–171, (1996)
7. Kocyigit, Y., Korurek, M., Karlik, B., ECG Data Compression by Artificial Neural
Networks, Proceeding of the ELECO’99, pp.338–340, December, 1–5, 1999, Bursa,
Turkey
8. Fisher, Y., Fractal Compression: Theory and Application, Springer-Verlag, (1995)
9. Bertrand, O. et al., Time-Frequency Digital Filtering Based on an Invertible Wavelet
Transform: An Application to Evoked Potentials, IEEE Transactions on BME, Vol.41,
No.1, pp.77–88, (1994)

