Interworking of Self-organizing Hierarchical Ad Hoc
Networks and the Internet∗
Hyukjoon Lee1, Seung Hyong Rhee1, Dipankar Raychaudhuri2, and Wade Trappe2
1

Kwangwoon University, 447-1 Wolgye-Dong, Nowon-Gu, Seoul 139-701, Korea
{hlee, shrhee}@daisy.kw.ac.kr
2
WINLAB, Rutgers University, 73 Brett Road, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA
{ray, trappe}@winlab.rutgers.edu

Abstract. Self-organizing hierarchical ad hoc network (SOHAN) is a new
network architecture that has been proposed to increase the scalability property
of flat ad hoc networks. This paper describes how SOHAN interoperates
efficiently with the Internet based on IPv6. Procedures for the autoconfiguration
of a globally-routable address, routing and gateway discovery are presented.
The amount of control overheads is reduced by taking advantage of cross-layer
interaction and limited-scope broadcast (LSBC) techniques. Simulation results
display SOHAN with the proposed interworking procedures outperforms
conventional flat ad hoc networks in interworking with the Internet in terms of
throughput capacity and scalability.
Keywords: Ad hoc network, IPv6, Mobile IP, Interworking, Cross-layer
interaction.

1 Introduction
Ad hoc networks have been studied extensively by the research community during the
past several years motivated by their high potential for rapid deployment and cost
benefits. The focus of most research works has been on stand-alone “flat” networks,
in which no hierarchical relationship between nodes is assumed and every node
contributes to multi-hop communication. One of the fundamental problems of the flat
wireless networks is that they do not scale well. Gupta and Kumar describe that the
throughput of a wireless network is bounded above and decreases as O(1 n ) as n
becomes large [1]. This motivates the investigation of a new wireless network
architecture based on a hierarchical structure.
SOHAN (Self-Organizing Hierarchical Ad hoc Network) is a novel ad hoc network
architecture proposed by Ganu et al. that consists of three tiers, i.e. access points
(AP’s), forwarding nodes (FN’s) and mobile nodes (MN’s) [2]. In this new
architecture, the AP’s are connected together by high-speed wired links. Using highspeed wired links not only increases the system capacity, but also provides a
convenient framework for interconnecting to a wired network. This paper describes
how SOHAN interoperates efficiently with the Internet based on IPv6.
∗ This work was supported by Grant No. R01-2001-00349 from the Korea Science &
Engineering Foundation and Research Grant of Kwangwoon University in 2004.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part IV, LNCS 3994, pp. 930 – 937, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

Interworking of Self-organizing Hierarchical Ad Hoc Networks and the Internet

931

The interworking of ad hoc networks with the Internet presents interesting
challenges. For example, the global routing of the Internet cannot be directly applied,
since each type of networks uses a different address architecture (i.e., flat vs.
hierarchical) and routing protocols (i.e., host-specific vs. prefix matching). There exist
several research works published in the literature that propose different approaches to
interconnect the ad hoc networks and the Internet [3-8]. Most of them use Mobile IP
to provide the mobile nodes (MN’s) with globally-routable addresses, i.e., care-of
addresses (CoA’s) [3-9]. In this approach, a foreign agent (FA) acts as the
interworking gateway. One of the main concerns of this approach is that it requires
flooding-based operations. For example, duplicate address detection (DAD) in
address autoconfiguration, gateway discovery and route discovery flood messages
over the entire ad hoc networks. Flooding could decrease the throughput capacity of
the network significantly.
The interworking methods for SOHAN proposed in this work takes advantage of
the hierarchical structure and routing mechanism such that efficient interworking is
achieved without interworking gateways. Based on the expectation that IPv6 would
become the unifying packet transport protocol in both the core and access networks of
the future communication systems, we focus on the interworking with IPv6.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we introduce SOHAN
architecture. In section 3, we present the detailed discussion on how the interworking
can be achieved. In section 4, we show some simulation results. Finally, in section 5,
we conclude our discussion.

2 Self-organizing Hierarchical Ad Hoc Networks
2.1 Architecture
SOHAN is a novel self-organizing hierarchical ad hoc network architecture designed
to provide significant improvements in systems capacity and performance relative to
conventional float ad hoc networks. It consists of three tiers of radio nodes: lowpower mobile node (MN) at the lowest tier, high-power forwarding nodes (FN) at the
mid-tier, and wired access points (AP) at the highest tier (Fig. 1).
The MN operates on a single radio (e.g. 802.15.4) and, instead of directly
connecting to other MN’s, it connects to an AP or FN of the best link quality. As a
user device, the MN does not forward packets for other nodes. The bandwidth and
energy-constrained MN’s do not communicate with an Internet host, but merely
send/receive their data to/from the directly-connected AP’s or FN’s of much higher
bandwidth and energy.
The FN can have a direct radio connection with all three types of nodes. The main
function of FN is to forward packets for other nodes by multi-hop ad hoc routing. It
can be equipped with a single or two radio interfaces, one for FN-MN traffic and the
other for the intra-FN and FN-AP traffic. The FN can be either fixed or mobile. The
AP has both a radio interface (e.g. 802.11) and a wired interface to the wired links.
The AP’s can be configured as an access router (AR). Multiple FN’s can be directly
connected to the AP in ad hoc mode. The transmission speed of the wired links that
connect the AP’s is assumed orders of magnitude faster than that of the wireless links.

932

H. Lee et al.

Internet

AP

AP

Msg
Type

FN

Node
Type

Node
ID

Channel

Cost to
AP

Beacon
No.

BSSID

AP IPv6
Addr.

MN

FN

FN
MN
MN

Fig. 1. Self-Organizing Hierarchical Ad
hoc Network (SOHAN) architecture

Fig. 2. Message format of SOHAN beacon and
association

2.2 Topology Discovery
The AP’s and FN’s use a self-organizing topology discovery protocol based on
beacons. The beacon is an application-level message based on the 802.11 MAC
beacons and used by the AP’s and FN’s to identify their one-hop neighbors. It carries
information about the quality of physical links to other nodes within a radio range,
which is used as the basis of determining the optimal logical network topology.
Upon bootstrapping, all nodes enter a self-organizing phase by transmitting the
beacons on their predetermined channels and repeat this phase periodically. Based on
the beacons received, the FN’s and MN’s update their neighbor table and transmit the
association messages to the best one-hop parent. The beacon and association
messages share the same augmented message format (Fig. 2).
2.3 Routing
The routing protocol proposed in [2] is based on the topology discovery protocol. The
neighbor table generated by the topology discovery protocol contains information
about the next hop node (i.e., parent node) for each node to reach an AP. The
neighbor tables are periodically exchanged between neighboring devices such that
information about multi-hop paths can be incrementally built up in a similar way to
the distance-vector routing protocol. The main purpose of this protocol is to enable
data to flow from the MN’s towards the AP’s. Hence, entries for the MN’s are
excluded from the neighbor table exchange. A packet sent across the boundaries of
two subtrees would be routed via the wired links. This routing strategy is based on the
assumption that the wired links connecting the AP’s provide much higher bandwidth
than the wireless links. It may be sub-optimal since an ad-hoc path may exist that
goes through the FN’s in less number of hops.
More recently, a new L2.5 routing protocol based on AODV with appropriate
modifications has been proposed [10]. This routing protocol, operating with the MAC
addresses, sets up the initial routing table based on the neighbor table and adds an
entry as a new route is found on-demand. The routes from the AP to the FN/MN’s are
found by flooding RREQ (Route Request) messages or by reverse route setup when
data packets are transmitted by the FN’s towards the AP.

Interworking of Self-organizing Hierarchical Ad Hoc Networks and the Internet

933

3 Interworking of SOHAN and the Internet
The topology discovery and routing protocols discussed in the previous section can
make the SOHAN appear as a set of Ethernet-like wireless LAN segments. Therefore,
IPv6 operations used in interworking, such as router discovery and address
autoconfiguration, can be directly applied in SOHAN (Fig. 3). In what follows, we
assume that every AP is configured as an IPv6 router in order to simply our
discussion. All aspect of the interworking functionalities discussed in this paper can
easily be extended with minor modifications when multiple AP’s exist in a subnet.
3.1 Address Autoconfiguration
An FN/MN in SOHAN must be configured with a globally-routable IP address to
communicate with an Internet host. IPv6 stateless address autoconfiguration allows a
globally-routable IP address for the FN/MN to be constructed from the prefix of an
AR when the FN/MN joins or boots up in an ad hoc network [11]. If the FN/MN does
not have its own IPv6 home address, the FN/MN should temporarily configure an
initial address simply by forming a link-local address, or using the IPv6_MANET
initial prefix [8]. The uniqueness of these tentative addresses can be verified using the
strong DAD described in [12, 13].
DAD operation based on NDP, when applied to an ad hoc network, must be
performed in a multi-hop fashion over the entire network (i.e., flooding), if a single
interworking gateway is used. However, flooding causes scalability problem when
there are a large number of nodes in the network. Moreover, it is meaningless to flood
the DAD packets to the nodes with possibly different prefixes (i.e., the nodes
associated with different AR’s) as in case of SOHAN. Therefore, the flooding in
SOHAN is confined within the subset of nodes that are associated with the same AP.
This so-called limited-scope broadcast (LSBC) uses the information about each
node’s association with AP’s stored in the neighbor table of the MAC layer. The node
can determine whether it is associated with the same AP as the source of flooding by
checking the Basic Service Set ID (BSSID).
The globally routable IP address is formed by appending to the prefix of the AP
the interface identifier of the FN/MN. We modify the format of a beacon message
specified in [2] to include the IPv6 address of the AP associated with each FN (Fig.
2). The FN/MN that is multi-hop away from an AP receives the address of the AP
associated with its upstream neighbor. Thus, the periodic broadcast of router
advertisement is not used. Therefore, a considerable amount of valuable radio
resource can be saved.
3.2 Routing
Address autoconfiguration discussed above logically maps a part of the network
corresponding to a subtree with an AP as its root in the network topology to an IP
subnet (Fig. 4). Since the ad hoc routing is performed below the network layer, the
subtree appears as a single-hop wireless LAN segment to the IPv6. The interworking
between the two routing protocols becomes a cross-layer interaction problem.

934

H. Lee et al.

Since the FN/MN’s use MAC addresses as their identifier for ad hoc routing at
L2.5, the IP addresses must be translated to the corresponding MAC addresses before
packets are routed. IPv6 address resolution operation based on requires broadcast on a
single-link [13]. Hence, the LSBC is again used to perform the address resolution. In
a usage scenario where the FN’s and MN’s are highly mobile, frequent update of
neighbor caches and route tables is necessary. LSBC is expected to reduce the
overhead of flooding significantly.
When an IP packet originated from an Internet host and destined to an FN/MN is
received by the AP that announces the route for the FN/MS, the IP layer of the AP
hands over the packet to the ad hoc routing layer for multi-hop forwarding since all
FN/MN’s appear as if they were a single hop away from the AP. Before the route
table is searched, address resolution is performed. If the destination node exists within
the subnet, the MAC address is returned within address resolution reply message by
unicast. Using this MAC address, the AP searches the route table for the entry of the
destination node. A new route table entry is added when an outbound data packet is
received by the AP and when a router solicitation message arrives at the AP. Hence,
the AP does not flood RREQ messages for destination nodes within its subnet. If an
entry is a stale one, the AP would receive a RRER message. In this case, the AP
should flood a RREQ message to find an alternate path. Note that there is no
tunneling or examination of routing headers involved in AP’s forwarding a packet to a
destination node in SOHAN.
In order to deliver a packet to an Internet host, the FN/MN’s use the default route
to forward the packet through the ad hoc network to the AP. The FN/MN’s determine
its destination is located outside the subnet by examining the destinations prefix.
Packet forwarding between two nodes that are associated with different AP’s must go
through the wired links. Once the FN determines to use the default route to the AP,
normal ad hoc routing proceeds in the ad hoc routing layer, which is transparent to the
upper layer. The AP then forwards the packet towards the destination through the
Internet as usual.

Higher layers

Higher layers

IPv6 (Mobile IP)

IPv6 (Mobile IP)

Ad hoc
routing
Ethernet
MAC

Ad hoc routing

Discovery
802.11x MAC

Ethernet
PHY

Discovery
802.11x MAC 802.11y MAC

802.11x
PHY

802.11x
PHY

802.11y
PHY

Higher layers
IPv6
(Mobile IP)
Ad hoc
routing
Discovery
802.11y MAC
802.11y
PHY
Subnet 1

AR

FN

MN

Fig. 3. Protocol stack for interworking
of SOHAN and Internet

Fig. 4. Hierarchical structure of SOHAN

4 Simulation
4.1 Simulation Environments
We used ns-2 simulator with Monarch extensions to evaluate the performance of the
proposed methods for interworking between SOHAN and the Internet. For the three

Interworking of Self-organizing Hierarchical Ad Hoc Networks and the Internet

935

tiers of SOHAN nodes, we implemented the topology discovery and routing protocols
based on 802.11 MAC and AODV with appropriate modifications to operate directly
on top of 802.11 MAC layer with MAC addresses. Procedures for LSBC and reverse
path setup were implemented and added to the AODV module. Both IPv6 and mobile
IPv6 modules were also added with the implementation of address autoconfiguration,
routing, and gateway discovery. The main simulation parameters are summarized in
Table 1. Five different combinations of AP’s, FN’s and MN’s were used to study the
performance with respect to the total number nodes. The number of AP’s, FN’s and
MN’s were chosen in accordance with the result by Liu et al. which states that the
throughput capacity increases linearly with the number of AP’s if it grows faster than
the square root of the number of nodes [14]. All AP’s are configured as routers and
connected to a backbone router in a star topology. This backbone router is directly
connected to another router to which all the Internet hosts used in the simulation are
connected via a LAN. All of the wired links between the AP’s and Internet hosts are
given enough bandwidth (100 Mbps) that congestion does not occur in the wired
section of end-to-end path between the MN and Internet host. Every communication
session is established between a MN and an Internet host. That is, no traffic flows
exist between two MN’s or two Internet hosts.
In order to compare the performance of SOHAN in interworking with the Internet
against that of flat ad hoc networks, we ran a series of simulations with the same
parameters using the interworking procedures proposed by Wakikawa et al. for flat ad
hoc network [8]. The flat ad hoc network consists of the AP’s and MN’s only. This
implies all MN’s are capable of forwarding packets among themselves. In each case
of the simulation, the number of MN’s is made equal to the number of FN’s plus the
number of MN’s.
Table 1. Simulation Parameters
Simulation area
Number of AP’s
Number of FN’s
Number of MN’s
Number of Internet hosts
Number of pkts/sec generated
Packet size
Number of communication pairs
Mobility model
Max speed
Pause time
Simulation time

4
6
10

1000 m × 1000 m
6
8
10
12
22
34
24
42
66
10
4 pkts/sec
512 bytes
20
Random waypoint model
0 m/s, 20 m/s
30 sec
1000 sec

12
48
96

4.2 Simulation Results
We measure the system throughput, average end-to-end delay, and normalized
overhead while increasing the number of nodes in order to compare the performance
of the two networks with respect to scalability. The number of bytes is measured for
MAC frames, instead of IP packets, since routing for SOHAN takes place in L2.5.

936

H. Lee et al.

Fig. 5(a) shows the curves for normalized control overheads. One can observe that
the control overheads incurred by the flat ad hoc network increase at an exponential
rate whereas they increase at a near linear rate. This indicates that flooding of control
messages for gateway and route discovery in the flat ad hoc network can reduce the
performance significantly. On the other hand, the amount of flood packets in SOHAN
is better controlled thanks to LSBC.
Fig. 5(b) clearly indicates that SOHAN has better scalability properties than the
flat network in terms of throughput. Notice that SOHAN produces lower throughput
than the flat network when the number of nodes is 16. This is because SOHAN has
only 10 AP/FN’s and some MN’s lose connections. Since all nodes are capable of
forwarding in flat networks, the loss of connection is less likely to happen. Finally,
Fig. 5(c) also clearly illustrates the improved scalability property achieved by
SOHAN compared to that of the flat network.
Packet rate=4pkts/sec, # of Flows=20, Mobility=20m/s

Packet rate=4pkts/sec, # of Flows=20, Mobility=20m/s

200000

2.5

180000

Flat-Wakikawa
SOHAN-Proposed

160000

2

Throughput(bps)

Normalized control overhead

Flat-Wakikawa
SOHAN-Proposed

1.5

1

140000
120000
100000
80000
60000

0.5

40000
20000

0
16

36

64
100
Number of nodes

16

144

36

64
100
Number of nodes

144

(a) Routing overhead vs. Number of nodes (b) Throughput vs. Number of nodes
Packet rate=4pkts/sec, # of Flows=20, Mobility=20m/s

Average end-to-end delay(sec)

3.5
3

Flat-Wakikawa
SOHAN-Proposed

2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
16

36

64
100
Number of nodes

144

(c) Average end-to-end delay vs. Number of nodes
Fig. 5. Simulation Results

5 Conclusions
We presented a method of interworking with the Internet for self-organizing ad hoc
networks based on IPv6. The most distinctive feature of our method is that, at the
network layer ad hoc nodes perform normal IPv6 operations while interworking
gateways act as a normal IPv6 access router. That is, all interworking functionalities

Interworking of Self-organizing Hierarchical Ad Hoc Networks and the Internet

937

along with ad hoc routing and topology discovery are hidden in the sub-IP (extended
MAC) layer. This allows the interworking to be scalable as well as to exploit the
hierarchical structure of SOHAN. As a result, a significant improvement in
performance can be achieved in terms of control overhead, throughput and delay
compared to an interworking procedure proposed for a flat ad hoc network.

References
1. Gupta, P., Kumar, P.: The Capacity of Wireless Networks. IEEE Transactions on
Information Theory, Mar 2000, Vol. IT-46(2), 388-404
2. Ganu, S., Raju, L., Anepu, B., Seskar, I., Raychaudhuri, D.: Architecture and Prototyping
of an 802.11-based Self-Organizing Hierarchical Ad-Hoc Wireless Network (SOHAN).
submitted to MobiHoc (2004)
3. Lei, H., Perkins, C.: Ad Hoc Networking with Mobile IP. Proc. of the 2nd European
Personal Mobile Communications Conference. (Oct, 1997) 197-202
4. Broch, J., Maltz, D., Johnson, D.: Supporting Hierarchy and Heterogeneous Interfaces in
Multi-hop Wireless Ad hoc Networks. Workshop on Mobile Computing. (1999) 370-375
5. Jonsson, U., Alriksson, F., Larsson, T., Johansson, P., Maguire Jr. G.: MIPMANET Mobile IP for Mobile Ad Hoc Networks. MobiHOC'00. (Aug, 2000) 75-85
6. Sun, Y., Belding-Royer, E., Perkins, C.: Internet connectivity for ad hoc mobile networks.
International Journal of Wireless Information Networks special issue on Mobile Ad hoc
Networks. (2002) Vol. 9(2), 75-88
7. Xi, J., Bettstetter, C.: Wireless Multihop Internet Access : Gateway Discovery, Routing
and Addressing. Proc. of the Int. Conf. on 3G and Beyond 3G Wireless. (May, 2002) 109114
8. Wakikawa, R., Malinen, J., Perkins, C., Nilsson, A., Tuominen, A.: Global Connectivity
for IPv6 Mobile Ad Hoc Networks. draft-wakikawa-manet-globalv6-04.txt. IETF Internet
Draft. (Jul, 2005)(work in progress)
9. Johnson, D., Perkins, C., Arkko, J.: Mobility Support in IPv6. IETF RFC 3775 (Jun, 2004)
10. Yang, S.: A Joint MAC Discovery-Routing Protocol for Self-Organizing Hierarchical Ad
Hoc Networks. Ph.D. Thesis (2004)
11. Thomson, S., Narten, T.: IPv6 Stateless Address Autoconfiguration. IETF RFC 2462.
(Dec, 1998)
12. Jeong, J., Park, J., Kim, H., Kim, D.: Ad Hoc IP Address Autoconfiguration. draft-jeongadhoc-ip-addr-autoconf-02.txt. IETF Internet Draft. (Feb, 2004)(work in progress)
13. Narten, T., Nordmark, E., Simpson, W.: Neighbor Discovery for IPv6. IETF RFC 2461.
(Dec, 1998)
14. Liu, B., Liu, Z., Towsley, D.: On the Capacity of Hybrid Wireless Networks. IEEE
INFOCOM ’03. (Apr, 2003) Vol. 2, 1543-1552

