A Multiagent Model for Supporting Tourism
Policy-Making by Market Simulations
Arnaldo Cecchini and Giuseppe A. Trunﬁo
Laboratory of Analysis and Modelling for Planning
Department of Architecture and Planning - University of Sassari
Palazzo del Pou Salit, Piazza Duomo, 6 I07041 Alghero (SS), Italy
cecchini@uniss.it, trunfio@uniss.it
Abstract. Sustainable tourism development at a destination requires an
understanding of the many interrelated factors that inﬂuence risks and
returns. For this reason, operators in tourism management and public
policy makers are increasingly interested in eﬀective tools for exploring
the consequences of their decisions. With this purpose, this paper describes a multiagent system which enables evaluation of the impact of
some possible interventions and policies at a destination by computer
simulations and provides an insight into the functioning of the market.

1

Introduction

As tourism is a primary industry for many geographical areas, strategic management of tourist destinations is becoming more and more important. On the
other hand, the success of this economic activity strongly depends on the decisions taken by the actors in the ﬁeld [1]. For example, tourism managers have to
take decisions on segmentation and market positioning, product design, pricing,
retail strategy and advertising, while public administrators have to implement
policies regarding the accessibility of the destination and of the single attractions, the organization of events or the economic incentive of speciﬁc market
segments. Given the diﬃculty of predicting the consequences of decisions regarding a system which involves many variables interrelated in a non-linear manner,
it is recognized that models for the simulation of market dynamics can provide
valuable support. Some models have already been developed for such purpose
(e.g. see [2,3]), exploiting various techniques. In this paper we propose a multiagent model [4] which, diﬀerently from most of the existing ones, has together
the following characteristics: (i) it is based on spatially-situated agents; (ii) the
agents are heterogeneous and with memory of their past experiences; (iii) the
agents constitute a social network. As in [5], the basic assumption of the model
is that tourists attempt to maximize utility from their holiday. The system is
built in such a way that a tourist who is satisﬁed with his tourist destination
is more likely to return to that destination than one who obtained lower utility.
Moreover, in the model as in the real world, a satisﬁed tourist can inﬂuence
other individuals with similar characteristics to choose the same destination,
whereas an unsatisﬁed tourist can inﬂuence other potential tourists to avoid
that destination.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part I, LNCS 4487, pp. 567–574, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

568

A. Cecchini and G.A. Trunﬁo

Fig. 1. The multiagent model overview

2

Tourist Destination

As shown in Figure 1, the main elements of the environment where agents operate
are a set of tourist destinations, that is cities, towns or small geographical areas,
the economy of which is to some extent dependent on revenues coming from the
tourist industry. In the model a tourist destination is represented as:
Destination = W, H, G, L

(1)

where W = {W1 , . . . , Wp } represents accessibility and each element:
Wi = price, time, capacity

(2)

corresponds to the i-th means of transport available for reaching the resort (e.g.
train, bus, ship, car or a combination of these) and groups together the price
per person, the duration of the journey and the daily capacity, respectively.
Set H = {H1 , . . . , Hn } of Equation 1 collects the accommodation sites:
Hi = x, type, quality, price, capacity

(3)

where x is the position in a bi-dimensional space, type is the kind of accommodation, quality is a real number belonging to the interval [0, 1] which summarizes
the degree of excellence of the signiﬁcant features of Hi , price(t) provides the
price per day and per person as a function of the tourist season ts and capacity
is the number of tourists that can be simultaneously accommodated;
Set G = {G1 , . . . , Gm } of Equation 1 collects the attractions (i.e. places of
interest that tourists visit) present at the destination, which are deﬁned as:
Gi = x, type, quality, price, capacity

(4)

where x is the position in a bi-dimensional space, type is the kind of attraction,
quality ∈ [0, 1] is a synthetic indicator of the quality of the signiﬁcant features
of Gi (e.g. view, water and sand quality for an uncontaminated beach or the
quality of the services and facilities for an equipped beach), price(t) provides the
entrance price per person given season ts and capacity is the number of people
who can simultaneously enjoy Gi .

A Multiagent Model for Supporting Tourism

569

Set L of Equation 1 contains links:
lij = Hi , Gj , type, price, time

(5)

specifying the money and time costs which are required for reaching the attraction site Gj from the accommodation site Hi , using the means of transport
speciﬁed by the attribute type. Thus, the elements of H and G are the edges of
a graph representing the environment in which the model agents operate.
For each destination, an accessibility agent answers the tourist agent’s requests, that is, he provides the ﬁrst available departure date, given the period,
the access mode and the duration of the stay. Besides, each accommodation site
Hi and attraction site Gi holds a manager agent that has three main tasks: (i)
to keep a schedule of admittance in order to accept or deny booking requests on
the basis of the site’s capacity, by interacting with tourist agents (ii), to answer
questions about the current state of the site (e.g. the number of people currently
hosted) (iii), to adapt his prices to the demand coming from tourists.

3

Tourist Agent

Each tourist, who it is assumed takes one vacation per year, has the main aim of
maximizing his utility and is capable of remembering the experiences had at a
destination. In addition, he can receive information from other tourists or from
advertising messages. More formally, the tourist agent is deﬁned as:
A = P, S, M, E, V, B

(6)

In the latter Equation P is a set of properties that inﬂuences the tourist’s behaviour (e.g. Age, Gender, F amily size, Income, Education).
Set S = {t0 , T (h) , Acc, Att} collects some properties that concur in deﬁning
the agent’s state. In particular, t0 is the instant of the start of the journey, T (h) is
the holiday duration, while Acc and Att are two links which, during the temporal
interval [t0 , t0 + T (h) ], indicate the accommodation site and the attraction site
currently holding the agent, respectively.
Set V in Equation 6 constitutes the information concerning potential tourist
destinations possessed by the agent. Each piece of information is represented as:
V = Dest, St, pG , GV

(7)

where Dest refers to the destination, St is the information strength, pG is an
estimate of the cost per day of a stay excluding accommodation and GV id the set
of attractions known by the agent in Dest. In each element gi = Gk , ni , αi ∈
GV , the value of ni is the number of visits of the attraction Gk in a previous stay
in Dest while αi is an evaluation parameter assigned to the same attraction. The
quantity St ∈ [0, 1] represents a measure of information reliability perceived
by the agent (e.g. St = 1 in the case of information originating from direct
knowledge). During the simulation, information strength St varies according

570

A. Cecchini and G.A. Trunﬁo

to two mechanisms: at each time-step k it decreases according to the relation
St(k+1) = σ St(k) , with σ ∈ [0, 1] and it changes in the case the agent receives
new elements of information about Dest.
Set E = {E1 , . . . , Eq } in Equation 6 groups together elements Ei deﬁned as:
(s)

(f )

Ei = Atti , ni , ni , pi , ri , αi

(8)

representing the agent’s memory of attractions experienced during a vacation.
(s)
In particular, Atti is the link to the attraction, ni is the number of accesses to
(f )
Atti , ni is the number of failures in accessing (e.g. an access request may be
refused when Atti is full), pi is the total expenditure made for the attraction,
(s)
(f )
ri is the sum of all ratings attributed to each of the ni = ni + ni requests,
αi represents the overall evaluation which is attributed by the agent to the ni
experiences on the whole. For t = t0 (i.e. the holiday start) the set E is empty.
During the holiday, the agent ﬁlls the set E of experiences with evaluations αi . At
(s)
the holiday end, values ni and αi are transferred in the corresponding variables
of the set V related to the destination (see Equation 7).
Set M in Equation 6 collects links to other potential tourists. As explained
below, the network of tourist agents determines the exchange of information
related to potential tourist destinations.
The agent’s behaviour is deﬁned by the actions collected in set B of Equation 6.
During the simulation, agents have to make decisions about actions to undertake
(e.g. which destination to visit). We assume that such decisions are made probabilistically, according to a logistic model [6]. In particular, given a choice set C,
the agent associates a utility value U (ci ) to each alternative ci ∈ C [7]. The utilC
ity values are then transformed into probabilities P r(ci |C) = eU(ci ) / j=0 eU(cj ) ,
where C is the number of alternatives. The actual choice is made comparing a
i
drawn random number in [0, 1] with the cumulative probabilities j=0 P (cj |C)
associated to the alternatives ci . In some cases, the choice account for a satisﬁer
threshold Uth , that is, in the choice set C, the alternatives ck with U (ck ) < Uth
are not considered by the agent.
If the current time t is greater than t0 + T (h), at each time-step of the simulation and with probability pb , the tourist agent tries to book a new holiday. The
algorithm proceeds by choosing ﬁrst the preferred season and the holiday duration T (h) , then the trip destination together with the means of transport and the
accommodation site. At the end the agent tries to book for a speciﬁc departure
date t0 . In the follows only the most relevant agent’s actions are illustrated.
Choice of destination, accommodation and means of transport. When
the agent decided to take a vacation, that is, the period of the year and the
duration T (h) have been chosen, for each piece of information regarding potential destinations possessed by the agent (i.e. contained in V), and for each
combination Wk , Hj , the agent computes two utility functions:
T (n)
UD =

m

(1 + St αi )βi (ni )qi + βacc qacc
i=1

T (2 m + 1)

(9)

A Multiagent Model for Supporting Tourism

UP = 1 −

pjour + T (n) (pacc + pG )
pmax (T )

571

(10)

which take values in the interval [0, 1]. In Equations (9) and (10):
– for each of the m = GV diﬀerent attractions known by the agent in the
potential destination (i.e. in the set G) there are: a function βi (ni ) ∈ [0, 1]
accounting for the degree of attractive inﬂuence on the agent and depending
on the number ni of previous visits to the attraction, the coeﬃcient qi =
quality(G) (see Equation 4) and the coeﬃcient αi (see Equation 7);
– St is the strength of the information on the basis of which the agent is
considering the destination (see Equation 7);
– βacc ∈ [0, 1] is a parameter expressing the degree of liking of the agent for
the accommodation considered, having the quality qacc = quality(Hj );
– T (n) = T (h) − time(Wk ) is the net time available for enjoying the stay (i.e.
the total holiday duration minus the journey time);
– pjour = price(Wk ) is the total cost of the journey, according to the means
of transport Wk chosen, pacc = price(Hj ) is the cost per day of accommodation Hj and pG is the estimated cost per day of a stay at the destination
considered; pmax is the maximum cost that the agent is willing to spend.
Agents compute their utility as the product of UD and UP . The values of utility are then transformed into probabilities according to the logit model and a
(D)
satisﬁer threshold Uth is used. for the choice.
Given the destination Dest, the access mode Wk and the accommodation Hj ,
the trip start date t0 is determined by interacting with the accessibility agent
and the manager agent (see Section 2).
The holiday experience. During the stay the tourist’s agent attempts to
maximize utility from his holiday. In particular, at t = t0 the set E, which
represents the history of the holiday, is empty. The agent’s accommodation site
being Hi , every time-step of the simulation the agent chooses an attraction
Gj ∈ G by using the utility function:
1
π(Gj , lij )
1−
(1 + α) β q
2
πmax (Gj )
π(Gj , lij ) = price(Gj ) + price(lij ) + μ time(lij )
UG =

(11)
(12)

where β and q have the same meaning so that in Equation 9, while the parameter
α, which is kept in memory by the agent as stated in Equation 8, expresses
an overall evaluation relative to the attraction site on the basis of previous
experiences of the same stay, μ is the cost of the time which depends on the
agent’s characteristics [8] and πmax (Gj ) is the maximum cost that the agent is
willing to spend for enjoying the attraction. The choice is made transforming
(G)
values (11) into probabilities and using a satisﬁer threshold Uth . Let Att be the
attraction chosen, the corresponding entry E ∈ E (see Equation 8) is updated
in order to reﬂect the new experience. In particular:

572

A. Cecchini and G.A. Trunﬁo

Fig. 2. The evaluation function used by the tourist agent

1. n(s) (or n(f ) in the case the request of access is refused) is incremented by
one, the total expenditure p is updated adding the new value π(Gj , lij ) and
the total rating r is updated with the new rating ρ ∈ [0, 1];
2. the evaluation α(u, n) of the attraction site is computed as a function of the
average rating u = r/n and of the number of requests n = n(s) + n(f ) .
The evaluation function α(u, n) is deﬁned as:
α(u, n) =

u

ln b(n)

u
u0

ln b(n)

e u0
e

− b(n)
+ b(n)

,

with

n

b(n) = 2e n0 ln 2 − 1

(13)

where the parameters n0 and u0 have the following meaning: (i) if the average
rating u is still null after n0 access requests, this corresponds to an overall evaluation of α = −0.5, that is, to the halving of the next estimation of the utility
component UE for that attraction site; (ii) u0 is the average rating corresponding to the neutral evaluation α = 0.0. Figure 2 reports two examples of agent’s
experience for an attraction site using Equations 13. It can be seen that ratings above u0 contribute, throughout the history of the experience, to increase
the overall evaluation α, making the experience satisfying. On the contrary, a
sequence of ratings below u0 produces, in agent convincement, a bad overall
evaluation of the attraction site. The rating ρ should reﬂect the actual agent’s
experience at the attraction site. Thus, its determination depends on both the
agent’s interactions and the interaction between agents and the environment.
(s)
At the end of the holiday, total expenditures p, number of accesses ni and
evaluations αi contained in the agent’s memory E, are transformed into updated
pieces of information for the set V.
Inﬂuencing other individuals. As shown in Figure 1, potential tourists constitute a social network in the sense that each agent can inﬂuence the decisions
of other agents. The latter are the ones pointed by the links contained in the set
M of each agent. The network is randomly initialized at the simulation start by

A Multiagent Model for Supporting Tourism

573

Table 1. The main characteristics of the focused destination
Id
H1−5
H6−15
H16−35
G1−4
G5−7
G8
G10

type
quality price capacity
Accommodation sites
four-star hotel
0.8
130
200
three-star hotel 0.8
80
240
bed & breakfast 0.6
35
10
Attraction sites
beach
0.6
2
500
equipped beach 0.6
10
600
historical center 0.5
5
5000
museum
0.8
4
600

Id
W1
W3
W3

Accessibility
price time capacity
300 3
360
100 12
1000
60
4
180

assigning for each agent the number of elements in M according to the characteristics in P and by assuring that the links are predominantly directed towards
agents having similar characteristics. In particular, an agent Ai which is not in
his holiday interval, selects with probability pe a group of neighbouring agents.
Then, to each of the selected agents Aj , agent Ai communicates one of his pieces
of information V (i) ∈ V which is probabilistically selected. When the agent Aj
receives the element of information V (i) , he updates his corresponding element
V (j) which refers to the same destination as:
ˆ (j) = max(St(j) , λij St(i) )
St

(j)

(j)

(i)

and α
ˆk = (αk + λij St(j) αk )/2

(14)

where Vˆ (j) is the updated information and the coeﬃcient λij ∈ [0, 1] is the
degree of trust of the agent Ai in the eyes of Aj .

4

A Preliminary Test

The model, implemented in C++ language, was tested with a hypothetical but
plausible scenario. A set of potential tourists was initialized with 100.000 agents
having random characteristics and relationships. Five destinations, each having
various access modes, accommodation and attraction sites, were included in the
artiﬁcial marketplace. The time-step size was set at 12 hours and it was assumed
each tourist would visit one attraction per step during vacations. The destination highlighted was composed in particulary of elements Hi and Gi having the
characteristics shown in Table 1. For each couple Hi and Gj three links lij , were
generated with random properties appropriate to represent walking, moving by
bus and by taxi, respectively. The attractions present at the destinations were
constantly populated by local visitors (i.e. visitors not accommodated at any of
the sites in H) for one half of their capacity.
The test presented here was aimed at assessing the inﬂuence of a modiﬁcation in
accessibility W. To this end, two groups of four runs were executed averaging the
probabilistic results. Each run was composed of 2920 steps, corresponding to four
years. In the ﬁrst group the set W for the destination under study was composed
of the two elements W1 and W2 shown in Table 1. In the second group, the element W3 shown in Table 1, which represents a daily ﬂight of a low-cost company,

574

A. Cecchini and G.A. Trunﬁo

Fig. 3. Eﬀects of the introduction of a low-cost daily ﬂight

was added to the set W at the end of the ﬁrst year. The results are illustrated in
Figure 3, where both the eﬀects in terms of guests at accommodation sites and visitors to attraction sites are reported. According to the model, the eﬀects in terms
of number of visiting tourists aﬀect both the peaks in high season and, to a lower
extent, the visitors in low season. The increment of tourists grows in the second
year by the introduction of E3 and tends to become stable after two years.

5

Conclusions and Future Work

The model allows evaluation of the eﬀect of advertising messages, the eﬀect of
pricing strategies, market segmentation approaches, introduction or enhancement of new attractions or the interrelated consequences of many simultaneous
actions. On the other hand, a drawback is represented by the diﬃculties which
may arise in the initial setup of the model for an actual destination. Indeed,
this phase requires a time-consuming activity involving the deﬁnitions of parameter values and the validation by comparison with real historical trends for
similar situations. Future work will focus on contextualizing the model in a real
geographical area, for which suﬃcient data are available.

References
1. Sainaghi, R.: From contents to processes: Versus a dynamic destination management
model (DDMM). Tourism Management 27 (2006) 1053–1063
2. Velthuijsen, J.W., Verhagen, M.: A simulation model of the dutch tourism market.
Annals of Tourism Research 21(4) (1994) 812–827
3. Kandelaars, P.: A dynamic simulation model of tourism and environment in the
yucatan peninsula. Working papers, Int. Inst. for Applied Systems Analysis (1997)
4. Wooldridge, M.: An Introduction to MultiAgent Systems. John Wiley & Sons (2002)
5. Hern´
andez-L´
opez, M., C´
aceres-Hern´
andez, J.J.: Forecasting tourists characteristics by a genetic algorithm with a transition matrix. Tourism Management 28
(2007) 290–297
6. Sirakayaa, E., Woodsideb, A.G.: Building and testing theories of decision making
by travellers. Tourism Management 26 (2005) 815–832
7. Russel, S., Norvig, P.: Artiﬁcial Intelligence: A Modern Approach. Prentice-Hall (1995)
8. Meignan, D., Simonin, O., Koukam, A.: Multiagent approach for simulation and
evaluation of urban bus networks. In: 5rd AAMAS Conference

