Multi-scale CAFE Modelling for Hot Deformation of
Aluminium Alloys
M.F. Abbod1, I.C. Howard3, D.A. Linkens2, and M. Mahfouf2
IMMPETUS
Institute for Microstructural and Mechanical Process Engineering, The University of Sheffield
1
School of Engineering and Design, Brunel University, Uxbridge UB8 3PH, UK
2
Department of Automatic Control and Systems Engineering,
3
Department of Mechanical Engineering
University of Sheffield, Sheffield S1 3JD, UK
Maysam.Abbod@brunel.ac.uk

Abstract. The multi-Scale CAFE modelling system utilises Cellular Automata,
Finite Elements and a Hybrid Modelling technique which combines neurofuzzy models and physical equations to simulate hot deformation of Al-1%Mg
aluminium alloys using the commercial finite element software package
ABAQUSTM. This paper addresses the issue of capturing microstructural details
and providing macro linkage by simulating two phenomena. The first defines a
suitable length scale such that numerical models are sufficient in detail and are
appropriate in terms of computational time. The second is the feasibility using
Cellular Automata (CA) as an additional technique that can be used in conjunction with a conventional Finite Elements (FE) representation to model
material heterogeneity and related properties. This is done by identifying an
abstract scale in between the micro and macro scales, termed the “mesoscale” to
obtain a multi-scale CAFE modelling technique that utilises the CA technique
to represent initial and evolving microstructural features at an appropriate
length obtained using an overlying FE mesh.

1 Introduction
During hot deformation of aluminium alloys, rolling will change particularly the
deformation texture and recrystallisation texture. Since aluminium and its alloys have
high stacking-fault energy, hot deformation will not provide mechanical twining.
Incorporating microstructural details in thermomechanical processing models is well
recognised by many researchers [4], [6].
Finite elements (FE) method can be used with numerical formulations that
describe the behaviour of different material models to elicit the response of a structure
to strain. The material microstructure model can be expressed mathematically by a
implicit semi-empirical methodology which is based on the use of trigonometric
functions that relate a change in equivalent strain to a change of equivalent stress. FE
models based on this approach [3] are successful in predicting the macro behaviour of
metal flow stress and load, but fail to model the evolution of the underlying
microstructure. In addition, constants used in these formulations should be employed
with caution outside the conditions beyond which they have been tested.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part I, LNCS 3991, pp. 993 – 996, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

994

M.F. Abbod et al.

The microstructural evolution and its effects during the rolling process can be
modelled using physically-based models. These relationships relate the evolution of
the microstructal variable to a change in the equivalent strain [5]. Conventional FE
models based on this approach use a statistically-averaged value to represent the
evolution of an internal variable that is linked to each finite element [2]. The local
variations, either present initially or evolving during the process itself, can be
monitored individually.
An alternative method is to model the microstructure explicitly. This methodology
requires the reduction of the size of each finite element to the size of a single grain or
even lower which computationally extensive. This paper introduces a novel
framework which couples hybrid modelling of thermomechanical processing [7], the
mathematical tool of Cellular Automata within the FE code to form a Cellular
Automata-based Finite Element (CAFE) model. Results for applications of the
augmented CAFE model as applicable to hot deformation are presented.

2 The Multi-scale Microstructure CAFE Model
The CAFE model [1] is a framework to capture different strata of initial and evolving
microstructures during deformation through a materials-mechanics formulism. CAFE
is based on three steps: 1) approximation of relevant microstructure, 2) distribution of
macro variables on the meso domain and 3) averaging meso-variables to the macro
domain.

Fig. 1. Linking Structure and Geometry to incorporate microstructural details into geometric
space of the Finite Element domain

CAFE is based on the structure shown in Fig. 1 which illustrates the methodology
of linking the microstructure to the Finite Element domain using CA. The material
slab under investigation is discretised into 18 rectangular finite elements. Each finite
element cell simulates the microstructure of aluminium alloys and comprises
equiaxed grains of the order of 80~100 microns. The spatial information is mapped

Multi-scale CAFE Modelling for Hot Deformation of Aluminium Alloys

995

onto the CA domain, the size of which is determined by the size of each CA cell
(marked by open circles). Finally, the CA domain is linked to the integration point
(black circle in figure) of each finite element. The next step in the CAFE
methodology is to transfer the independent macro level variables into the meso level
CA variables. These macro variables are supplied by the overlying FE either at its
nodes, centroids or Gaussian integration points.
To start the simulation of a microstructure, grain nuclei are randomly scattered
over the domain. A second-level array of CA cells of 0.1~5μm size represent these
nuclei. All nuclei can be assumed to be present at the start of the simulation as is the
case with site-saturated nucleation or they can continue to appear during the
simulation as a function of the deformation variables. The present work employs the
first approach and uses a random function to generate and locate these nuclei on the
domain. All first-level CA cells except those occupied by the nuclei have a “zero”
orientation that represents the matrix within which the grain can grow. The presence
or absence of nuclei is an internal variable for the first-level CA cell. Other internal
variables are the spatial location of the CA cell and the orientation of the
microstructure it will represent. This form of linking a microstructural entity to a
spatial geometric entity allows embedding different structure-geometry relationships
in a multi-level CA.
In the initial simulation validation stage, a Plane Strain Compression (PSC) model
was simulated. Both the specimen and tool are modelled using 4-noded quadrilateral
elements. All the stock elements are initialised with a starting temperature of 400oC
and the tool elements are at 390oC. Friction at the tool-stock interface is modelled
using the Amonton-Coulomb law with a constant coefficient of friction of 0.1. The
heat transfer coefficient at the interface is 80 kW/m2K. The instantaneous tool
velocity changes with the instantaneous specimen height and is controlled to achieve
a constant nominal strain-rate of 3 s-1. The stock is thickness-reduced by 41% during
the deformation. The simulation begins with the introduction of a representative
microstructure into each finite element. Results for the von-Mises stress and the strain
are shown in Fig. 2 which gives the advantages of showing the microstructure of the
material as well as the grains structure.

(a) von Mises stress

(b) Equivalent strain

Fig. 2. The multi-scale CAFE simulation for PSC test of commercial purity aluminium alloy,
Tstrip=400oC, Ttool =390oC

996

M.F. Abbod et al.

3 Conclusions
This paper presents a generic method for modelling the microstructure within the
continuum formulation of finite element structural modelling. The Multi-Scale CAFE
framework was applied to model the behaviour of the materials during hot
deformation using a hybrid modelling technique. The model has simulated the
microstructure of the material during hot deformation. The material behaviour was
developed from the physically-based relations that relate the stress evolution to the
total dislocation density using the CAFE approach. Recrystallisation behaviour was
modelled using a critical dislocation density and subgrain size at a CA level.

Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the UK EPSRC (Engineering and Physical
Sciences Research Council) for their financial support under grant number
GR/R70514/01.

References
1. Beynon, J.H., Das, S., Howard, I.C., Palmiere, E.J., Chterenlikht, A.: The Combination of
Cellular Automata and Finite Elements for the Study of Fracture: The CAFE Model of
Fracture. 14th European Conference on Fracture - ECF 14, Cracow, Poland (2002).
2. Busso, E.P.: A Continuum Theory for Dynamic Recrystallisation with Icrostructure-Related
Length Scales. International Journal of Plasticity, Vol. 14, No. 4-5 (1998) 319-353.
3. Dutta, K.: Finite Element Modelling of Hot Rolling. PhD Thesis. The University of
Sheffield (1996).
4. Jonas, J.J., Sellars, C.M., McG Tegart, W.J.: Strength and Structure Under Hot Working
Conditions. Metallurgical Reviews, Vol. 130 (1969) 1–24.
5. Marthinsen, K., Nes, E.: A General Model for Metal Plasticity. Material Science and
Engineering. Vol. A234-236 (1997) 1095-1098.
6. Sellars, C.M., Whiteman, J.A.: Recrystallisation and Grain Growth in Hot Rolling. Metal
Science, (1979) 187-194.
7. Zhu, Q., Abbod, M.F., Talamantes-Silva, J., Sellars, C.M., Linkens, D.A., Beynon, J.H.:
Hybrid Modelling of Aluminium-Magnesium Alloys During Thermomechanical Processing
in Terms of Physically-Based, Neuro-Fuzzy and Finite Elements Models. Acta Mat, Vol. 51
(2003) 5051–5062.

