Signal Cascades Analysis in Nanoprocesses with
Distributed Database System
Dariusz Mrozek, Bożena Małysiak, Jacek Frączek, and Paweł Kasprowski
Silesian University of Technology, Department of Computer Science,
ul. Akademicka 16, 44-100 Gliwice, Poland
{Mrozek, malysiak, kasprowski}@polsl.pl,
jacekf@polsl.gliwice.pl

Abstract. The signal cascades are a number of successive biochemical reactions, occurring in the cells. In these reactions take part many proteins (often
enzymes) and the entire process may be compared to the dominoes effect. The
common term used for define a varied biochemical mechanisms regulating processes in the nanonetworks is signal transduction executed in the signal cascades. These processes can be realized in a closed area of space which contains
proper quantities of substrates and a set of control molecules working in a predefined manner which was determined by their chemical construction, including changes of chemical activity reached usually by the conformational changes. Information about the signal cascades that happen in the various type of
cells for given processes can be retrieved from the biochemical research accessible in the biochemical databases. In this work, the simulation process of the
signal transduction in bio-nanoprocesses using the distributed database environment is presented and illustrated by the biological example.

1 Introduction
In outward things development of nanotechnology is in initial stage. Nowadays, manufacturing methods are very simple and basic at the molecular level. Manufactured
products are made from cells. The properties of those products depend on how those
cells are arranged. The first approach to implement the nanoprocesses would be coping biocompatible standards in design and implementation phase of such processes.
The signal cascades are a number of successive biochemical reactions, occurring in
the cells. In these reactions take part many proteins (often enzymes) and the entire
process may be compared to the dominoes effect – when the first protein of the cascade is modified, such modified protein has an effect on the next protein modifying it in
some direction. Thanks to the signal cascades diverse organisms can live and develop.
Furthermore, if some protein take part in signal cascade incorrectly (as a result of
mutation in gene coding this protein), effect of this single change can result in the
tumor development.
The common term used for define a varied biochemical mechanisms regulating
processes in the nanonetworks is signal transduction which is executed in the signal
cascades. These processes (coping biocompatible solutions) can be realized in a closed area of space which contains appropriate quantities of substrates and a set of conV.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3516, pp. 334 – 341, 2005.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

Signal Cascades Analysis in Nanoprocesses with Distributed Database System

335

trol molecules working in a predefined manner which was determined by their chemical construction, including changes of chemical activity reached usually by the conformational changes. These molecules have a decisive role of a control system. The
system is stimulated by external signal molecules coming from outside of the closed
area of space to its surface, meeting the function of nanoprocess border. The signal
cascades are the fixed cycles of transformations in which the molecular control system performs its control tasks. Actually, this kind of system performing nanoprocess
ought to be called as a nanonetworks. The selected substrates (inorganic ions and
most of metabolites e.g. sugars, amino acids, and nucleotides) and final products can
penetrate through the border of the process in determined conditions. The external stimulating signal molecules only activate the receptors placed in the border of a nanonetwork, excluding selected ions fulfilling the control functions in the signal cascades.
The signal transduction [4, 21] is the process of internal transformations and conversions of control molecules in signal cascades expressed as a control of nanoprocesses
in a nanonetwork. Generally, one can talk about wide area and local nanonetworks.
In living organisms wide area nanonetworks [13, 19] is represented by an electro-chemical net (e.g. nervous system) and extracellular communication net (e.g. immune
and hormone systems). The local area nano-network is represented by a cell. Exploitation of a living cell is one of the most natural (but not basic) approach to build the
local nanonetwork performing a given production process, which can be modified
through the external control. An assurance of survival requirements is the basic condition, which have to be satisfied for the cell. Stimulation of inputs of the signal cascades in a nanoprocess cell from its environment is necessary for the control. Information about the signal cascades that happen in the various type of cells for given processes can be retrieved from the biochemical research available in the biochemical databases. Finally, a sequence of stimuli signals for given process can be determined.

2 Architecture of the Simulation System Implementation
The mirror-based architecture presented in Fig. 1 defines the foundation of the simulation system used in the signal cascade analysis. The approach arose as the consequence of the distribution of domain-specific information. Nowadays, the growing
number of central repositories for collecting biochemical and biomedical data is observed and many organizations, research institutes and university laboratories around
the world lead their projects in order to understand the mysterious nature of living
cells. This cause the situation the particular information is distributed in many databases managed by different institutions connected to specific domain, e.g. the huge
amount of biomolecular structural data is stored in public databases of the PDB
(Protein Data Bank [1]) managed by the RCSB1 or NCBI’s2 MMDB [20], amino acid
sequence information stored in the UniProt3 [3, 11] and NCBI’s databases, human gene data stored in the H-Invitational DB provided by JBIRC4, protein interaction data

1

Research Collaboratory for Structural Bioinformatics (http://www.rcsb.org).
National Center for Biotechnology Information (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov).
3
UniProt Consortium (http:// www.uniprot.org).
4
Japan Biological Information Research Center (http://www.jbirc.aist.go.jp).
2

336

D. Mrozek et al.

managed by BIND5 [12], etc. Fortunately for the community, all the data is available
from these institution’s FTP sites in the form of text files (e.g. PDB [17], mmCIF [5]
formats), XML-structured files or using dedicated application programming interfaces
(OMG’s Macromolecular Structure Specification and Biomolecular Sequence Analysis Specification [15]) and loaders (OpenMMS [2, 18] toolkit). Searching information
across distributed heterogeneous database systems that store all the enormous volumes of data has become a very important aspect of the scientific research and may be
a great challenge.
In the mirror-based approach in Fig. 1, during the query process, data does not come directly from the distributed data sets. The complete sets or subsets of databases
are first mirrored to the local server(s) and then queries are submitted to local replicas.
In this architecture the source databases are called the primary databases and the local
servers are called the secondary databases.

Fig. 1. The architecture with mirrored data sets synchronized with the primary databases

The main components of the architecture are: mirrored datasets in the form of relational databases (RMDB icon – Relational Mirrored Database), XML- and TXT- format mirror sets (XML-MS, TXT), the Query Translation/Data Integration module
(QTDIm), the Mirror Sets Synchronization module (MSSm) and End-User tools. User
queries, similarity searching and advanced computing are triggered from End-User
Tools through the QTDIm which is a kind of controller in the process of information
extraction. The synchronization process is coordinated by the MSSm, which can be
forced to make replicas by the QTDIm, if needed.

3 Approximate Methods of Similarity Searching
At present, the afford of implementing the structure similarity search has been made
with approximate methods. The main assumption of approximate retrieval methods is
5

Biomolecular Interaction Network Database of Blueprint Initiative (http://www.bind.ca).

Signal Cascades Analysis in Nanoprocesses with Distributed Database System

337

that for the answer on the given query we can obtain a set of the objects from database
which are consistent with criteria defined in the query with given degree. Queries of
this type require defining characteristic function, which determines in what degree the
searched object is consistent with criteria defined in the query and threshold value,
which allows to qualify the objects that should occur in the answer. Existing retrieval
algorithms for the biological databases are based on principles valid in the objects
approximate retrieval methods. In the biological databases two trends are separated:
− similarity searching by a protein sequences alignment,
− similarity searching by alignment of a three-dimensional protein structures.
During the research (example introduced in section 5) the PDB [1], BIND [12] and
BioCarta [9] datasets were exploited but there is a possibility to access other mirrored
databases like UniProt/Swissprot [11] and GenBank [8]. Some features of developed
simulation software are presented in Fig. 2.

Fig. 2. Signal Transduction Spy – the Search Manager

Two modes of preparing experiment remain feasible: batch mode and interactive
step-by-step mode (left window). Processing data in the batch mode seems to be better because it is going without any control and doesn’t affect the user attention – the
experiment may take a long time especially during all the processes that use protein
conformation computation module to investigate changes in protein 3D structure as
a result of environmental parameters changes (e.g. temperature, pH). However, the
batch process is supposed to be described in the special purpose process-description
files containing all steps of the computation. The mode is in the development phase.

338

D. Mrozek et al.

The interactive mode provides users to see what changed during each step of the experiment and to make corrections or to change the way the process goes (e.g. see each
step of the signal transduction and the substrates of the cascade, see the network of interactions, explore of protein conformation, change the similarity search method,
etc.). In the mode users make use of RasMol [10] to display semi-result structures of
their activities in graphical form.

4 Processing of a Single Step of the Signal Cascade
Processing of the signal cascade may be divided on processing respective steps of the
cascade, represented by reactions on each level. Fig. 3a presents a sample network of
the reactions between nanostructures (e.g. proteins, polypeptides). Each reaction results with a creation of a final product. The product may be a protein in the appropriate state and conformation, which can be the activator or inhibitor of the other reactions which take place in the living cell or nanoprocess. Fig. 3b shows the algorithm
of tracking the signal cascade step – e.g. 1.7.2.24 reaction [24] marked in the Fig. 3a.
a)

b)

3.2.1.14

Perform
reaction 1.7.2.24

Signal
transduction DB

Check
results

Encapsulated
DBs (e.g. PDB)
similarity

2.7.7.4
2.7.1.25
1.8.99.4

1.7.2.24
conf. found

N

Y
Go ahead with
new conformation

update

Conformation computation software (based
on molecular mechanics e.g. MC, DP)
Establish conf.
in signal cascade

Next
reaction

Fig. 3. a) Sample network of reactions, b) Processing of a single step of the cascade

During the process of tracking cascade’s steps it is possible to check the conformational results (of nanostructure like polypeptide) with the databases consisting of the
structural information (e.g PDB [1]). These databases work as an integral parts of the
entire system. The retrieval of similar polypeptides is based on the approximate methods (section 3). If the structure or similar structure (with similarity determined) is
found in the database, the system retrieves appropriate information and tracks to the
next step of the cascade with the retrieved polypeptide. The information about cascade steps comes from other databases (e.g. BioCarta [9], BIND [12], aMAZE [24]). If
the resultant structure is not found in the database, it must be computed with the use
of molecular mechanics methods and software, with the assumption of getting minimal potential energy. We are strongly convinced that minimizing of the energy expression describing a conformational energy of structure [7, 22, 23] leads to the problem
related with multiple local minima or saddle points and so simple algorithms of optimization e.g. gradient-based, Newton’s or Fletcher-Powell have to be modified to find

Signal Cascades Analysis in Nanoprocesses with Distributed Database System

339

the global minimum. The implementation of algorithms of dynamic programming
(DP) [25] or Monte Carlo (MC) methods [16, 26] is better solution. Moreover, these
methods are time- and computer’s memory consuming. Once the new conformation is
established, it is possible to look for the interactions with other proteins and reactions
the new protein can participate and meanwhile the database is being updated.

5 Example of Selected Process in the Signal Cascade Analysis
The dataflow in the signal transduction simulation system using the distributed databases environment [14] is presented in Fig. 4. In the system the three databases work
as encapsulated parts of the computing process visible through the interfaces A and B.
Cascade #1
Begin simulation:
Cascade structure
Interactions

BioCarta database
mirror
Interface
A
BIND database
mirror

Continue:
Conformations

Interface
B

PDB database
mirror

Similarity
Environment
Modifications

CA

Cascade #n
Cascade #3
Cascade #2

Fig. 4. Dataflow in simulation process

The BioCarta database mirror allows the cascade structures data [9], the BIND database mirror allows nanostructures interactions data [12], and the PDB database mirror allows the molecule structures data [1].
The example presents the approach of conformation determination in signal cascade including the human CDK2 kinase during the phosphorylation process [6] using
proper database. In inactive form the CDK2 kinase can be retrieved from the PDB database as molecule signed by 1B38 [1]. During the phosphorylation process the threonine 160 in main chain of CDK2 is modified. To find this conformation change is very difficult by computation. The better solution is to search the proper, existing information from database. In Fig. 4 the shadowed area CA presents this simulation/database operation. To make more visible the critical place responsible for the conformation of kinase CDK2 (in the ATP complex) described by the 1B38 file was processed
to extract the threonine 160 neighborhood [6]. Retrieved from 1B38 file the middle

340

D. Mrozek et al.

part of the main chain of amino acids of the CDK2 is presented in Fig. 5a. The same
part of the main chain of CDK2 after the phosphorylation (extracted from 1B39 file
from PDB database) is presented in Fig. 5b. The changes in the conformation can be
found basing on molecular mechanics approach, however, the results obtained from
operation CA using selected database seem to be more practical.
a)

b)

Fig. 5. a) Sticks representation with the van der Waal’s dot surfaces of the conformation in
a middle part (residues 157-163) of the non-phosphorylated CDK2 (the threonine 160 in the
center of view), b) the same view of CDK2 in a middle part of the amino acids chain (residues
157-163) presenting the results of phosphorylation of threonine 160 on the conformation switching of the whole CDK2 structure

6 Evolution of the System and Future Research
Searching information in the distributed bioinformatics databases takes integral part
of the signal cascade analysis process. The paper presents the simulation system under
development in the Institute of Informatics, Silesian University of Technology, Gliwice, Poland intended to signal transduction simulation using the data from BIND, BioCarta, PDB (Rutgers) databases, and others. The considered system includes the algorithms of fused signal cascades analysis, the nanostructures conformation determination, the sequence (amino acids chain) and shape (conformation) similarity searching
and the solution of the encapsulation of databases (DB mirrors, interfaces and control)
enables to use the proper database in the on-line computing.

References
1. Berman, H.M., Westbrook, J., Feng, Z., Gilliland, G., Bhat, T.N., Weissig, H., Shindyalov,
I.N., Bourne, P.E.: The Protein Data Bank. Nucleic Acids Res. 28 (2000), 235–242
2. Greer, D.S., Westbrook, J.D., Bourne, P.E.: An ontology driven architecture for derived
representations of macromolecular structure. Bioinformatics. 18 (2002) 1280-1281
3. Apweiler, R., Bairoch, A., Wu, C.H., et al.: UniProt: the Universal Protein knowledgebase.
Nucleic Acids Research. 32 (2004) D115-D119

Signal Cascades Analysis in Nanoprocesses with Distributed Database System

341

4. Berridge, M.J.: The Molecular Basis of Communication within the Cell. Scientific American. 253 (4) (1985) 142-152
5. Bourne, P.E., Berman, H.M., Watenpaugh, K., Westbrook, J.D., Fitzgerald, P.M.D.: The
macromolecular Crystallographic Information File (mmCIF). Methods Enzymol., 277
(1997) 571–590
6. Brown, N.R. et al.: Effects of Phosphorylation of Threonine 160 on Cyclin-dependent
Kinase 2 Structure and Activity. J. of Biol. Chem. 274(13) (1999) 8746-8756
7. Znamirowski, L., Zukowska, E.D.: Simulation of Post-translational Conformations in the
Ribosomal Polypeptide Synthesis. Proc. of the IASTED Intern. Conf. Modeling and Simulation, Marina del Rey, California, ACTA Press, Anaheim-Calgary-Zurich (2002) 97-102
8. Benson, D.A., Karsch-Mizrachi, I., Lipman, D.J., Ostell, J., Wheeler, D.L.: GenBank:
update. Nucleic Acids Res. 32(Database issue) (2004) D23-6
9. BioCarta: Charting Pathways of Life. http://www.biocarta.com/genes/
10. Sayle R. RasMol: Molecular Graphics Visualization Tool. Biomolecular Structures
Group, Glaxo Wellcome Research & Development, Stevenage, Hartfordshire 1998, H. J.
Bernstein. v.2.7.1.1, rasmol@bernstein-plus-sons.com
11. Boeckmann, B., Bairoch, A., Apweiler, R., et al.: The SWISS-PROT protein knowledgebase
and its supplement TrEMBL in 2003. Nucleic Acids Res. 31 (2003) 365-370
12. Bader, G.D., Betel, D., Hogue, C.W.V.: BIND: the Biomolecular Interaction Network
Database. Nucleic Acids Research. Vol. 31(1) (2003) 248-250
13. Snyder S.H.: The Molecular Basis of Communication between Cells. Scientific American,
253 (4) (1985) 132-141, (1985)
14. Signal Transduction Simulation System Using the Distributed Databases Environment. Research Project BW/2004/05, Institute of Informatics, Silesian University of Technology,
Gliwice (2005)
15. http://www.omg.org
16. Warecki, S., Znamirowski, L.: Random Simulation of the Nanostructures Conformations,
Intern. Conference on Computing, Communication and Control Technology, Proceedings
Volume I, The Intern. Institute of Informatics and Systemics, Austin, Texas, August 14-17,
p. 388-393, (2004)
17. Callaway, J., Cummings, M., et al.: Protein Data Bank Contents: Atomic Coordinate Entry
Format Description, Federal Govern. Agency. (1996)
http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/docs/format/
18. http://openmms.sdsc.edu
19. Tonegawa, S.: The Molecules of the Immune System, Scientific American, 253 (4) (1985)
122-131
20. Wang, Y., Addess, K.J., Geer, L., Madej, T., Marchler-Bauer, A., Zimmerman, D., Bryant
S.H.: MMDB: 3D structure data in Entrez. Nucleic Acids Res. 28 (2000) 243-245
21. Ray, L.B.,: The Science of Signal Transduction. Science. 284 (1999) 755-756
22. Znamirowski, L.: Switching VLSI Structures. Reprogrammable FPAA Structures. Nanostructures. Studia Informatica. Vol. 25 (4A) (60) (2004) 1-236
23. Ponder, J.: Tinker – Software Tools for Molecular Design. Dept. of Biochemistry & Molecular Biophysics, Washington University, School of Medicine, St. Louis (2001)
24. van Helden, J., Naim, A., Mancuso, R., et al.: Representing and analysing molecular and
cellular function using the computer. Biol Chem. 381(9-10) (2000) 921-35
25. Bellman, R.: Dynamic Programming. Princeton University Press, Princeton, N. J. (1957)
26. Metropolis, N., Ulam, S.: The Monte Carlo Method, Journal of the American Stat. Assoc.,
44 (247) (1949) 335-341, (1949)

