A Multiphysics Model of Capillary Growth
and Remodeling
Dominik Szczerba1 , G´abor Sz´ekely1 , and Haymo Kurz2
1

2

Computer Vision Lab, ETH, CH-8092 Z¨urich, Switzerland
Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Freiburg, D-79104 Freiburg, Germany

Abstract. We report on an enhanced computational framework for simulating
flow-tissue interactions that significantly expands the capabilities of our previous model [1]. We adhere to the basic structural concept of the so-called intussusceptive growth and remodeling which does not only generate capillaries and
terminal vessels but also rebuilds them into a highly perfused system [2]. Present
enhancements comprise calculation and visualization in three dimensions, refined
tissue and fluid mechanics, and the transport of molecules that act as biochemical
growth or signaling factors. Our present model explains formation of capillary
meshes and bifurcations, and the emergence of feeding and draining microvessels in an interdigitating pattern that avoids arterio-venous shunts. In addition, it
predicts detailed hydrodynamic properties and transport characteristics for oxygen, metabolites or signaling molecules. In comparison to the previous work, the
complexity of our approach is dramatically increased by using a multiphysics
modeling environment, where many independent computational components are
combined and the data structure is unified.

1 Introduction
The long-standing interest of biology and medicine in a thorough quantitative understanding of the vascular system and its development has gained new impetus due to
increased efficiency of computational resources during the past two decades. Different
aspects of normal and tumor angiogenesis have been subject to in silico modeling, and
such different approaches have been chosen as fractal self-similar constructs [3], cellular automata [4], functional macroscopic pipelines ([5], [6], [7], [8]), optimal design
principles [9] and various mathematical formulations ([10], [11], [12]). A more comprehensive review of available literature can be found in our previous publications ([6],
[7], [1]) and will not be repeated here. Although many of those models are successful
in predicting structurally realistic systems with relevant biophysical properties, they do
not demonstrate fundamental understanding of how such structures actually come into
existence from the microscopic point of view. Such understanding is, however, mandatory if realistic simulations of, e.g., anti-angiogenic cancer treatments or the effects of
irradiation are considered.
In our previous approach, formation of blood vessels was treated as flow-driven remodeling of a planar capillary network or plexus demonstrated to be present at many
anatomical sites. The tissue was represented as a set of discrete entities (pixels) displacing under shear stress determined by the local flow conditions. The model successfully
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part II, LNCS 3992, pp. 86–93, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

A Multiphysics Model of Capillary Growth and Remodeling

87

predicted bifurcation formation and micro-vessel separation from a capillary bed, but
failed to ensure correct topology of the resulting arterial and venous branches, thus
producing shunt vessels.
We therefore attempted to implement cellular response mechanisms that would result in self-avoidance of arterial and venous branches. We found that the interplay of
production and transport of molecular compounds controlling the development, refined
tissue and fluid dynamics (including non-linear material responses) and remodeling into
the third dimension result in self-avoidance and interdigitating patterns of the terminal
branches. This allowed us to achieve better similarity to real patters and hence improved
predictive power.
Fundamental differences between other models that we are aware of and our current
approach are: 1) addressing each and every single capillary loop and terminal arterial or
venous branch - not just vector fields or concentration gradients, or only ramified trees;
2) using exclusively local interactions - without explicitly enforcing global optimality
or a priori prescribing bifurcation parameters. We thus hope to demonstrate that the
emergence of gross functional optimality in macroscopically tree-like networks can be
realized by molecular mechanisms that act on the microscopic scale. Major innovations
in this mathematically and computationally challenging project are presented here.

2 Numerical Background
Most generally spoken, we base our modeling on in vivo observations (cf. cited references) that strongly justify mechanistic assumptions about vascular tissues that are
able to respond to hydrodynamic conditions and signaling molecules by shape changes.
Numerically, the core of our model underlying all computations is a differential form
of the general transport equation for property φ, usefully written in the following form:
∂ρφ
+ div(ρφu) = div(Γ gradφ) + Sφ ,
∂t

(1)

with φ denoting the transported property, Γ diffusivity, ρ density, u convective vector
field and Sφ being the sources (or sinks) of the transported property.
Invoking the Gauss theorem and integrating over a three dimensional control volume
V yields an integral (conservative) equation for the transported property:
∂
∂t

ρφdV +
V

(ρφu)da =
A

(Γ gradφ)da +
A

Sφ dV ,

(2)

V

The above finite volume discretization is further linearized and written as:
AφP φP = Aφi φi + SPφ ,

(3)

with summation over explicit cell neighbours and compass notation as in [13]. The
above equation has to hold true for every point in the grid. This can be formulated as a
linear problem Ax = b, where x is a vector of unknown scalar values, A is a domaindependent (and property-specific) coefficient matrix and b is given by the boundary
conditions and the solution from the previous time steps.

88

D. Szczerba, G. Sz´ekely, and H. Kurz

The above sketched general computational technique allows to address a wide range
of transport phenomena by setting φ to an implicit geometry function, velocity components, concentrations, internal energy, temperature, etc. and identifying the diffusive
coefficient accordingly (mass diffusivity, fluid viscosity, etc.).

3 Tissue Modeling
Simulation of biological phenomena most often requires dealing with complex geometries. Unstructured body-fitted meshes, while offering obvious advantages like delivering accurate solutions at the boundaries, are computationally too expensive in case of
complex anatomical domains. Therefore, in the presented model we rely on Cartesian
grids, eventually using adaptive refining, as seen in Fig. 1.
We represent the tissue formally as a mathematical continuum, separated from external fluid (blood) by an interface defined in a level set sense. An introduction to this family of methods is beyond the scope of this report and can be found elsewhere [14]. Here
we only briefly discuss the most important issues relevant to our modeling. The key
ingredient is to define an implicit or embedding function to represent the fluid-structure
interface to be tracked. In our case it clearly will be the deforming blood-tissue interface. Deforming such an interface is computationally equivalent to solving a transport
problem with φ = φls and u being an interface advancing vector field. Such a convenient formulation offers a natural treatment of topological changes like break-up and
fusion of the boundaries, however, does not provide explicit geometrical information
about the domain. In particular, this means that we will not be able to (directly) describe local geometry or topology as no geometric primitives as pipes or tripods will be
available. On the other hand, a big advantage of this technique is that the level set function is continuous and the associated partial differential equations can be handled with
a common, previously introduced numerical method. Such a treatment allows to drive
the domain remodeling in an elegant manner using deformation fields (available near
the boundaries) instead of arbitrary displacements introduced in our previous work [1].

Fig. 1. A close-up of an initial input (left) for the simulations along with computational grid
demonstrating adaptive refinement (middle) to the blood-tissue boundary in a real capillary
plexus. Note the mesh inside the black tissue pillars (right): the discretization of the whole domain
is needed to solve the level-set equation.

A Multiphysics Model of Capillary Growth and Remodeling

89

Whereas previously we only considered the tangential shear stress as the remodeling
factor, using the current formulation we are able to derive the deformation fields generated by any sources, including boundary viscous and pressure forces, surface tension
and gradients of growth factors. In addition, we propose a non-linear tissue response
to the shear stress of the form f (τ ) ∼ 1/(τ + τ0 ). This means that due to decreased
cellular sensitivity the tissue will deform less to increasingly stronger stimulus exerted
by the flowing fluid.

4 Flow Conditions
In order to provide hemodynamic conditions in the domain of interest, the NavierStokes equations governing the fluid flow have to be solved. Generally speaking, this
can be done by using the general transport equation (taking φ = u, v, w), relating the
source terms to the pressure gradient and enforcing the mass-conservation equation
(taking φ = 1) - and additionally neglecting the rate of change of ρ for an incompressible fluid. Unfortunately, such treatment will not guarantee smooth pressure solution,
as pressure will not be present in the resulting mass-conservation equation. Solving
such a system will result in oscillatory pressure solutions, therefore this case needs special treatment. We chose a recent smoothing pressure correction approach [15], which
unlike most other established techniques, allows calculations to be performed using a
colocated variable arrangement. The whole solution procedure results in discrete distributions of velocity and pressure in the domain of interest, which can be used to derive
any further variables like, e.g., shear stress, experimentally known to modulate endothelial cell remodeling via realignment and elongation [2]. To control the remodeling process using flow derived forces we first calculate the viscous stress tensor τ :
τ = η(∇u + (∇u)T ) ,

(4)

In addition to the stress due to viscous forces, there can also be internal stresses due to
the fluid pressure:
σ = −pI ,
(5)
where I is the identity matrix. From these stress tensors, the viscous and pressure
boundary forces (normal, tangential) per unit area can be derived and directly added
to the interface advancing vector field displacing the tissue boundary. Another component of this field can be surface tension:
σs = σ0 κnδ ,

(6)

where σ0 is a material coefficient, κ denotes the curvature, n is an interface normal
vector and δ is a delta function of the implicit level-set function (non-zero only at the
zero level-set). We also attempt to include some approximations of the known nonlinear properties of blood. As a first order approximation to the experimentally known
shear-thinning behaviour of blood we pick a power law fluid, where the apparent or
effective viscosity is a function of the shear rate as given by:
η ∗ = KDn−1 ,

(7)

90

D. Szczerba, G. Sz´ekely, and H. Kurz

where D is the shear rate (independent of fluid orientation) and K, n are the model
parameters to be found experimentally. More sophisticated versions of such power law
rheology are also available in our model to simulate the non-newtonian regime of the
flow, however, they are all only valid for homogeneous fluids. In capillaries with a few
microns diameter, however, blood does not fulfill this assumption. In particular, the
finite sizes of the red blood cells could lead to explicit momentum or molecular transfer
to the walls during collisions or cause mechanical obstructions in thinner capillaries.
We do not currently address these effects in our model.

5 Transport Properties
We regard the mechanical response of a tissue exposed to physical influence of external
flow to be a major factor in capillary plexus growth. It is, however, not yet understood,
how molecular signaling interacts with this process and how these two effects can be integrated within a single comprehensive model of vascular tissue morphogenesis. Once
the computational method is available to solve the general transport equation it becomes
straight-forward to model mass transport of any chemical molecules like oxygen, carbon dioxide or growth factors. Technically speaking, nothing restricts us from introducing a few such molecular partners and allowing them to react with each other. First
order chemical reactions can easily be modeled by modifications of the corresponding
source terms, e.g.:
SO2 = −θO2 φO2 ,
SCO2 = −SO2 ,

(burning oxygen)
(into carbon dioxide)

SAGF = θAGF φCO2 , (producing growth factors in ischemic areas)
Sls = θls φAGF ,

(enforcing/inhibiting tissue remodeling)

(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)

etc. with φx relevant properties, Sx production/consumption rates (positive/negative),
and θx local tissue activities. Modeling possibilities here are limited solely by experimental knowledge.

6 Results
The simulation workflow is composed of all the components described so far. First,
initial structural conditions are derived experimentally from confocal microscopy images of an early developmental stage of chicken embryo capillary plexus. The resulting
images are enhanced and segmented using standard, semi-automatic image processing
techniques. Binarized blood-tissue boundaries become the input for the flow simulation, thereby determining hemodynamic conditions in the domain. Currently, the input
is two-dimensional, which is a sufficient approximation of the initial stage of a real capillary plexus. The tissue remodeling during the simulation, however, is permitted into a
thin three-dimensional layer (see [2] for background information about the real remodeling process). The next version of our framework, however, is planned to use full 3-D
segmentation for structural input.

A Multiphysics Model of Capillary Growth and Remodeling

91

Fig. 2. Simulation of transport from the arterial (left) to the venous (right) side of a respiratory
capillary plexus. Oxygen is diffused into the domain through the top face of the square image
area and then convected with the flowing blood. In response to its time-averaged exposure, a
heavy growth factor is produced and also convected with the flowing fluid. Color intensity values
correspond to its concentration levels and the white areas correspond to the tissue pillars (black
in Fig. 1). Note the inhomogeneous concentration that results from greatly varying passage times
through the capillary plexus, which can in itself represent a growth or remodeling signal.

Fig. 3. Final stage of a virtual vascular development. Left: a 2-D network. Due to linear tissue
response and lack of chemical signalling a shunt is formed. Right: a 3-D network. Formation of
an arterio-venous shunt is avoided and a primitive capillary exchange plexus is formed in between
the feeding artery (left) and draining vein (right). At the right and bottom sides, cross-sections
of the structure are shown. Both results originate from the same input geometry. Size of the 3-D
grid: 600x400x20.

Second, the global deformation field is computed, and molecular components (O2 ,
CO2 , growth factor) are dissolved and eventually allowed to react with the tissue surface (Fig. 2). The resulting vector field is transferred to the tissue simulation module,
where shape changes are calculated as physical deformations (including surface tensions). Thus, the solution determined for a given input domain is used for structural
remodeling of the entire system. This procedure is iterated in subsequent steps for a
preset time period or until steady-state is reached. Note, that opposed to our previous
2-D approach, we do not anymore attempt to a priori separate between the experimentally known sub-modes of the intussusceptive remodeling. Instead, we presume they all

92

D. Szczerba, G. Sz´ekely, and H. Kurz

should emerge as a result of the simulations once a sufficient level of modeling complexity is reached. In particular, we do not explicitly insert new pillars into low shear
stress regions; instead, we observe their natural appearance from adjacent layers in 3-D.
A possible stable result of remodeling an initially uniform capillary plexus into a differentiated microvascular network via our multiphysics simulation is shown in
Fig. 3 (right). Obviously, higher order vessels are formed that avoid direct fusion (arteriovenous shunt) by interdigitation: one feeder artery aims between two draining venous
branches. This will not be the case if our previous remodeling procedure is applied
Fig. 3 (left). We identified chemical signalling in 3-D as well as a non-linear tissue response to strain as the keys to avoiding the malformations. The non-linear nature of blood,
at least in the homogeneous regime we address, is not mandatory to achieve these results
and can be accounted for in the tissue response function. This will noticeably increase
the performance without seriously compromising the modeling efficiency. It could also
be noted that the simulation process itself has reached a considerable level of complexity.
Even if it is still far away from inherent complexity of real vascular networks, however, it
excels most other models that we are aware of in this aspect, hopefully leading to superior
predictive power. While we are currently evaluating the performance of our multiphysics
framework with respect to robustness and similarity to real microvessels, this work is beyond the scope of this article.

7 Conclusions
The findings resulting from our multiphysics multiscale model are consistent with observations on real morphology, where a microvascular tree is generated from a capillary
plexus. In addition to explaining the formation of bifurcations and the separation of
microvessels, our new method is also able to predict a primitive interdigitation of the
terminal branches and avoids arterio-venous malformations. Moreover, the current version allows computational studies about the transport of oxygen, metabolites or signaling molecules. Our results demonstrate that interdisciplinary multicomponent computer
models of blood vessel networks can integrate experimental data on the cellular level to
simulate supracellular morphogenesis with unprecedented detail.

References
1. Szczerba, D., Sz´ekely, G.: Computational model of flow-tissue interactions in intussusceptive
angiogenesis. Journal of Theoretical Biology 234(1) (2005) 87–97
2. Kurz, H., Burri, P., Djonov, V.: Angiogenesis and vascular remodeling by intussusception:
From form to function. News in Physiological Sciences 18 (2003) 65–70
3. Lindenmayer, A.: Mathematical models for cellular interaction in development. Journal of
Theoretical Biology 18 (1968) 280–315
4. Alarcon, T., Byrne, H., Maini, P.: A cellular automaton model for tumour growth in inhomogeneous environment. Journal of Theoretical Biology 225 (2003) 257–274
5. Sandau, K., Kurz, H.: Modelling of vascular growth processes: a stochastic biophysical
approach to embryonic angiogenesis. Journal of Microscopy 175 (1994) 205–213
6. G¨odde, R., Kurz, H.: Structural and biophysical simulation of angiogenesis and vascular
remodeling. Developmental Dynamics 220 (2001) 387–401

A Multiphysics Model of Capillary Growth and Remodeling

93

7. Szczerba, D., Sz´ekely, G.: Macroscopic modeling of vascular systems. In: Medical Image
Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention - MICCAI 2002. Volume 2489 of Lecture
Notes in Computer Science., LNCS Springer (2002) 284–292
8. Szczerba, D., Sz´ekely, G.: Simulating vascular systems in arbitrary anatomies. In: Medical
Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention - MICCAI 2005: 8th International
Conference, Palm Springs, CA, USA,. Volume 3750 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science.,
Springer-Verlag GmbH (2005) 641–648
9. Schreiner, W., Buxbaum, P.F.: Computer optimization of vascular trees. IEEE Transactions
on Biomedical Engineering 40 (1993) 482–491
10. Baish, J.W., Gazit, Y., Berk, D.A., Nozue, M., Baxter, L.T., Jain, R.K.: Role of tumor vascular
architecture in nutrient and drug delivery: An invasion percolation-based network model.
Microvascular Research 51 (1996) 327–346
11. Anderson, A., Chaplain, M.: Continuous and discrete mathematical models of tumor-induced
angiogenesis. Bulletin of Mathematical Biology 60 (1998) 857–899
12. McDougall, S.R., Anderson, A.R.A., Chaplain, M.A.J., Sherratt, J.A.: Mathematical modelling of flow through vascular networks: Implications for tumour-induced angiogenesis and
chemotherapy strategies. Bulletin of Mathematical Biology 64 (2002) 673–702
13. Ferziger, J., Peri´c, M.: Computational Methods for Fluid Dynamics. Springer-Verlag (2002)
14. Sethian, J.A.: Level Set Methods and Fast Marching Methods. Cambridge University Press
(1999)
15. Date, A.W.: Solution of transport equations on unstructured meshes with cell-centered colocated variables. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 48 (2005) 1117–1127

