Analytical Solution to Settlement of Cast-In-Situ
Thin-Wall Concrete Pipe Pile Composite Foundation
Han-long Liu1,2, An Deng1,2, and Shi-qing Wen1,2
1

Key Laboratory for Geotechnical Engineering of Ministry of Water Resource,
Hohai University, Nanjing 210098, P.R. China
2
Geotechnical Research Institute, Hohai University, Nanjing 210098, P.R. China
{hliu,a_deng,sqw}@hhu.edu.cn

Abstract. The cast-in-situ thin-wall concrete pipe pile (PCC pile) is
increasingly employed as a soft soil improvement technique in China. The
formed composite foundation by using PCC pile renders a competitive
advantage compared to conventional comparable soft soil treatment techniques.
To calculate the settlement of PCC composite foundation helps better design a
soil improvement scenario and understand the mechanism of PCC composite
foundation. In this study, an elastic analytical solution to deformation modulus
of PCC composite foundation was developed based upon the pile-soil-cushion
interaction system and model analyses. Using the calculated modulus, formula
presenting pile-soil stress ratio and composite foundation settlement were
derived. A case study was conducted to verify the calculations. It is indicated
that calculated settlements are in consistency with fielding monitoring data.
Keywords: PCC pile, composite foundation, deformation modulus, pile-soil
stress ratio, settlement.

1 Introduction
As the drastic developments along the east China areas, a number of infrastructure
works, e.g. ports, highway, bridges and warehouses, are constructed or planned. One
of the obstacles in constructions is the poor bearing capacity of soft ground, which
widely exists in east China, in particular in the vicinities of sea, rivers and lakes. Soil
treatment has to be applied to improve the bearing capacity and decrease the
settlement of soft soil foundations. The cast-in-situ, thin-wall, concrete pipe pile (PCC
pile), a patented technique for soft soil improvement,[1, 2] has been extensively
employed to address the soft soil concerns.
The PCC pile is a cast-in-situ, thin-wall, concrete pipe pile. The external diameter
varies from 1000 to 1500 mm, and the wall thickness is in the range of 150 to 200
mm. The length of PCC pile is decided by ground properties and engineering goals,
generally ranging from several meters to tens of meters. PCC piles can either be
driven into ground fully as a composite foundation, or be driven partially with
embedded reinforcement to set as a retaining structure. Fresh concrete is cast and
vibrated at continuous steps to form the pile body. Using PCC composite foundation
to improve soft soils has advantages spanning multiple aspects, i.e. concept,
construction, performance, and economics. In concept, it maximizes the utilization of
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part III, LNCS 4489, pp. 1172–1179, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Analytical Solution to Settlement of Cast-In-Situ Thin-Wall Concrete Pipe Pile

1173

shaft frictions through both inside and outside soil masses. It also minimizes concrete
consumption by converting a solid pile into an economical annular cross section. The
dimensions of PCC pile are adjustable, which makes PCC suitable for various soil
properties and engineering goals. A steel pipe mold is driven into the soil mass to
form an annular-shape room and the fresh concrete is poured. In this manner, the
completeness and continuity of pile body is ensured. Since the shaft friction resistance
is basically doubled, and the inner and outer soils may co-work together with PCC
piles, the bearing capacity of PCC composite foundation is increased in a more
effective way than other conventional techniques, e.g. deep-soil-mixing columns.
Mechanical mechanism of PCC composite foundation has not been clearly
recognized. As a newly patented technique, the soil-pile interaction and composite
foundation settlement are not yet understood. The primary settlement of composite
foundation is not easy to estimate. Current applications are basically fulfilled at an
empirical basis. Lack of deeper technical knowledge about PCC composite foundation
barriers its optimization in designs. To upgrade this technique is also delayed without
knowing its mechanical mechanism. This paper presents the establishment of a
theoretical frame and computing methods regarding the deformation modulus, the
pile-soil stress ratio and the settlement the composite foundation. A case study is
conducted to verify the reliability of the derivation and computation.

2 Method and Analyses
2.1 Composite Foundation Model
A PCC composite foundation model, the pile-soil-cushion unit, is demonstrated in
Fig. 1. The upper load P is uniformly applied over the cushion. The cushion is
constructed with the thickness of hc and modulus of Ec. The pile length is h, with its
outer diameter D and inner diameter d. The pile body has elastic modulus Ep. The
elastic modulus of soil layer i within the improvement area is Esi. After the adjustment
of layer, the uniform load on PCC pile is Ps. The total soil compression is composed
of two parts: S1 for h thick improved deposit and S2 for underlying soil deposits. The
pile compression is S3. The settlement of pile tip is δ p . It is known that δ p is equal
to the addition of S1, S2 and S3.
Assumptions are made with respect to the PCC composite foundation. It is assumed
that the composite foundation is an elastic semi-infinite body, ignoring the boundary
conditions. The replacement ratio of PCC composite foundation is m. PCC piles are
arranged at the same spacing. The contact stresses upon cushions, pile heads and soil
surface are uniformly distributed. Inner soils' bearing capacity is ignored. Soil-pile
composite foundation is homogeneously layered. The underlying soil layers are
compressible homogenous elastic body conforming to Hooker’s law. The elastic soil
layer, outside and inside PCC piles, has identical compression modulus ES and shaft
frictional resistance coefficient K. When the pile-soil relative displacement δ is less than
the ultimate displacement δ u , the frictional resistance is the product of relative
displacement δ and frictional resistance coefficient K. Otherwise, when relative
displacement δ exceeds the ultimate displacement δ u , the frictional resistance is the
product of δ u and K.

1174

H.-l. Liu, A. Deng, and S.-q. Wen

Cushion

Improvement
soil deposit

Cushion

PCC pile

Underlying layers

Underlying layers

Fig. 1. PCC composite foundation loads and displacements model

2.2 Model Analyses
The upper load P on cushion is transferred to pile at Pp and soil at Ps, respectively,
and quantified by Eq. 1 according to the pile-soil replacement ratio m.[3]

p = mPp + (1 − m) Ps .

(1)

The cushion deformation above pile tip due to Pp is expressed as
hc − [hc' − ( S1 + S 2 − S 3 − δ P )] according to Fig. 1. Thus, the pile load Pp is computed
using Eq. 2.
Pp = E c

hc − [ hc' − ( S1 + S 2 − S 3 − δ P )]
.
hc

(2)

On the other hand, the cushion deformation above soil due to Ps is expressed as
h c − hc' . The load on soil, Ps, is shown in Eq. 3.
PS = Ec

hc − hc'
.
hc

(3)

The stress transferring model of PCC pile in a linear elastic condition is presented
in Fig. 2 as recommended for a conventional pile.[4, 5] The pile is divided into a
number of identical small units. Because all units follow deformation and stress
coordination, Eq. 4 is derived and converted into Eq. 5.

Nz = Nz +

dN z
dz + ( f z1c1 + f z 2 c 2 )dz .
dz

dN z
+ ( f z1c1 + f z 2 c2 ) = 0 .
dz

(4)

(5)

Analytical Solution to Settlement of Cast-In-Situ Thin-Wall Concrete Pipe Pile

1175

Fig. 2. Linear elastic stress transferring model of PCC pile

where, fz1 indicates the outer friction resistance of a unit; c1 indicates pile outer
perimeter; fz2 is the inner friction resistance of a unit; c2 is pile inner perimeter.
As it is assumed that soil-pile composite foundation is homogeneously layered, the
compression of improved soil deposit, S1, can be calculated by using layer-wise
summation method as shown in Eq. 6.
n

S1 =

∑E
i =1

Psi

hi = ϕPs .

(6)

si

where, n is the total layer number of improved soil deposit. The additional stress for
layer i is Psi. The thickness of layer i is hi. The composite modulus of layer i is Esi. ϕ
represents the equivalent compression coefficient of improved deposit.
Pile may punch into cushion and underlying layer at deep Sh and Sl, respectively.[6]
The pile punching effect and displacement coordination between pile and soil are
taken in consideration to calculate the composite foundation modulus E c as shown in
Eq. 7.
E c ε c = mε p E p + (1 − m) E s ε s .
where, ε c = ε s = S1 h , ε p = [ S1 − ( S h + S l )] h × ε p . ε p and

(7)

εs

represent the

vertical strains of pile and soil, respectively. ε c is the vertical strain of composite
foundation. Sh, the depth of upper pile punching, is equal to ( S1 + S 2 − δ P − S 3 ); Sl,
the depth of lower punching, is equal to ( δ p − S 2 ). Eq. 7 is further converted into
Eq. 8.
E c = m[1 − ( S h + S l ) S1 ]E p + (1 − m) E s = u p mE P + (1 − m) E .

(8)

1176

H.-l. Liu, A. Deng, and S.-q. Wen

＋

where, u p = 1 − ( S h S l ) S1 = S 3 S1 , which indicates the performance coefficient of
the pile modulus. Its value can be obtained by using iteration method.
The compression of underlying layers, S2, can be calculated by using layer-wise
summation method as shown in Eq. 9.
k

S2 =

Psj

∑E
j =1

hj .

(9)

sj

where, k is the total number of compressible underlying layers; Psj is the additional
stress for underlying layer j; hj is the thickness of underlying layer j; Esj is the
compression modulus of underlying layer j. Psj can be calculated by using stress
diffusion method.[3]
The total amount of PCC pile compression is relatively small, which can be
approximately calculated using Eq. 10.
S3 = ( PP A1 ) ( EP A) = GPP .

(10)

where, A1 = πD 2 , indicating pile-soil section area; A = π ( D 2 − d 2 ) , indicating PCC
pile annular area; G = ( A1h) ( EP A) .
Under elastic conditions, the pile-soil displacement is relatively small. Suppose the
compression curve of improved deposit is linear, and the compression of rigid piles
varies linearly with depth, the outer shaft friction resistance of the pile is expressed
using Eq. 11.
f z1 = K [δ p − ( S1 + S 2 − S3 ) + ( z h) ( S1 − S3 )] .

(11)

Similarly, suppose the compression curve of the inner soil is linear, the inner shaft
friction resistance at point Z is expressed in Eq. 12.
f z 2 = K ( z / h)[δ p + S3 (1 − z / h) − S 2 ] .

(12)

By applying Eqs. 11 and 12 to Eq. 5, Eq. 13 is obtained.
S −S
dNZ
z
z2
= −Kc1 1 3 z − Kc1δ p + Kc1 (S1 + S2 − S3 ) − Kc2 (δ p + S3 − S2 ) + Kc2 S3 2 .
dZ
h
h
h

(13)

Given the boundary condition at pile cap, Nz=Pp A1, as shown in Fig. 2, Eq. 13 is
integrated into Eq. 14.
Nz =

S − S3 2 1
1
z2 1
z2
Kc2 S3
− Kc1 1
z − Kc2 (δ p + S3 − S 2 ) − Kc1δ p z
.
3
h2 2
h
2
h

(14)

+ Kc1 ( S1 + S 2 − S 3 ) z + Pp A

It is supposed that the pile tip foundation conforms to Winkler’s Law.[7] Therefore,
when point Z reaches to depth h in Fig. 2, the axial stress of pile tip, Nz, is ksA(δP-δ2).
Ks is the coefficient of subgrade reaction for the pile tip bearing layer. Apply it to Eq.
14, Eq. 15 is obtained.

Analytical Solution to Settlement of Cast-In-Situ Thin-Wall Concrete Pipe Pile

1
1
Kc1h( S1 − S3 ) − Kc2 hS3 − αδ P + αS 2 + Pp A1 = 0 .
2
6

1177

(15)

1
Kc2 h .
2
Combining Eqs. 1 to 3, 6, 10 and 15, pile load Pp, soil load Ps, and compressed
cushion thickness h'c are computed as shown in Eqs. 16, 17 and 18, respectively.

where, α = k s A + Kc1h +

Pp =

P[(1 − m)θϕ + αβ ]
mαβ + (1 − m)(θG + αβ + A1 −

1
Kc2 hG )
6

.

(16)

1
Kc1hG − mθϕ
6
.
Ps =
1
mαβ + (1 − m)(θG + αβ + A1 − Kc2 hG )
6

(17)

⎛
P ⎞
hc = ⎜⎜1 − s ⎟⎟hc = hc − Ps β .
⎝ Ec ⎠

(18)

P(θG + αβ + A1 −

1
1
1
Kc1h + Kc2 h + Kc2 h .
2
2
2
Thus, the total deformation of the composite foundation is shown in Eq. 19.

where, β = hc E c , θ = k s A +

S = S1 + S 2 + hc − hc' = ϕP + βPs + S 2 .

(19)

The pile-soil stress ratio is shown in Eq. 20.

N=

Pp
Po

=

(1 − m)θϕ + βα
.
1
θG + αβ + A1 − Kc2 hG − mθϕ
6

(20)

Parameter u p can also be calculated using Eq. 21.

uP =

S1 G
(1 − m)θϕ + αβ
=
.
S3 ϕ mαβ + (1 − m)(θG + αβ + A − 1 Kc hG)
1
2
6

(21)

In Eq. 21, because ϕ is related to u p , value of u p cannot be calculated directly.
Iteration method may provide an analytical value of u p by following procedures.
First, suppose a relatively small value of u p1 and run the calculations to obtain the
value of ϕ and a new value u p 2 . Secondly, run a comparison between calculated
u p 2 and supposed value u p1 . If u p 2 is larger than u p1 , increase supposed u p1 in a
proper addition to u p 3 , re-run the calculations. Repeat the procedures until u pi and

1178

H.-l. Liu, A. Deng, and S.-q. Wen

u p (i −1) are identical. Final value u pi is the performance coefficient of pile modulus.
Based on the iteratively inferred u pi value, the pile-soil stress ratio and the PCC
composite foundation settlement are obtained. A program can be coded to run the
iterative computations according to design data of PCC composite foundation.

3 Case Study
A case study was conducted to verify the analytical solution developed in this study.
Hang-Ning Highway links Hangzhou and Nanjing and crosses most soft ground
zones. The PCC composite foundation was applied for improving soils at Changxing
section of the highway.
The PCC pile spacing is 2.5 m. The outer diameter D and inner diameter d of the
pile is 1.0 and 0.76 m, respectively. The pile length h is 16 m. The composite
foundation displacement ratio m is 0.053. The cushion, composed of gravels and
sands, is 0.5 m thick with Ec being 31 MPa.[8] The coefficient subgrade reaction Ks is
20 MPa.[8] The embankment filling height is 4.5 m. After iterative computations, Up is
calculated as 5.6%; pile-soil stress ratio is 12.2; the settlement of improvement
deposit S1 is 21.5 mm; the settlement of underlying layers S2 is 104.3 mm; the total
settlement of composite foundation is 125 mm. Field monitoring data indicate that the
maximum pile-soil stress ratio is 16, and the composite foundation settlement is 141
mm. Calculated results are less than but close to monitored data. Therefore, analytical
solution is validated.

4 Concluding Remarks
Analytical solutions are derived regarding the composite modulus, the pile-soil stress
ratio, and the settlement of PCC composite foundation, based on the displacement
coordination of pile-soil-cushion unit model. The analytical solutions help understand
the pile-soil interaction mechanism, optimize PCC composite foundation design, and
predict foundation’s future primary settlement. Monitored data in a highway project
using PCC composite foundation present good agreement with calculated data
according to analytical solutions, and thus the derived solutions are verified.
Acknowledgment. The study was supported by a grant of National Natural Science
Foundation of China (No. 50679017).

References
1. Liu, H. L., Fei, K., Ma, X. H.: Field Pour Concrete Cased Pile with Vibrated and Steel Tube
Mould Technology and its Application I: Development and Design Theory. Rock Soil
Mech. 24 (2003) 164-168
2. Liu, H. L., Hao X. Y., Fei, K.: Field Pour Concrete Cased Pile with Vibrated Steel Tube
Mould Technology and its Application II: Application and in-situ Test. Rock Soil Mech. 24
(2003) 372-375

Analytical Solution to Settlement of Cast-In-Situ Thin-Wall Concrete Pipe Pile

1179

3. Gong, X. N.: The Theory and Practice of Composite Foundation. China Architecture
Building Press, Beijing (2001)
4. Zhang, S. N.: Pile-Soil Stress Ratio Study of Mixing Pile Composite Foundation.
Foundation Treatment, 6 (1995) 9-14
5. Ronald Y. S. P., Feng, J.: Rational Mechanical of Axial Soil-Pile Interaction. J. Eng. Mech.
119 (1993) 813-831
6. Mao, Q., Gong, X. N.: Research on the Properties of Cushion of the Composite Ground.
Rock Soil Mech. 19 (1998) 67-73
7. Fu, J. H., Song, E. X.: Analysis of Rigid Pile Composite Foundation Working Performance.
Rock Soil Mech. 21 (2000) 335-339
8. Zhou, J. X., Wang H. J., Yu, S. M.: Foundation Construction. Tsinghua University Press,
Beijing (1996)

