A Three Tier Architecture for LiDAR
Interpolation and Analysis
Efrat Jaeger-Frank1, Christopher J. Crosby2 , Ashraf Memon1 ,
Viswanath Nandigam1 , J. Ramon Arrowsmith2 , Jeﬀery Conner2 ,
Ilkay Altintas1 , and Chaitan Baru1
1

San Diego Supercomputer Center, University of California, San Diego,
9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA
{efrat, amemon, viswanat, altintas, baru}@sdsc.edu
2
Department of Geological Sciences, Arizona State University,
Tempe, AZ 85281, USA
{chris.crosby, ramon.arrowsmith, jsconner}@asu.edu

Abstract. Emerging Grid technologies enable solving scientiﬁc problems that involve large datasets and complex analyses. Coordinating distributed Grid resources and computational processes requires adaptable
interfaces and tools that provide a modularized and conﬁgurable environment for accessing Grid clusters and executing high performance
computational tasks. In addition, it is beneﬁcial to make these tools
available to the community in a uniﬁed framework through a shared cyberinfrastructure, or a portal, so scientists can focus on their scientiﬁc
work and not be concerned with the implementation of the underlying
infrastructure. In this paper we describe a scientiﬁc workﬂow approach
to coordinate various resources as data analysis pipelines. We present
a three tier architecture for LiDAR interpolation and analysis, a high
performance processing of point intensive datasets, utilizing a portal, a
scientiﬁc workﬂow engine and Grid technologies. Our proposed solution
is available through the GEON portal and, though focused on LiDAR
processing, is applicable to other domains as well.

1

Introduction

With improvements in data acquisition technologies comes an increase in the
volume of scientiﬁc data The demand for eﬃcient processing and management
of the data have made Grid infrastructures an essential component in a wide
range of scientiﬁc domains. Grid infrastructure technologies enable large scale
resource sharing and data management, collaborative and distributed applications and high performance computing, for solving large scale computational and
data intensive problems. However, the distributed and heterogeneous nature of
Grid clusters, such as various hardware platforms and software systems, access
and interaction interfaces and data and resource management systems, make
the Grid environment diﬃcult to use by the layman, and thus require additional
management to coordinate the multiple resources. In this paper we propose a
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part III, LNCS 3993, pp. 920–927, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

A Three Tier Architecture for LiDAR Interpolation and Analysis

921

coordination of Grid resources in a workﬂow environment as part of a three tier
architecture. The workﬂow system provides a modularized and conﬁgurable environment. It gives the freedom to easily plug-in any process or data resource,
to utilize existing sub-workﬂows within the analysis, and easily extend or modify the analysis using a drag-and-drop functionality through a graphical user
interface.
The Geosciences Network (GEON) [1] is an NSF-funded large Information
Technology Research (ITR) project to facilitate collaborative, inter-disciplinary
science eﬀorts in the earth sciences. GEON is developing an infrastructure that
supports advanced semantic-based discovery and integration of data and tools
via portals (the GEON portal), to provide uniﬁed and authenticated access to
a wide range of resources. These resources allow geoscientists to conduct comprehensive analyses using emerging web and Grid-base technologies in order to
facilitate the next generation of science and education. One of the challenging
problems GEON is currently focusing on is distribution, interpolation and analysis of LiDAR (Light Distance And Ranging) [2] point cloud datasets. The high
point density of LiDAR datasets pushes the computational limits of typical data
distribution and processing systems and makes grid interpolation diﬃcult for
most geoscience users who lack computing and software resources necessary to
handle these massive data volumes. The geoinformatics approach to LiDAR data
processing requires access to distributed heterogeneous resources for data partitioning, analyzing and visualizing all through a single interactive environment.
We present a three tier architecture that utilizes the GEON portal as a front end
user interface, the Kepler [3] workﬂow system as a comprehensive environment
for coordinating distributed resources using emerging Grid technologies, and the
Grid infrastructure, to provide eﬃcient and reliable LiDAR data analysis. To
the best of our knowledge, there exists no previous work on utilizing a scientiﬁc
workﬂow engine as a middleware behind a portal environment for coordinating
distributed Grid resources.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides an introduction to LiDAR data and describes the traditional processing approach. Section 3
gives a brief overview of the Kepler scientiﬁc workﬂow system. The novel approach for LiDAR processing, utilizing the Kepler workﬂow engine through the
GEON portal is described and analyzed in Section 4. We conclude in Section 5
and discuss expansions of the current work aimed at making GEON a leading
portal for LiDAR processing.

2

Introduction to LiDAR and Previous Approach

LiDAR (Light Distance And Ranging, a.k.a. ALSM (Airborne Laser Swath Mapping)) data is quickly becoming one of the most exciting new tools in the Geosciences for studying the earth’s surface. Airborne LiDAR systems are composed
of three separate technologies: a laser scanner, an Inertial Measurement Unit
(IMU) and a Global Positioning System (GPS) all conﬁgured together to calculate the absolute location for the earth’s surface based upon each individual

922

E. Jaeger-Frank et al.

laser return. The systems typically record one or more returns per square meter
on the ground with an absolute vertical accuracy of better than 15 cm. Capable
of generating digital elevation models (DEMs) more than an order of magnitude
more accurate than those currently available, LiDAR data oﬀers geologists the
opportunity to study the processes the shape the earth’s surface at resolutions
not previously possible. LiDAR data is currently being utilized by earth scientists for a wide variety of tasks, ranging from evaluating ﬂooding hazards to
studying earthquake faults such as the San Andreas [2].
Unfortunately, access to these massive volumes of data generated by LiDAR
is currently diﬃcult, and the average geoscience user is faced with the daunting
task of wading through hundreds or thousands of ASCII ﬂat ﬁles to ﬁnd the
subset of data of interest. The distribution, interpolation and analysis of large
LiDAR datasets, currently performed on a desktop PC with software packages
available and familiar to most earth scientists, also presents a signiﬁcant challenge for processing these types of data volumes. In the current state of aﬀairs,
the popularity and rate of acquisition of LiDAR data far outpaces the resources
available for researchers who wish to work with these data. The geoinformatics
approach to LiDAR processing described herein represents a signiﬁcant improvement in the way that geoscientists access, interpolate and analyze LiDAR data.
The improved, internet-based approach, acts to democratize access to these exciting but computationally challenging data.

3

Kepler: A Scientiﬁc Workﬂow System

Kepler [4, 5] is a cross-project, multi-disciplinary collaboration to build open
source tools for scientiﬁc workﬂows that provide domain scientists with an easyto-use, yet powerful system for capturing and automating their ad-hoc process.
Kepler is built on top of the PtolemyII system developed at UC Berkeley, which
provides a set of java APIs for modeling heterogeneous, concurrent and hierarchical components by means of various models of computations [6, 7]. Kepler
provides the scientists with a repetitive and conﬁgurable environment available through a graphical user interface and as a command-line tool. It combines high-level workﬂow design with execution and runtime interaction, access
to local and remote data and legacy applications, and local and remote service invocation along with a built-in concurrency control and job scheduling
mechanism.
Computational units in Kepler are called actors, which are reusable components communicating with each other via input and output ports. The control of
ﬂow of actors is orchestrated by a director that speciﬁes the model of computation. Kepler uses the Modeling Markup Language (MoML), inherited from the
underlying PtolemyII system, as its workﬂow description language. MoML is a
modularized and extensible XML modeling language where actors can be deﬁned
as place holder stubs to be set prior to the workﬂow execution. In the next section
we describe how utilizing the Kepler features enhances LiDAR processing.

A Three Tier Architecture for LiDAR Interpolation and Analysis

4

923

A Scientiﬁc Workﬂow Based Approach for LiDAR
Processing

In the following section we present a three tiered Kepler scientiﬁc workﬂow solution for facilitating distribution, interpolation and analysis of LiDAR datasets.
4.1

Coordinating Distributed Resources in a Single Environment

LiDAR processing requires three main computational steps each deployed on
a distributed resource: querying point cloud datasets, processing the data using various interpolation algorithms, and visualizing the results. Coordinating
these steps in a Kepler scientiﬁc workﬂow provides scheduling and monitoring of
each task and communication between the various resources. Furthermore, the
scientiﬁc workﬂow environment gives us modularity and extensibility through
reusable actors. The LiDAR processing workﬂow, depicted in Figure 1, provides
a conceptual workﬂow where each of the components can be dynamically customized by the availability of the data and processing algorithms and is set on
the ﬂy prior to the workﬂow execution. This modularized approach can be captured as a workﬂow pattern of subset, analyze, and visualize. Below we elaborate
on each of the processing steps.
The massive amount of LiDAR data (currently two datasets at ∼1 billion
points each) were uploaded and organized in a DB2 spatial database on DataStar to provide a uniﬁed structure to the collected data. The subset query returns
all points (X,Y,Z) that reside within a user selected bounding box. The database
connection information along with the query are speciﬁed as workﬂow parameters and are set on the ﬂy prior to the workﬂow execution. The query is then
performed on DataStar where the result is also stored on an NFS mounted disk.
The analysis step consists of an interpolation algorithm. As shown in the ﬁgure, the query response is shipped to the analysis cluster and is then interpolated
Analyze

Visualize

Subset
move

process

move

render

display

Arizona Cluster
Global Mapper (Titan)
Get image
for grid file

Datastar

Browser

d2
d1

d1

d2 (grid file)

d1
IBM DB2

NFS Mounted Disk

d2
NFS Mounted Disk

Fig. 1. Coordinating distributed heterogeneous resources in a single scientiﬁc workﬂow
environment

924

E. Jaeger-Frank et al.

into a regularized grid. Currently we use the GRASS spline interpolation [8] algorithm deployed on the Arizona GEON four nodes cluster. Other interpolation
algorithms, for example, Inverse Distance Weighted (IDW) or Krieging algorithms may be plugged in as well. Interpolation of the high-point density LiDAR
data currently constitutes the bottleneck in the overall process. Parallelization
of the interpolation code or alternative interpolation algorithms will likely result
in improved performance.
The interpolation results may be visualized and/or downloaded. At present,
the Global Mapper imaging tool1 is used to create a display from the interpolated results. Global Mapper, available to the GEON community through a web
service, takes an ASCII grid ﬁle as an input and returns a URL to the resulting
image. The image can be displayed on a web browser and requires no speciﬁc
visualization components. Other visualization methods may be applied as well.
4.2

A Three Tier Architecture

The GEON project is developing a web-based portal for gathering GeoScience
applications and resources under a single roof. In order to make the workﬂow
based approach for LiDAR processing uniformly accessible through the GEON
portal, our proposed solution is based on a three tier architecture (depicted in
Figure 2): the portal layer, the workﬂow layer or control layer, which is the
Kepler workﬂow system, and the Grid layer as the computation layer.
The portal layer, a portlet, serves as a front end user interface. It enables
the user to partition the data using an interactive mapping tool and attribute
selection through a WMS map2 . Algorithms, processing attributes and desired
derivative products, are also chosen using a web interface. Within Kepler, one
can design a predeﬁned parameterized workﬂow template which is modularized
and conﬁgurable using place holder stubs to be set prior to the workﬂow execution. The aforementioned “subset, analyze, visualize” workﬂow pattern serves
as a conceptual workﬂow template, deﬁned in the Kepler workﬂow description
language, MoML. A workﬂow instance is created on the ﬂy from the conceptual workﬂow based on the user selections. The instantiated workﬂow is then
scheduled to be executed by the workﬂow layer.
The workﬂow layer, also referred to as the main control layer, communicates
both with the portal and the Grid layers. This layer, controlled by the Kepler
workﬂow manager, coordinates the multiple distributed Grid components in a
single environment as a data analysis pipeline. It submits and monitors jobs
onto the Grid, and handles third party transfer of derived intermediate products
among consecutive compute clusters, as deﬁned by the workﬂow description. In
addition, it sends control information (a.k.a. tokens) to the portal client about
the overall execution of the process. The workﬂow is executed by the Kepler
engine in a batch mode. Once a job is submitted, the user can detach from the
system and receive an email notiﬁcation after the process has completed.
1
2

http://www.globalmapper.com/
OpenGIS Web Mapping Speciﬁcation (http://giserver.esrin.esa.int/quickwms/).

A Three Tier Architecture for LiDAR Interpolation and Analysis

925

As the LiDAR processing workﬂow involves long running processes on distributed computational resources under diverse controlling authorities, it is exposed
to a high risk of component failures, and requires close monitoring. In order to
overcome these failures with minimal user involvement, Kepler provides a data
provenance and failure recovery capability by using a job database and smart
reruns. The job database is used for logging the workﬂow execution trace and
storing intermediate results along with the associated processes/components that
were used to produce them. The workﬂow engine maintains information about
the status of each intermediate step, and this can be used to initiate a smart rerun from a failure point or a checkpoint. These advanced features thus eliminate
the need to re-execute computationally intensive processes.
The Grid layer, or the execution layer is where the actual processing implementations are deployed on the distributed computational Grids. Currently a
simple submission and queueing algorithm is used for mapping jobs between various resources based on the number of allocated tasks and the size of the data to
be processed. In the near future we plan to utilize the Pegasus [9] Grid scheduler
to beneﬁt from mapping jobs based on resource eﬃciency and load, thus making
the process more robust. We also plan to extend this further by deployment of
the computationally challenging processes on a higher performance machine, for
example, DataStar, which consists of 32 P690 processors with 128GB of memory
running at 1.7GHz, each with a gigabit connection to an underlying SAN disk
infrastructure, making it an ideal machine for compute intensive tasks.

Fig. 2. Three tier LiDAR processing architecture

926

4.3

E. Jaeger-Frank et al.

Data Upload and Access

As initial pilot datasets, LiDAR data collected along the Northern San Andreas
Fault (NSAF) in Sonoma and Mendocino Counties, California and data from
the Western Rainier Seismic Zone in Pierce County, Washington were utilized.
The approximately 1.2 billion points in each of these datasets were stored in
a DB2 Spatial Extender Relational Database on DataStar. To optimize query
performance, and due to its sheer volume, the data were grouped by USGS Quarter Quadrants3 and organized in the database as a table per quarter quadrant.
The multiple data segments are accessible through the WMS map using a metadata table that speciﬁes the bounding box coordinates for each segment. Each
record in the datasets consists of a coordinate, elevation and corresponding attributes. The Spatial Extender feature in DB2, leveraging the power of standard
SQL for spatial data analysis, enables storage, access and management of the
spatial data. Furthermore, it provides a grid indexing technology for indexing
multi-dimensional spatial data, dividing a region into logical square grids, thus
facilitating region based subset queries.
4.4

Analysis of the Approach

The three tier based architecture utilizes the Kepler workﬂow system to reengineer LiDAR data processing from a Geoinformatics approach. The data and
processing tools are accessible through a shared infrastructure and are coordinated using the Kepler engine. Kepler provides an incremental design and development environment which allows users to create incomplete workﬂow templates,
which can be ﬁlled on demand prior to the workﬂow execution. Seamless access
to resources and services is enabled through existing generic components such as
SSH, Web Service, database access and command line processor actors. These
generic building block components oﬀer the ﬂexibility to plug-in any applicable
data or process, thus providing a customizable and modularized environment.
The LiDAR workﬂow currently has access to two datasets both stored in a DB2
database on DataStar. Other databases sharing a similar structure may be used
simply by pointing to a diﬀerent database location. Currently we use GRASS
spline interpolation, available via a web service deployed on the Arizona GEON
cluster. Other interpolation algorithms such as GRASS IDW can be applied by
updating a WSDL URL parameter. The visualization tools are interchangeable
as well. Global Mapper can be replaced with FlederMaus4 or ArcIMS visualization tools, both deployed on the GEON portal as web services.
The LiDAR workﬂow’s main processing bottleneck is in the interpolation of
the high point density datasets. Currently, the GRASS spline interpolation is
limited to processing 1,600,000 points. This problem is being addressed by the
GRASS development community and we anticipate a solution to this problem
in the near future. Ultimately however, to improve performance, a parallel interpolation algorithm is required along with deployment on a higher performance
3
4

http://www.kitsapgov.com/gis/metadata/support/qqcode.htm
An interactive 3D visualization system (http://www.ivs3d.com/products/
ﬂedermaus/).

A Three Tier Architecture for LiDAR Interpolation and Analysis

927

machine. We are also testing the Pegasus system [9] in coordination with the Pegasus group at the University of Southern California for a more eﬃcient mapping
of the interpolation sub-workﬂow onto the Grid.

5

Conclusion

In this paper we describe a three tier architecture for LiDAR data processing using a comprehensive workﬂow system, a shared cyberinfrastructure and evolving
Grid technologies. The ﬁrst version of this eﬀort is available at the GEON portal
(https://portal.geongrid.org:8443/gridsphere/gridsphere), and has already been
incorporated as a public tool. We plan to extend this work in progress by making
additional datasets available, and improving the overall performance with advanced processing tools such as parallel interpolation algorithms and enhanced
visualization methods. We also intend to utilize the Kepler provenance system
to link the workﬂow execution trace to the portal interface in order to provide
extended user monitoring of the workﬂow execution status. Our goal is to provide a centralized location for LiDAR data access and interpolation that will be
useful to a wide range of earth science users.
Acknowledgement. GEON is supported by NSF ITR 0225673. Special thanks to
Dogan Seber and Ghulam Memon for their support in this work.

References
1. NSF/ITR: GEON: A Research Project to Creat Cyberinfrastructure for the Geosciences, www.geongrid.org
2. Carter, W.E., Shrestha, R.L., Tuell, G., Bloomquist, D., and Sartori, M., 2001, Airborne Laser Swath Mapping Shines New Light on Earth’s Topography: Eos (Transactions, American Geophysical Union), v. 82. p. 549
3. Kepler:
An
Extensible
System
for
Scientiﬁc
Workﬂows,
http://
kepler.ecoinformatics.org
4. Lud¨
ascher B., Altintas I., Berkley C., Higgins D., J¨
ager-Frank E., Jones M., Lee
E.A., Tao J., Zhao Y.: Scientiﬁc Workﬂow Management and the Kepler System.
Concurrency and Computation: Practice & Experience, Special Issue on Scientiﬁc
Workﬂows, to appear, 2005
5. Altintas I., Berkley C., J¨
ager E., Jones M., Lud¨
ascher B., Mock S.: Kepler: Towards
a Grid-Enabled System for Scientiﬁc Workﬂows, in the Workﬂow in Grid Systems
Workshop in The Tenth Global Grid Forum, Germany, 2004
6. Lee E. A. et al.: PtolemyII Project and System. Department of EECS, UC Berkeley,
http://ptolemy.eecs.berkeley.edu/ptolemyII
7. Liu X, Liu J., Eker, J., Lee E. A.: Heterogeneous Modeling and Design of Control Systems, in Software-Enabled Control: Information Technology for Dynamical
System, Tariq Samad and Gary Balas, Wiley-IEEE Press, 2003
8. Mitasova, H., Mitas, L. and Harmon, R.S., 2005, Simultaneous Spline Interpolation
and Topographic Analysis for LiDAR Elevation Data: Methods for Open Source
GIS, IEEE GRSL 2(4), pp. 375- 379
9. Blythe J., Jain S., Deelman E., Gil Y., Vahi K., Mandal A., Kennedy K.: Task
Scheduling Strategies for Workﬂow-based Applications in Grids. CCGrid 2005

