Probing the Eddies of Dancing Emergence:
Complexity and Abstract Painting
Tara Krause
Atelier 1599, 6558 San Haroldo Way, Buena Park, CA 90620 USA
tara@tarakrause.com
http://tarakrause.com

Abstract. Complexity and abstraction provide a fertile frontier by which to express and experience complex systems in art, with integral challenges for abstract painting: Can we create complex art without a computer? What are the
simple rules by which to create that art? The author proposes a model of the
artist and her materials as a cellular automaton (CA) with eight simple rules.
Experiments with the New Kind of Science (NKS) Rule 1599 algorithm, abstract painting and video shorts are discussed with four observations about the
plurality of CA visualization, a new abstract visual language that embraces
emergence, the discovery of “eddies” of complexity within the paintings, and
the resemblance of these eddies to other complex phenomena found in nature
and culture. Future exploration merits investigation into the neural basis of art,
and experimentation in the synaesthesic experience of complexity.

1 Introduction
Complexity can be generated by software/algorithmic artists and by artists using traditional techniques. This paper explores these seemingly separate paths, which are in
fact convergent. Computation does not require artifice, but instead is a natural phenomena. Exciting generative art elicits an almost primal response of recognition.
Complexity gives insight into processes in nature and society, and provides a basis for
artistic insight.
Over the last 15 years, the concept of complexity has sparked our imagination, not
just in science but in art, music and literature as well. Abstract art expert and critic F.
V. O’Connor finds inspiration in the new kind of science (NKS): “Let it suffice to
state flatly that there is enough dream energy and invincible charm -- enough agency
in these physical invisibilities that are part of us -- to inspire a new sense of beauty, a
revitalized aesthetic, and those sublime manifestations that are beyond any measurement or ethical judgment, but which can still stun us back to living life to the
fullest” [1].
Much of the artistic effort on complexity has been software-based as exemplified
by the work of Pegg, Trott, and Tarbell. There have been numerous art and complexity exhibitions. In the net art exhibition catalog of Abstraction Now, new media theorist Lev Manovich observed abstract and complexity as a new paradigm for software
artists.
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3515, pp. 428 – 435, 2005.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

Probing the Eddies of Dancing Emergence: Complexity and Abstract Painting

429

For a painter, this presents a challenge: Without computers and software-generated
algorithms, is complexity in art merely a metaphor, albeit a powerful construct? Can
we move beyond complexity-inspired themes to actually create complexity? And if
so, what are the simple rules that create complex art? Where is that NKS threshold of
complexity where all four classes of behavior are once crossed with further embellishments having little effect?
Certainly there have been artists who have created art that can described as exhibiting NKS Classes 1 (repetitive), 2 (nested) and 3 (random) behavior. Traditional artisan craft is based on repetitive motifs. Abstract Expressionist Jackson Pollack’s action
paintings and the Japanese woodcuts of waves by Hokusai (1830-1840) have been
shown to be fractal in nature. Medici mosaics made by the Cosmati brothers are surprising examples of NKS Class 2 patterns, as are the Byzantine mosaic from the marble pavement in Cosmedin. Earlier Chinese pottery designs appear to be examples of
NKS Class 3 behavior
But what about NKS Class 4 complex behavior? This paper attempts to articulate
a model in the Liebnizian spirit of the quest for the simple [2], based on Wolfram’s
standard of visual perception test to determine levels of complexity, and in the tradition of Salvador Dali’s exhortation that “to look is to think.” One is reminded of early
Roman philosopher and dramatist Horace’s maxim: ‘Pictoribus atque poetis
quidlibet audendi semper fuit aequa potestas1.’ This model proposes that an artist and
her materials act as a cellular automaton with simple rules to create complex art.
This model is based on observations discovered in a series of both computer experiments and experimentation in the medium of acrylic polymer pigments and emulsions
on canvas with a limited historical palette.
As for definitions, emergence is defined as the threshold of complexity at that coalescing moment of self-evidence when new meanings cascade into both the details
and the painting as a whole. The term eddy is borrowed from physical oceanography
[3] to describe the interesting details that seem to represent a small segment of adhering self-organization within the painting itself. The term primal describes that unconscious immediate response or compulsion, unedited or subjected to conscious thought.
The limited palette chosen is grounded in Baroque traditional techniques, as well as
pigments found in Upper Paleolithic cave art in Europe. The pigments are restricted to
the ochres, siennas, umbers, black and white, with the addition of Indian yellow (traditionally made with the urine of mango leaf fed cows) and alizarin crimson or madder lake.

2 Proposed Model
The proposed model presents an artist and her materials acting as a cellular automaton
(CA). In this sense, the art becomes an expression of this complex system. The process cannot by definition be predicted due to irreducibility. As outlined below, there
are eight simple rules by which complex art can be created by this CA:

1

Painters and poets alike have always had license to dare anything.

430

T. Krause

1) An artist and materials act a complex system. The artist in the model does not
impose a planned “cartoon” on her work in the tradition of a Caravaggisti technique,
but approaches the painting as an experiment in process rather than pre-determined
result. 2) The canvas is upright on the easel at a moderate temperature to exploit the
reactive medium with swipes, glidings, drips and other methods of application. This
allows for experimentation in the gravity-driven turbulence and flow of the materials.
3) A limited palette is used, that is grounded in human artistic tradition. Acrylic paints
and polymer emulsions are set up directly on the palette, but only combined on the
canvas with a palette knife or brush, not pre-mixed. 4) There is a humility of irreducibility [4]. The artist must embed the “moi” of the creative process and accept that
the brain at criticality acts differently than when imposing solutions. 5) Rather than
seeking to represent nature, the artist yields to a symbolic nonrepresentational (abstract) visual language of sensing complexity through the primal. The intent is to see
if patterns of complex behavior can emerge. 6) The artist calibrates the painter’s eye
through familiarization to scientific concepts of complexity and physical processes.
She learns to recognize NKS classes of behavior through repeated exposure to images
of complexity. 7) The artist reaches an altered state of consciousness through the
use of music and dance. She uses her whole body with motion of the lower body
driving her strokes and application of painting and medium, versus standing still or
sitting. 8) The artist intuitively and rigorously seeks the essence of her underlying
inspiration, asking essential (simple) questions to explore the mechanism of form that
moves toward transcendence as Brancusi, Modigliani, Moore, Cecily Brown and
Gerhard Richter.

3 Results and Discussion
According to Wolfram, the presence of localized structures that move is a fundamental feature of NKS Class 4 complex behavior. Localized structures are sometimes
called gliders in the Game of Life. Within class 4 CAs, systems organize themselves
to where definite structures become visible. Some die out, but others persist. These
persistent structures transfer information from one part of a class 4 system to another.
Sometimes there are collisions between structures producing cascades of new
structures.
Code 1599 is a one dimensional, 3 color (2 state) totalistic cellular automata for
which no algebraic or Boolean expression exists. This simple rule works by following the rules as shown in Figure 1’s rule icon. The values of the cells in an array are
updated in discrete steps according to the local rule. This simple program works by
having the color of each cell in successive rows be determined by the same simple
rule. As a result, a pattern is produced. Interestingly, it takes 8282 steps in evolution
to stabilize.
The significance of rule code 1599 is that the patterns seem to follow no definite
laws. The structures emerge without anyway to predict them. One can only observe..
Wolfram uses this code to illustrate the principle of computational irreducibility and

Probing the Eddies of Dancing Emergence: Complexity and Abstract Painting

431

Fig. 1. (Top) NKS Rule 1599 evolution and icon rules. (Bottom) Landscape view of Code
1599 from steps 1 to 8,300 with one black cell as initial condition

its implication for the problems inherent in prediction. The only way to work out the
behavior is through observation. One must perform the computation in order to see
how the system behaves. This undecidability “makes it ultimately inevitable that such
surprises [different forms of behavior emerging] much occur”.
Wolfram also observes that rule code 1599 seems to show an analog of free will in its computational
irreducibility [5]. There is also a possibility that code 1599 is quasi-universal; meaning that like NKS Rule 110, it may have the potential to emulate any other system,
though much more investigation is required [6].
A series of computer experiments were conducted to explore the behavior of localized structures in NKS Code 1599 during Wolfram Research Institute’s NKS Summer
School 2004 at Brown University. An automated search of specified initial conditions
of range 1 to 3,000,000 run to step 300 yielded 20,416 files that were sorted into four
separate categories of behavior: Dead within 300 steps (11%), Single chain of “lady
bug” like structures (19.2%), Single chain of “railroad track” like structures (2%) and
those other initial conditions that might create interesting patterns (67.7%). The last
category of 13,820 images was visually analyzed. From this analysis, it was observed
that the behavior varies across conditions, with only 2 equivalent initial conditions
creating the 8,282 steps of evolution. There appeared to be definite structures, some
of which were resistant to varying specified initial conditions, and evident patterns of
smaller subcomponent elements in both specified and random initial conditions [7].
3.1 Observation 1: There Are a Myriad of Ways to Express Cellular Automata
The experiments were followed by an investigation into visualizing the onedimensional CA 1599 in three dimensions. These visualizations included various
coloration schemes, as well as perspectives such as spinning radius, beaded hanging,
and birds-eye view. While interesting, none of these approached the beauty of the CA
in the original first dimension.
This raised new questions in terms of the physicality of painting in 2 dimensions. If
all the visualizations represented unique but acceptable views, could there not be

432

T. Krause

other possibilities in expressing the complexity? This opened the degrees of freedom,
aptly expressed by Todd Rowland: “Some people describe 1599 mathematically in
terms of 1s and 0s. Other people call it cool babushka, and still others teach their
children to dance to it” [8]. Moreover, like the Modernist artists struggling with expressing the fourth dimension, contemporary artists are confronted with the phenomena of the first dimension of the computational universe.
There are a myriad of ways of expressing a CA. Stephen Wolfram’s use of the
cone shell (conus textile) is the “classical” example of a 3 dimensional expression of a
CA. The cone shell is a 3-D coiled object with the surface as a 2-D pattern generated
by a 1-D CA at the living edge of the organism. Another example developed in the
experimentation was a tapestry [9]. Birthed of Flatland [10], the tapestry can be conceived as a cellular automata causal network. The digital art image, NKS_Nasij
(2003), was based upon fragment of a woven golden tapestry (c. 1302) for the emperor Ghazan Khan, grandson of Ghenghis Khan, in Tabriz with Code 1599 superimposed [11]. Considering the cultural complexity of this tapestry’s creation and use,
this might be an NKS class 4 localized structure that maintains its coherence while
moving through its cellular space.
3.2 Observation 2: A New Abstract Visual Vocabulary Embraces Emergence
Yet even with these various visualizations and computer-generated expressions, it was
still not evident that emergence as a result of process was possible in painting. Experimentation in the medium of acrylic polymer on canvas was necessary. Earlier
efforts in printmaking with experiments in 2003 demonstrated that monotype printing
as a reactive medium might produce some evidence of complexity; but due to the
medium’s heavy reliance on fluid flows of turpentine and inks, it was not conclusive
enough.
The acrylic painting experiments used simple rules as outlined in section 2 of this
paper for the total of 18 paintings in the Dancing Emergence series by Krause. The
paintings ranged from 30 inches by 40 inches, to 18 inches to 12 inches. The surprise
of the experimentation was that a new abstract visual vocabulary developed. Emergence became an artistic process.
However, there remained the challenge of scaling up the size of the canvas while
still maintaining the capacity for emergent patterns. This Richard Serra scale intent
became: Can one evoke a complex reaction from the viewer using these images projected on a large screen? How can one create a Rothko-like chapel of a procession of
images that evoke complexity?
To work around this challenge, a short film was made that combined Katarina
Miljkovic’s music compositions of different CA rules (Rules 41 and 1599 along with
a Turing Machine) with video footage of the paintings. This experiment demonstrated
that this new language was rich enough for further experimentation. Following that
up, the Dancing Emergence paintings were filmed close-up in motion synchronized to
music. In editing the footage, it was discovered that while the paintings cohered as

Probing the Eddies of Dancing Emergence: Complexity and Abstract Painting

433

complex, there were also many individual close-up details of complex “eddies” or
localized structures.
3.3 Observation 3: The Eddies Stand on Their Own Terms as Local Structures
of Complexity Within the Larger Work
In the approximately 50 minutes of that raw video footage, there were at least 174
examples of images that can be described as complex eddies. Figure 2 below shows
the visual evidence of four of these particular eddies. These are still frames of actual
details of the larger acrylic polymer and emulsion paintings on canvas.

Fig. 2. Details of acrylic polymer and emulsion on canvas.
Video stills from Dancing_Emergence painting series with the following titles of (clockwise) DE_17, DE_19, DE_12,
and DE_15 (2004)

3.4 Observation 4: The Complexity in the Abstract Paintings Resemble Other
Complex Phenomena in Culture
The observation of the paintings’ eddies sparked a recognition of similar complex
patterns in some Upper Paleolithic microliths. Photographs of Paleolithic rock art
seem to appear to show a web of class 4-like finger fluting (intentional engravings)
over the initial images. Examples of such are the yellow stallion in the Apse of the
Cave of Lascaux (c. 17,000 years ago in the Magdalenian era); another Magdalenian
period carved image from the Bases-Pyrénées in France; and the finger tracings of the
Gargas and Cosquer caves. One class of Paleolithic finger fluting has been theorized
to result from lower body motion. The phenomena of finger flutings in the Rouffignac
Cave were to have resulted from moving from the hips with bending, twisting and
shifting weight on feet [12]. Some experts have also observed that the size of the
handprint signatures in more than twenty caves throughout Italy, France and Spain

434

T. Krause

point to women shamans and that this indicated a female shamanic role in the spiritual
and creative life of the Paleolithic clans.
Even more provocative are the theories of South African San rock art expert Davis
Lewis-Williams [13]. His shamanistic art neuropsychological model holds that shamans created these microlithic abstract images from trance phosphenes or entopics
(seen by the eye when eyelids are shut) while in an altered state of consciousness
(ASC) mode. In Lascaux cave art, Mario Ruspoli stressed that these images have to
seen as a whole and mused that perhaps in the flickering of the fire to the rhythm of
drums, a shaman in the Lascaux engraved the figures as he told the story before his
initiates, that the movements of his hand and the act of drawing combined in its
meaning.
Another example of complexity expressed in culture is the Taoist Neo-Confucian
taxonomy of Li patterns that represent dynamic forms found in nature, considered as
laws or principles and expounded on by Chu Hsi during the Sung dynasty (960-1279)
and Ch’en Shun. Many of David Wade’s categories of li, such as breccia and fracture,
are strikingly NKSesque if not Class 4 in appearance [14].
These observations raise more questions than answers. What is the neural basis of
the artistic creation and perception of such complexity? Is there an interconnection
with neural laws of art as theorized by neuroscientist V.S. Ramachandran, such as
peak shift, grouping, contrast and isolation [15]? This frontier expands beyond the
realm of vision when the question is asked: How does one express and experience
cellular automata synaesthesically, where all senses are integrated?
More investigation should be done to address the complexity science underneath
these observations: Are these observations a representation of natural processes or a
result of a complex process? What is the role of irreducibility? Is the surprise of
emergence a result of the process? It does not seem that this could be achieved
through an imposed Caravaggisti method. The artist and her materials become the
cellular automata.

4 Conclusion
As observed, the creative use of cellular automata provides fertile ground by which
complex systems can be expressed and experienced in art, particularly in abstract
painting. The artist and her materials function as a computational machine, or cellular
automata to create complex art out of simple rules. The patterns in paintings resulting
from this CA may resemble complex phenomena in some natural as well as cultural
processes. Like the Modernist artists who struggled with expressing Einstein’s fourth
dimension, contemporary artists are challenged with the phenomena of complexity.
New artistic insights from complexity and cellular automata can spark our imaginations, with the songs of the past sung with the rituals of the present to weave the vision and language of the future, where we can sense the kernel of our humanity and
environment in the story space of the universe, and where gliders and persistent structures can lead us to transcendence.

Probing the Eddies of Dancing Emergence: Complexity and Abstract Painting

435

Acknowledgements
I would like acknowledge: Drs. Jiri Kroc; composer Katarina Miljkovic of New England Conservatory of Music; Stephen Wolfram and the Wolfram Research Institute
team, particularly Todd Rowland, Catherine Boucher, Jason Cawley and Ed Pegg Jr.;
and Dale C. Krause of the Marine Science Institute of UCSB.

References
1. F.V. O’Connor: Commentary No.2 (2004) http://members.aol.com/FVOC/comment.html
2. G. Chaitin: Irreducible Complexity in Mathematics (2004)
http://www.cz.auckland.ac.nz/CDMTCS/chaitin/latest.html
3. D.C. Krause: The Self-Organized Marine Biological System. In: Soto, L.A, (ed): AyalaCastanares. Sciencia del Mar y Lmnol. Univ. el NAL. Auton. Mexico (2003)
4. Private communication: J. Cawley, T.Rowland and K. Miljkovic, NKSSS2004 (2004)
5. S.Wolfram: A New Kind of Science. Stephen Wolfram, Champaign (2002)
6. Private Communication: S. Wolfram during NKSSS2004 (2004)
7. T. Krause: Greeting the Muse, NKS Code 1599: Behavior, Motifs & Potentialities for an
NKS Way of Art. NKS Summer School 2004. Boston (2004)
8. Private communication: T. Rowland of WRI (2004)
9. Private communication: J. Cawley, T. Roland , R. Philips of WRI and K. Miljkovic of
New England Conservatory of Music during NKSSS2004 (2004)
10. E.A. Abbott: A Romance of Many Dimensions (1884)
11. T.Krause: Cellular Automata, Undulating Jellies & Pulsing Bonita. Video, NKS2003, Boston (2003). Color images can be found at http://tarakrause.com
12. K. Sharpe and L. van Gelder. Finger Flutings in Rouffignac Cave, France. (2003)
13. D. Lewis-Williams: Mind in the Cave: Consciousness and the Origins of Arts. WW Norton
(2004)
14. D. Wade: Li: Dynamic Form in Nature. Wooden Books, New York (2003)
15. V.S. Ramachandran: A Brief Tour of Human Consciousness. Pi Press, New York (2004)

