Auto-steered Information-Decision Processes for Electric
System Asset Management
James D. McCalley, Vasant G. Honavar, Sarah M. Ryan, William Q. Meeker,
Ronald A. Roberts, Daji Qiao, and Yuan Li
Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011, US
{jdm, honavar, smryan, wqmeeker, rroberts, daji,
tua}@iastate.edu

Abstract. The total replacement value of the US transmission lines alone
(excluding land) is conservatively estimated at over $100 billion dollars [1] and
triples when including transformers and circuit breakers. Investment in new
transmission equipment has significantly declined over the past 15 years. Some
of the equipment is well beyond intended life, yet is operated under increasing
stress, as load growth, new generation, and economically motivated
transmission flows push equipment beyond nameplate limits. Maintaining
acceptable electric transmission system reliability and delivering electric energy
at low energy prices requires innovations in sensing, diagnostics,
communications, data management, processing, algorithms, risk assessment,
decision-making (for operations, maintenance, and planning), and process
coordination. This paper overviews a comprehensive approach to develop
methods and processes in these areas, driven by the ultimate objective to
develop a hardware-software prototype capable of auto-steering the
information-decision cycles inherent to managing operations, maintenance, and
planning of the high-voltage electric power transmission systems.

1 Introduction
In electric power transmission systems, the assets include transmission lines, support
structures, transformers, power plants, and protection equipment. Condition
information includes loading or operating histories, inspection data, periodic and asneeded testing and diagnostic results, and continuous diagnostic measurements, the
latter of which are typically collected via intelligent electronic devices (IED) and
stored within substation servers. A single transmission company, each of which has
their own centralized control center, has responsibility for many thousands of each
equipment type. A single control area, represented by an Independent System
Operator (ISO), oversees and coordinates activities of a number of different
transmission companies. The eastern and western US interconnections are each
comprised of a number of ISOs; the only other US interconnection, Texas, has only
one. Failure of an asset may affect physical and economic performance of the entire
interconnection and always increases likelihood of additional failures. Because
economic performance (power supply allocation among power plants) affects
transmission loading which affects failure likelihood and consequence, operational
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part III, LNCS 3993, pp. 440 – 447, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

Auto-steered Information-Decision Processes for Electric System Asset Management

441

risk-reduction inevitably results in less economic power supply. Frequency and
severity of blackout scenarios as observed on August 14, 2003 are affected by policies
associated with equipment operation, maintenance, and planning.
The objective in this work is to develop a hardware-software prototype capable of
auto-steering the information-decision cycles inherent to managing operations,
maintenance, and planning of the high-voltage electric power transmission systems.
We focus on the needs of the most critical electric transmission equipment, including
power transformers, circuit breakers, and transmission lines. Similar equipment exists
at the distribution level, so the work will find direct application there. Figure 1
illustrates the structure of the problem and facilitates description of how we intend to
approach its solution. We overview intended implementation of the 5 different layers
in what follows.
Minutes - 1 week

Layer 5:
Simulation
& decision

1 week-2 years

Time
frame

1-10 years

2-20 years

Information valuation
Maintenance
schedule

Operational
decision
making

Desired maintenance
& inspection frequency

Short term
maintenance
planning

Short-term facility plans
Long-term facility plans

Long term
maintenance
planning

Probabilistic
failure indices

Layer 4: Data
processing and
transformation

Current loading
& 1-day forecast

Facility
planning

Stochastic
maintenance &
inspection
model
Long-term
forecast

Short term
forecast

Long-term
deterioration

Short-term
deterioration models

Data Integration

Layer 3: Data
communication
and integration

Nameplate
data

Maintenance
histories
Sensor
deployment

Layer 2:
Condition
sensors

Decision
implementation

Condition
Histories
Iowa Sub 1

Condition
Histories
Iowa Sub 2

Condition
Histories
Iowa Sub 3

….

Condition
Histories
Iowa Sub N

Condition
Histories
ISU Sub1,2,3

Operational policies
Maintenance schedules

Iowa/ISU Power System Model

Facility R&R plans

Areva Simulator
(DTS)

Areva EMS

Operating
histories

Event selector

Layer 1: The
power system

Fig. 1. The structure of the asset management problem

Layer 1, The power system: The prototype will center on a continuously running
model of the Iowa power system using network data provided by local utility
companies using a commercial-grade (Areva) simulator.

442

J.D. McCalley et al.

Layer 2, Condition sensors: As indicated by the taller “Condition History” cylinder at
the far right of layer, 3 campus substations will be equipped with sensors,
communication equipment, and servers to provide a benchmark prototype for
hardware implementation. Other substations will be represented virtually, each with
its own unique database containing the condition data for that substation provided by
the utility company.
Layer 3, Data communication and integration: This will entail intra-substation
communication using wireless between IEDs and substation server together with
federated data integration to provide efficient, dependable, and secure mechanisms for
interfacing Layer 4 data transformation algorithms with the data resources.
Layer 4, Data processing and transformation: This layer will operate on the integrated
data from layer 3 to produce, for each component/failure mode/time, an estimate of
that particular component/failure mode deterioration level at the given time. This will
require deterioration models, and we target such models for the chemical degradation
processes in oil and cellulose (both of which provide insulation in power
transformers). We will also need stochastic models to predict future degradation, and
we further describe these models in Section 2.
Layer 5, Simulation and decision: This layer will utilize the component probabilistic
failure indices from layer 4 together with short and long-term system forecasts to
drive integrated stochastic simulation and decision models. These models will operate
interactively, so that simulation and decision in each time frame utilizes information
from simulation and decision within other time frames. Resulting operational policies,
maintenance schedules, and facility reinforcement plans will then be implemented on
the power system (as represented by the Areva simulator). The decision models will
also be used to discover the value of additional information. This valuation will be
used to drive the deployment of new sensors and redeployment of existing sensors,
impacting Layer 2. This layer is further described in Section 3.

2 Layer 4: Data Processing and Transformation
Component condition, deterioration level, or propensity to fail, is essential
information for asset management decision problems. Our objective in this part of the
work is to develop methods of computing component (or subsystem) failure
probabilities. One unique aspect of this work is that in addition to steady-state failure
probabilities that capture average behavior over a large number of components and
over an extended period of time, we also require transient failure probabilities to
capture instantaneous behavior for each specific component.
Consider a set of condition vectors c(t)=[c1(t),c2(t),…,cK(t)] for K similar
components taken over an extended period of time t=0,1,…,T, where each vector ck(t)
provides M different measurements ck1(t), ck2(t),…ckM(t),
on component k
characterizing its condition at time t. The total possible number of measurements is
less than K×T×M because there are different frequencies for which different
measurements are taken. We will augment c(t) with operational and environmental
information in building predictive failure models. For some system components,
failure is closely related to a single condition measurement that can be measured over
time and modeled in a manner that allows reasonably accurate prediction of failure

Auto-steered Information-Decision Processes for Electric System Asset Management

443

(e.g., extent of vegetation growth or the amount of chemical degradation). Let c(t,e;β)
denote the expected level of degradation for a unit subjected to environmental
conditions e, where β is a vector of unknown model parameters to be estimated from
available data. The form of the function c may be suggested by physical-chemical
theory, (see, for example, [2,3,4]), past experience, or the available data. A failuretime cdf F(t) is induced by a specified model for c(t,e;β), the environment e, and a
definition of failure (usually a specified value cf, beyond which failure is said to have
occurred). Stochastic behavior in c(t,e;β) can be captured either by using a stochastic
process model (e.g., [5]) or by driving a deterministic model with a stochastic
environmental model (e.g., [6]). As new condition information is received for a given
unit, it is possible to update the failure probability for that unit. For the special case in
which all units are in a common and constant environment, [7] develops a model to
describe the effect that nondestructive inspections will have on the failure probability.
It is possible to generalize this “degradation analysis” approach to a vector of
condition measurements, but statistical modeling of the joint distribution of a vector
of condition measurements is more difficult, especially if the dimension exceeds 2.
The Markov modeling approaches discussed next provide a useful alternative.
We can often characterize boundary conditions separating J states of deterioration
in component k in terms of the measurements ck(t), via a deterioration function
g[ck(t)]. The deterioration function returns a deterioration level j identified by dj1<g[ck(t)]<dj, where the last state j=J represents the failed state. State J need not
represent the rare “blue smoke” condition where the component has catastrophically
failed (and for which little data is typically available). Rather, state J represents a set
of measurement values for which engineering judgment indicates the component
should be removed from service. This approach to computing failure probabilities is
illustrated in Fig. 2, based on multistate Markov models, where each of J states is
represented as a deterioration level. The representation of Fig. 2 shows J=4
deterioration levels, and deterioration level j is reached only from deterioration level
j-1. Yet, the model is flexible; any number of deterioration levels can be represented,
and, if data indicates transitions occur between non-consecutive states (e.g., 1 to 3),
the model can accommodate this.

Historical
data c(t)
t=1,…,T
Statistical
Processing

Most recent
observation
c(T+1)

Level 1 λ12 Level 2 λ23 Level 3 λ34 Level 4
(minor)
(major)
(new)
(failed)
λjk

deterioration
function
g(c(T+1))

Fig. 2. Computing contingency probability reductions

444

J.D. McCalley et al.

The model parameters capture the deterioration in equipment state as influenced by
past loading and environmental conditions. To capture future effects of variation in
such conditions on model parameters, one needs to model the dependency of the
transition intensities on these parameters. To account for uncertainty in state
identification through observation or indirect measurement, the variance of the
conditional probability of observation given the state, referred to as σki for component
k, state i is used. This parameter can also facilitate the analysis to identify investments
to make for obtaining better or more information, described in Section 3.2.
Once transition intensities are determined, state probabilities are obtained from the
transition probability matrix and initial state vector. We denote this failure probability
for the kth component as pk(c), a function of the time-dependent physical condition of
the equipment c(t). This modeling provides the ability to predict the effect that
maintenance will have on failure probability and expected time to failure, metrics that
are important for a number of decision problems. The expected time to failure is
captured by computing first passage times [8,9].

3 Layer 5: Simulation, Decision and Information Valuation
Asset management decision problems are characterized by: (1) strong
interdependencies between physical performance of individual assets, physical
performance of the overall system, and economic system performance; (2) limited
resources; (3) important uncertainties in individual component performance, system
loading conditions, and available resources; (4) multiple objectives. We describe these
decision problems in this section, together with our intent to solve them in an
integrated fashion.
3.1 Simulation and Decision

Asset management decision problems can be classified into one of 4 types which all
involve resource allocation with the objective to minimize cost and risk. These
specific asset management decision problems include (a) Operations, (b) Short-term
maintenance selection and scheduling, (c) Long-term maintenance planning, and (d)
Facility planning.
These problems differ primarily in their time scale but are linked by a common
focus on the interactions between the condition of equipment and the decisions taken.
The operational decision problem of how to meet demand in the next hour to week
treats facilities available and their deterioration levels as given (though the
deterioration is not known precisely). The contribution here is to use condition
measurements to more accurately estimate short-term failure probabilities along with
the deterioration effects of loading each piece of equipment at various levels, and to
integrate these improved estimates into the dispatch and unit commitment decisions.
The tactical decision problem to allocate resources for maintenance in the next 6-24
months suppresses detail about hourly operations but considers an aggregate
description of equipment loading when deciding how to allocate resources to best
manage the condition of the equipment. Our approach will use historical data to better
judge the combined effects of maintenance and loading on the equipment

Auto-steered Information-Decision Processes for Electric System Asset Management

445

deterioration and use this information to improve maintenance scheduling. The longterm maintenance problem examines tradeoff between maintenance expense and
equipment life to find inspection and maintenance policy to minimize expected long
run cost of keeping the equipment in service reliably. The strategic decision problem
to both expand capacity and replace equipment over the next 2-20 years takes as input
distributions of equipment life lengths resulting from adopted maintenance policies
and determines when to replace existing equipment and invest in additional assets.
Unlike previous models for equipment replacement and capacity expansion, we
consider the cumulative effect of power flow on equipment life and take advantage of
better data-driven life length predictions.
When we integrate these optimization problems having different time-scales
together, we will treat the quantities that vary much more slowly as static and model
quantities that vary much faster in a way that ignores the details of their variations,
such as by replacing fast-moving quantities by their averages. A similar strategy is
used in hierarchical planning of manufacturing systems [10].
3.2 Information Valuation and Sensor Deployment

A last but critical decision problem to be addressed is how to extract from data
transformation (Layer 4) and decision (Layer 5) algorithms identification of
economically sound opportunities for obtaining better information, thereby reducing
uncertainty and improving decision-making capability. A simple case is when an
abrupt measurement change causes immediate suspicion that a failure is imminent.
The response is to inspect the equipment. Additional more specialized measurements
may be done, and if those measurements confirm a problem, the equipment is
removed. Such situations are addressed via alarms. A decision to obtain information is
clear in this case, because imminent failure poses high capital loss and physical harm
to humans.
Decision to gather information is more difficult for maintenance and planning
problems because the payoff (or avoided loss) is not so pronounced. We address this
problem via a two-stage information valuation approach [11,12,13,14]. In the first
stage, we determine candidate components for which additional information may be
of interest. Denoting the value of the objective function at the solution as Γ, we
compute an index giving sensitivity in Γ due to component k, as σki(∂Γ/∂pk) where pk
is the failure probability of component k and σki (see end of Section 2) is the deviation
in the observation for component k given that it is in state i. Components having high
index are candidates to consider in the information valuation stage. Other selection
criteria can be considered, e.g., we could identify components that are almost or
barely selected by the decision algorithm. We denote additional information
associated with candidate component k as rkm, which indicates component k is in state
m. Such information may be obtained by installing more or better sensors at a cost.
For example, a 50 year-old transformer that is a clear candidate for replacement may
be operating with no monitoring equipment, yet installation of such equipment,
providing information rkm, may result in decision to operate the unit for more years.
Following [13], states in which component k may reside are identified by
i={1,…,S}, with each state having probability πi obtained from procedures described
in Section 2. Simulation and decision algorithms are then repeated once for each

446

J.D. McCalley et al.

possible state of component k, generating solutions with corresponding objective
values. Denote identified solutions (alternatives) by a={1,…,A}. Thus, for each
combination of state and alternative we have a consequence c(a,i). Denoting the utility
of an alternative as u(a) and of a consequence as v(c), we desire to choose the
alternative to maximize expected utility u(a,π)=∑i=1,S[πiv(c(a,i))]. The decision to
obtain additional information is based on expected utility gains from shifting to better
choices among the set of actions. Denote a0 as the optimal alternative with no
additional information, identified using prior probabilities πi, and am as the optimal
alternative with the additional information rkm. Then the value of information rkm is
given by Δ(rkm)=u(am, πi,m)-u(a0, πi,m)=∑i=1,S[πi,mv(c(a0,i))]-∑i=1,S[πi,mv(c(am,i))], where
the posterior probabilities πi,m are given by πi,m=Pr{rkm|i}πi/Pr{rkm}. However, the
decision to seek the additional information must be done ex-ante to be useful, and so

* Current measurement.
Fig. 3. Illustration of information valuation and sensor deployment

we cannot know that we will obtain rkm, i.e., that we will learn that component k is in
state m. But we can assess (subjectively, or from historical data) the probability of
learning from the new information that the component is in state m, which is Pr{rkm}.
Then we may compute the expectation of the value associated with the new
information as E{Δ(rkm)}=∑m=1,SPr{rkm}[u(am,πi,m)-u(a0,πi,m)]. We will use this
approach to interface with Layers 4 and 5 procedures for assessing where and when to
obtain additional information.

4 Conclusions
This paper gives a framework of a hardware-software prototype capable of autosteering the information-decision cycles inherent to managing operations,
maintenance, and planning of the high-voltage electric power transmission systems.
The framework is divided into 5 layers and described in this paper accordingly.
Although each layer represents an essential and substantive part of the framework, the
paper focuses on the data transformation (in layer 4) and decision (in layer 5)
elements.

Auto-steered Information-Decision Processes for Electric System Asset Management

447

Acknowledgments
The work described in this paper is funded by the National Science Foundation under
grant NSF CNS0540293.

References
1. M. Gallaher, S. Johnston, B. Kirby, “Changing measurement and standards needs in a
deregulated electric utility industry,” Nov., 1999, Research Triangle Institute,
http://www.rti.org/pubs/dereg.pdf.
2. Lu, C.J., and Meeker, W.Q. (1993), Using Degradation Measures to Estimate a Time-toFailure Distribution. Technometrics 35, 161-174.
3. Meeker, W.Q., and LuValle, M.J. (1995), An Accelerated Life Test Model Based on
Reliability Kinetics. Technometrics 37, 133-146.
4. Meeker, W.Q., Escobar, L.A., Lu, C.J. (1998), Accelerated Degradation Tests: Modeling
and Analysis. Technometrics 40, 89-99.
5. Grall, A., Dieulle, L., Berenguer, C., and Roussignol, M. (2002), Continuous-Time
Predictive-Maintenance Scheduling for a Deteriorating System, IEEE Transactions on
Reliability 51, 141-150.
6. Meeker, W. Q., Escobar, L. A., and Chan, V. (2002), Using Accelerated Tests to Predict
Service Life in Highly-Variable Environments. Chapter 19 in Service Life Prediction
Methodology and Metrologies Washington: American Chemical Society, J. W. Martin and
D. R. Bauer, Editors.
7. Garrigoux, C.G. and Meeker, W.Q. (1995), Assessing the Effect of In-Service Inspections
on the Reliability of Degrading Components, Recent Advances in Life-Testing and
Reliability, N. Balakrishnan (Editor), CRC Press.
8. G. Anders, Probability Concepts in Electric Power Systems, John Wiley, New York, 1990.
9. A. Leite da Silva and J. Endrenyi, “Application of First Passage Times in the Markov
Representation of Electric Power Systems,” Proceedings of the 4th International
Conference on Probabilistic Methods Applied to Power Systems, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil,
Sept. 1994.
10. S. B. Gershwin, “Hierarchical Flow Control: A Framework for Scheduling and Planning
Discrete Events in Manufacturing Systems,” Proceedings of the IEEE Volume 77, Issue 1,
Jan. 1989 Page(s):195-209.
11. H. Raiffa, “Decision analysis: Introductory lectures on choices under uncertainty,”
Addison-Wesley, 1968.
12. J. Mnarschak, “Economic information, decision, and prediction,” Volume II, D. Reidel
Publishing Co., 1974.
13. A. Baker, “Business decision-making,” Croom-Helm, 1981.
14. J. Hirshleifer, “Time, Uncertainty, and Information,” Basil Blackwell, 1989.

