Experiment of Event Injection Technology for Network
Dependability Evaluation
Yonggang Pang1, Huiqiang Wang1, and Ye Du2
1

College of Computer Science and Technology,
Harbin Engeering University 150001 Harbin, China
pangyonggang@hrbeu.edu.cn,
wanghuiqiang@hrbeu.edu.cn
2
College of Computer, Beijing Jiaotong University, 100044 Beijing, China
mail_dy@163.com

Abstract. Dependability evaluation of computer network is an integrated and
complex research problem. Evolving from fault injection, event injection can be
better used to evaluate dependability of computer network system. According to
the principle of event injection, an experiment model for network dependability
evaluation was designed and correlative experiments were carried out. At last,
application of event injection for dependability evaluation on computer network
was discussed.
Keywords: dependability evaluation; event injection; DDoS; Loadrunner.

1 Introduction
In some important domains, such as national defense, avigation, finance and transportation, dependability of its computer network system is an important problem. Dependability of a system is related to network reliability, availability, security and
safety, so how to evaluate the integrated dependability is a problem to be solved urgently [1]. Nowadays, the research on dependability of computer network system
concludes important server system, small-size network and web application network,
and the conception of dependability is still developing. However, method, model and
relative index system of dependability evaluation are lacking, research on these domains sill need to be further carried on.
Event injection technology is introduced to the research on dependability evaluation of network system, by which the integrated dependability of a target system can
be tested [2]. Event injection technology adapts better to the experiment in the computer network environment than fault injection. In the event injection experiment,
relative characteristic events can be injected into the system to check its reaction according to the relative attributes and characters of dependability evaluation. This
paper sequentially dissertates the conception of event injection technology, some
event injection experiments and integrated judgment to the experiments. At last, some
problems of event injection technology in network experiment are discussed.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part III, LNCS 4489, pp. 141–144, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

142

Y. Pang, H. Wang, and Y. Du

2 Dependability of Computer Network
The new conception of dependability[3] was formally advanced by J.C.Laprie in 1985,
which included conceptions of reliability, availability, maintainability and safety at that
time, that is to say, the reliable computing and fault-tolerance were joined into the conception of dependability. From the medium term of 1980s’, fault-tolerance technology
was applied to deal with the security threat and a series of exploring researches on hostile failure problems led to a fusion of the two conceptions of security and dependable
computing. After that, deep and close discussion of some experts caused the appearance
of an academic patent which has further effect [4]. After that, J.C.Laprie deeper illustrated his viewpoint many times at different occasions. After 1995, with the worsening
of Internet security, together with the developing of security technologies and changing
of attack means, people had to afresh scan the essence of dependable computing and
security computing. And the new consideration of dependable computing and security
computing by A.Avizienis， J.C.Laprie， Brian Randell, and Carl Landwehr reflected the
newest changes.
Correlative conceptions including trusted computing from U.S. military [5] and
trustworthy computing advanced by Bill Gates of Microsoft developed. During research on dependability [6], correlative conceptions are developing continuously, but
there isn’t uniform standard.

3 Event Injection Model
During the dependability evaluation on system, there were not only traditional exact
models such as the network hardware reliability problems, but also the non-accurate
models, such as the security problem, so event injection evolving from fault injection
can solve these problems better.
Event injection technology is an experimental process, in which different kinds of
system events including reliability events, availability events, security events of network system are injected into the target system, at the same time, response information of injected events is analyzed or called back by corresponding system, and at last
relative results are provided to experimenters. Key technologies affecting the dependability evaluation result by event injection technology mainly are: selection of event
model library, statistical event coverage, and experiment comprehensive evaluation.
3.1 Selection of Event Model Library
Event model library should include the events that can influence the service ability of
the target system. The injected event model selected is more similar to the events
occurred during the actual running of the system or covers them to the greatest extent,
the results of the experiment will be more accurate. A suitable event model library
should follow two principles: Firstly, it should include a majority of event models that
can influence the actual running of the system and cause performance decline of the
target computer systems; Secondly, event models in it can detect the vulnerability of
the target system.

Experiment of Event Injection Technology for Network Dependability Evaluation

143

3.2 Statistical Event Coverage
The events injected into an running system can’t include all of the events faced by
system applications and injection strategy of one event can’t represent entire instances, at the same time, harm extents of different events faced by system are different from each other, so during the dependability evaluation on the target system, the
satisfactory degree which is named as statistical event coverage should have a credibility interval.
3.3 Experiment Comprehensive Evaluation
Computer network dependability evaluation includes reliability, availability, safety
and security, and so on, moreover the network system can be divided into local area
network, distributed network and internet, therefore the network system dependability
research is very broad, the corresponding test data will be massive, how to obtain a
system’ dependability degree is a complex question.

4 Event Injection Experiment
In the network dependability evaluation, the network service performance and security are very important. This article simulates and evaluates the web server in network
using event injection technology, use Loadrunner to test the basic performance of the
network and use the DDoS attack test to influence the system.
This experiment is to test the operating performance of the target system, LoadRunner8.0 test software is used. The results can then be analyzed in details, to explore
the reasons for particular behaviour. the data in Table 1 will be used as the index data
in the dependability evaluation to the target server system.
Table 1. Main tesing data of web sever

Measure events
connection
rate
error rate
Hits per Sec
HTTP Responses per
Sec_
flow speed

index
Connection shutdowns
New connections
Error-26628
Hits/s
HTTP_200
HTTP_403
HTTP_404
B/s

min
0.125
0.107
0
0.286
0.143
0
0
2313

max
83.063
83.125
5.438
153.063
91.844
75.75
0.625
591651

average
42.497
42.563
2.745
75.377
41.775
33.291
0.311
340855

DDoS makes the failure of attacked network server. In Figure 1 and Figure 2, the
server average response time increases along with the attack flow increase, the
mean flow speed reduces along with the attack flow increase. At the same time,
along with the attack duration extension, the server average response time increases,
mean flow speed reduces. When the attack computer increases, the server response

144

Y. Pang, H. Wang, and Y. Du

Fig. 1. Average response time curves of server

Fig. 2. Average flow speed curves of server

time obviously increases, with the server processing attack request event increases,
the server response slows down even in the same flow situation.

5 Conclusions
In the experiment method, event injection technology can preferably solve the problems of network dependability evaluation. Event injection technology can not only
analyze the cases when the target system fail but also analyze the cases when the
capability of target system performance declines or the system not being able to offer
satisfied services to users.

References
1. Yves Deswarte, Karama Kanoun, Jeam-Claude Laprie. Diversity against accidental and deliberate faults. PRDC’99,Hong Kong, 1999.
2. Huiqiang Wang, Yonggang Pang, Ye Du. Evaluation of network dependability using event
injection. In: Proc of the APWeb 2006 Int’1 Workshop: XRA, IWSN, MEGA, and ICSE.
Berlin: Springer, (2006) 991-998.
3. J.C. Laprie. Dependable Computing and Fault Tolerance: Concepts and Terminology.
Proc.15th IEEE Int’l Symp. Fault-Tolerant Computing (FTCS-15), (1985) 2-11.
4. J.C. Laprie, ed. Dependability: basic concepts and terminology-in English, French, German,
Italian and Japanese. In Dependable Computing and Fault Tolerance. Springer-Verlag,
Vienna, (1992) 265.
5. Department of defense trusted computer system evaluation criteria. http://www.radium.ncsc.mil/
tpep/library/rainbow/5200.28-STD.html.
6. Bill Gates. Trustworthy Computing, 2002.

