Core Equivalence in Economy for Modal Logic
Takashi Matsuhisa
Department of Liberal Arts and Sciences, Ibaraki National College of Technology
Nakane 866, Hitachinaka-shi, Ibaraki 312-8508, Japan.
mathisa@ge.ibaraki-ct.ac.jp

Abstract. We investigate a pure exchange economy under uncertainty
with emphasis on the logical point of view; the traders are assumed to
have a multi-modal logic with non-partitional information structures. We
propose a generalized notion of rational expectations equilibrium for the
economy and we show the core equivalence theorem: The ex-post core
for the economy coincides with the set of all its rational expectations
equilibria.
Keywords: Multi-modal logic, Pure exchange economy under reﬂexive
information structure, Ex-post core, Rational expectations equilibrium,
Core equivalence theorem.
Journal of Economic Literature Classiﬁcation: D51, D84, D52, C72.

1

Introduction

This article relates economies and multi-agent modal logic. Let us consider a pure
exchange atomless economy under uncertainty. As far as the standard notion of
economy either with complete information or with incomplete information, the
role of traders’ knowledge and beliefs remains obscured: The economy has not
been investigated from the epistemic point of view. Here this article aims to ﬁll
that gap. Speciﬁcally, we seek epistemic conditions of traders’ knowledge for the
equivalence between equilibria and core in a pure exchange atomless economy
under uncertainty.
The purposes of this article are: First to propose the multi-modal logic KT by
which the traders use making their decision, secondly to establish the extended
notion of rational expectations equilibrium for the economy, and ﬁnally to investigate the relationship between the ex-post core and the rational expectations
equilibrium allocations with emphasis on modal logical point of view.
The stage is set by the following: Suppose that the trader have the multiagent modal logic KT: It is an extension of the propositional logic with many
modal operators requiring only the axiom (T) “ each traders does not know a
sentence whenever it is not true.” The logic have non-partitional information
structures, each of which gives an interpretation of the logic. Each trader has
This is an extended abstract and the ﬁnal form will be published elsewhere.
Partially supported by the Grant-in-Aid for Scientiﬁc Research(C)(2)(No.14540145)
in the Japan Society for the Promotion of Sciences.

P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2658, pp. 74−83, 2003.
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

Core Equivalence in Economy for Modal Logic

75

own utility function which is measurable, but he/she is not assumed to know
the function completely. It is shown that
Main Theorem. (Core equivalence theorem). In a pure exchange atomless economy under generalized information, assume that the traders have the multi-modal
logic KT and they are risk averse. Then the ex-post core coincides with the set
of all rational expectations equilibrium allocations for the economy.
Many authors have investigated several notions of core in an economy under
asymmetric information (e.g., Wilson [11], Volij [10], Einy et al [5] and others).
The serious limitations of the analysis in these researches are its use of the
‘partition’ structure by which the traders receive information. The structure is
the Kripke semantics for the modal logic S5;1 it is obtained if each trader t’s
possibility operator Pt : Ω → 2Ω assigning to each state ω in a state space
Ω the information set Pt (ω) that t possesses in ω is reﬂexive, transitive and
symmetric. From the epistemic point of view, this entails t’s knowledge operator
Kt : 2Ω → 2Ω that satisﬁes ‘Truth’ axiom T: Kt (E)
E (what is known is
true), the ‘positive introspection’ axiom 4: Kt (E) Kt (Kt (E)) (we know what
Kt (Ω \ Kt (E))
we do) and the ‘negative introspection’ axiom 5: Ω \ Kt (E)
(we know what we do not know).2
One of these requirements, symmetry (or the equivalent axiom 5), is indeed so
strong that describes the hyper-rationality of traders, and thus it is particularly
objectionable. The recent idea of ‘bounded rationality’ suggests dropping such
assumption since real people are not complete reasoners. In this article we weaken
both transitivity and symmetry imposing only reﬂexivity. As has already been
pointed out in the literature, this relaxation can potentially yield important
results in a world with imperfectly Bayesian agents (e.g. Geanakoplos [7]).
The idea has been performed in diﬀerent settings. Among other things Geanakoplos [7] showed the no speculation theorem in the extended rational expectations
equilibrium under the assumption that the information structure is reﬂexive,
transitive and nested (Corollary 3.2 in Geanakoplos [7]). The condition ‘nestedness’ is interpreted as a requisite on the ‘memory’ of the trader.
However all those researches have been lacked the logics that represents the
traders’ knowledge. This article proposes the multi-modal logic of the traders
and the economies under generalized information structure as the models for the
logic. In the structure we shall relax the transitivity, and we extend the ex-post
core equivalence theorem of Einy et al [5] into the models with removing out
transitivity and symmetry.
This article is organized as follows: In Section 2 we present the multi-modal
logic KT and give its ﬁnite model property. Further we introduce the notion
“economy for logic KT”, a generalized notion of rational expectations equilibrium and ex-post core for the economy. Section 3 gives the existence theorem of
rational expectations equilibrium. In Section 4 we give an outline of the proof of
1
2

C.f.: Chellas [3], Fagin, Halpern et al [6].
C.f.: Bacharach [2], Fagin, Halpern et al [6].

76

T. Matsuhisa

Main theorem. Finally we conclude by giving some remarks about the assumptions of the theorem. The detailed proofs except for Theorem 1 and discussions
are given in Matsuhisa, Ishikawa and Hoshino [9].

2

Economy for Multi-modal Logic

2.1

Logic of Knowledge KT

Let T be a set of traders and t ∈ T . Let us modal logics for traders as folows:
The sentences of the language form the least set containing each atomic sentence
Pm (m = 0, 1, 2, . . . ) closed under the following operations:
– nullary operators for falsity ⊥ and for truth ;
– unary and binary syntactic operations for negation ¬, conditionality → and
conjunction ∧, respectively;
– unary operation for modality t with t ∈ T .
Other such operations are deﬁned in terms of those in usual ways. The intended
interpretation of t ϕ is the sentence that ‘trader t knows a sentence ϕ.’
A modal logic L is a set of sentences containing all truth-functional tautologies and closed under substitution and modus ponens. A modal logic L is
an extension of L if L
L . A sentence ϕ in a modal logic L is a theorem
of L, written by L ϕ. Other proof-theoretical notions such as L-deducibility,
L-consistency, L-maximality are deﬁned in usual ways. (See, Chellas [3].)
A system of traders’ knowledge is a modal logic L closed under the 2n + 3
rules of inference (RE ) and containing the schema (N), (M), (C), and (T): For
every t ∈ T ,
ϕ ←→ ψ
←→ t ψ

(RE )

tϕ

;

(N)

t

(M)

t (ϕ

∧ ψ) −→ (

tϕ

∧

tϕ

−→ ϕ.

(C)
(T)

(

t ψ)

−→

∧

t ψ);

t (ϕ

∧ ψ);

tϕ

Deﬁnition 1. The multi-modal logic KT is the minimal system of trades’ knowledge.
2.2

Information and Knowledge3

Trader t’s information structure is a couple Ω, Pt , in which Ω be a non-empty
set and Pt is a mapping of Ω into 2Ω . It is said to be reﬂexive if
Ref
3

ω ∈ Pt (ω)

for every ω ∈ Ω,

See Fagin, Halpern et al [6].

Core Equivalence in Economy for Modal Logic

77

and it is said to be transitive if
Trn

ξ ∈ Pt (ω) implies Pt (ξ)

Pt (ω) for any ξ, ω ∈ Ω.

An information structure is a structure Ω, (Pt )t∈T where Ω is common for all
trader, and it is called an RT-information structure if each Pt is reﬂexive and
transitive.
Given our interpretation, a trader t for whom Pt (ω) E knows, in the state
ω, that some state in the event E has occurred. In this case we say that at the
state ω the trader t knows E. i’s knowledge operator Kt on 2Ω is deﬁned by
Kt (E) = {ω ∈ Ω|Pt (ω) E}. The set Pt (ω) will be interpreted as the set of all
the states of nature that t knows to be possible at ω, and Kt E will be interpreted
as the set of states of nature for which t knows E to be possible. We will therefore
call Pt t’s possibility operator on Ω and also will call Pt (ω) t’s possibility set at
ω. A possibility operator Pt is determined by the knowledge operator Kt such
as Pt (ω) = Kt E ω E. However it is also noted that the operator Pt cannot be
uniquely determined by the knowledge operator Kt when Pt does not satisfy the
both conditions Ref and Trn.
A partitional information structure is an RT-information structure Ω, (Pt)t∈T
with the additional condition: For each t ∈ T and every ω ∈ Ω,
Sym
2.3

ξ ∈ Pt (ω) implies Pt (ξ)

ω.

Finite Model Property

A model on an information structure is a triple M = Ω, (Pt )t∈T , V , in which
Ω, (Pt )t∈T is an information structure and a mapping V assigns either true or
false to every ω ∈ Ω and to every atomic sentence Pm . The model M is called
ﬁnite if Ω is a ﬁnite set.
Deﬁnition 2. By |=M
ω ϕ, we mean that a sentence ϕ is true at a state ω in a
model M. Truth at a state ω in M is deﬁned by the inductive way as follows:
1.

|=M
ω Pm if and only if V (ω, Pm ) = true, for m = 0, 1, 2, . . . ;

2.

|=M
ω

3.

M
|=M
ω ¬ϕ if and only if not |=ω ϕ ;

4.

M
M
|=M
ω ϕ −→ ψ if and only if |=ω ϕ implies |=ω ψ ;

5.

M
M
|=M
ω ϕ ∧ ψ if and only if |=ω ϕ and |=ω ψ ;

6.

|=M
ω

,

tϕ

and

not |=M
ω ⊥ ;

if and only if Pt (ω) ⊆ ||ϕ||M , for t ∈ T ;

Where ||ϕ||M denotes the set of all the states in M at which ϕ is true; this is
called the truth set of ϕ. We say that a sentence ϕ is true in the model M and
write |=M ϕ if |=M
ω ϕ for every state ω in M. A sentence is said to be valid in an
information structure if it is true in every model on the information structure.

78

T. Matsuhisa

Let Σ be a set of sentences. We say that M is a model for Σ if every member
of Σ is true in M. An information structure is said to be for Σ if every member
of Σ is valid in it. Let R be a class of models on a reﬂexive information structure.
A modal logic L is sound with respect to R if every member of R is a model for
L. It is complete with respect to R if every sentence valid in all members of R is
a theorem of L. We say that L is determined by R if L is sound and complete
with respect to R.
A modal logic L is said to have the ﬁnite model property if it is determined
by the class of all ﬁnite models in R. The following theorem can be shown by
the same way described in Chellas [3].
Theorem 1. The multi-modal logic KT has the ﬁnite model property.
From now on we consider t’s information structure Ω, (Pt )t∈T , V
model for KTt .
2.4

as a ﬁnite

Economy for Logic KT

Let Ω be a non-empty ﬁnite set called a state space, and let 2Ω denote the ﬁeld
of all subsets of Ω. Each member of 2Ω is called an event and each element of Ω
a state. The space of the traders is a measurable space (T, Σ, µ) in which T is a
set of traders, Σ is a σ-ﬁeld of subsets of T whose elements are called coalitions,
and µ is a measure on Σ.
A pure exchange economy under uncertainty is a tuple T, Σ, µ, Ω, e, (Ut )t∈T ,
(πt )t∈T consisting of the following structure and interpretations: There are l
commodities in each state of the state space Ω , and it is assumed that Ω is
ﬁnite and that the consumption set of trader t is Rl+ ;
– (T, Σ, µ) is the measure space of the traders;
– e : T × Ω → Rl+ is t’s initial endowment such that e(·, ω) is µ-measurable
for each ω ∈ Ω;
– Ut : Rl+ × Ω → R is t’s von-Neumann and Morgenstern utility function;
– πt is a subjective prior on Ω for a trader t ∈ T .
For simplicity it is assumed that (Ω, πt ) is a ﬁnite probability space with πt full
support 4 for almost all t ∈ T .
Deﬁnition 3. An pure exchange economy for logic KT is a structure E KT =
E, (Pt )t∈T , V , in which E is a pure exchange economy such that Ω, (Pt )t∈T , V
is a ﬁnite model for the logic KT. Furthermore it is called an economy under
RT-information structure if each Pt is a reﬂexive and transitive information
structure.
Remark 1. An economy under asymmetric information is an economy E KT under
partitional information structure (i.e., each Pt satisﬁes the three conditions Ref,
Trn and Sym.)
4

I.e., πt (ω)

0 for every ω ∈ Ω.

Core Equivalence in Economy for Modal Logic

79

Let E KT be a pure exchange economy for logic KT. We denote by Ft the ﬁeld
generated by {Pt (ω) | ω ∈ Ω} and by F the join of all Ft (t ∈ T ); i.e. F = ∨t∈T Ft .
We denote by {A(ω) | ω ∈ Ω } the set of all atoms A(ω) containing ω of the
ﬁeld F = ∨t∈T Ft .
Remark 2. The set of atoms {At (ω) | ω ∈ Ω} of Ft does not necessarily coincide
with the partition induced from Pt .
We shall often refer to the following conditions: For every t ∈ T ,
e(t, ω)dµ 0 for all ω ∈ Ω.
A-1
T
A-2
e(t, ·) is Ft -measurable
A-3
For each x ∈ Rl+ , the function Ut (x, ·) is Ft -measurable, and the function:
T × Rl+ → R, (t, x) → Ut (x, ω) is Σ × B-measurable where B is the σ-ﬁeld of
all Borel subsets of Rl+ .
A-4
For each ω ∈ Ω, the function Ut (·, ω) is continuous, strictly increasing
on Rl+ .
A-5
For each ω ∈ Ω, the function Ut (·, ω) is continuous, increasing, strictly
quasi-concave and non-saturated 5 on Rl+ .
Remark 3. It is plainly observed that A-5 implies A-4. We note also that A-3
does not mean that trader t knows his/her utility function Ut (·, ω).6
2.5

Ex-post Core

An assignment x is a mapping from T × Ω into Rl+ such that for every ω ∈ Ω,
the function x(·, ω) is µ-measurable, and for each t ∈ T , the function x(t, ·) is
at most F-measurable. We denote by Ass(E KT ) the set of all assignments for
the economy E KT .
By an allocation we mean an assignment a such that for every ω ∈ Ω,

T

a(t, ω)dµ

T

e(t, ω)dµ.

We denote by Alc(E KT ) the set of all allocations, and for each t ∈ T we denote
by Alc(E KT )t the set of all the functions a(t, ·) for a ∈ Alc(E KT ).
An assignment y is called an ex-post improvement of a coalition S ∈ Σ on
an assignment x at a state ω ∈ Ω if
Imp1
Imp2
Imp3

µ(S) 0;
y(t, ω)dµ
S
Ut (y(t, ω), ω)

e(t, ω)dµ; and
Ut (x(t, ω), ω) for almost all t ∈ S.

S

We shall present the notion of core in an economy E KT for logic KT.
5
6

I.e.; For any x ∈ Rl+ there exists an x ∈ Rl+ such that Ut (x , ω) Ut (x, ω).
That is, ω ∈
/ Kt ([Ut (·, ω)]) for some ω ∈ Ω, where [Ut (·, ω)] := { ξ ∈ Ω | Ut (·, ξ) =
Ut (·, ω)}. This is because the information structure is not a partitional structure.

80

T. Matsuhisa

Deﬁnition 4. An allocation x is said to be an ex-post core allocation of a
pure exchange economy for logic KT if there is no coalition having an ex-post
improvement on x at any state ω ∈ Ω. The ex-post core denoted by C ExP (E KT )
is the set of all the ex-post core allocations of E KT .
Let E KT be the pure exchange economy for logic KT and E KT (ω) the economy with complete information T, Σ, µ, e(·, ω), (Ut (·, ω))t∈T for each ω ∈ Ω.
We denote by C(E KT (ω)) the set of all core allocations for E KT (ω).
Proposition 1. Let E KT be a pure exchange economy for logic KT satisfying
the conditions A-1, A-2 and A-3. Suppose that the economy is atomless (that
is, (T, Σ, µ) is non-atomic measurable space.) The ex-post core of E KT is nonempty (i.e., C ExP (E KT ) = ∅). Moreover, C ExP (E KT ) coincides with the set of
all assignments x such that x(·, ω) is a core allocation for the economy E KT (ω)
for all ω ∈ Ω: i.e.,
C ExP (E KT ) = {x ∈ Alc(E KT ) | x(·, ω)) ∈ C(E KT (ω)) for all ω ∈ Ω}.

2.6

Expectation and Pareto Optimality

Let E KT be the pure exchange economy for logic KT. We denote by Et [Ut (x(t, ·)]
the ex-ante expectation deﬁned by
Et [Ut (x(t, ·)] :=

Ut (x(t, ω), ω)πt (ω)
ω∈Ω

for each x ∈ Ass(E KT ). We denote by Et [Ut (x(t, ·))|Pt ](ω) the interim expectation deﬁned by
Et [Ut (x(t, ·)|Pt ](ω) :=

Ut (x(t, ξ), ξ)πt (ξ|Pt (ω)).
ξ∈Ω

Deﬁnition 5. An allocation x in an economy E KT is said to be ex-ante Paretooptimal if there is no allocation a with the two properties as follows:
PO-1 For almost all t ∈ T , Et [Ut (a(t, ·)] Et [Ut (x(t, ·)].
PO-2 The set of all the traders s ∈ T such that
Es [Us (a(t, ·)]

Es [Us (x(t, ·)].

is not a µ-null set.
2.7

Rational Expectations Equilibrium

Let E KT = N, Ω, (et )t∈T , (Ut )t∈T , (πt )t∈T , (Pt )t∈T be a pure exchange economy for logic KT. A price system is a non-zero F-measurable function p : Ω →
Rl+ . We denote by σ(p) the smallest σ-ﬁeld that p is measurable, and by ∆(p)(ω)

Core Equivalence in Economy for Modal Logic

81

the atom containing ω of the ﬁeld σ(p). The budget set of a trader t at a state
ω for a price system p is deﬁned by
Bt (ω, p) := { x ∈ Rl+ | p(ω) · x

p(ω) · e(t, ω) }.

Let ∆(p) ∩ Pt : Ω → 2Ω be deﬁned by (∆(p) ∩ Pt )(ω) := ∆(p)(ω) ∩ Pt (ω);
it is plainly observed that the mapping ∆(p) ∩ Pt satisﬁes Ref. We denote by
σ(p) ∨ Ft the smallest σ-ﬁeld containing both the ﬁelds σ(p) and Ft , and by
At (p)(ω) the atom containing ω. It is noted that
At (p)(ω) = (∆(p) ∩ At )(ω).
Remark 4. If Pt satisﬁes Ref and Trn then σ(p) ∨ Ft coincides with the ﬁeld
generated by ∆(p) ∩ Pt .
We shall propose the extended notion of rational expectations equilibrium
for an economy E KT .
Deﬁnition 6. A rational expectations equilibrium for an economy E KT under
reﬂexive information structure is a pair (p, x), in which p is a price system and
x is an allocation satisfying the following conditions:
RE 1 For almost all t ∈ T , x(t, ·) is σ(p) ∨ Ft -measurable.
RE 2 For almost all t ∈ T and for every ω ∈ Ω, x(t, ω) ∈ Bt (ω, p).
RE 3 For almost all t ∈ T , if y(t, ·) : Ω → Rl+ is σ(p) ∨ Ft -measurable with
y(t, ω) ∈ Bt (ω, p) for all ω ∈ Ω, then
Et [Ut (x(t, ·))|∆(p) ∩ Pt ](ω)
pointwise on Ω.
RE 4 For every ω ∈ Ω,
The allocation x in E

KT

T

x(t, ω)dµ =

Et [Ut (y(t, ·))|∆(p) ∩ Pt ](ω)
T

e(t, ω)dµ.

is called a rational expectations equilibrium allocation.

KT

We denote by RE(E ) the set of all the rational expectations equilibria of a
pure exchange economy E KT for logic KT, and denote by R(E KT ) the set of all
the rational expectations equilibrium allocations for the economy

3

Existence Theorem

We can prove the existence theorem of the generalized rational expectations
equilibrium for a pure exchange economy E KT for logic KT. Let E KT (ω) be the
economy with complete information for each ω ∈ Ω. We set by W (E KT (ω)) the
set of all the competitive equilibria for E KT (ω), and we denote by W(E KT (ω))
the set of all the competitive equilibrium allocations for E KT (ω).
Theorem 2. Let E KT be a pure exchange economy for logic KT satisfying the
conditions A-1, A-2, A-3 and A-4. Suppose that the economy is atomless (that
is, (T, Σ, µ) is non-atomic measurable space.) Then there exists a rational expectations equilibrium for the economy; i.e., RE(E KT ) = ∅.
Proof. See Appendix.
Remark 5. Matsuhisa and Ishikawa [8] shows Theorem 2 for an economy under
RT-information structure.

82

4

T. Matsuhisa

Proof of Main Theorem

We can now state explicitly Main theorem in Section 1 as follows:
Theorem 3. Let E KT be a pure exchange economy for logic KT satisfying
the conditions A-1, A-2, A-3 and A-4. Suppose that the economy is atomless (that is, (T, Σ, µ) is non-atomic measurable space.) Then the ex-post core
coincides with the set of all rational expectations equilibrium allocations; i.e.,
C ExP (E KT ) = R(E KT ).
In view of Theorem 2 it is ﬁrst noted that R(E KT ) = ∅. Because E KT (ω)
is an atomless pure exchange economy for each ω ∈ Ω, it follows from the
core equivalence theorem of Aumann [1] that C(E KT (ω)) = W(E KT (ω)) for any
ω ∈ Ω. We shall observe that Main theorem immediately follows from the above
Proposition 1 together with the below Proposition 2:
Proposition 2. Let E KT be a pure exchange economy for logic KT satisfying
the conditions A-1, A-2, A-3 and A-4. Then the set of all rational expectations
equilibrium allocations R(E KT ) coincides with the set of all the assignments x
such that x(·, ω) is a competitive equilibrium allocation for the economy with
complete information E KT (ω) for all ω ∈ Ω; i.e.,
R(E KT ) = {x ∈ Alc(E KT ) | There is a price system p such that
(p(ω), x(·, ω)) ∈ W (E KT (ω)) for all ω ∈ Ω}.

5

Concluding Remarks

We shall give a remark about the ancillary assumptions in results in this article.
Could we prove the theorems under the generalized information structure removing out the reﬂexivity? The answer is no vein. If trader t’s possibility operator
does not satisfy Ref then his/her expectation with respect to a price cannot
be deﬁned at a state because it is possible that ∆(p)(ω) ∩ Pt (ω) = ∅ for some
ω ∈ Ω.
Could we prove the theorems without four conditions A-1, A-2, A-3 and
A-4 together with A-5. The answer is no again. The suppression of any of
these assumptions renders the existence theorem of rational expectations equilibrium (Theorem 2) vulnerable to the discussion and the example proposed in
Remarks 4.6 of Matsuhisa and Ishikawa (2002).

Appendix
Proof of Theorem 2
In view of the conditions A-1,A-2, A-3 and A-4, it follows from the existence theorem of a competitive equilibrium for an atomless economy with com-

Core Equivalence in Economy for Modal Logic

83

plete information7 that for each ω ∈ Ω, there exists a competitive equilibrium (p∗ (ω), x∗ (·, ω)) ∈ W (E KT (ω)). We take a set of strictly positive numbers
{kω }ω∈Ω such that kω p∗ (ω) = kξ p∗ (ξ) for any ω = ξ. We deﬁne the pair (p, x)
as follows: For each ω ∈ Ω and for all ξ ∈ A(ω), p(ξ) := kω p∗ (ω) and x(t, ξ) :=
x∗ (t, ω). It is noted that x(·, ξ) ∈ W (E KT (ω)) because E KT (ξ) = E KT (ω), and
we note that ∆(p)(ω) = A(ω).
We shall verify that (p, x) is a rational expectations equilibrium for E KT : In
fact, it is easily seen that p is F-measurable with ∆(p)(ω) = A(ω) and that x(t, ·)
is σ(p) ∨ Ft -measurable, so RE 1 is valid. Because (∆(p) ∩ Pt )(ω) = A(ω) for
every ω ∈ Ω, it can be plainly observed that x(t, ·) satisﬁes RE 2, and it follows
from A-3 that for almost all t ∈ T , Et [Ut (x(t, ·))|∆(p) ∩ Pt ](ω) = Ut (x(t, ω), ω)
On noting that E KT (ξ) = E KT (ω) for any ξ ∈ A(ω), it is plainly observed that
(p(ω), x(t, ω)) = (kω p∗ (ω), x∗ (t, ω)) is also a competitive equilibrium for E KT (ω)
for every ω ∈ Ω, and it can be observed by the above equation that RE 3 is
valid for (p, x), in completing the proof.

References
1. Aumann, R. J.: Markets with a continuum of traders, Econometrica 32 (1964)
39–50.
2. Bacharach, M. O.: Some extensions of a claim of Aumann in an axiomatic model
of knowledge, Journal of Economic Theory 37 (1985) 167–190.
3. Chellas, B. F.: Modal Logic: An introduction. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, London, New York, New Rochelle, Melbourne, Sydney (1980)
4. Debreu, G.: Existence of competitive equilibrium. In Arrow, K.J. and Intriligator, M.D., (eds): Handbook of Mathematical Economics, Volume 2. North-Holland
Publishing Company, Amsterdam (1982) 697–744.
5. Einy, E., Moreno, D. and Shitovitz, B.: Rational expectations equilibria and the
ex-post core of an economy with asymmetric information, Journal of Mathematical
Economics 34 (2000) 527–535.
6. Fagin, R., Halpern, J.Y., Moses, Y., and Vardi, M.Y. Reasoning about Knowledge.
The MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, London, England (1995)
7. Geanakoplos, J.: Game theory without partitions, and applications to speculation
and consensus, Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper No.914 (1989) (Available in
http://cowles.econ.yale.edu)
8. Matsuhisa, T. and Ishikawa, R.: Rational expectations can preclude trades. Working paper. Hitotsubashi Discussion Paper Series No.2002-1 (2002) (Available in
http://wakame.econ.hit-u.ac.jp/)
9. Matsuhisa, T., Ishikawa, R. and Hoshino, Y.: Core equivalence in economy under generalized information. Working paper. Hitotsubashi Discussion Paper Series
No.2002-12 (2002) (Available in http://wakame.econ.hit-u.ac.jp/)
10. Volij, O.,: Communication, credible improvements and the core of an economy with
asymmetric information, International Journal of Game Theory 29 (2000) 63–79.
11. Wilson, R.: Information, eﬃciency, and the core of an economy, Econometrica 40
(1978) 807–816.
7

C.f., Theorem 9 in Debreu [4]

