Modelling Tactical Driving Manoeuvres with
GA-INTACT
H. Tawfik1 and P. Liatsis2
1

School of Computing, Liverpool Hope University, Liverpool, UK
tawfikh@hope.ac.uk
2
School of Engineering and Mathematical Sciences, City University, UK
p.liatsis@city.ac.uk

Abstract. This work concerns the design and development of a driving simulation system, which exhibits intelligent driving behaviour at the tactical level, as
part of a traffic simulation environment. Our tactical driving system using genetic algorithms, named GA-INTACT, accounts for the subject vehicle and
other vehicles positions and speed parameters in the surrounding traffic condition, and selects favourable speed change and lane transition actions for the
‘subject’ vehicle, according to safety, speed and driving behaviour criteria.
Simulation results demonstrated that the adoption of the Genetic Algorithms
approach for obtaining near-optimum driving solutions eliminates the need for
learning driving patterns, and allows the efficient handling of the complex nature of tactical driving modelling problem. The role of the driving behaviour in
influencing the outcome of the driver’s decision is emphasised, an aspect that
was not treated sufficiently in previous tactical driving simulation approaches.

1 Introduction
The development of Autonomous Vehicle Navigation (AVN) systems remains an active research area for the automotive industry, and several AVN systems [3,13] have
been tested in structured environments, such as motorways. A key issue to the success
of any AVN system is the systematic performance evaluation of the underlying sensing algorithms [5] in a variety of traffic scenes and driving scenarios.
The Road Simulation Environment (ROSE) [12] has been developed as a traffic
and driving simulation platform for testing obstacle detection, lane detection and driving modelling systems. This has been achieved through the construction of a visual
database of traffic scenes; and the generation of geometrically valid 3-D roads [7],
and driving scenarios by simulating driving decision-making procedures.
We focus here on the tactical driving part which contributes to limited research in
the modelling of this complex driving activity. Our tactical driving system, GAINTACT, selects favourable tactical driving actions for the ‘subject’ vehicle according to safety, speed and driving behaviour criteria, using a genetic algorithm.

2 Related Tactical Driving Simulation Research
Considerable progress was made in automating various strategic and operational driving aspects, compared to limited success in developing intelligent tactical driving
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part III, LNCS 3993, pp. 767 – 774, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

768

H. Tawfik and P. Liatsis

models [4]. Typical applications of tactical modelling targeted automatic cars and robots driving in simulated environments and adopted various rule-based, neural networks and evolutionary techniques. The main challenges associated with rule-based
approaches [4,10] are the difficulty of modifying existing rules and implementing
new ones, and poor results in unanticipated driving situations. Typical problems that
arise with neural networks solutions [1,9] include a biased behaviour towards a particular driving style, exhibiting similar mistakes to those in the training data, and the
lack of a criterion for the determination of satisfactory a representation for tactical
driving in the training set. Other research attempts used genetic algorithms (GAs) to
model tactical driving tasks [2,11] by exploiting their power in solving complex problems without the need for a comprehensive understanding of tactical driving as for the
rule-based case or for a representative training set as with neural networks.

3 INtelligent TACTical Driving System Based on Genetic
Algorithms (GA-INTACT)
The objective of the driving simulation module of ROSE is to provide driving scenarios where vehicles drive at desirable speeds, maintain safety gaps, and closely resemble real driving, in terms of speed changes and lane transitions.
A ‘Subject driver’ centred approach was adopted such that driving journey refers to
the changing driving situation in the immediate vicinity of the subject vehicle driver.
The subject vehicle driving actions in terms of lane and speed changes are determined
by GA-INTACT. A dual carriageway road type with two lanes on each traffic direction (Fig.1) was chosen for this application. It permits a variety of manoeuvres to be
performed, and is genaralisable to other road structures such as Motorways.

Subject
vehicle

VSubject
Fig. 1. Layout of the dual carriageway

ACS LN LTS

Fig. 2. GA solution representation

A number of application specific assumptions were made, as follows:
-

-

Only the subject vehicle has the ability to perform intelligent tactical manoeuvres.
The driving scenarios of other vehicles are predetermined and prior information
with regard to each vehicle’s position and speed, at any stage, is also available.
A flowing traffic without interruptions, roundabouts or junctions, is assumed.
A five-second interval (FSI) is the updating period for the tactical driving steps as it
allows adequate time to perform realistic speed changes and lane transitions [12].
The two-second minimum gap: This safety distance is the distance required to allow for a two second time gap to the vehicle ahead, at the subject vehicle speed,
such that:

Modelling Tactical Driving Manoeuvres with GA-INTACT

D two_sec = V × 2

-

769

(1)

where Dtwo_sec is the two-sec distance in metres, and V is the vehicle speed in
(m/s).
Driver Behaviour Model (DBM): The DBM input takes the parameters of the
driver’s age, gender, experience, and personality, and returns a 0 to 1 output, corresponding to a range of very risky to very cautious driving behaviours, as follows:

DBM = w 1 DBM A + w 2 DBM E + w 3 DBM P/G

(2)

where DBMA, DBME, and DBMP/G are the different DBM contributions resulting
from the driver’s age, experience and personality/gender factors, respectively
[12].
3.1 Genetic Alogorithms
A genetic algorithm search was adopted for the selection of optimum tactical manoeuvres for the subject vehicle as it can provide a powerful means of obtaining optimum solutions for complex problems and eliminate the need for obtaining training
data. GAs are stochastic search methods that adopt mechanisms of natural selection
and genetics for carrying out their optimisation tasks [6].
The GA solution in GA-INTACT is a tactical decision in the form of a change in
speed, acceleration rate, and lane and the type of lane transition, which is then optimised with respect to tactical driving criteria. We use a 14-bit binary string that encodes the speed, acceleration, lane parameters (Fig. 2), as follows:
-

-

VSubject is the target speed of the subject vehicle at the end of the FSI. The 7 bits
allow for a 1-kph resolution of a 0 to 128 kph speed range.
ACS (Acceleration Scale): this scaling factor corresponds to the change in acceleration/deceleration over the FSI [8]. A 3-bit field allows for scenarios such as
(000) for a ‘very sharp’ acceleration rate and (111) for a ‘very smooth’ deceleration rate.
LN is the subject vehicle’s lane number at the end of the FSI where LN = 0 is for
the slow lane and LN = 1 is for the fast lane.
LTS (Lane Transition Scale): this reflects the manner by which the lane change is
performed in terms of smoothness/sharpness. LTS ranges from ‘very smooth’
fast-to-slow lane transition (LTS = 7/7) to ‘very sharp’ slow-to-fast transition
(LTS = 0/7).

3.2 GA Fitness Function Design
Four main design optimisation criteria were defined, namely safety, speed, driving
behaviour, and ‘keeping to the slow lane’. The overall GA fitness function can be described as the weighted sum of the 4 evaluation measures, as follows:

GA fittness = w .f
+ w .f
+ w .f
+ w .f
1 Safety
2 Speed
3 Behaviour
4 Slow

(3)

Three conditions were imposed to reject unrealistic or unlawful driving solutions at
every FSI maneouvre, based on min. gap and max. speed and acceleration limits:

770

H. Tawfik and P. Liatsis

G(.) ≥ G min (.) : Gap to the vehicle ahead which is below minimum safety gap.
V(.) ≥ VOpt (.) : Subject vehicle drives faster than its optimum speed VOpt .
a (.) ≥ a Max (.) : Vehicle exceeds its max. acceleration/deceleration rate amax [8].

3.2.1 Safety Fitness (fSafety)
The objective of the safety function is to drive the subject vehicle such that the gap to
the vehicle ahead is reduced, while maintaining the minimum safety gap, as follows:

f Safety =

SSafety

SSafety + (G (t + T ) − G min (t + T) )

.

(4)

where: T = FSI (i.e., 5 seconds),
G(t+T) is the actual gap ahead of the subject vehicle at the end of the manoeuvre.
Gmin(t+T) is the minimum gap ahead of the subject vehicle at time (t+T).
The G gap is the distance from the subject vehicle to the vehicle ahead.
Gmin is based on the two-second rule, with the addition of the DBM related term [12].
SSafety is a scaling parameter based on the initial Gap G(t) is and minimum gap Gmin(t).
3.2.2 Speed Fitness (fSpeed)
The fSpeed function encourages solutions according to which the subject vehicle drives
at speeds near or equal to the optimum speed, as follows:

fSpeed =

SSpeed

SSpeed
+ (VOpt (t + T ) − VSubject (t + T) )

(5)

The optimum speed VOpt is dependent on the road design speed VD(.), the vehicle's acceleration capabilities, and its driver behaviour DBM [12].
VSubject(t+T) is the subject vehicle speed at the end of the FSI.
VOpt(t+T) is the optimum subject vehicle speed at the end of the FSI
SSpeed is the fSpeed function scaling parameter based on VSubject(t) is the initial subject
vehicle speed and VOpt(t) is the initial optimum subject vehicle speed.
3.2.2 Driving Behaviour Fitness (fBehaviour)
The fBehaviour gives reflects the compatibility of the subject vehicle manoeuvre with the
driving behaviour (DBM). It encourages tactical actions in the form of LTS, ASC,
and SCS (Speed Change Scale) [12], which are coherent with DBM and discourages
actions that are inconsistent with it. fBehaviour can be written as:

f Behaviour = f (LTS, ACS, SCS, DBM )

(6)

DBM is the subject driver behaviour model output value, LTS is the lane transition
scale, ACS is the acceleration rate scale, and SCS is the speed change scale [12].
A heuristic model was formulated with data points that define the correspondence between the DBM, LTS, SCS and ACS input terms and the output value of fBehaviour [12].
According to this model, when DBM=0.9 (overcautious drivers), high performance

Modelling Tactical Driving Manoeuvres with GA-INTACT

771

scenarios (fBehaviour>0.8) involve low acceleration rates, decreasing speeds (SCS\ACS
>0.6), and smooth lane transitions from fast to slow lanes (LTS>0.7). On the other
hand, very low fitness values are produced, when a ‘cautious’ driver carries out high
acceleration and speed rates and sharp lane transition manoeuvres.
3.2.4 ‘Keeping to Slow Lane’ Fitness (fSlow lane)
This fitness term comes to noticeable effect, when there are ‘almost’ equal gaps ahead
of the subject vehicle to the immediate vehicles on both slow and fast lanes, with
these vehicles driving at similar speeds. The influence of fSlow lane is such that, when a
similar traffic condition are present at both lanes, the subject vehicle would end up on
the slow lane. The fSlow Lane function was formulated as follows:

⎛
SSlow lane
fSlow lane = (LN max - LN) × ⎜⎜
⎝ SSlow lane + VSlow − VFast + G Slow − G Fast

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

(8)

where VSlow and VFast are the speeds of the vehicles ahead, on slow and fast lanes.
GSlow and GFast are the gaps of the vehicles ahead on the slow and fast lanes, respectively. If there are no vehicles ahead, then GSlow/Fast = 200 m, and VSlow/Fast = 128 kph.
LN is the lane number of the subject vehicle at the end of the FSI.
LNmax the maximum number of lanes per traffic direction number.
The SSlow lane scaling parameter adjusts the sharpness of fSlow lane based on DBM [12].

4 Simulation Results
This section presents examples of tactical driving results produced by GA-INTACT.
A 3 FSI traffic journey length was selected to evaluate the performance of the system.
A graphical representation of the behaviour of the subject vehicle’s actions is presented with plots of the key GA optimisation criteria as follows:
Subject vehicle speed (VSubject) and optimum speed (VOpt) Vs (FSI) or (T);
The minimum gap (Gmin) and actual gap to the vehicle ahead (G) Vs time steps (T).
Lane number (LN), LTS and ACS values at each time step (T).
The speed and distance values are approximated to the nearest kph for speed calculations, and nearest meter for gap calculations, while LTS and ACS values are approximated to the nearest decimal. An initial LTS and ACS value of 0.5 is assumed.
Due to the dynamic nature of the driving conditions and constraints, tactical manoeuvres are assessed in comparison to the optimum speed and minimum safety gaps.
Our traffic scenario has the following conditions: Design speed=120 kph, Subject
vehicle starting lane LN=0, Starting speed =80 kph, speed of the first vehicle ahead on
the slow lane=90 kph, and speed of the first vehicle ahead on the fast lane=100 kph.
In order to observe the effect of the driving behaviour on the tactical manoeuvres,
the same traffic conditions were simulated with three DBM values: DBM=0.9 ‘overcautious’ driver, DBM=0.5 ‘standard’ and DBM=0.1 ‘risky’ driver.
We use the U.K road layout standards in which the slow lane refers to the left lane
while the fast lane refers to the right lane. This layout structure and subsequent calculations can be changed in the simulation to meet other road layout conventions.

772

H. Tawfik and P. Liatsis

Case 1: overcautious driver (DBM =0.9), Figs 3&4.
1st manoeuvre (Time step 0 to 1): the subject vehicle accelerates from 80 kph to 102
kph to match its optimum speed (VOpt), thus reducing the gap ahead from 60m to
58m, in a ‘smooth’ manner (ACS=0.4), on the same lane.
2nd manoeuvre (Time step 1 to 2): the gap ahead of the subject vehicle is reduced to
the optimum gap from 58m to 50m on the same lane, by decelerating smoothly (ACS
= 0.7) to a speed of 92 kph, a speed level near that of the vehicle ahead.
3rd manoeuvre (Time step 2 to 3): The optimum gap of 48m is matched, by readjusting the subject vehicle’s speed to that of the vehicle ahead on the left lane. The
speed is reduced smoothly (ACS=0.7) from 92 kph to 90 kph.
Case 2: standard driver (DBM =0.5), [12]
1st manoeuvre: the subject vehicle accelerates from 80 kph to match its optimum
speed of 104 kph, thus reducing the gap ahead from 60m to 57m, close to the optimum gap. The subject vehicle increases speed in a ‘smooth’ manner (ACS=0.4).

Time step 0

Time step 1

Time step 2

Time step 3

Fig. 3. Three 5-second step journey from the subject vehicle’s perspective for case 1
VOpt
VSubject
GMin
G
LN
LTS
ACS

Fig. 4. Five-second time step changes of the subject vehicle’s behaviour, for case 1

Modelling Tactical Driving Manoeuvres with GA-INTACT

773

2nd manoeuvre: the gap ahead of the subject vehicle is decreased to 52m and is
therefore kept near the optimum gap of 50m. This is achieved by decelerating
smoothly (ACS = 0.6) to a speed of 91 kph, and making no lane change.
3rd manoeuvre: The subject vehicle carries out a smooth lane transition (LTS=0.4)
from the slow to the fast lane (LN=1). The speed is increased from 91 kph to the optimum of 104 kph on the fast lane, in a smooth manner (ACS=0.4). The gap to the
‘new’ fast-lane vehicle ahead, which had been traveling at 00 Kph, is now very large.
Case 3: risky driver (DBM =0.1), [12]
1st manoeuvre: the subject vehicle accelerates from 80 kph to 107kph, a speed close to
its optimum 111 kph. This speed allows a 56m gap to the vehicle ahead which is a
near-optimum gap length, as the minimum gap is 55m. The vehicle also stays on the
slow lane, and carries out the speed increase in a ‘very sharp’ manner (ACS=0.1).
2nd manoeuvre: The subject vehicle carries out a very sharp lane change (LTS=0.1)
from the slow to the fast lane (LN=1). This allows it to increase its speed from 107
kph to the optimum 111 kph s. A sharp acceleration type was carried out (ACS=0.3).
3rd manoeuvre: no speed or lane change, reducing the gap is reduced from 90 to 80m.
Results show that GA-INTACT aims at driving at maximum possible speeds and
maintaining minimum gaps. When there exists a wide range of optimisable speed and
safety gap combinations, high DBM ‘cautious’ drivers, have the tendency of travelling on the slow lane and optimising the safety distance. 'Standard' drivers produce a
driving action that follows the general need to optimise the speed and the safety distance, changing lanes when necessary. 'Risky' drivers increase their speed and travel
on the fast lane. In addition, varrying DBMs result in different approaches to speed
and lane changes. Cautious drivers perform smooth, acceleration and lane transitions,
while risky drivers perform these manoeuvres in a sharp manner.
Optimisation of the safety and speed criteria can be thought of as driving at the
maximum possible speed, while keeping the safety distance to the other vehicles.
The use of DBM represents a distinct property of the GA approach in our GAINTACT system, and allows the generation of more realistic and broader types of tactical manoeuvres, and the possibility to ‘steer’ the subject vehicle’s driving journey.
The current 14-bit GA solution size means that the problem under consideration
has a relatively small search space. The GA efficiency would be more apparent when
using GA-INTACT for more complicated configurations. For more than 2 lanes per
direction, the chromosome size needs to be increased such that it allows enough resolution to accommodate for extra LTS patterns. In a more sophisticated traffic scenario
in which other vehicle are equipped with GA-INTACT, the solution size can increase
significantly to accommodate for interactions between vehicles driving in the vicinity
of each other. This leads to a larger search space to explore and would require more
parallel optmisation of the tactical manoeuvres of all interacting vehicles.

5 Conclusions
The GA-INTACT system adopts a genetic search approach to generate highperformance tactical driving solutions with regards to safety, speed and driving behaviour criteria. The driver behaviour element was particularly emphasised during the

774

H. Tawfik and P. Liatsis

tactical driving design. GA-INTACT performs a variety of speed and lane change actions at various traffic situations, and generates tactical manoeuvres which optimise
driving safety, efficiency and the driver’s behaviour-manoeuvre compatibility criteria.
The work may be extended to a more versatile driving simulation system, which
accommodates for driving decisions that relate to issues such as approaching junctions, traffic signals, and taking suitable exits. A more sophisticated traffic layout
would be that where other vehicles, in particular those in the subject vehicle’s vicinity
are themselves equipped with GA-INTACT systems carry out speed and lane changes
in a highly dynamic manner, an remains as a future research challenge.

References
1. Arain, M.A.,et al.: Action planning for the collision avoiding system using neural networks. Proc Intelligent Vehicles Sym. (1993) 119-124
2. Baluja, S., and Sukthankar, R.: Prototyping intelligent vehicle modules using evolutionary
algorithms. Evolutionary Algorithms in Engineering Applications. Springer-Verlag (1998)
3. Campell, N.W.,et al.: Autonomous road vehicle navigation. Engineering Applications of
Artificial Intelligence. Vol.7(2), (1990) 177-190.
4. Ehlet, P.A.M., and Rothkrantz, L.J.M.: Microscopic traffic simulation with reactive driving agents. Proc. 4th IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems Conf. USA (2001) 860-865
5. Foresti, G., et al.: A distributed approach to 3D scene recognition. IEEE Trans. Vehicular
Technology. vol.43(2), (1994) 389-406
6. Goldberg, D.E.: Genetic algorithms in search, optimisation, and machine learning. Addison-Wesley (1989)
7. Liatsis, P., and Tawfik, H..M.: Two dimensional road shape optimisation using genetic algorithms. Mathematics and Computers in simulation. Vol.5, (1999) 19-31
8. Leutzbach, W.: Introduction to the theory of traffic flow. Splinger-verlag, Berlin (1988)
9. Lyons, G., and Hunt, J.: Traffic models - a role for neural networks. Proc. of neural networks and combinatorial traffic models. (1993) 71-79
10. Reece, D.A., and Shafer, S.A.: A computational model of driving for autonomous vehicles.
Transportation research. vol.27A(1), (1993) 23-50
11. Sukthankar, R., Baluja, S., and Hancock, J.: Multiple adaptive agents for tactical driving.
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence. Vol. 9(1), (1998)
12. Tawfik, H.M.: A graphical simulation environment for modelling of road and traffic scenarios. PhD Thesis. Control Systems Centre, UMIST, UK (2000)
13. Tribe, R.T., et al.: Intelligent driver support. 2nd World Congress on Intelligent Transport
Systems. Yokohama, Japan (1995)

