Industrial Challenges for Numerical Simulation
of Crystal Growth
Dmitry K. Ofengeim1 and Alexander I. Zhmakin1,2
1

2

Softimpact Ltd., P.O. 83, 194156 St. Petersburg, Russia
{dima,zhmakin}@softimpact.ru
http://www.softimpact.ru/main-engl.html
A.F.Ioﬀe Physical Technical Institute, Russian Academy of Sciences,
194021 St. Petersburg, Russia

Abstract. Numerical simulation of industrial crystal growth is diﬃcult
due to its multidisciplinary nature and complex geometry of real-life
growth equipment. An attempt is made to itemize physical phenomena
dominant in diﬀerent methods for growth of bulk crystals from melt and
from vapour phase and to review corresponding numerical approaches.
Academic research and industrial applications are compared. Development of computational engine and graphic user interface of industryoriented codes is discussesd. In conclusion, a simulator for the entire
growth process of bulk crystals by sublimation method is described.

1

Introduction

The aims of numerical simulation are to explain and to predict. Computational
Fluid Dynamics (CFD) is certainly one of the most mature computational technologies evolved from academic research into widespread industrial application.
However, it is recognized that non-expert is rarely able to apply CFD succesfully to industrial problems [33]. CFD is considered as uncertain discipline and a
knowledge-based activity. To cure the situation, EU has launched a huge project
QNET-CFD (over 40 organizations from 11 states) with the aim not to perfome
actual research, but to assemble and arrange existing knowledge encapsulating CFD use in diﬀerent industrial sectors (external aerodynamics, combustion,
chemical and civil engineering, environment, turbomashinery ﬂows) and to establish best practice guidelines. Numerical simulation of crystal growth, being
based on CFD, inherits all its concerns and adds a number of own problems
such as unknown phase boundary, facetting of crystal surface, anisotropic crystal properties, radiative heat transfer in the presense of both diﬀuse and specular reﬂecting surfaces and semi-transparent bodies, evolution of thermal stresses,
point and extended defects during growth as well as during post-process cooling.
In the present paper an attempt is made to review the problems of numerical
simulation of industrial crystal growth and approaches to their solution.

P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2657, pp. 3–12, 2003.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

4

2

D.K. Ofengeim and A.I. Zhmakin

Mathematical Models

A simulation of the crystal growth requires a solution of a number of subproblems. The key one is the computation of the melt and/or gas ﬂow coupled
to the global heat transfer in the growth facility.
Melt Flow. The great variety of melt ﬂow patterns observed in crystal growth
systems results from highly diﬀerent scales of crystals, variation of melt properties (for example, silicon Prandtl number is three order of magnitude smaller
that that of some oxides) and numerous driving forces [16].
Bridgman (directional solidiﬁcation) method is probably the simplest one to
simulate. The ﬂow is driven by natural thermal and concentration (double diffusive) convection. The ﬂow is more complex in the case of vertical Bridgman
growth with centrifugation [43], being determined by the interaction of buoyancy
with Coriolis force. Rotational Bridgman method [30] adds forced convection and
free melt/gas surface (and thus Marangoni eﬀect). The forced ﬂow in Czochraski
(Cz) growth is caused by the crucible and crystal rotation. An important phenomena to account for is a dynamic gas/melt interaction (the shear stress due
to gas ﬂow can greatly exceed the Marangoni stress [17]). In Liquid Encapsulated Czochraski (LEC) method a presence of a third ﬂuid - encapsulant - does
not essentially increase the diﬃculty of the ﬂow computations (encapsulant ﬂow
is usually laminar), but could greatly complicate mass transfer problem due to
numerous physical-chemical processes in the three media and at interfaces with
poorly known rate constants and transport coeﬃcients. In all methods mentioned so far the melt/gas interface can be considered ﬂat while in the ﬂoating
zone (FZ) method it could be highly curved [28].
One can judge whether the melt ﬂow in the growth system should be laminar
or turbulent by the values of the Grashof and (rotational) Reynolds numbers.
A winner is surely silicon Cz growth due to the large size of the crystal and
the crucible and the low melt viscosity. Turbulent melt ﬂow in the crucible is
non-steady three-dimensional. Axisymmetric approximation could not reproduce
experimental data on the melt/crystal phase boundary shape or the oxygen concentration in the crystal which are critical for the crystal quality [18]. Direct
Numerical Simulation (DNS) of the melt ﬂow in the large-scale industrial equipment is hardly possible in the near future, to say nothing of the oxygen transport
which requires much ﬁner grids for computation due to the high Schmidt number. One should consider with caution the results of so called “coarse DNS” or
“quasi-DNS” computations. These approaches does not provide the necessary
spatial resolution, but, as their advocates claim, reproduce the ﬂow structures
observed experimentally. Indeed, coherent structures in the developed turbulent
ﬂow is known to weakly depend on the Reynolds number. However, in the crystal
growth problems one is interested ﬁrst of all in the ﬂow behaviour near the crystal, the crucible and the free surface. At present, the most adequate methods for
modelling of the turbulent ﬂow in the industrial growth systems are Large Eddy
Simulation (LES) and a hybrid method mixing the best features of LES and an
approach based on the Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes equations (RANS) [19].

Industrial Challenges for Numerical Simulation of Crystal Growth

5

Gas Flow. Gas ﬂow in crystal growth governed by the low-Mach number
Navier–Stokes equations [23] is laminar in most cases, except high pressure LEC
of A3 B5 crystals. A CFD problem is coupled to mass transfer one for nondilute mixtures [11]. Generally both homogeneous and heterogeneous chemical
reactions are to be taken into account, the latter resulting in highly nonlinear
boundary conditions.
Radiative Heat Transfer. Due to the high temperatures radiative heat transfer is, as a rule, an important mechanism and frequently a dominant one. It can
be even used as a heating method as in FZ method with a double-ellipsoid
mirror furnace [22]. The complexity of the adequate radiative transfer model
varies greatly. If only opaque solid bodies with diﬀuse surfaces are present in the
growth system, computation of grey radiation using conﬁguration (view) factors
(“surface–to–surface”) [8] is required. Simulation of growth of semi-transparent
crystals is more diﬃcult. One has to account for spectrally dependent absoption
in the crystal, specular reﬂection from the surfaces and diﬀerent values of the
refraction index. Peculiarities of the radiation propagation can cardinally change
the shape of the melt/crystal interface in semi-transparent oxides [44]. Thus advanced models, such as characteristics method [34] or extension of Ray Tracing
method [25] to multi-band radiative heat transfer [20], are needed.
Phase Boundaries. The simulation of crystal growth from melt includes selfconsistent determination of several interfaces. In Cz methods boundary melt/gas
(melt/encapsulant, encapsulant/gas in LEC) can be usually assumed ﬂat except
a small meniscus region. To ﬁnd this phase boundary in FZ method one had to
solve a coupled thermal-electromagnetic-hydrodynamic problem [28].
The boundary melt/crystal is common for all growth methods. One can either track it explicitly or use one of ’uniform’ methods such as enthalpy model,
level set approach, phase-ﬁeld model. In the latter, for example, solid phase is
considerd as a ﬂuid with very large viscosity [1]. This approach could be optimal
for growth of crystals with complex boundaries, such as dendritic solidiﬁcation
[3]. In simulation of the industrial growth of single crystal treatment of the
melt/crystal boundary as a sharp phase interface is preferable. For solidiﬁcation
of “pure” substance (i.e. when mass diﬀusion eﬀects can be neglected) process
is driven by the temperature alone and described by a classical Stefan problem.
In quasi-stationary formulation the interface should be ﬁtted in such a way that
the growth rate projection on the crystal pulling direction is constant.
Interface description is more diﬃcult when alloy segregation or facetting of
the crystal surface occur. In the latter case melt/crystal boundary does not follow
the melting point isotherm, but coinsides with a crystallographic plane. Interface
undercooling could be large (for example, up to 20 K in bismuth germanate
growth [10]). It is usually claimed that the facetting is harmful for crystal quality
[29] and thus should be avoided by keeping thermal gradient above a critical
value. However, recently large nearly perfect crystals of bismuth germanate have
been grown with fully facetted solidiﬁcation front [5]. Numerical treatment of
the partially facetted interface has been discussed recently in [40].

6

D.K. Ofengeim and A.I. Zhmakin

Electromagnetics. The degree of coupling of the electromagnetic problem to
other phenomena varies greatly. Magnetic ﬁeld used to damp the turbulence ﬂuctuations in Cz method or to provide a controlled action on the melt ﬂow should
be computed self-consistently with the ﬂow or considered given, depending on
the value of the magnetic Reynolds number. Radio frequency (RF) heating is
only weakly coupled to the thermal problem via temperature-dependent material
properties in the sublimation crystal growth. On the other hand, in FZ method
it is coupled to the ﬂow that determine the free surface shape and even to the
dopant segregation at the growth interface via local electric resistivity [28].
Assessment of Crystal Quality. CFD-like simulations themself could provide
the growth rate and composition distributions only. The ultimate aim being the
crystal quality, one has also to analyse thermal stresses, point defects and dislocations in the grown crystal and their evolution during post-growth processing.
When the crystal deformation is pure elastic, stresses can be computed for
any growth stage independently. Thermoelasicity problem is three-dimensional
even for an axisymmetric crystal, except the case of special orientation of the
principal crystal axes [27,47]. Stresses caused by the temperature gradients (as
well as by the compositional inhomogeneity in ternary compounds induced by
segregation) could result in the formation of cracks in the crystals [9]. When
stress level exceeds a critical value, a plastic creep occurs. Models of dislocations
evolution usually exploit the plastic strain rate dependence on the deviatoric
stress and dislocations parameters ( the density, the velocity, the Burgers vector)
[39] and an equation for the evolution of the dislocation density [24,29,37].
The incorporation of intrinsic point defects into a growing crystal and their
evolution are of paramount importance for the silicon crystals. These processes
are essentially depend on the melt/crystal interface shape, the ratio of the growth
rate to the axial temperature gradient and the presence of impurities, i.e. on
peculiarities of the global heat and mass transfer. Simulation of defects in Si
crystals has been reviewed recently in ref. [41].
Mathematical models, as well as numerical methods, used for simulation of crystal growth are essentially the same as in other Computational Continuum Mechanics (CCM) applications (ﬂuid dynamics, electromagnetics, elasticity). The
main diﬀerence between simulation of the thin ﬁlm growth and the bulk crystal
growth is that in the ﬁrst case the computational domain can be considered
ﬁxed due to the smallness of the epitaxial layer thickness. Numerical study of
the bulk crystal growth requires use of either moving grids or regeneration of
the grid. The latter approach is attractive when one can exploit quasi-stationary
simulation of the growth processes (the characteristic time of the crystal shape
changes is large compared to hydrodynamic/thermal time).
Evidently, one has to search for a compromise between a model completness
and tractability. Re-phrasing the well-known quotation, the development of the
model is ﬁnished not when there are no more relevant phenomena to incorporate,
but when one can not exlude an eﬀect without compromizing the model.

Industrial Challenges for Numerical Simulation of Crystal Growth

3

7

Software

Requirements. The center of numerical simulation of crystal growth is moving
from university and academia to industry. There are reasons for that: a great
number of available commercial and public-domain generic CFD codes [7]; cheap
high power hardware; industry’s reluctance to reveal proprietary information to
outside consulting partners; in-house operation allows to use simulation routinely in everyday work. Industry needs customized multidisciplinary simulators
that hide from the user intricacies of numerical issues and allow the engineer
to concentrate on her/his problem [4,6,13,29,36]. There are two approaches to
development of such growth simulators. One can either “wrap” general purpose
code(s) or design a “dedicated” simulator. Somewhat exaggerated diﬀerences in
requirements for software used in academia and industry are given in Table 1.
Table 1. Comparison of numerical simulation in academia and industry
Feature

Academia

Industry

Aim
Geometry
Domain
Physics
Properties
Platform
Execution time
Run-time tuning
Robustness
User’s experience
Foolproof input
On-line help
Documentation

Insight
Simple
Single or a few blocks
One or a few phenomena
Constant or analytical
Workstation up to mainframe
Not critical
Possible
Not critical
Up to high
Optional
Optional
Optional

Optimization
Complex
Complete multi-block system
Multidisciplinary
Real
Workstation or cluster
Up to hours
Unacceptable
Mandatory
None up to average
Mandatory
Mandatory
Mandatory

Optimization of Growth Process and Equipment. The aim of optimization is to increase the crystal size and the uniformity of crystal properties, decrease the number of defects and production costs. Straightforward scaling of the
growth equipment with the crystal dimension does not work due to the nonlinearity of the underlying physical phenomena. Optimization of industrial growth
of bulk crystals and thin ﬁlms is now in its infancy while that of growth equipment is still in the prenatal state. A few known examples of process optimization
use a small number of control parameters (such as heater(s) power/position in
Cz growth [29] or mass ﬂow rates and susceptor rotation rate in CVD [12]) and
thus probably does not encounter ill-posedness of the inverse problems to be
solved. When the number of control parameters is large, one is forced to use a
regularization of some kind [38] as in the optimization of the crucible design for

8

D.K. Ofengeim and A.I. Zhmakin

SiC bulk crystal growth [4]. Probably the most advanced example of the crystal growth optimization is an application of the adjoint method to the solution
of the inverse problem for the optimal boundary heat ﬂux distribution in the
directional solidiﬁcation and Bridgman method [45].
High ﬁdelity direct problem solvers are not fast enough, thus one is often
forced to use, at least at early optimization stages, “surrogate” models [31]. Such
low ﬁdelity models could be physically motivated (reduced spatial dimension of
the problem) or derived as black-box models via multivariable approximation
(regression methods, neural networks, kriging etc. [14]). Note that in the latter
case numerical and experimental data could easily be combined in the optimization process. Parametric geometric modeling, being essentially morphing of a
few curves/surfaces, severely restricts the search space. To increase the power
of the optimization, topological changes in the system conﬁguration should be
allowed. To summarize, there is still a long way to the development of software
for optimal design of the entire crystal growth system. Obviously, experience in
multidisciplinary optimization should be borrowed from more (computationally)
mature industry sectors such as aerospace engineering [2,14].
Could Software be User-Friendly? It is claimed that terms such as “userfriendly” or “easy-to-learn” are ambiguous because they are subjective and thus
unveriﬁable [15]. On the other hand, they can be measured (in relative units) one easily can compare two codes using time needed to master code operation
by uninitiated user or time required for speciﬁcation of geometry and problem
parameters. To make a code attractive to the industry user, developers should
1. Use robust algorithms that does not require run-time monitoring and tuning
2. Minimize user actions required for problem speciﬁcation
3. Use units, variables and control parameters speciﬁc for growth method
Ideally, a code should be a black-box one that requires no intervention by
the user. The price of the robustness is eﬃciency. To ﬁnd a compromise, different forms of adaptivity should be exploited. Grid adaptation to the solution
easily can be automated, using as a stopping criteria (in steady problems) either
speciﬁcation of the ﬁnest grid size [46] or, more properly (but more tediously),
an error estimation [32]. For the most time consuming part - iterative solution
of large sparse system of equations - one can use an adaptive polyalgorithm (an
ordered set of iterative methods from the fast, but the least robust to the most
robust slow one) with automatic method switching [35].
Examples of the item 2 are automatic block detection in the geometry entered
by the user and automatic updating geometry and grid regeneration during the
growth process (caused by crystal shape evolution, inductor or boat movement).
Complete automation could be extremely diﬃcult. Many wide-spread formats
for CAD models do not provide the neibourhoods relations for model entities.
Thus, the topology of the model must be reconstructed and this procedure is
non-trivial due to the erroneous gaps between the neigbour elements [42].
To conform to the item 3 only the developers’ goodwill is needed.

Industrial Challenges for Numerical Simulation of Crystal Growth

9

Fig. 1. A fragment of the unstructured nonmatched grid (left) and temperature distribution (right) around crystal at instants: a) t=0; b) t=18h

4

An Example: A Simulator for Bulk Crystal Growth by
Sublimation Method

In the sublimation method a single crystal is grown from the vapour phase in a
closed crucible, the transport being provided by a suitable temperature gradient
between the powder charge and the seed.
The code “Virtual Reactor” (VR) [4] for crystal growth by sublimation has
been developed as a tool for industry engineers. It provides an accurate solution
of all major physical-chemical phenomena relevant to this method such as resistive or RF heating ; conductive, convective and radiative heat transfer; mass
transfer in gas and porous media; heterogeneous chemical reaction at catalytic
walls and on the surface of powder granules; deposits formation; formation of
elastic strain and dislocations in the growing crystal; evolution of crystal and
deposit shape. The problem is solved using a quasi-stationary formulation.
Unstructured grid is generated block-wise using Delaune algorithm, an advancing front method or their combination. Non-matched grids in the neighbour
blocks are allowed. At each virtual time step a number of subproblems is solved
subsequently. Joule heat source distribution is determined by solution of Maxwell
equations in the frequency domain. Global heat transfer analysis includes radiative transfer using conﬁguration factors. Darcy law is used to relate the velocity
and the pressure distribution in the powder. Conjugate mass transfer in the gas
and the powder using Hertz-Knudsen ﬂuxes in the formulation of the boundary
conditions for the species concentrations gives the growth rate at the catalitic
surfaces. The kind of growing crystal is determined by the type of the surface and
local concentration of gas phase components. Computation of thermal stresses
and dislocation density is implemented as a post-processing procedure.
Transfer to the next global time instant includes the propagation of the
crystal and deposit(s) boundaries, identiﬁcation of new blocks and boundaries (if
needed), the movement of the inductor (if speciﬁed by the user) and unstructured
grid generation in the new and altered blocks. A special optimization procedure
for the growing front advancement has been developed that eliminate the eﬀect of
the numerical noise in the growth rate distribution and allows a stable evolution
of the crystal and deposit(s) shape and a monitoring of the topological changes

10

D.K. Ofengeim and A.I. Zhmakin

Fig. 2. The crusible shape and isotherms: a) befor optimization; b) after optimization.

in the computational domain. As an example the crystal shape along with the
isotherms is shown in Fig. 1 at the growth start and after 18 hours.
VR could be used for the optimization of both crystal growth process and
equipment [21]. Fig. 2 illustrate the crucible shape optimization aiming at the
temperature uniformity (along AB and CD directions) which is known to be
favorable for the stable long-term growth.
VR has an easy-to-learn interface that allows the user either to describe
the geometry manually or to import a CAD ﬁle. All input ﬁelds for the problem speciﬁcation have reasonable default values that allow to start computation
directly after the geometry import and the automatic block identiﬁcation. All
geometric and process parameters entered by the user are checked automatically
to belong to the corresponding interval of admissible values. The code has a vast
extendable data base of material and species properties.
Acknowledgements. The authors are greatful to M.V. Bogdanov, I.Yu. Evstratov, V.V. Kalaev, S.Yu. Karpov, S.K. Kochuguev, A.B. Kulik, Yu.N. Makarov,
M.S. Ramm, A.M. Serkov, A.V. Tsirulnikov, I.A. Zhmakin for collaboration and
useful discussions.
The work has been supported in part by INTAS Project 00-0263.

References
1. Anderson, D.M., McFadden, G.B., Wheeler, A.A.: A phase-ﬁeld model of solidiﬁcation with convection. Physica D 135 (2000) 175–194
2. Batill, S.V., Renand, J.E., Gu, X.: Modeling and simulation uncertainty in multidisciplinary design optimization. AIAA-2000-4803 (2000) 11 p.

Industrial Challenges for Numerical Simulation of Crystal Growth

11

3. Bene`s, M.: Mathematical and computational aspects of solidiﬁcation of pure substances. Acta Math. Univ. Comenianae LXX (2001) 123–151
4. Bogdanov, M.V., Galyukov, A.O., Karpov, S.Yu., Kulik, A.V., Kochuguev, S.K.,
Ofengeim, D.Kh., Tsirulnikov, A.V., Zhmakin, I.A., Komissarov, A.E., Bord, O.V.,
Ramm, M.S., Zhmakin, A.I., Makarov, Yu.N.: Virtual reactor: a new tool for SiC
bulk crystal growth study and optimization. Mat. Sci. Forum, 353-356 (2001) 57–60
5. Borovlev, Yu.A., Ivannikova, N.V., Shlegel, V.N., Vasiliev, Ya.V., Gusev, V.A.:
Progress in growth of large sized BGO crystals by the low-thermal-gradient
Czochralski technique. J. Crystal Growth 229 (2001) 305–311
6. Cape Simulations Homepage: http://www.capesim.com/simulators.htm
7. CFD codes list: http://www.icemcfd.com/cfd/CFD codes.html
8. Dupret, F, Nicodeme, P., Ryckmans, Y., Crochet, M.J.: Global modeling of heat
transfer in crystal growth furnaces. Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer 33 (1990) 1849–1871
9. Dutta, P.S., Ostrogorski A.G.: Suppression of cracks in Inx Ga1−x Sb crystals
through forced convection in the melt. J. Crystal Growth 194 (1998) 1–7
10. Golyshev, V.D., Gonik, M.A., Tsvetovsky V.B.: In situ measurement of Bi4 Ge3 O1 2
interface supercooling during melt crystal growth. J. Crystal Growth 237-239
(2002) 735–739
11. Egorov, Yu.E., Zhmakin, A.I.: Numerical simulation of low-Mach number gas mixture ﬂows with heat and mass transfer using unstructured grid. Comput. Mater.
Sci. 11 (1998) 204–220
12. Eldred, M.S., Hart, W.E., Bohnhoﬀ, W.J., Romero, V.J., Hutchinson, S.A.,
Salinger A.G.: Utilizing Object-Oriented Design to Build Advanced Optimization
Strategies with Generic Implementation. AIAA-96-4164 (1996) 16 p.
13. FEMAG Homepage: http://www.meca.ucl.ac.be/ femag/products.html
14. Giesing, J.P., Barthelemy, J.-F.M.: A Summary of Industry MDO Applications
and Needs. AIAA-98-4737 (1998) 20 p.
15. Hooks, I.: Writing Good Requirements. Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. NCOSE (1993)
http://www.incose.org/rwg/writing.html
16. Hurle, D.T.J.(ed.): Handbook of Crystal Growth. Bulk Crystal Growth (1994)
17. Kalaev, V.V., Evstratov, I.Yu., Makarov, Yu.N.: Gas ﬂow eﬀect on global heat
transport and melt convection in Czochralskii silicon growth. J. Crystal Growth
249 (2003) 87–99
18. Kalaev, V.V., Zhmakin, A.I., Smirnov, E.M.: Modeling of turbulent melt convection during Czochralski bulk crystal growth: J. of Turbulence 3 (2002) 013
19. Kalaev, V.V., Zhmakin A.I.: Large Eddy Simulation of melt convection during
Czochralski crystal growth. Proc. 9th Europ. Turbul. Conf. (2002) 207–210
20. Kochuguev, S., Ofengeim, D., Zhmakin, A., Galyukov, A.: Ray tracing method for
axisymmetrical global heat transfer simulation. CFD Journal II-33 (2001) 440–448
21. Kulik, A.V., Bogdanov, M.V., Ofengeim, D.Kh., Kochuguev, S.K., Demina, S.E.,
Karpov, S.Yu., Zhmakin, A.I., Ramm, M.S., Makarov, Yu.N.: Modeling and optimization of SiC bulk crystal growth by sublimation technique. Proc. 4th Int. Conf.
Single Crystal Growth and Heat Mass Transfer (2001) 698–705
22. Lan, C.W.: Three-dimensional simulation of ﬂoating-zone crystal growth of oxide
crystals. J. Crystal Growth 247 (2003) 597–612
23. Makarov, Yu.N., Zhmakin, A.I.: On ﬂow regimes in VPE reactors. J. Crystal
Growth 94 (1989) 537–551
24. Maroudas, D., Brown, R.A.: On the prediction of dislocation formation in semiconductor crystals grown from the melt: analysis of the haasen model for plastic
deformation dynamics. J. Cryst. Growth 108 (1991) 399–415

12

D.K. Ofengeim and A.I. Zhmakin

25. Maruyama, S., Aihira, T.: Radiation heat transfer of arbitrary three-dimensional
absorbing,emitting and scattering media and specular and diﬀuse surfaces. J. Heat
Transfer 119 (1997) 129–136
26. Meyappan, M. (ed.): Computational Modeling in Semiconductor Processing (1995)
27. Miyazaki, N.: Development of a thermal stress analysis system for anisotropic single
crystal growth. J. Crystal Growth 236 (2002) 455–465
28. Muehlbauer, A., Muiznieks, A., Raming, G.: System of mathematical models for
the analysis of industrial FZ-Si-Crystal Growth Processes. Cryst. Res. Technol. 34
(1999) 217–226
29. M¨
uller, G.: Experimental analysis and modeling of melt growth processes. J. Crystal Growth 237-239 (2002) 1628–1637
30. Ozawa, T., Hayakawa, Y., Balakrishnan, K., Kumagawa, M.: Numerical simulation
of eﬀect of ampoule rotation for the growth of InGaSb by rotational Bridgman
method. J. Crystal Growth 237-239 (2002) 1692–1696
31. Papalambros, P.Y.: Extending the optimization paradigm in engineering design.
Proc 3rd Int. Symp. Tools Meth. Compet. Engineer. Delft (2000) 14 p.
32. Prudhomme, S., Oden, J.T., Westermann, T., Bass, J., Botkin, M.E.: Practical
Methods for a posteriori Error Estimation in Engineering Applications. Int. J.
Num. Meth. Engineer. 56 (2003) 1193–1224
33. Hirsh, Ch.: The QNET-CFD project. Network Bulletin 1 (2001) 4–5.
http://www.qnet-cfd.net/newsletter/1st/newsletter-1.pdf
34. Rukolaine, S.A., Vasilyev, M.G., Yuferev, V.S., Galyukov, A.O.: Numerical solution of axisymmetric radiative transfer problems in arbitrary domains using the
characteristic method. J. Quant. Spectr. Radiat. Transfer 73 (2002) 205–217
35. Sch¨
onauer, W.: Numerical engineering: design of PDE black-box solvers. Math.
Comput. Simul. 54 (2000) 269–277
36. Semiconductor Technology Research, Inc. Homepage: http://www.semitech.us/
37. Suezawa, M., Sumino, K., Yonenenaga, N.: Dislocation dynamics in the plastic
deformation of silicon crystals. Phys. Stat. Sol. (a) 51 (1979) 217–233
38. Tihonov, A.N., Arsenin, V.Ya.: Solution of Ill-posed problems. New York (1979)
39. Tsai, C.T.: On the ﬁnite element modeling of dislocation dynamics during semiconductor crystal growth. J. Cryst. Growth 113 (1991) 499–507
40. Virozub, A., Brandon, S.: Selecting ﬁnite element basis functions for computation
of partially facetted melt/crystal interfaces appearing during the directional growth
of large-scale single crystals. Model. Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng. 10 (2002) 57–72
41. Voronkov, V.V., Falster R.: Intrinsic point defects and impurities in silicon crystal
growth. J. Electrochem. Soc. 149 (2002) G167–G174
42. Weihe, K., Willhalm, Th.: Why CAD data repair requires discrete algorithmic
techniques. Konstanzer Schrift. Math. Inform. N 61 (1998) 12 p.
43. Wilcox, W.R., Regel, L.L., Arnold, W.A.: Convection and segregation during vertical Bridgman growth with centrifugation. J. Crystal Growth 187 (1998) 543–558
44. Yuferev, V.S., Budenkova, O.N., Vasiliev M.G., et.al. : Variations of solid-liquid
interface in BGO low thermal gradients Cz growth for diﬀuse and specular crystal
side surface. J. Crystal Growth (2003) in print
45. Zabaras, N.: Adjoint methods for inverse free convection problems with applications to solidiﬁcation processes. Comp. Meth. Opt. Design Control (1998) 391–426
46. Zhmakin, A.I.: A memory-eﬃcient unstructured grid reﬁnement algorithm for computation of 3d steady viscous ﬂows. Comm. Num. Meth. Eng. 13:219–228, 1997.
47. Zhmakin, I.A., Kulik, A.V., Karpov, S.Yu., Demina, S.E., Ramm, M.S.., Makarov,
Yu.N.: Evolution of thermoelastic strain and dislocation density during sublimation
growth of silicon carbide. Diamond and Related Materials 9 (2000) 446–451

