Intelligent Agents and Evolvable Systems
Krzysztof Cetnarowicz1, Robert Schaefer1 , Bojin Zheng2 , Maciej Paszy´
nski1 ,
1
´ zy´
and Bartlomiej Snie˙
nski
1
Department of Computer Science
AGH University of Science and Technology, Cracow, Poland
2
College of Computer Science,
South-Central University for Nationalities, Wuhan, China

The workshop Intelligent Agents and Evolvable Systems has originated as the
fusion of two former workshops: Intelligent Agents and Evolvable Systems and
Algorithms and Evolvable Systems. It has been organized since 2004 within the
frame of the International Conference on Computational Science. Mathematical
considerations, algorithmic aspects and designing computer applications supporting the development and management of systems for the large scale computation have been emphasized.
Two contributions are related to the formal description of multi agent systems.
The ﬁrst one delivered by Smołka, concerns agents that carry tasks of distributed,
parallel computation. The results ensure existence of time-optimal scheduling
and locate the optimal scheduling rules among static ones. The second paper
written by Capković, is devoted to the modeling inter-agents relations by Petri
Nets. Main results have been obtained by using the discrete event systems control
theory and illustrated on several examples.
The next three papers contain new agent-based concepts of intrusions detection (infections) in computer systems. Byrski has introduced the system which
is appropriate for the speciﬁc communication in Mobile Ad-hoc Networks in
his paper. Immune-inspired mechanisms allow detecting anomalies coming from
communication threads. Prusiewicz has proposed in his paper another system
detecting the security policy violations in computer networks. Cetnarowicz et.al.
have proposed a social layer that may be used for evaluation of agents behavior.
Agents learn patterns of behaviors, which may be used to detect intruders and
eliminate them from the system.
The following group of papers have dealt with applications of multi-agents
paradigm for solving various, complex engineering problems. Barbucha et al.
have presented application of agents to creation of asynchronous team which
is able to realize an optimization process and giving accessibility by WEB.
Al-Kanhal et al. have proposed an application of multi-agent systems to the
optimization of dynamic uncertain process occurring when optimal uncertain
manufacturing process are created. Problems of uncertain, human-originated
knowledge grounding, accomplished with the use of ontologies in particularly
applying uncertainties and several ontologies have been discussed by Szymański
et al. Turek has presented an agent-based architecture, which should provide
a multi-agent system that enables management of a multi-robot team and its
simple extensibility. An interesting application of multi-agent system has been
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2008, Part III, LNCS 5103, pp. 533–534, 2008.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

534

K. Cetnarowicz et al.

proposed by Srovnal et. al. It is an embedded system for hydrogen powered car
control. Multi-agent architecture with dynamic mutual negotiation is applied. A
new interesting research area is the application of graph grammars for modeling
evolvable systems. The graph grammar can be eﬀectively utilized for modeling
self-adaptive PDE solvers, as it has been presented by Paszyńska et al. The graph
representation of a problem can be stored in distributed manner and maintained
by intelligent agents, as it has been proposed by Kotulski.
Some papers are focused on theoretical aspects of evolutionary computation
and multi-agent systems and are related to real-world applications. Mirabedini
et al. have proposed an ant-based routing algorithm, inspired by swarm intelligence and enhanced by fuzzy systems, to solve the routing problem in networks.
In their system, multiple constrains can be considered in a simple and intuitive
way. Qin et al. have constructed an adapted dynamic vehicle routing problem
model based on multi-objective optimization. Then, they have proposed a hybrid
multi-objective ant colony algorithm to solve this problem. The hybrid algorithm
employs an EA to speed up the convergence of the algorithm. Khelil et al. have
proposed the cancer diagnostic system to classify patients who may be aﬀected
by cancer. Fang et al. have analyzed the advantage of partnership selection based
on grey relation theory and ant colony algorithm. The pre-election process can
help to reduce problem search space and complexity. Ciepiela et al. have presented the hierarchical approach to multi-objective optimization problem based
on Hierarchical Genetic Strategy (HGS). Barabasz et al. have presented hp-HGS,
an enriched version of the HGS algorithm, to solve parametric inverse problems.
Furthermore, they have analyzed the asymptotic behavior of their algorithm.
Byrski at al. have combined evolutionary algorithms and multi-agent systems
to form evolutionary multi-agent systems. The parameters of such systems can
be tuned on-line. Application of agent-based co-evolutionary approach to the
ﬁnancial-decision support enabling ﬁnancial investor planning process by generation of possible investments strategies have been discussed by Dreżewski et al.
The contribution delivered by Fidanova discusses special kind of the evolvable
systems – the ant colony and its application to ﬁnding quasi-optimal solution to
Global Positioning System surveying problems.
Several papers have touched the problem of learning in multi-agent systems.
Gehrke at al. have presented an application of rule induction algorithm for traﬃc
prediction. Agents use knowledge generated from historical traﬃc data for route
planning. The learning process in this work is performed outside of the multiagent system by AQ21 program. The paper presented by Śnieżyński has proposed
an architecture to design an agent, which has several learning modules for a
number of aspects of its activity and every module can use diﬀerent learning
strategy. The architecture is tested on Fish-Banks game simulator. Other papers
cover the development of self-learning agents systems. The application of agents
with built-in machine learning routines designed to retrieve and analyze data
coming from civil engineering data-bases has been presented by Kasperkiewicz et
al. The paper by Jurek focuses on self-learning schemes in agents with application
to the syntactic pattern recognition.

