Trajectory Mapping for Landmine Detection Training
Yang Cai
Human-Computer Interaction Institute,
School of Computer Science,
Carnegie Mellon University,
5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
ycai@cmu.edu

Abstract. A head-mounted camera is a useful tool for studying the usability of
mobile devices in the field. In this paper, a computerized visualization method
is presented. It includes the target trajectory mapped with the deformable template-based tracking algorithm and landmarks-based relative object registration.
A landmine detection training video is used for the case study. The results show
that this approach has advantages over optical flow and overhead camera methods.

1 Introduction
Human field performance has been studied for decades, from golfing to landmine
detection. It has become a renaissance area because of: 1) emerging mobile computers for field applications, such as Ground Penetration Radar (GPR) for landmine
detection and handheld training computers for Navy personnel, etc., 2) emerging
remote control through telepresence, such as robotic rescue systems and capsule
medical cameras, 3) traditional manned field missions with new situations, such as
landmine detection for peace-keeping and vehicle driving studies, etc. In light of this,
human field performance study is an “old field” that is redeemed with new technologies.
Video cameras have been widely used in human performance studies, such as
surveillance camera, infrared camera, high-speed camera, microwave imaging camera, etc. It is common to keep vision systems static while tracking human subjects’
movement. In these cases, human tracking is relatively easy during the video postprocessing phase. For example, we can use the background subtracting method to
separate the human subjects and the static background. Also, it is easy to measure the
distance or track the motion speed. However, in many situations, the static camerabased approach is rather expensive or difficult to use in the field. For example, it is
very hard to use a single static camera to track human activities in an obscured scene
or multiple rooms. In addition, it is hard to track the human operation in a very large
open field without an overhead camera or multiple cameras. If we use multiple camP.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2659, pp. 1045–1053, 2003.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

1046

Y. Cai

eras, then we have to add image fusion, object registration and synchronization functions. In these cases, a head-mounted video camera seems a reasonable choice.
Head-mounted video cameras have been used in special research projects for
example, “augmented reality” by video overlaying on head-mounted displays
[1,2,3,4,5,6], lip movement tracking [7] and eye movement tracking [8]. The “augmented reality” registers computer generated graphics to a video image. In this paper,
we attempt to do the opposite: to register an object from the video image to computer
generated graphics. The current head-mounted camera-based lip and eye movement
tracking systems only observe a single component on human face. In this paper, the
author focuses on a broader problem: “how to visually evaluate human field performance with a head-mounted video camera?” The goal of this study is to develop a computerized object tracking and mapping system that can automatically register the
moving target to a trajectory map. This study uses military landmine detection video
as a case study and uses computer vision algorithms to map the original video data to
a dynamic tracking graph. It is expected that the method can be applied to other
fields, such as behavior measurement for elderly in nursing homes, user performance
modeling for airplane inspection, etc.

2

Trajectory Map

A trajectory map is a 2D or a 3D space that is registered with a dynamic trace of a
target. It is a visual model of human field performance dynamics, for example, search
patterns, pace, and sweeping patterns, etc. Fig.1 shows a comparison of a trace of a
sweeping metal detector from an expert and a novice. From the map we discovered
that the trace of the expert is uniform and thorough. However, the trace of the novice
is uneven that contains missing spots.

Fig. 1. “Sweeping Patterns” of a metal detector head. Note the expert’s pattern is uniform and
thorough. The novice’s pattern is uneven and random

Visualization helps the analysts to understand the dynamics of the human behavior in
the trajectory. The methods include: 1) time-stamping the trajectory points with “temperature colors”, which maps a duration time with a color, etc., 2) plotting the effec-

Trajectory Mapping for Landmine Detection Training

1047

tive halo envelope for the trajectory, which reveals the overlapping patterns. In many
cases, adding verbal protocols which are aligned to the trajectory points would help
analysts to understand the subject’s motivation, cognition and decision making process.
The challenge for processing the data from a head-mounted video is how to register
the trajectory map. A head-mounted camera has four degrees of freedom (DOF):
pitch, yaw, tilt and zoom, which make the registration rather cumbersome. To make
efficient target tracking and registration, landmarks are recommended in the headmounted video tracking. Fig 2 shows an example of the usage of the measurement
tapes as landmarks.

Fig. 2. Landmine detection training field

3

Target Tracking

The moving target normally has a defined shape, e.g. circle, etc. In this study, an
active contour model, “Snake” [9] is used for tracking. It is a general algorithm for
matching a deformable model to an image by means of energy minimization. The
energy function is a weighted combination of internal and external forces. The snake
is defined parametrically as v(s) = [x(s), y(s)], where x(s), y(s) are x, y co-ordinates
along the contour and s ∈ [0,1]. The energy functional to be minimized as

where Eint represents the internal energy of the spline due to bending, Eimage denotes
image forces, and Econ external constraint forces. In this case, v(s) is approximated as
a spline to ensure desirable properties of continuity.
Fig.3 shows a result from the algorithm for tracking a metal detector head from the
head-mounted video. After nearly ten iterations for each frame, the deformable
“snake” successfully located the metal detector head in the video.

1048

Y. Cai

Fig. 3. Metal detector head tracking result. The square dots indicate the tracked target

4 Target Registration
There are many ways to register a target to a two-dimensional map. Because a headmounted camera has at least four degrees of freedom (DOF), the images in the video
are geometrically distorted. A classical way to correct the image is linear or non-linear
transformation. With a few pairs of “control points”, a warping function can be used
to transform the distorted raw images from pixels in the source video to the destination defined by a transformation function. [10] We call the transformation-based
methods “absolute registration” methods since they generate “absolute” coordinates
of the tracked object in the map.
However, in reality, there are only very few video frames containing required control points for the linear transformation. In many cases, the video only shows partial
landmarks. What do we do to fill in these gaps? In addition, it is not necessary to
transfer all pixels from one to another. For target tracking purposes, we only need the
relative coordinators and distances referenced to the landmark and the plane of the
landmarks. In light of the shortcomings of the transformation, this study focuses on the
“relative registration.”
Relative registration is a non-metric measurement method in which a target is not
only just an object but also a reference itself. It is an approximate way for a quick
measurement of the object's size and the distance between things. For example, artists
often use “number of heads” to measure human figure’s height and use “number of
eyes” to measure the width of face. This is based on observations of our daily life. Our
perception systems have "internal yardsticks" for qualitative measurement. Our eyes
do not make absolute measures of characteristic of the subject, but instead detect these
characteristics only in a relative way. We do not see the true color of a thing, but
rather an apparent color, which is our sensation of how a color is different from the
colors surrounding it. As Van Gogh said, "There is no yellow if there is no blue if
there is no red." The same principle applies to our perception of edges, patterns, and
shapes. We may focus our attention solely on a part of the subject or notice this part

Trajectory Mapping for Landmine Detection Training

1049

peripherally as we scan our eyes around the whole visual field. More evidence has
been found from artists' painting textbooks and the landmine detection tapes.
The relative registration procedure in this study is based on a few assumptions. For
example, we assume that the metal-detector head is near parallel to the ground and the
subject looks at the near field ground, etc. The registration heuristics is as followings:
•

Determine a template (box) of the object (metal detector head) in the image.

•

Locate a feature point on the landmark (e.g. the numerical mark)

•

Find the reference lines that are either perpendicular or parallel to the landmark on the plane.

•

Measure the distances (perpendicular and parallel directions) from the object
(metal-detector head) to the landmark with the template. For example, in Fig.
4 on the right, the relative coordinate to the mark “100” for the metaldetector head object is (0.8,0) in terms of “number of templates”

Fig. 4. Illustration of “Relative Registration” versus “Absolute Registration.” In relative
registration, the template of the target is used as a measurement reference.

5

Results

A preliminary experiment has been conducted based on a 60 minute test video from
the field. It was stored on MiniDV and converted to AVI files at 30 frame per second
with the frame size of 177 x 172. Before the video analysis, we removed about 20% of
“irrelevant” clips, e.g. vomiting and resting. Those irrelevant clips are easy for humans
to understand but difficult for computational processing. Fig.5 shows a result of the
trajectory mapping from a video clip, where the dots are reference points with intervals of 10 frames and the trace of the metal detector head indicates a normal sweeping
pattern, which is uniform and thorough. Fig.6 and Fig. 7 show examples of the traces
of a metal detector head while making decisions to determine the location and type of
the landmine. The closer dots, the more decision time that the subject spent. Also,
from the trajectory maps, we found a few decision making “styles.” For example, the
pattern in Fig.5 shows a circular search style. The pattern in Fig.6 shows a cross-shape
search style.

1050

Y. Cai

Fig. 5. An output of the “sweeping” patterns. Dots are reference points with an interval of 10
frames and the trace of the metal detector head indicates a normal sweeping pattern, which is
uniform and thorough.

Fig. 6. A circular shape searching style. The trace of the metal detector shows how the subject
makes decisions to determine the location and type of landmines.

Fig. 7. A cross-shape searching style. The trace of the metal detector shows how the subject
makes decisions to determine the location and type of landmines.

Trajectory Mapping for Landmine Detection Training

1051

Table 1. Performance summary
Items

Performance

Registration accuracy

¼ to ½ of metal detector head diameter

Trajectory mapping speed

Near real-time

Object tracking speed

3 times real-time on PC (700 MHz,256MB RAM)

Landmark visibility

57% single lane, 19% both lanes, 24% none

Manual reinitiating

35% (e.g. subject looks at sky, drinks water, etc.)

Table 2. Comparison between head-mounted camera and overhead camera
Items

Head-Mounted Camera

Overhead Camera

Protocol sound tracks

yes

Wireless needed

Camera tower

no

yes

Object registration

Relative registration

Absolute registration

Object tracking

Software-based

Light-bulb-based

Distance distortion

less

yes

Table 3. Comparison between the Landmark-based and Optical Flow-based methods

6

Items

Landmark-based

Optical Flow-based

“drafting”

no

yes

generalization

no

yes

computation

simple

intensive

Discussions

A preliminary experiment has been also conducted to apply an Optical Flow algorithm
to estimate the moving directions. Unfortunately, because there is a moving target in
addition to the moving background, it is rather hard to separate the target from the
background.
At this stage, manual initiation is used in tracking. Since the manual initiation is just
to put a circular shape near the center of the target, and the manual and automation
ratio is significant, it is tolerable to use the manual initiation.
The main problem for tracking based on the head-mounted camera is the “drifting
problem”. The trajectory would accumulate the error by time and eventually drift
away from the correct course. To avoid the drifting problem, we have to use frequent

1052

Y. Cai

landmark checking, introduce additional sensors, such as magnetic sensors, etc. to
calibrate the ground truth at a certain duration. Besides, dual-camera registration, e.g.
one for head-mounted and another for overhead, is desirable to minimize drifting.
Tracking a target with the current algorithm is time-consuming. The video processing
time over the real-time is 3:1 on a PC with 700MHz, 256MB RAM. To improve this,
development of faster tracking algorithms is underway.
At this stage, the optimal tracking accuracy is ¼ to ½ of the size of the metal detector head template. A 2D trajectory map may also lose the 3D information. For example, landmine detection experts sometimes turn the metal detector head at 45 degree to
identify the halo envelop of the mine or just test the head. It is hard to observe this on
a 2D map.

7

Conclusions

In this paper, a visual trajectory model for field performance evaluation is presented.
The author addresses the approach for a trajectory map, target tracking and the “relative object registration” method. A landmine detection training video is used as a case
study.
Although head-mounted video cameras have been used for field performance observation for long time, very little has been done in trajectory mapping. It is concluded
that the “snake” algorithm can be used for deformable target tracking for the headmounted video camera. However, it is rather computation intensive. The relative registration method is a novel approach to map the target from incomplete larndmarks in
video scenes. It provides approximate and fast qualitative measurement. Compared to
the overhead camera and optical flow methods, this approach is inexpensive and flexible.
It is also suggested that computerized head-mounted video analysis has its great
potential in studying human field performance. To improve the accuracy of the image
registration, physical trackers, such as magnetic sensors, are recommended in addition
to the landmarks in the video. In addition, since video analysis involves both human
and computational collaborative efforts, a well-designed human-computer interface
would significantly increase the productivity.
Acknowledge. The author thank Dr. James Staszewski for providing the field data
and insightful advice and Dr. Margaret Nasta for her review and comments on this
paper.

References
1.

Chai, L., W.A. Hoff, and T. Vincent, “3-D motion and structure estimation using inertial
sensors and computer vision for augmented reality,” Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual
Environments, 2000.

Trajectory Mapping for Landmine Detection Training
2.

1053

Chai, L. and K. Nguyen, W. Hoff, and T. Vincent, “An adaptive estimator for registration
in augmented reality,” Proc. of 2nd IEEE/ACM Int'l Workshop on Augmented Reality, San
Francisco, Oct. 20–21, 1999.
3. Hirota, G. et al, “Hybrid tracking for augmented reality using both camera motion detection and landmark tracking”, US Patent 6064749, May 16, 2000
4. Hoff, W. A. and T. Vincent, “Analysis of Head Pose Accuracy in Augmented Reality,”
IEEE Trans. Visualization and Computer Graphics, Vol. 6., No. 4, 2000.
5. Hoff, W. A. “Fusion of Data from Head-Mounted and Fixed Sensors,” Proc. of First
International Workshop on Augmented Reality, IEEE, San Francisco, California, November 1, 1998.
6. Hoff, W. A., Lyon, T., and Nguyen, K., “Computer Vision-Based Registration Techniques
for Augmented Reality,” Proc. of Intelligent Robots and Computer Vision XV, Vol. 2904,
in Intelligent Systems & Advanced Manufacturing, SPIE, Boston, Massachusetts, Nov.
19-21, pp. 538–548, 1996.
7. Takaaki, K, et al. “Principal Components Based Lip Contour Extraction from HeadMounted Camera and Cross-Subject Facial Animation”, IPSJ SIGNotes Computer Graphics and cad Abstract No.100 - 014, 2000
8. Sodhi, M., B. Reimer, JL. Cohen, E. Vastenburg, R. Kaars, S. Kirchenbaum. “On-Road
Driver Eye Movement Tracking Using Head-Mounted Devices”. Proceedings of the Eye
Tracking Research and Applications Symposium, March 2002
9. Trucco, E. and Verri, A. “Introductory Techniques for 3-D Computer Vision”, Prentice
Hall, 1998
10. Lillesand, T. et al, Remote Sensing and Image Interpretation, fourth edition, John Wiley
& Sons, Inc. 2000

