The Applications of Meshfree Particle Methods at the
Nanoscale
Weixuan Yang and Shaoping Xiao
Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering and Center for Computer-Aided
Design, The University of Iowa, 3131 Seamans Center, Iowa City, IA, 52241-1527, USA
{weixuan-yang, shaoping-xiao}@uiowa.edu

Abstract. Since meshfree particle methods are beneficial in simulating the
problems involving extremely large deformations, fractures, etc., these methods
become attractive options in multiscale modeling, especially when approaching
a large number of atoms. In this paper, we propose preliminary research on applying meshfree particle methods to solve nanoscale problems. A quasicontinuum technique, i.e. the Cauchy-Born rule, is implemented into the meshfree
particle methods so continuum approaches for large deformation problems or
fracture problems at the nanoscale can be performed. Furthermore, the meshfree particle methods can be coupled with molecular dynamics via the bridging
domain coupling technique. The examples show that the meshfree particle
methods can benefit either hierarchical or concurrent multiscale modeling at the
nanoscale.

1 Introduction
With the development of nanotechnology, numerical simulation plays an important
role in nanoscale material and device design. To develop a potential numerical
method, which can efficiently model micro/nano systems, has been one of the forefront research topics of computational nanotechnology.
Among a variety of numerical simulation techniques, molecular dynamics (MD)
has become a powerful tool to elucidate complex physical phenomena [1-2]. Up to
billions of atoms can be simulated by MD when studying the crack propagation [2] at
the atomistic level with parallel computing techniques. However, most MD simulations are still restricted on both small length and short time scales. Therefore, multiscale methods have been of more and more interest to simulate large nanoscale systems. The recently developed multiscale methods can be divided into two classes:
hierarchical multiscale methods [3] and concurrent multiscale methods [4-7]. In hierarchical multiscale modeling, the continuum approximation is based on the properties
of a subscale model, such as a MD model. The intrinsic properties of materials are
sought at the atomic level and embedded in the continuum model according to the
quasicontinuum technique, which is also called the Cauchy-Born rule [8-9]. The
Cauchy-Born rule states that the deformation is locally homogeneous.
Concurrent multiscale methods use an appropriate model to solve each length scale
simultaneously. Recently, some concurrent multiscale techniques [4-6], particularly
coupling methods between the continuum model and the molecular model, have been
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3516, pp. 284 – 291, 2005.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

The Applications of Meshfree Particle Methods at the Nanoscale

285

developed. One of the key issues the concurrent multiscale methods must overcome is
the occurrence of spurious numerical phenomena, such as non-physical reflections on
the interfaces between the molecular and continuum models. Most researchers use the
Langevin equation [6] or other filtering processes to eliminate spurious reflections.
Xiao and Belytschko developed a bridging domain coupling method [7], which can
eliminate the spurious wave reflection automatically.
Mostly, finite element methods are used in the hierarchical or concurrent multiscale methods with the implementation of the quasicontinuum technique. It is known
that the meshfree particle methods [10] are more attractive for a variety of problems
with moving boundaries, discontinuities, and extremely large deformations. Therefore, the incorporation of the meshfree particle methods and the quasicontinuum technique will have much potential to solve the above problems at the nanoscale. Belytschko and Xiao [11] found that the meshfree particle methods with Lagrangian
kernels are more stable than those with Eulerian kernels. In this paper, only the meshfree particle methods with Lagrangian kernels are considered. With the implementation of the quasicontinuum method, the meshfree particle methods can be used to
simulate large nano systems. Furthermore, based on the idea of the bridging domain
coupling method [7], the meshfree particle methods can be coupled with molecular
dynamics to accomplish a multiscale modeling for large nano systems.
The outline of this paper is as follows: We will introduce the meshfree particle
methods; The Cauchy-Born rule will then be implemented into the meshfree particle
methods, which can also be coupled with molecular dynamics; Several examples are
studied in the following section and the last section presents the conclusions.

2 Meshfree Particle Methods at the Nanoscale
2.1 Discrete Equations
The physical princ iples governing the continuum are the conservation of mass, momentum and energy. A so-called total Lagrangian description is employed (see Belytschko, Liu and Moran [12]); therefore, the linear momentum equations are

∂Pji
∂X j

+ ρ 0 bi = ρ 0 u!!i .

(1)

where ρ 0 is the initial density, P is the first Piola-Kirchhoff stress tensor, X is the
reference coordinates, b is the body force per unit mass, u is the displacement and
the superposed dots denote material time derivatives. The weak form of the momentum conservation equation is

∫

Ω0

δu i ρ 0 u!!i dΩ 0 = ∫ δu i ρ 0 bi dΩ 0 − ∫ δFij Pji dΩ 0 + ∫ δu i t i dΓ0
Ω0

Ω0

Γ0

(2)

where Ω 0 is the reference configuration, δui is the test function, Fij is the gradient of
deformation and t i is the prescribed boundary traction. The particle approximation is

286

W. Yang and S. Xiao

u i ( X, t ) = ∑ wI (X )u iI (t ) .

(3)

I

where wI (X ) is a Lagrangian kernel function, which is the function of reference coordinates. With a similar expansion for δu(X ) , the following discrete equations can
be obtained:

M I u!!iI = FiIext − FiIint , M I = ρ 0V Io .

(4)

where VI0 is the volume associated with particle I in the reference configuration.

FiIext and FiIint are the external and internal nodal forces, respectively, given by
FiIext = ∫ ρ 0 wI bi dΩ + ∫ t N I t i dΓ0 , FiIint = ∫
Ω0

0

Γ0

Ω0

∂wI ( X)
Pji dΩ 0
∂X j

(5)

If the nodal integration scheme [11] is used in the meshfree particle methods, the
internal nodal forces in (5) can be calculated by
FiIint = ∑V J0
J

∂wI ( X J )
Pji (X J ) .
∂X j

(6)

The Nodal integration scheme may result in one of instabilities due to the rank deficiency. A stress point integration scheme [11] can be used to stabilize it.
2.2 Implementation of the Quasicontinuum Technique
In a continuum model, the potential energy depends on the elongations and angle
changes of the bonds at the atomistic level. The total potential of the continuum
model can be written as
WC =

∫ wC dΩ

(7)

Ω0

where

wC is the potential energy per unit volume. Then, the first Piola-Kirchhoff

stress can be obtained from the potential of the continuum by
P=

∂wC (F )
.
∂F

(8)

where F is the deformation gradient. In this paper, it is assumed the molecular structure in the volume associated with each particle is under a constant deformation gradient. Therefore, the first Piola-Kirchhoff stress at each particle can be evaluated
through (8). In other words, (8) serves as the constitutive equation for meshfree particle methods at the nanoscale. For curved monolayer crystalline membranes such as
nanotubes, an extension of the Cauchy-Born rule, called the exponential Cauchy-Born
rule, can be used (see Arroyo and Belytschko [9]).

The Applications of Meshfree Particle Methods at the Nanoscale

287

2.3 Coupling with Molecular Dynamics
Belytschko and Xiao [7] proposed a multiscale method called the bridging domain
coupling method, in which, the molecular model and the continuum model overlap at
their junctions in a bridging domain.
In this paper, molecular dynamics and the meshfree particle method are coupled
via the bridging domain coupling technique. The complete domain in the initial configuration is denoted by Ω 0 . The domain is subdivided into the subdomain treated by
continuum mechanics, Ω C0 , and the one treated by molecular dynamics, Ω 0M . The
intersection of these two subdomains is called the bridging domain denoted by Ω int
0 in
the initial configuration. The bridging domain multiscale modeling of a molecular
chain is shown in Figure 1.

Fig. 1. A Bridging domain coupling model for a molecular chain

In expressing the total Hamiltonian of the system we employ a scaling parameter
β in the bridging domain as shown in Figure 1. The scaling parameter β vanishes at
one end of the bridging domain and is unity at another end. Therefore, the Hamiltonian for the complete domain is taken to be a linear combination of the molecular and
continuum Hamiltonians

H = βH M + (1 − β )H C = ∑ β (X I )
I

p MI ⋅ p MI
+ βW M
2m I

p C ⋅ p CI
+ ∑ (1 − β (X I )) I
+ (1 − β )W C
2M I
I

.

(9)

where W M is the potential in the molecular model, and W C is the strain energy in
the continuum model. The discrete equations can be obtained via the classical
Hamiltonian mechanics. The details can be found in [7].

3 Examples
3.1 Bending of a Nano Beam
The bending of a nano cantilever beam is considered in this example. The nano beam
contains 5,140 atoms and the dimensions are: length L = 270nm and height
H = 15.6nm .

288

W. Yang and S. Xiao

A pair potential function is used to approximate the interaction between nearest
atoms,
U (l ) = 0.5k (l − l 0 )

2

(10)

where k = 10000 N / m and l 0 = 1nm .

(a) The meshfree particle method

(b) The molecular mechanics calculation

Fig. 2. Deformed configurations of the nanobeam

Fig. 3. Convergence of the nanoscale meshfree particle method

We use the meshfree particle method with 250 particles to simulate the bending of
this nano beam. The prescribed displacement is applied on the right upper corner of the
beam. The final configuration of the nano beam is shown in Figure 2(a). Figure 2(b)
shows the deformed beam when performing the molecular mechanics calculation, and it
supports the meshfree particle method result. As shown in figure 3, the convergence is
also studied by using the l 2 error in displacement for the meshfree particle method.
3.2 A Nano Plate with a Central Crack

Meshfree particle methods are advantageous to simulate fracture problems. In this
example, the meshfree particle method is used to study the stress concentration of a

The Applications of Meshfree Particle Methods at the Nanoscale

(a) The molecular mechanics calculation

289

(b) The meshfree particle method

Fig. 4. Comparison of stress concentration at the crack tip

nano plate containing an central crack. This nano plate contains 86,915 atoms with the
triangular molecular structure. The dimensions are: L = 270nm and M = 280nm , and
the crack length is 135nm . The crack is initialized by taking a number of bonds out.
The meshfree particle model has 400 particles, and a visibility criterion is used to
construct the kernel functions for the particles near the crack or around the crack tip.
Figure 4 shows the comparison of the stress ( σ yy ) contour obtained from the molecular mechanics calculation with the one from the meshfree particle method. It can be
seen that they are in accord.
3.3 Wave Propagation in a Molecular Chain

In this example, the wave propagation in a molecular chain, which contains 2001
atoms, is simulated. The LJ 6-12 potential function is used as the interatomic potential
function between the nearest atoms, and it is

[

wM = 4ε (σ / r ) − (σ / r )
12

6

].

(11)

where the constants are chosen as: σ = 3.4e −10 m and ε = 1.65e −21 J . The mass of
each atom is set to be 3.8 × 10 −10 kg .
In the bridging domain coupling modeling of this molecule chain, there are 1001
atoms in the molecular domain and 200 particles in the continuum domain. The initial
wave is the combination of high frequency and low frequency waves and starts to
propagate from the molecular domain. A non-physical phenomenon, shown in Figure
5(a), can be observed if using a handshake coupling technique [4] without the application of the artificial viscosity. It is possible to see that the high frequency wave is
reflected while the low frequency wave passes the continuum domain. Such a phenomenon is also called the spurious wave reflection. However, with the bridging
domain coupling technique, the spurious wave reflection can be eliminated as shown
in Figure 5(b).

290

W. Yang and S. Xiao

(a) The handshake method

(b) The bridging domain coupling method

Fig. 5. Multiscale simulations on the wave propagation in a molecular chain

4 Conclusions
In this paper, the quasicontinuum technique (the Cauchy-Born rule) was implemented
into the meshfree particle methods. Therefore, numerical simulations in nanotechnology can be valuable in regards to the meshfree particle methods. This progress makes
it possible to treat extremely large deformation problems and the problems involving
discontinuities, such as fractures, at the nanoscale. The examples showed that the
nanoscale meshfree particle methods can give accurate results when compared with
the molecular mechanics calculation outcomes. In addition, the meshfree particle
methods can be coupled with molecular dynamics via the bridging domain coupling
technique. The spurious wave reflection can be eliminated without any additional
filtering processes.

References
1. Rountree, C. L., Kalia, R. K., Lidorikis, E., Nakano, A., Van, B. L., Vashishta, P.: Atomistic aspects of crack propagation in brittle materials: Multimillion atom molecular dynamics simulation. Annu. Rev. Mater. Res. 32(2002) 377-400
2. Abraham, F. F., Gao, H.: How fast can crack move. Phys. Rev. Lett. 84(2000) 3113-3116
3. Tadmor, E. B., Phillips, R., Ortiz, M.: Hierarchical modeling in the mechanics of materials. Int. J. Solids Struct. 37 (2000) 379-389
4. Abraham, F., Broughton, J., Bernstein, N., Kaxiras, E.: Spanning the continuum to quantum length scales in a dynamic simulation of brittle fracture. Europhys. Lett. 44(1998),
783-787
5. Rudd, R. E., Broughton, J. Q.: Coarse-grained molecular dynamics and the atomic limit of
finite elements. Phys. Rev. B. 58(1998) R5893-R5896
6. Wagner, G. J., Liu, W. K.: Coupling of atomic and continuum simulations using a bridging
scale decomposition. J. Comp. Phys. 190(2003) 249-274
7. Xiao, S., Belytschko, T.: A bridging domain method for coupling continua with molecular
dynamics. Comput. Method Appl. M. (2004) in press
8. Tadmor, E. B., Ortiz, M., Phillips, R.: Quasicontinuum analysis of defects in solids. Philos.
Mag. A 73(1996) 1529-1563

The Applications of Meshfree Particle Methods at the Nanoscale

291

9. Arroyo, M., Belytschko, T.: A finite deformation membrane based on inter-atomic potentials for the transverse mechanics of nanotubes. Mech. Mater. 35(2003) 193-215
10. Belytschko, T., Krongauz, K., Organ, D., Fleming, M., Krysl, P.: Meshless methods: An
overview and recent developments. Comput. Method Appl. M. 139(1996) 3-47
11. Belytschko, T., Xiao, S.: Stability analysis of particle methods with corrected derivatives.
Comput. Math. Appl. 43(2002) 329-350
12. Belytschko, T., Liu, W. K., Moran, B.: Nonlinear Finite Elements for Continua and Structures. Wiley, New York (2000)

