Control Parameter Setting of IEEE 802.11e for
Proportional Loss Rate Diﬀerentiation
Seung-Jun Lee, Chunsoo Ahn, and Jitae Shin
School of Information and Communication Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University,
Suwon, 440-746, Korea
{lsj6467, navy12, jtshin}@ece.skku.ac.kr
Abstract. The IEEE 802.11 DCF mechanism does not present performance diﬀerentiation, because Best-eﬀort-Service is used for the degree
of importance of packets. The Enhanced Distributed Coordination Function (EDCF) mechanism of IEEE 802.11e supports QoS. According to
the degree of importance of packets, packets are assigned priority and
control parameters are assigned diﬀerence values. Through diﬀerentiation
of theses parameters, diﬀerentiated services can be provided to various
priority packets (classes) in terms of throughput, packet loss rate, and
delay. In this paper, parameters of the IEEE 802.11e EDCF mechanism
for Proportional Loss Rate Diﬀerentiation Service(PLDS) between adjacent priority classes are investigated through mathematical analysis and
network simulation.

1

Introduction

The DCF mechanism only provides a best-eﬀort service, even though the importance of packets or type of packets (real-time or non real-time) exists [1].IEEE
802.11e Enhanced DCF (EDCF) supports QoS. The MAC method of the EDCF
mechanism is similar to the DCF, with the exception that EDCF applies a different value to control parameters, according to the packet type, to support QoS
[3]. The Markov chain model is used frequently for mathematical analysis of
the IEEE 802.11 mechanism [2]. However, Markov chain analysis in [2] had two
problems, ignoring the cases of dropping packets and the frozen slot time. Ref.
[4] uses a modiﬁed Markov chain model for mathematical analysis of the IEEE
802.11e EDCF mechanism. In the case of [4],this includes two cases that are
not considered in [2]. In this paper, based on [4] and [5], we will ﬁnd out which
control parameters such as the CWmin /CWmax , retry limit, AIFS, and so on., in
IEEE 802.11e EDCF mechanism have the most eﬀect on loss rate. In addition, in
order to obtain a proportional and diﬀerentiated performance between adjacent
priority classes, a method of setting the most dominant parameter in QoS, is
proposed.

2

Mathematical Model of Packet Loss Rate

In order to support QoS, IEEE 802.11e EDCF classiﬁes the packets and the
packet map into four access categories (ACs), according to priority. AC
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part I, LNCS 3991, pp. 952–955, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

Control Parameter Setting of IEEE 802.11e

953

denotes AC[i] (i=0,1,2,3) for distinguishing priority. A smaller value of i represents higher priority. Each AC[i] is assigned diﬀerent values of parameters
(CWmin [i]/CWmax [i], AIFS[i], etc). A default value of IEEE 802.11e EDCF parameters is deﬁned in [3].
The backoﬀ stage increases by one, in the case where a station does not
transmit a packet. If collision occurs continuously, the backoﬀ stage continues to
increase. As presented in Fig. 1 of ref. [5], the backoﬀ stage increases until the
maximum retry limit, i.e., L. At the maximum retry limit, if the packet collision
occurs with the backoﬀ stage, and it is the same as the value of maximum retry
limit, the packet will be dropped. The packet-loss-rate is deﬁned by the following
equation.
Let Pi,loss (i=0, , N-1) denote the packet-loss probability for the priority i
class.
i +1
Pi,loss = pL
i

(1)

As pi of Eq. (1) is the probability that a transmitted packet collides, refer to Eq.
(9) of ref. [5].

3

Analysis of Proportional Diﬀerentiation Service in Loss
Rate

In Proportional Loss Rate Diﬀerentiation Service(PLDS), the goal is to have the
packet loss rate ratio between the adjacent i-th priority class and i+1-th priority
class, at a certain value (KL ) such as Eq. (2).
L

+1

p i+1
Pi+1,loss
= i+1
i +1
Pi,loss
pL
i

KL

(2)

The desired loss rate ratio is assigned a KL . When taking the logarithm to Eq.
(2),
log KL = (Li+1 + 1) log pi+1 − (Li + 1) log pi

(3)

Arrange Eq. (3) in terms of Li+1 . Then log pi and log pi+1 are considered as
nearly same value for our approximation. Therefore,
log KL
log KL
= Li +
Li+1 ∼
= Li +
log pi+1
a (n) log n

(4)

Where n and a(n) are the number of nodes and a related constant value to
compensate the relationship between log pi+1 and log n, respectively. From Eq.
(4), guidance of PLDS between adjacent classes can be derived. When the value
of Li is provided, the KL for the desired ratio between adjacent priority classes
is assigned, and the collision probability pi+1 calculated according to the station
number (n) is obtained, Li+1 can be found out, and should be set for PLDS.

954

4

S.-J. Lee, C. Ahn, and J. Shin

Numerical and Simulation Results

In this section, the validation of PLDS through numerical and simulation results is provided. For basic parameter setting, the IEEE 802.11 FHSS system
parameters of ref. [2] are referred to.
In both numerical and simulation by the NS-2 simulator, priority classes are
divided into classes 0, 1, and 2 (class 0 represents the highest priority). The
number of each priority class station is assumed to be identical. The numerical
and simulation results are performed at the number of each priority class station,
from 4 to 15. That is, the number of total stations (or nodes) varies from a
minimum value of 12 to a maximum value of 45 nodes.
In order to present validation of PLDS, except for retry limit (Li ), which most
inﬂuencing parameter for PLDS, it is assumed that other control parameters
remains as the same cross classes. The CWmin of all classes is 16, maximum
backoﬀ stage of all class is 2, and initial value of L0 , i.e., maximum retry limit
of the highest priority class 0, is ﬁxed at 4. When the node number is counted
and the ratio (KL =2) for PLDS is provided, then L1 , i.e., 3, and L2 , i.e., 2, can
be calculated through Eq. (2). However the calculated value through Eq. (2)
is not the exact diﬀerence with the number 1. The result is actually a decimal
smaller than the number 1. However, the value of the maximum retry limit
should have an exact positive number. Therefore, the diﬀerence of the retry limit
between adjacent priority classes is approximately applied as 1. Fig. 1(a) presents
numerical results for the loss rate of classes and Fig. 1(b) presents the simulation
results for loss rate of classes. When Fig. 1(a) is compared with Fig. 1(b), little
diﬀerence exists. This is due to NS-2 random execution. In addition, Fig. 1(c)
(regarding analysis) and Fig. 1(d)(regarding simulation) conﬁrms whether the
desired ratio is obtained through PLDS.
When the number of the station (or node) is minimal, i.e., the nodes for each
class consist of approximately 2∼6 numbers, PLDS deviates considerably from
the desired ratio. This aﬀects the absolute value of log p.

5

Conclusion

In this paper, mathematical analysis of the loss rate for the proposed PLDS
is derived, in order to provide proportional and diﬀerentiated services among
diﬀerent priority classes in the IEEE 802.11e mechanism. In addition, validation
of PLDS is proven through NS-2 simulation results.
As a result, the desired loss-rate according to the type of packets is provided in
the case where data is transmitted. The maximum retry limits are very sensitive
to packet loss, and are applied diﬀerently to each packet, depending on the type
of transmitted packets. Therefore, users can directly control the condition of a
network. If the packet should not be lost, a larger maximum retry limit is applied
to recover packet loss. In addition, if the packet is less aﬀected by dropping, the
packet takes maximum retry limit that is smaller than that of sensitive packet.
Through this technique, the complexity of a network can be reduced.

Control Parameter Setting of IEEE 802.11e

(a) Analysis: KL = 2 (L0 = 4, L1 =
3, L2 = 2)

(c) Analysis: loss rate ratio

955

(b) Simulation: KL = 2 (L0 = 4,
L1 = 3, L2 = 2)

(d) Simulation: loss rate ratio

Fig. 1. Analysis and simulation results

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the Ministry of Information and Communication
(MIC), Korea, under the Information Technology Research Center (ITRC) support program supervised by the Institute of Information Technology Assessment
(IITA) (IITA-2005-(C1090-0502-0027)).

References
1. IEEE Standard for Wireless LAN Medium Access Control(MAC) and Physical
Layer(PHY) Speciﬁcations, P802.11, Nov. 1997.
2. G. Bianchi, “Performance Analysis of the IEEE 802.11 Distributed Coordination
Function,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 18, no. 3, pp.
535-547, Mar. 2000.
3. IEEE 802.11 WG, Draft Supplement to Part 11: Wireless Medium Access Control
(MAC) and physical layer (PHY) speciﬁcations: Medium Access Control (MAC)
Enhancements for Quality of Service (QoS), IEEE 802.11e/D2.0, Nov. 2001.
4. Yang Xiao, “Performance Analysis of IEEE 802.11e EDCF under Saturation Condition,”IEEE Communications Society, 2004.
5. Seung-Jun Lee, Chunsoo Ahn, and Jitae Shin, “Control Parameter Setting of IEEE
802.11e for Proportional Throughput,” ICOIN 2006.

