Evolving Toward Next Generation Wireless
Broadband Internet
Seung-Que Lee1 , Namhun Park1, Choongho Cho2 , Hyongwoo Lee3 ,
and Seungwan Ryu3,
1

Mobile Telecommunications Research Division, ETRI, Daejeon, Korea
2
Department of Computer and Information Science,
Korea University, Korea
Department of Electronics and Information Engineering,
Korea University, Korea
3
Department of Information Systems,
Chung-Ang University, Korea
{sqlee, nhpark}@etri.re.kr, {chcho, hwlee}@korea.ac.kr,
rush2384@cau.ac.kr

Abstract. Recently, much attention has been paid to portable Internet
as a solution not only to surpass limits of high-speed Internet, wireless
LAN and cellular communications but also to accommodate increasing
demands for wireless Internet services. In this paper, we introduce the
Wireless Broadband (WiBro) system which has been developed in Korea
as a portable Internet system to foster a new home grown wireless system
and services.

1

Introduction

Recently, demand for portable Internet service via various mobile terminals such
as notebook PC, PDA, and cellular phone is increasing rapidly. As a result, much
attention has been paid to portable Internet as a solution not only to surpass
limits of high-speed Internet, wireless LAN and cellular communications but also
to accommodate increasing demands for Internet services in anytime, anywhere
by users in the stationary or mobile environments with a low access cost and
high data rate. Portable Internet is aiming to provide wireless Internet services
at any time and anywhere via portable wireless devices with high data rate and
medium or low mobility.
In this paper, we introduce the wireless Broadband Internet (WiBro) considered as a ﬁrst system that bridges the wired and wireless realm by giving
high speed portable Internet access anywhere at anytime while on moving with
a low access cost and high data rate. An overview of the WiBro system architecture and its services are given followed by design concepts and structure of
the WiBro Access Terminal which is plays an important role in delivering user
friendly wireless Internet access.
Corresponding author.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part IV, LNCS 3994, pp. 168–171, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

Evolving Toward Next Generation Wireless Broadband Internet

2

169

The Wireless Broadband Internet (WiBro) System

In Korea, the Wireless Broadband (WiBro) system has been developed in 2005
as a portable Internet system based on IEEE802.16 standard [1, 2, 3, 4] to foster
a new home grown wireless system and services. The design objectives of the
WiBro system is to support seamless multimedia internet services with wider
cell coverage than that of the wireless LAN under medium or low mobility. The
WiBro system deploys OFDMA/TDD to take asymmetric traﬃc pattern into
account for. Commercial WiBro service is scheduled to begin in June, 2006 in
Korea.
Three types of WiBro services are information provisioning type services such
as Internet access, e-mailing, and data searching, entertainment type services
such as picture transmission, VoD, and gaming, and business type services such
as remote approval, telemetering, and e-commerce. In order to provide such
WiBro services, many requirements are needed. First, the system should be able
to support data rate of 2Mbps per user in average, which is almost the same
as data rate of the ADSL1 . It is also required to support up to 50 Mbps data
rate under various mobility conditions under indoor or outdoor environments.
In addition, it should be able to support various data rate according to radio
channel condition with low latency and high reliability.
2.1

WiBro System Architecture

The WiBro system consists of three diﬀerent components; WiBro-AT (Access
Terminal), WiBro-AP (Access-point), and PAR (Packet access router). Many
WiBro-AP are connected to a PAR, and PAR is connected to the IP networks
which contains many types of servers such as Authorization, Authentication and
Accounting (AAA) server, Home Agent (HA) server, and network management
and operations (NMO) servers.
The AT is an end point of the radio channel and communicates with AP via
OFDMA wireless access. Main functions performed at an AT are radio channel
transmission/reception, MAC processing, handover, user authentication and encryption, radio link control. The AP is responsible to deliver information between
ATs and a PAR through performing mapping process between radio and wired
channels. The AP performs packet retransmission, packet scheduling, bandwidth
allocation, ranging, handover, and so on. The PAR manages many APs connected
to it, and performs handover control to guarantee high mobility within its control area. In order to perform such functions, a PAR is constructed based on
Gigabit Ethernet switch, and connected to APs based on IP protocol.

3

WiBro Access Terminal Subsystem (ATS)

Since the user equipment, i.e., WiBro Access Terminal (AT) provides interface
with users, it is the most important factor for successful launching and fast
1

ADSL: Asymmetric Digital Subscriber Line.

170

S.-Q. Lee et al.

Fig. 1. The WiBro system architecture

Accounting

L3

L2

Authentication

MIP
IP Convergence

IP Convergence

Basic Access

Cell Reselection

Basic Access

ARQ
Power Saving
Privacy

L1

CDMA BW
Request
Contention
Resolution
CDMA Ranging

Adaptive
Modulation
Channel coding

CDMA Random
Access

Synchronization &
Timing

Power Control

AT (Access Terminal)

Diameter

Authentication

MIP

Basic Access

IP Tunnel

Handover

IPSec

QoS Management

Pivacy

Handover

ARQ

QoS Management

Pivacy

Bandwidth
Allocation

Adaptive
Modulation

Cell Planning
(SFN & MFN)

Channel coding

Receive Diversity

Synchronization &
Timing
Multiple Access
OFDMA

Power Control
Frame Structure

AP (Access Point)

PAR (Packet Access Router)

Fig. 2. Functions of each layers of AT, AP and PAR subsystem

expansion of commercial WiBro service scheduled to begin in June 2006 [5]. In
this section, we brieﬂy introduce design concepts.
Logical structure of the WiBro ATS shown in ﬁgure 3 consists of the high level
protocol, the higher MAC, the lower MAC and RF and modem part. The high
level protocol is responsible for functions of upper part of MAC protocol such as
Mobile IP (MIP), authentication, installation of IP conﬁguration, radio link condition report, and card interface. The higher MAC executes MAC convergence
sublayer (MAC-CS) functions and MAC common part sublayer (MAC-CPS)
functions. MAC-CS functions include MAC convergence, MAC service ﬂow control, packet classiﬁcation and header suppression. MAC-CPS functions include

Evolving Toward Next Generation Wireless Broadband Internet
High Level Protocol

Higher MAC(HMAC)

Lower MAC(LMAC)

CQI

171

Modem & RF

RF/IF

Linux Kernel
Internet & WiBro
Application
HARQ
MAC
Conv.

RMON

MIP

DHCP

AUTH

Classi
fier

MAC
Privacy

QoS

ARQ

MAC
PDU

PCMCIA/USB/
Ethernet
DRIVER

MAC Global Data

MAC
Control
Data

MAC
Resource

PCMCIA/USB/Ethernet

HARQ
Ciphering/CRC

TCP/UDP/IP

PCMCIA/USB/Ethernet
DRIVER

Header
Supp.

DM Agent

Windows OS

MAC
User
Data

MAC
Serv.
Flow

Rx Filtering
Tx Timing

TDD

MAP
Decoding
CDMA
HMAC-LMAC
Interface

FPGA
DRIVER

MAC-PHY
Interface

Data/Control/Interrupt

OFDMA

Data/Clock/Sync

S/W
H/W

Fig. 3. Logical structure of WiBro access terminal subsystem (ATS)

MAC user and control data management, MAC resource management, MAC
privacy, QoS management, MAC PDU, and error control (ARQ).
The lower MAC handles functions having strict time constraint such as channel quality information (CQI) report, HARQ, ciphering, CRC generation/check,
Rx ﬁltering, Tx timing, MAP decoding. Modem and RF part is responsible for
modulation/demodulation for radio transmission and RF related functions including modulation/demodulation for OFDMA, bit spreading for CDMA-based
random access, TDD for data transmission and reception, HARQ for fast error
correction, and other functions for radio transmission.

References
1. IEEE Standard, “IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks; Part
16: Air Interface for Fixed Broadband Wireless Access Systems,” May, 2004.
2. IEEE Standard, “IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks; Part
16: Air Interface for Fixed Broadband Wireless Access Systems, Amendment for
Physical and MAC Layers,” February, 2005.
3. Telecommunications Technologies Association (TTA), “2.3GHz Portable Internet
Standard; Medium Access Control Sublayer,” June, 2004.
4. Telecommunications Technologies Association (TTA), “2.3GHz Portable Internet
Standard; Physical Layer,” June, 2004.
5. S. Lee and N. Park, “An Overview of WiBro Access Terminal,” KICS Journal (in
Korean), 22(9), pp. 128–137, September, 2005.

