Adapting the CSE Program at ETH Zurich to
the Bologna Process
Rolf Jeltsch and Kaspar Nipp
Seminar for Applied Mathematics, ETH Zurich, CH-8092 Zurich, Switzerland
jeltsch@math.ethz.ch, nipp@math.ethz.ch

Abstract. In 1997 a new interdisciplinary Diploma program in Computational Science and Engineering (CSE) was started at ETH Zurich. We
report on the changes of the curriculum due to the Bologna Declaration
of June 19, 1999 by the European Ministers of Education. The new Bachelor program in CSE at ETH Zurich started in October 2003 and the
Master program in CSE will follow in October 2005. We will describe
both programs in some detail as well as the design principles. We will
also discuss the boundary conditions imposed by ETH and we will give
some preliminary experiences.

1

Introduction

In the 2002 International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS, held in
Amsterdam, April 21 - 24, we have reported on the CSE Program at ETH, see
[1]. This program was started in 1997 and was leading to a Diploma degree in
CSE. In brief, students could join the CSE curriculum after 4 semesters of studies
in a subject related to CSE (e.g., engineering, computer science, mathematics,
physics, science). The CSE curriculum consisted of additional 4 semesters of
studies followed by a diploma thesis to be completed in 4 months. The details
of the curriculum are given in [1]. We report on the changes of the curriculum
due to the Bologna Declaration of June 19, 1999 by the European Ministers
of Education. ETH Zurich wanted to be among the ﬁrst to change the diploma
curricula into Bachelor and Master programs. The new Bachelor program started
in the fall of 2003 with about 15 students and the Master program will be started
in the fall of 2005. We will describe here the basic design principles of the new
programs. For the design of the new Bachelor/Master curricula in CSE we still
had the same understanding of the new discipline Computational Science and
Engineering (CSE) and what we feel a student in this subject should learn in
the program.

2
2.1

The Bachelor and Master Curriculum in CSE at ETH
Design Principles and Boundary Conditions

The transformation of the previous diploma studies into the new two stages
program had to follow the objectives we had intended for the diploma studies
and some boundary conditions imposed on us by the ETH system.
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3039, pp. 1196–1201, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

Adapting the CSE Program at ETH Zurich

1197

a) Aim of Curriculum
When designing a new curriculum one should think of what students should
know and which abilities they should have acquired when successfully ﬁnishing
the program. Our principles for the Bachelor and Master program are basically
the same as for the Diploma curriculum in CSE, see [1].
The major objectives and design principles are:
– The emphasis is on Science and Engineering and not just on computing for
the sake of computing, i.e., we want that the students know what they are
computing.
– Computing has to be an essential tool in any ﬁeld taught.
– Students should make an in-depth study in at least one or maybe two ﬁelds.
– Students should obtain a broad view and should have knowledge of many
applications.
– Students should acquire the ability to work in a team.
– Students should have the ability to work together with people from diﬀerent
backgrounds (e.g., they must be able to talk to scientists and/or engineers
who know the application area and they must be able to talk to mathematicians and computer scientists since they cannot solve all problems themselves).
– Students should have the ability to enter quickly into an ongoing research
project of a team, make a contribution and transmit it successfully to the
team.
– Students should acquire communication abilities.
– The overall study time for the Bachelor and Master programs should not be
longer than for other students at ETH Zurich, i.e., 4 years and an additional
4 months for the diploma thesis.
b) ETH Boundary Conditions
Let us ﬁrst discuss the two major new boundary conditions.
– With the change from the diploma curriculum to the two stages Bachelor/Master program, the major exam after 4 semesters has been abandoned.
In our diploma program this used to be the natural point to motivate students from diﬀerent studies to join the CSE program. This had the advantage
to still have two years to educate them in the direction of CSE. It did have,
however, the disadvantage that students entered the program with rather
diverse backgrounds leading to an individually designed program for each
student to ﬁll the gaps.
– ETH kept the ﬁrst major exam to be done by the students two semesters
after entering ETH. This exam is now called basic exam and is much the
same in most Bachelor programs.
Therefore, it was natural to start the CSE training directly after the ﬁrst
year of education. Considering the whole period including the master program
this gave us an additional two semesters where the selection of courses could

1198

R. Jeltsch and K. Nipp

be tailored to the education in CSE. In addition, since students have no longer
strongly diverse backgrounds the ﬁlling of the gaps could be abolished.
There is a third dramatic boundary condition, namely, that any two stages
Bachelor/Master program should ﬁt the old Diploma program in length. In classical diploma studies one considered the ﬁrst two years as the basic education
terminated by the above mentioned major exam after 4 semesters. Then the
second 4 semesters were used to train the students in advanced topics, i.e., in
the CSE core courses and in their ﬁeld of specialization. With the two stages
program the Bachelor exam just cuts the time interval for the advanced education exactly in the middle. This meant that we had to make sure that the
advanced courses already started in the Bachelor curriculum. For this reason we
have designed the Bachelor/Master program as a whole. Concerning the core
courses, students have to take all of them during their Bachelor/Master studies.
Concerning the Fields of Specialization, we have introduced a minor ﬁeld in the
Bachelor program and a major ﬁeld in the Master program. Clearly this combined design of the Bachelor/Master program could prolong the Master studies
for students from outside. Another problem turned out to be that for mobility
reasons students should ﬁnish their Bachelor degree by the end of the summer
semester and not only in the fall. Hence, the Bachelor thesis should preferably be
done during the ﬁnal semester of the Bachelor studies. This thesis is in the range
of a term paper which means that it is about 160 hours of work. Two positive
changes at ETH have improved the curriculum in CSE. One is the increase of
teaching staﬀ so that we can now oﬀer more courses which are geared directly
to this group of students. The other is that we could introduce new ﬁelds of
specialization, namely, Computational Astrophysics and Computational Chemistry and Biology . The latter replaces Computational Chemistry. In addition, we
have introduced a new core course Computational Statistics.
2.2

Curriculum

a) The Bachelor Curriculum in CSE
The CSE Bachelor curriculum consists of two years of studies (4 semesters,
second and third year) and is based on knowledge acquired in a ﬁrst year of
basic studies at ETH Zurich or elsewhere. The basic exam after the ﬁrst year
is counted for 60 credit points (ECTS). In the following two years the students
have to get 120 ECTS, half of them in mandatory Basic Courses, the other half
mainly in eligible Core Courses, Fields of Specialization, Elective Courses and
with a Bachelor Thesis, respectively.
The Basic Courses provide basic knowledge in Mathematics, Computer
Science and Science and Engineering. They are mandatory. The corresponding
examinations are combined in 5 blocks supposed to be taken after the third,
fourth and ﬁfth semester, respectively. The list of basic courses is following:
– Analysis III
– Complex Analysis

Adapting the CSE Program at ETH Zurich

–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

1199

Data Bases
Programming Techniques for CSE
Numerical Mathematics for CSE
Computer Networks
Parallel Numerical Computing
Optimization Techniques
Quantum Mechanics
Stochastics
Statistical Physics
Chemistry for CSE
Physics I and Physics II
Fluid Dynamics for CSE

The Core Courses are concerned with computational mathematical methods
and with more advanced topics in computer science. Students have to take 2 of
them in the third year and pass a combined exam. The list of core courses is
following:
–
–
–
–

Theory and Numerical Techniques of Diﬀerential Equations
Computational Statistics
Software Engineering
Visualization / Graphics

The Fields of Specialization provide a profound knowledge in application
areas with an emphasis on computational aspects. In the third year, students
have to take 2 courses in a chosen ﬁeld of specialization and pass the exams. The
list of specialization ﬁelds is following:
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

Astrophysics
Physics of the Atmosphere
Chemistry and Biology
Fluid Dynamics
Control Theory
Robotics
Theoretical Physics

The Elective Courses are complementary to the Fields of Specialization and
to the Core Courses and should have an emphasis on computational aspects.
Students in the third year have to take 2 courses out of a large list and pass
the exams. In their third year, students have to attend twice the CSE Case
Studies Seminar where each semester invited speakers from ETH, from other
universities as well as from industry give a 2x45 minutes talk on an applied
topic. Beside of attending the scientiﬁc talks students are asked to give short
presentations (10 minutes) on a published paper out of a list (containing articles
from, e.g., Nature, Science, Scientiﬁc American, etc.). In the case studies ETCS
are obtained on a passed/failed basis. The Bachelor Thesis concludes the
curriculum. It should deepen the knowledge in a specialization area, provide a

1200

R. Jeltsch and K. Nipp

ﬁrst contact with applications and should enable students to learn to approach
applied problems computationally. It should also enable them to work within
a scientiﬁc group. The bachelor thesis is typically written in a topic of a core
course or a ﬁeld of specialization. It requires about 160 hours of work and ECTS
are obtained for an accepted paper.
Table 1. The CSE Bachelor Curriculum
Year

ETCS (at least)

Basic Studies

Semester 1/2

60

Bachelor CSE

Semester 3/4

65

Basic Courses

65

Semester 5/6

55

Core Courses
Field of Specialization
Elective Courses
Case Studies
Bachelor Thesis

17
6
6
6
8

After having successfully ﬁnished their studies students will be given the degree
Bachelor of Science ETH in Computational Science and Engineering (BSc ETH
CSE). The main objective of the Bachelor curriculum is to prepare the students
for the continuation of their studies in high quality Master curricula.
b) The Master Curriculum in CSE
The CSE Master curriculum at ETH Zurich consists of one year of studies (2
semesters, fourth year) followed by a Master thesis. The Master curriculum is
based on the CSE Bachelor curriculum and its objective is to prepare students
for a successful professional career in research in industry and/or on a university
level. The Master students have to get 90 ECTS mainly in Core Courses, in eligible Fields of Specialization and Elective Courses as described in Subsection a)
and with a Term Paper and a Master Thesis, respectively. In the Core Courses
students have to take those 2 courses not covered for the Bachelor degree and
pass a combined exam. Students have to choose a second Field of Specialization out of the list given in Subsection a) (in addition to the one chosen for the
Bachelor degree) and have to take 4 courses within their two ﬁelds of specialization and pass the exams. Students have to take 2 Elective Courses and pass
the exams. Students have to attend twice the CSE Case Studies Seminar
as described in Subsection a) for the Bachelor curriculum. The Term Paper
should be computational and application oriented work in a team in order to
deepen the knowledge in a specialization area. It should require about 160 hours
and ECTS are obtained for an accepted paper. The Master Thesis takes 4

Adapting the CSE Program at ETH Zurich

1201

months and is advised by a professor teaching in a core course or in a ﬁeld of
specialization. It concludes the CSE Master studies and should teach students
to work independently on a scientiﬁc topic. ECTS are obtained for an accepted
thesis. After having successfully ﬁnished their studies students will be given the
degree Master of Science ETH in Computational Science and Engineering (MSc
ETH CSE).
Table 2. The CSE Master Curriculum
Year
Master CSE

3

ETCS (at least)

Semester 7/8

60

Core Courses
Field of Specialization
Elective Courses
Case Studies
Term Paper

17
16
6
6
8

Semester 9

30

Master Thesis (4 months)

30

Conclusions

As the program has started just a few weeks before the writing of this manuscript
we can report only on preliminary experiences. One is that due to the fact that
the Bachelor program starts after one year of studies at ETH we have now
students which entered ETH after high school with the aim to study CSE. In
the fall of 2003 14 students have entered the program. Again all students are
highly motivated. Currently, there are no foreign students. Hence, the teaching
is not done in English. It will be no problem, however, to do so if necessary.
For more information on the CSE Bachelor/Master curricula see the webpage
www.cse.ethz.ch. Reference [2] may be ordered from the Seminar for Applied
Mathematics, ETH Zurich, CH-8092 Zurich.

References
1. Jeltsch, R., Nipp, K.: CSE Program at ETH Zurich: Are we doing the right thing?
Eds. P.M.A. Slott, C.J. K. Tan, J.J. Dongarra, A.G. Hoekstra, Proceedings of the
Conference: Computational Science - ICCS 2002, Vol III, pp. 863 - 871.
2. CSE Computational Science and Engineering, Annual Report 2002/2003, R. Jeltsch,
K. Nipp, W. van Gunsteren, edits., ETH Zurich, 2003.

