Velocity Field Modelling for Pollutant Plume
Using 3-D Adaptive Finite Element Method
Gustavo Montero, Rafael Montenegro, Jos´e Mar´ıa Escobar,
Eduardo Rodr´ıguez, and Jos´e Mar´ıa Gonz´
alez-Yuste
University Institute of Intelligent Systems and Numerical Applications in Engineering,
Univ. of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Edif. Central Parque Cient´ıﬁco-Tecnol´
ogico,
Campus Universitario de Taﬁra, 35017 Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain
{rafa,gustavo}@dma.ulpgc.es, jescobar@dsc.ulpgc.es,
barrera@dma.ulpgc.es, jmgonzalezy@pas.ulpgc.es

Abstract. Air pollution models usually start from the computation of
the velocity ﬁeld of a ﬂuid. In this paper, we present a model for computing that ﬁeld based on the contribution of the observed wind ﬂow and the
vertical buoyancy or momentum plume rise deﬁned by a Gaussian plume
model. This initial velocity ﬁeld is adjusted to verify incompressibility
and impermeability conditions by using a mass consistent model. In this
environmental modelling that occur in a three-dimensional domain deﬁned over complex terrain, a mesh generator capable of adapting itself to
the topographical data and to the numerical solution is essential. Here,
the unstructured tetrahedral meshes are generated by combining the use
of a reﬁnement/dereﬁnement algorithm for two-dimensional domains and
a tetrahedral mesh generator based on Delaunay triangulation. Occasionally in this process, low quality or even inverted elements may appear.
A simultaneous untangling and smoothing procedure allows to optimise
the resulting meshes. Once we have constructed the adapted mesh in
accordance with the geometrical characteristics of our domain, we use
an adaptive local reﬁnement in the plume trajectory. Finally, this model
is applied in a test problem.

1

Introduction

In [1] the authors propose a mesh generator for environmental problems which
is applied in this model. The studied domain is limited at the bottom by the
terrain and at the top by a horizontal plane. The lateral walls are formed by
four vertical planes. Speciﬁcally, we propose the construction of a regular triangulation of this upper boundary. Now, the reﬁnement/dereﬁnement algorithm
[2] is applied over this regular mesh to deﬁne an adaptive node distribution of
the layer corresponding to the terrain surface and the functions which represent
the chimneys. Once the node distribution is deﬁned on the terrain and the upper
boundary, we begin to distribute the nodes located between both layers by using
a vertical spacing function. Next, a three-dimensional mesh generator based on
Supported by MCYT and FEDER. Grant contract: REN2001-0925-C03-02/CLI
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3037, pp. 642–645, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

Velocity Field Modelling for Pollutant Plume

643

Delaunay triangulation [3] is applied. In a ﬁrst stage, our 3-D mesh generator
constructs meshes with poor quality and, in special cases, for example when node
movement is required, inverted elements may appear. In [4] we propose a procedure for mesh untangling and smoothing in the same stage. In addition, along
the plume trajectory, we apply a local reﬁnement algorithm [5] based on the 8subtetrahedron subdivision. This tetrahedral mesh is used in a mass consistent
model for wind ﬁeld adjustment [6]. To obtain the observed wind, horizontal
interpolation of the station measures is carried out. Then, a log-linear wind proﬁle is built in the surface layer taking into account the horizontal interpolation,
the eﬀect of roughness and the air stability. Above the surface layer, a linear
interpolation is carried out using the geostrophic wind.

2

Vertical Velocity Correction along Plume Trajectory

The main idea is to add a vertical velocity along the trajectory of a pollutant
plume arising from a chimney to the interpolated wind ﬁeld, which usually only
consider the horizontal components of wind velocities. Gaussian plume models allow to approximate the eﬀective height of a plume zH and the horizontal
distance df from the stack to the point where the plume height reaches zH , depending on the emission characteristics, the wind and the atmospheric stability.
Gases rise from the stack if their density is lower than the air density (buoyancy
rise) or due to emission velocity (momentum rise). In order to compute the effective height of the plume, we use Briggs’ equations (see e.g. [7]). So, using the
computed values of zH and df for buoyancy rise, except for stable conditions and
calm wind, we propose to adjust the vertical component of the velocity along
the trajectory of the plume by a linearly unaccelerated motion. In addition, the
horizontal motion from the source to the distance df is considered uniformly
accelerated. Thus, the time tf corresponding to the distance df is,
tf =

1
ad

− |v 0 (xc , yc , zc )| +

2

|v 0 (xc , yc , zc )| + 2ad df

(1)

where ad is the module of horizontal acceleration (adx , ady ) in the direction of
wind velocity v 0 at the centre of the emission surface (xc , yc , zc ). The trajectory
of the plume, the vertical velocity w0 and the vertical acceleration a0 , are then
given by the following functions of the parameter t,
x(t) = xc + u0 (xc , yc , zc )t + 12 adx t2

(2)

yc + v0 (xc , yc , zc )t + 12 ady t2
zc + wc t + K1 t2 + K2 t3
wc + 2K1 t + 3K2 t2

(3)

y(t) =
z(t) =
w0 (t) =

a0 (t) = 2K1 + 6K2 t
where K1 =

−2wc tf +3(zH −zc )
,
t2f

K2 =

wc tf −2(zH −zc )
,
t3f

(4)
(5)
(6)

with wc , the emission veloc-

ity of gases and zc , the eﬀective height of the stack. The vertical component of

644

G. Montero et al.

velocity v 0 is modiﬁed in any point of the domain Ω located inside a cylinder
generated by the circular emission surface of the gases (of diameter Dc ) which
is moving parallel to the horizontal plane, along the parametric curve given by
equations (2), (3) and (4) between t = 0 and t = tf . Thus, constant vertical
velocities are generated in the cylinder for each horizontal disk.
On the other hand, for momentum rise or buoyancy rise with stable condition
and calm wind, the horizontal motion of the plume until reaching the eﬀective
height is very small. Thus the trajectory of the gases is nearly vertical. In this
case, we consider a uniformly unaccelerated motion. Now tf = w2c (zH − zc )
c
and the acceleration a0 = −w
tf . Thus, the vertical velocity at a point of height
z is w0 (z) = wc

1−

2(z−zc )
wc tf .

Here, the vertical component of the velocity is

modiﬁed inside a standard cylinder of which base is the emission surface of
gases in the stack and its height is zH − zc .

3

Numerical Experiments

For air pollution modelling of a test power plant located in the region of La Palma
Island, we add the chimney geometry to the topographical data and apply the
3-D mesh generator. Consider a chimney with a height of 200 m over the terrain
and diameter of 20 m at its top and 40 m at its bottom. Since, the mesh must be
able to detect the details of the chimney, a size of elements about 2 × 2 m in the
chimney, starting from the uniform 2-D mesh τ1 of the rectangular area with a
size of elements about 2×2 km, means to make ten global reﬁnement steps using
Rivara 4-T algorithm [8]. However, we only need ﬁve global reﬁnement steps over
τ1 and, after, ﬁve local reﬁnement steps of elements inside the chimney.

Fig. 1. Detail of a 3-D mesh with a chimney near the right bottom corner

Velocity Field Modelling for Pollutant Plume

645

Fig. 2. Detail of the simulated velocity ﬁeld in the surroundings of the chimney

Here we applied the dereﬁnement algorithm with a parameter ε = 40 m
considering that those nodes located inside the chimney could not be eliminated.
Finally, we have applied six local reﬁnement steps in the plume trajectory to
previous resulting 3-D mesh in order to obtain a new mesh with 31555 nodes
and 170784 tetrahedra. Figs. 1 and 2 show a detail of the mesh and the adjusted
velocity ﬁeld where the eﬀect of chimney emission is included, respectively.

References
1. Montenegro, R., Montero, G., Escobar, J.M., Rodr´ıguez, E., Gonz´
alez-Yuste, J.M.:
Tetrahedral Mesh Generation for Environmental Problems over Complex Terrains.
Lect. Notes Comp. Sci., 2329 (2002) 335–344
2. Ferragut, L., Montenegro, R., Plaza, A.: Eﬃcient Reﬁnement/Dereﬁnement Algorithm of Nested Meshes to Solve Evolution Problems. Comm. Numer. Meth.
Engng. 10 (1994) 403–412
3. Escobar, J.M., Montenegro, R.: Several Aspects of Three-Dimensional Delaunay
Triangulation. Adv. Engng. Soft. 27(1/2) (1996) 27–39
4. Escobar, J.M., Rodr´ıguez, E., Montenegro, R., Montero, G., Gonz´
alez-Yuste, J.M.:
Simultaneous Untangling and Smoothing of Tetrahedral Meshes. Comp. Meth.
Appl. Mech. Engng. 192 (2003) 2775–2787
5. Gonz´
alez-Yuste, J.M., Montenegro, R., Escobar, J.M., Montero, G., Rodr´ıguez, E.:
An Object Oriented Method for Tetrahedral Mesh Reﬁnement. Adv. Engng. Soft.,
in press.
6. Montero, G., Montenegro, R., Escobar, J.M.: A 3-D Model for Wind Field Adjustment. J. Wind Engng. & Ind. Aer. 74-76 (1998) 249–261
7. Boubel, R.W., Fox, D.L., Turner, D.B., Stern, A.C.: Fundamentals of Air Pollution.
Academic Press, San Diego, (1994)
8. Rivara, M.C.: A Grid Generator Based on 4-Triangles Conforming. MeshReﬁnement Algorithms. Int. J. Num. Meth. Engng. 24 (1987) 1343-1354

