Answer Extracting Based on Passage Retrieval in
Chinese Question Answering System*
Zhengtao Yu1,2, Lu Han1, Cunli Mao1, Yunwei Li1, Yanxia Qiu1,
and Xiangyan Meng1
1

The School of Information Engineering and Automation,
Kunming University of Science and Technology, Kunming, P.R. China 650051
ztyu@bit.edu.cn,hanlu530530@163.com,
maocunli13888832386@yahoo.com.cn, li1225yingwei@126.com,
ytaq007@soho.com,mengxiangyan1984@yahoo.com.cn
2
The Institute of Intelligent Information Processing, Computer Technology Application
Key Laboratory of Yunnan Province, Kunming,P.R.China 650051

Abstract. Passage retrieval is a base of answer extracting in Chinese question
answering system.In order to improve the precision of the passage retrieval
which includes answers, this paper analyze first existing passage retrieval
methods,and point to their shortcomings, then put forward a new method of
passage retrieval, in which factors are considered ,such as frequency of query
words and query expansion words in passage, the length of passage, the distribution density and minimum match span of query words and query expansion
words in passage ,when calculating passage weight.The new method can realize
passage retrieval on the basis of the weight calculation, and obtain optimization
answers passage. Final, experiment result of answer extracting based on passage retrieval have shown that the method given has better effect.
Keywords: Chinese Question Answering System;Passage retrieval, Word frequency, Distribution density, Match Span.

1 Introduction
The current information search engines (Google, Yahoo, etc.) can provide users with a
large number of WebPages. Users have to find out useful information from these
WebPages again. Question Answering System provides users with answers which have
been treated. For example, user's question Q1:
?(When was
Zedong Mao born? )The demanded answer is a sentence which includes "1895", or a
direct answer string "1895", but not a lot of WebPages associated with the question.
The distinction between Question Answering System and conventional search engines
is that the form of providing answers is different. Search engine only positions to the
WebPages and the answer is relatively rough. But Question Answering System provides users with the passage, phrase and words, which the answer is relatively brief.

毛泽东是什么时候出生的

*

This paper is supported by National Nature Science Fundation (60663004),Ministry of Education PH.D. Foundation (No.20050007023) and Kunming University of Science and Technology
PH.D. Fundation (2006-12).

Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 598–605, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Answer Extracting Based on Passage Retrieval

599

The key to Question Answering System is to extract the answer which is more
briefer and more relevant to the questions from the recalled Webpages of information
retrieval. In TREC8,TREC9 and TREC10, for English Factoid questions, it is aimed
to extract the passage which contains 50 or 250 bytes string as the answer[1]. Since
the TREC11, it was aimed to extract the correct answer directly but not including the
other information which has nothing to do with the question[2]. Because of the passage is the base of answer extraction, if the answer is not included in the passage, the
extraction of the answer will be fail. Conversely, if the answer is included in the passage and in the front list of candidate passage, the accuracy and efficiency of answer
extraction will be improved. So, in order to improve the accuracy of the answer extracting ,this paper studies answer extracting based on passage retrieval.

2 Related Works
Different from text retrieval, the object of passage retrieval is passage rather than text.
The calculation of passage weight is the key of the search ranking. At present, there are
many methods of calculation passage weight aiming at English Question Answering
System: MITRE used the word overlap algorithm which is presented by Light[3]. It
believes that the passage weight is determined by the number of the same words
between passage and query words. Then the number of the same words between the
passage and query words will be calculated as similarity metrics; MultiTex is a density-based passage retrieval algorithm[4]. This method considers that a short sentence
which includes more query words should have a higher weight. And the passage
weight is determined by the weight of the words and the length of the passage; SiteQ’s
passage retrieval algorithm receives the weight of a passage composed with n sentences by calculating every sentence weight, and the sentence weight is determined by
the weight of matching query words and the distance of the query words in the sentence[5]; Alliance’s passage retrieval algorithm receives it’s weight by calculating the
cosine value between query words vector and the passage vector. It mainly considers
the value tfidf of words that appear in both the query words and the passage[6].
The researches on passage retrieval algorithm about Chinese Question Answering
System are very less. Yongkui Zhang etc present a model of N-gram model and a
modified space vector model[7], the first one mainly considers the relationship of Ngram. It distributes the passage weight by the appearing probability of N-grim. The
second one adopts Okapi’s method of weight distributing[8]. It mainly considers the
frequency of the query words appear in the passage and the length of the passage.
Shifu Zheng presents a method to calculate the passage weight [9]. It mainly considers the query word in the passage, the synonyms of the query word and the query
words not in the passage etc. Huan Cui etc present a method of calculating the similarity between question and passage[10]. It mainly considers the number of the same
keywords between the question and the passage, the order of the keywords appear in
passage, the distance of the keywords appear in passage and the length of question
and passage.
From the methods to calculate the passage weight above, there are many factors affect the passage weight. But there are no mature methods now. Currently, Chinese
passage weight calculation mainly considers the frequency feature of the query words

600

Z. Yu et al.

which appear in the passage, less considers the query words semantic information and
the location of the query words in the passage. The word frequency of query words
and query expansion words in passage, the length of passage, the distribution density
and minimum match span of query words and query expansion words in passage are
considered in this paper. Then a method to calculate the passage weight is presented,
and the candidate passages set is retrieved on the basis of weight calculation.

3 Answer Passage Retrieval Based on Weight Calculation
3.1 Passage Retrieval Based on Vector Space Model
Whether a passage associates with the question can be judged by calculating the similarity between the passage and question. In information retrieval, the VSM is commonly used in calculating the similarity.The passage P which contains the answer is
expressed as a vector P = { p1 , p2 L pi L p n } , n is the number of all words, pi is the

frequency of No. i word which appears in the passage. Similarly, the question Q is
expressed as a vector Q = {q1 , q 2 L q i L q n } , then calculate the cosine value of the
two vectors as the similarity of the question and passage. The similarity calculate
expressions based on VSM is given as follows[10]

：

n

Sim ( Q , P ) =

∑q
i =1

n

∑
i =1

i

× pi
n

( qi ) 2 ∑ ( pi ) 2

(1)

i =1

The method based on VSM is a statistic method,in which frequency information
(occurring, not occurring, frequency occurring) of words in question and passage can
be considered. Therefore, only the more words are included in the passage, then the
more times relative words occur repeatedly, and then the good effect of this statistic
method can be embodied. But at passage retrieval, because the number of words in
the passage is less, so it can not enough to embody the effect of the method.
3.2 The Passage Weight Calculation Method

In passage retrieval, the question must be segmented first, then query word will be
extracted. But the words occurring in passage always was not the query words itself
but synonymy or related word of query words. Therefore, besides the query words are
considered,the impact of query expansion words must be considered when calculating
the passage weight. So in this paper, a relatively simple linear expansion strategy is
used, firstly expanded query words with related words according to question type,
then expanded the noun of query words with synonymy in HowNet[11], then query
expansion words is formed. The query expansion words may contain many words, but
not all the words have equivalent function for passage retrieval. Therefore, the weight
of each query expansion words will be computed by using the method of tfidf[11]. So
the first m query expansion words will be extracted as query expansion words set to

Answer Extracting Based on Passage Retrieval

601

passage retrieval. The impact of these query expansion words to passage retrieval will
be considered in passage retrieval.
The frequency feature of query words and query expansion words is a crucial factor in the passage. Vector space model reflects the words frequency characteristics,
but the affect of length of the passage to weight is not considered. So in this paper, the
VSM is modified according to the length of the passage. The specific modified methods are given in calculation methods as follows.
The distribution density of query words and query expansion words in the passage
have great affect to passage retrieval. If the distribution of query words and query
expansion words in the passage more intensive, the possibility of the passage which
contains relevant answers is greater, and the passage weight is greater,so the distribution density of query words and query expansion words in the passage will be considered in this paper.
The author had discussed that query words and query expansion words has a great
impact on the text retrieval [11]. Certainly, the distribution of the query words and
query expansion words has a different of influence to passage retrieval. So the minimum match span methods are presented in this paper, (the specific method refer to the
literature [11] definitions 1 and definitions 2) to calculate the minimum match span of
the query words and query expansion words in the passage. Then the influence of the
distribution of query words and query expansion words in passage retrieval will be
considered.
All these factors are considered, a method of Chinese passage weight calculation is
presented.The weight both of the word frequency of query words and query expansion
words in passage and the length of passage weight ( Woverlap ), the weight of distribution
density of query words and query expansion words in passage ( Wdensity ), the weight of
minimum match span of the query words and query expansion words in passage ( Wmms )
are considered . The passage weight calculation (Pi) is given as following:
(1) The weight both of the word frequency of query words and query expansion
words in passage and the length of passage ( Woverlap )
|qa |
3× tf (t j ) × idf(t j )
3×tf (ti ) × idf(ti )
Woverlap= ∑
+∑
Pas
_
Len
Pas_ Len
i =1
0.5 +1.5×
+ tf (ti ) j =1 0.5 +1.5×
+ tf (t j )
Pas_len_ avg
Pas_len_ avg
|q' |

(2)

q ' is the set of query words, qa is the set of query expansion words, | q ' | is the
number of query words in query words set, | qa | is the number of query expansion
words in the query expansion words set, Pas_Len is the number of the words in the
passage , Pas_len_avg is the average length of passage in the candidate passage set, tf
is the words frequency of question query words and query expansion words, idf is
inverted document frequency of question query words and query expansion words.
(2) The weight of the distribution density of query words and query expansion words
in passage ( Wdensity)

602

Z. Yu et al.

qa
q + qa
q
W density = W density
+ W density
= W density
'

| q | −1

∑ tf (t
j =1

W density =

j

(3)

) × idf (t j ) + tf (t j +1 )idf (t j +1 )
(4)

α × dist ( j , j = 1) 2

× | matched _ q |

| q | −1

q is composed by query words q ' and query expansion words qa
dist ( j , j + 1) is distance between word j and word j+1 in passage
matched_ q is a set of query words q matched in a passage
α is constant.
(3) The weight of minimum match span of the query words and query expansion
words in passage ( Wmms )
μ

ν

⎛
q' I p + ne(qa I p) ⎞⎟ ⎛⎜ q ' I p + ne(qa I p) ⎞⎟
Wmms = ⎜
×
⎜ 1 + max(mms) − min(mms) ⎟ ⎜
⎟
q' + ne(qa )
⎝
⎠ ⎝
⎠

(5)

mms is the minimum match span based on query words and query expansion
words, q ' I p is the number of query words that appear in the passage, qa I p is the
set of query expansion words that occur in the passage , the ne (L) function returns
the number of set qa I p . If qa I p > 0 , ne(qa I p) returns q a I p which is the
number of query expansion words appears in passage. Otherwise, ne(qa I p) returns
0. It shows that query expansion words can not be found in passage. μ ν are constant
numbers which always μ = 1 8 ν = 1 .
All the above factors are considered, then the formula is given as following:

，

Weight ( p i ) = λ1W overlap + λ 2W density + λ 3W mms

λ1 + λ 2 + λ 3 = 1

，

(6)
(7)

3.3 Extracting Passage as Answer of Question

Given question and candidate passage set, according to formula (6), similarity between question and each candidate passage can be computed, but it is not sure for
correct answers to be contained in passage with maximum similarity. Therefore, we
have to get rid of some passage not according with semantic logic with the help of
semantic analysis[12].During the course of question parsing, question type of each
question can be recognized[13].Therefore,it is required that the candidate passage
extracted must contain the corresponding answer type, such as question asking “

人名

Answer Extracting Based on Passage Retrieval

603

人名

(HUM-PERSON)” is required that named entity of “
(HUM-PERSON)” must be
contained in candidate passage.The recognition of answer type is very complicated.
We recognize the answer type according to whether the named entity or related words
of corresponding question type are included in passage or not. Recognition algorithm
of named entity refers to LPT: Language technology platform API which is developed
by Information Retrieval Laboratory, Harbin Institute of Technology[14]. This Recognition algorithm has very good name entity recognition ratio for 7 kinds of question
types such as “
(HUM-PERSON) ”, “
(LOC-LOC)” , “
(TIME-YEAR)”
and so on. It is regarded that the passage is the candidate passage of the question if the
named entity of corresponding question type in passage is recognized. But parts of
question types have not corresponding named entity, so it can not be recognized by
named entity. Therefore, a related words list for all question types is constructed. The
number of the same words in passage and list of related words for corresponding
question type is counted, and it is regarded that this passage is the corresponding
answer type when the number exceeds a constant value.
Through judging the answer type of every passage, if the passage answer type does
not according with corresponding question type, the passage is excluded outside the
corresponding answer candidate passage set .Because it is possible that a passage may
have several answer types, it is regarded the passage as the candidate passage as long
as corresponding answer type appears in the answer. After get rid of the passage
which does not correspond answer type, all candidate passage will be sorted according to passage weight, and then the first 5 passage will be extracted as answers.

人名

地名

年份

4 Experiment and Evaluation
The experiment mainly focuses on evaluating the performance on answer extracting
with passage retrieval. At present, there is no standard test data set of question and
passage in Chinese question answering system, therefore, the experiment is only
restricted in passage retrieval to factoid questions of 5 fine-grained question types
including “
(HUM-PERSON)”, “
(LOC-CITY)”, “
(TIME-YEAR)” ,“
NUM-WEIGHT)”, “
OBJ-FOOD)”. Select 60 questions for 5 types respectively to practice. Analyze those 60 questions, then get the query words and submit them to Baidu search engine, retrieve the first 80 recalled abstract as the resource
of the passage retrieval.
The evaluating method of the passage retrieval refers to TREC8, and takes MRR
(Mean Reciprocal Rank) as evaluation criterion. The formula (8) of MRR is following:

量（

人名

食物（

MRR =

城市

1 n 1
∑
n 1 ri

年份

重

(8)

n is the number of the testing question, ri is the position of the passage which include
the first right answer to the i question.
Takes VSM as the baseline in the experiment, considers the weight both of the
word frequency of query words and query expansion words in passage and the length
of passage ( Woverlap ), the weight of distributing density of query words and query

604

Z. Yu et al.

expansion words in passage ( Wdensity ) and the weight of minimal match span of query
words and query expansion words in passage ( Wmms) respectively. Then, we design
four experiment methods. Method 1:only consider Woverlap ( λ1 = 1, λ 2 = 0, λ 3 = 0
Method 2: consider Woverlap and Wdensity ( λ1 = 0.6, λ2 = 0.4, λ3 = 0

）

）;

）；Method 3: con-

sider Woverlap , Wdensity and Wmms ( λ1 = 0.5, λ2 = 0.3, λ3 = 0.2 ; In experiment, the first 2
query expansion words are selected to calculate the weight (m=2). Table 1 shows
different experiment results with different passage retrieval methods.
From the experiment data of table1, takes the different methods to passage retrieval, takes VSM as the baseline, considers both the word frequency of query words
and query expansion words in passage and the length of passage, the distributing
density of query words and query expansion words in passage, the minimal match
span of query words and query expansion words in passage etc. Compare the effect of
the passage retrieval. When only considers VSM, the MRR is 0.36.When considers
both the word frequency of query words and query expansion words in passage and
the length of passage, the MRR is 0.41. When more considers distributing density of
query words and query expansion words in passage, the value of MRR is improved. It
is 0.45. Specially, when considers the four factors together, the value of MRR is improved largely. It has good effects that MRR value is 0.50.
Table 1. Passage Retrieval Experiment Result

Question type

人名(HUM-PERSON)
城市(LOC-CITY)
年份(TIME-YEAR)
重量(NUM-WEIGHT)
食物(OBJ-FOOD)
Average

number

60
60
60
60
60
60

Recall
rate
82.2%
77.8%
80.6%
78.6%
81.3%
80.1%

MRR
VSM Method 1 Method 2 Method 3
0.45
0.49
0.53
0.59
0.26
0.31
0.35
0.41
0.31
0.35
0.40
0.46
0.41
0.45
0.48
0.52
0.38
0.43
0.47
0.50
0.36
0.41
0.45
0.50

5 Conclusions
Aiming at characters of the Chinese question answer system, the method of calculating the passage weight which is presented in the paper not only considers the number
of the same words between the query words and the expanding words in question and
passage, the length of the passage, the distributing density of the query words and the
expanding words, the minimal distributing distance etc. The experiment results of
candidate passage retrieval show that the method has good effect. Next, the relationship among the several factors affected the weight of the passage retrieval and the
answer extraction arithmetic will be studied.

Answer Extracting Based on Passage Retrieval

605

Acknowledgements. Thanks for information retrieval laboratory, Harbin Institute of
Technology provided the LTP: Language Technology Platform API with us to word
segmentation, passage split, Name entity recognition.

References
1. Voorhees, E., Tice, D.: The TREC-8 Question Answering Track Evaluation. In Proceeding
of the Eighth Text REtrieval Conference. NIST Special Publication,Gaithersburg,
(2000)83-105
2. Voorhees, E.: Overview of the TREC 2002 Question Answering Track. In Proceeding of
the 11th Text REtrieval Conference, NIST Special Publication,Gaithersburg, (2002)
115-123
3. Light, M., Mann, G.S., Riloff, E.: Analyses for Elucidating Current Question Answering
Technology. Journal of Natural Language Engineering, Special Issue on Question Answering, Fall–Winter (2001)
4. Clarke, C., Cormack, Tudhope, G.E.: Relevanceranking for One to Three Term Queries.
Information Processing and Management, 36( 2000)291-311
5. Lee, G. , Seo, J., Lee, S.: SiteQ: Engineering High Performance QA System Using LexicoSemantic Pattern Matching and Shallow NLP. In Proceedings of the Tenth Text REtrieval
Conference, NIST Special Publication, Gaithersburg,(2001)
6. Llopis, F., Vicedo, J. L.: IR-n: A Passage Retrieval System at CLEF-2001. In Proceedings
of the Second Workshop of the Cross-Language Evaluation Forum, (2001)
7. Zhang, Y.K, Zhao, Z.B. L.: Internet-based Chinese Question-Answering System. Computer Engineering. 29(15)(2003)84-86.
8. Robertson, S.E., Walker, S., Jones, S.: Okapi at TREC4. In Proceedings of the Forth Text
REtrieval Conference, NIST Special Publication , Gaithersburg, (1996)73-79
9. Zheng, S.F., Liu, T., Qin B.: Overview of Question Answering. Journal of Chinese Information Processing, 16(6)(2002) 46~52
10. Cui, H., Cai, D.F., Miao, X.L.: Research on Web-based Chinese Question Answering Systerm and Answering Extraction. Journal of Chinese Information Processing.
18(3)(2004)24-31
11. Yu, Z.T., Fan X.Z., Song L.R.: The Research on Query Expansion for Chinese Question
Answering System. Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 3613. Springer-Verlag,
Berlin Heidelberg New York, (2005) 571-579
12. Kim, S., Baek, D., Kim, S.B.: Question Answering Considering Semantic Categories and
Co-occurrence Density TREC-9. In Proceeding of the 11th Text Retrieval Conference,
NIST Special Publication ,Gaithersburg, (2000)317-325
13. Yu, Z.T.,Fan, X.Z.,Guo, J.Y.:Chinese Question Classification Based on Support Vector
Machine. 33(9)(2005)25-29
14. Lang, J., Liu T., Zhang, H.P., Li, S.: LTP:Language Technology Platform. In Proceeding
of the Third Student Workshop on Computation Language, Shengyan, (2006) 64-68

