Comparison of Simulation and Optimization
Possibilities for Languages: DYNAMO and
COSMIC & COSMOS – on a Base of the
Chosen Models
El˙zbieta Kasperska, Elwira Mateja-Losa, and Damian Slota
Institute of Mathematics,
Silesian University of Technology,
Kaszubska 23, 44-100 Gliwice, Poland
{e.kasperska, e.mateja, d.slota}@polsl.pl

Abstract. On the base of the chosen models, the comparison of simulation and optimization possibilities for languages DYNAMO and COSMIC & COSMOS, is presented. The computational techniques, for example: integration facilities, optimization opportunities, are the main point
of interest for this comparison.

1

Introduction

The problem of modelling, simulation and optimization of complex, nonlinear,
dynamical and multilevel systems, authors already have undertaken in many
papers (see [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11]). In mentioned works the main attention on
the problem of modelling, structure of object, results of experiments, were paid.
Now we are concentrating on some technical aspects of realization of these experiments using languages: Professional DYNAMO and COSMIC & COSMOS [1,13].
The computational techniques, for example: integration facilities, optimization
opportunities, are the main point of interest. Specially, two diﬀerent philosophies
of embedding simulation and optimization, will be undertaken. The locally or
globally solutions can be confronted with the decision-makers preferences and
objectives, giving interesting issues for building, for example, decision support
systems.

2

Some Technical Aspects of Computational
Opportunities for Languages: DYNAMO and
COSMIC & COSMOS

Realization of simulation and optimization experiments on models type System
Dynamics [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11] requires special languages and computational
techniques.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part I, LNCS 3991, pp. 24–29, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

Comparison of Simulation and Optimization Possibilities for Languages

25

Two main problems have occured. The one is connected with integration in
simulation computation in models of complex, nonlinear, dynamic and multilevel systems. The second problem is related with two philosophies of, so called,
embedding simulation in optimization and vice versa on models type System
Dynamics.
The Professional DYNAMO [13] provides two types of integration:
– Euler method,
– Runge-Kutta method.
If the Euler’s method is used, attention should be paid to a proper choice of
the simulation step.If the Runge-Kutta method is used, the simulation step is
automatically partitioned to obtain a solution for a given exactness. The example
of using both methods is described in paper [7].
In COSMIC (Computer Oriented System Modelling – Integrated Concept)
the main attention is paid on simulation step and delays (diﬀerent orders). To
ensure that instability does not occur from delays, the value of DT should be
one quarter of the smallest ﬁrst order delay or one twelfth of the smallest third
order delay duration speciﬁed in the model (see [1, pp. 34–35]).
The second technical aspect of computational opportunities of mentioned
languages is optimization facilities. COSMOS (Computer – Oriented System
Modelling Optimization Software) is a software tool which automatically links
a dynamic simulation model to an optimization package. This facility makes it
possible to apply powerful optimization techniques to:
–
–
–
–

the ﬁne tuning of policies in the model (Direct Optimization),
sensitivity analysis of the model (Base Vector Analysis),
simpliﬁcation of the structure of the model (Simpliﬁcation),
exploring the eﬀects of forecasting and forward planning in the model (Planning Horizon).

All of these types of optimization are, so called, simulation embedded in optimization. Diﬀerent philosophy is the optimization embedded in simulation model
type System Dynamics. Generally speaking, locally in structure of the model is
embedded the optimized decision rule, which dynamically, during horizon of
simulation, is changing the structure of model, giving solution (or pseudosolution [12]) which optimized the chosen objective function. Such embedding,
authors already have applied in some models [6, 9].

3

Comparison of Simulation and Optimization
Possibilities

The scope of the paper not allows to undertaken all interesting aspects of mentioned comparison. Lets concentrate of one of them. The problem of embedding
optimization in simulation of System Dynamics models is connected with evolution of structure in these models, and applying “hybrid” ideas. Below the idea
of such evolution, in the scheme of the main structure of the computational

26

E. Kasperska, E. Mateja-Losa, and D. Slota

Fig. 1. Block diagram of optimization embedded in simulation on System Dynamics
model – on a base of the example of model DYNBALANCE(2-2) [9]

program is presented on Figure 1. For comparison, the block diagram of simulation embedded in optimization on models type System Dynamics is presented
on Figure 2.
Comparing both diagrams, we can see that in ﬁrst case the achieved solution
has locally meaning. Contrary, in second case we have obtained the globally
optimized solution. Reminding, that objective function measures interesting aspects of dynamic behaviour of systems (we put attention, our preferences on
them), we obtain solution optimal in whole horizon of simulation. Such are the
technical possibilities of both computational programs in appropriate languages:
DYNAMO and COSMIC & COASMOS.

Comparison of Simulation and Optimization Possibilities for Languages

27

Fig. 2. Block diagram of simulation embedded in optimization on System Dynamics
model – on a base of the example of model DYNBALANCE(3-1-III) [8]

28

4

E. Kasperska, E. Mateja-Losa, and D. Slota

Conclusions

After presenting some technical aspects of computational opportunities for languages DYNAMO and COSMIC & COSMOS, illustrated in the previous section,
we have come to the following conclusions:
– Both languages: DYNAMO and COSMIC & COSMOS are specialized for
System Dynamics models, but only the second has possibilities that are
build in its “philosophical” structure of experiments. The ﬁrst required embedded speciﬁc “hybrid” matrix construction in classical program of System
Dynamics models.
– Obtained, in both types of computing, solutions are locally or globally optimized. The simulation experiments allows to examine the eﬀects of such
solutions (decisions) on the dynamics of a whole system. This aspect has
its connections with directives for building decision support systems (experiments with decision-makers preferences and objectives can help in this
problem).

References
1. Coyle, R.G. (ed.): Cosmic and Cosmos. User manuals. The Cosmic Holding Co,
London (1994)
2. Coyle, R.G.: System Dynamics Modelling. A Practical Approach. Chapman & Hall,
London (1996)
3. Kasperska, E., Mateja-Losa, E., Slota, D.: Some extension of System Dynamics
method – practical aspects. In: Deville, M., Owens, R. (eds.): Proc. 16th IMACS
World Congress. IMACS, Lausanne (2000) 718–11 1–6
4. Kasperska, E., Mateja-Losa, E., Slota, D.: Some dynamics balance of production
via optimization and simulation within System Dynamics method. In: Hines, J. H.,
Diker, V. G. (eds.): Proc. 19th Int. Conf. of the System Dynamics Society. SDS,
Atlanta (2001) 1–18
5. Kasperska, E., Mateja-Losa, E., Slota, D.: Optimal dynamical balance of raw materials – some concept of embedding optimization in simulation on system dynamics
models and vice versa. In: Davidsen, P. I., Mollona, E. (eds.): Proc. 20th Int. Conf.
of the System Dynamics Society. SDS, Palermo (2002) 1–23
6. Kasperska, E., Slota, D.: Two diﬀerent methods of embedding the optimization in
simulation on model DYNBALANCE(2-2). In: Davidsen, P. I., Mollona, E. (eds.):
Proc. 20th Int. Conf. of the System Dynamics Society. SDS, New York (2003) 1–27
7. Kasperska, E., Slota, D.: The Estimation of the Mathematical Exactness of System
Dynamics Method on the Base of Some Simple Economic System. In: Bubak, M.,
Albada, G.D., Sloot, P.M.A., Dongarra, J.J. (eds.): Computational Science, Part II.
LNCS 3037, Springer-Verlag, Berlin (2004) 639–642
8. Kasperska, E., Mateja-Losa, E.: Simulation embedded in optimization – a key for
the eﬀective learning prosess in (about) complex, dynamical systems. In: Sunderam, V.S., Albada, G.D., Sloot, P.M.A., Dongarra, J.J. (eds.): Computational
Science, Part III. LNCS 3516, Springer-Verlag, Berlin (2005) 1040–1043
9. Kasperska, E., Slota, D.: Optimization embedded in simulation on models type System Dynamics – some case study. In: Sunderam, V.S., Albada, G.D., Sloot, P.M.A.,
Dongarra, J.J. (eds.): Computational Science, Part I. LNCS 3514, Springer-Verlag,
Berlin (2005) 837–842

Comparison of Simulation and Optimization Possibilities for Languages

29

10. Kasperska, E.: Some remarks about chosen structural aspect of System Dynamics
method. In: 6 ´eme Congr´es Europ´een de Science des Syst´emes, AFSCET, Paris
(2005) 1–5
11. Kasperska, E., Mateja-Losa, E., Slota, D.: Multicriterion choices in System Dynamics – some way of modelling and simulation. In: 6 ´eme Congr´es Europ´een de
Science des Syst´emes, AFSCET, Paris (2005) 1–6
12. Legras, J.: Methodes et Techniques De’Analyse Numerique. Dunod, Paris (1971)
13. Pugh, A.L. (ed.): Professional Dynamo 4.0 for Windows. Tutorial Guide. PughRoberts Associates, Cambridge (1994)

