Comfortable Driver Behavior Modeling for Car
Following of Pervasive Computing Environment1
Yanfei Liu and Zhaohui Wu
College of Computer Science , Zhejiang University, 38# Zheda Road,
Hangzhou , Zhejiang , China, 310027
yliu@zju.edu.cn

Abstract. This paper demonstrates a novel car-following model based on driver
or passengers’ comfort. As we know, hasty deceleration during emergency
brake will cause passengers feel uncomfortable. According to the relationship
between brake acceleration and people’s comfortable feeling, the comfortable
model is setup. The model calculates the following car’s acceleration by
measuring the distance between the following car and the preceding car, the
velocity of the following car, and controls the car’s acceleration to make driver
and passengers feel comfort. The paper combine the model with the pervasive
computing concept, provoke the pervasive computing driver behavior modeling
idea and turn it into reality to increase the adaptability and reliability of car’s
parts, when car equipped with this device, the prospect is not only the assistant
driver or comfortable driver are realized in the car-following circumstance, but
also the whole car’s performance will be improved.

1 Introduction
The idea of pervasive computing is developing to be one of the hottest research topics
at present [1]. The academic circles of all countries already have great foresight to
focus on the research of the related topic [2].
The researches on driver behavior modeling have developed following mainly
directions in recent years, the driver performance and capacity [3], the longitudinal
driver behavior [4] and driver skill. The driver performance and capacity include
mental and physical researches. There have been made a huge progress in all the
directions these years [5].
Most of the early works in car-following model [6], PD-controller car following
model [7], and visibility angle model [8] [9] are that drivers react immediately to the
behavior of the vehicle in front of them so as to avoid imminent accidents. This paper
focus on the driver’s comfortable of car following.
Actually there can be as many as 50 embedded computers inside a modern car, on
the other hand, a general human drivers behaviors is inherently complex. Both the
1

This research was supported by 863 National High Technology Program under Grant No.
2003AA1Z2080, "Research of Operating System to Support Ubiquitous Computing".

V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3516, pp. 1068 – 1071, 2005.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

Comfortable Driver Behavior Modeling

1069

car’s researches and driver behaviors modeling can not be separate from using as
many as computing techniques, the pervasive computing must take an important roles
in future research of them.

2 A Comfortable Car-Following Model
2.1 A Car Following Model Based on Space and Velocity
Car following model describes the driver longitudinal behavior shown as in Fig.1.

Fig. 1. Car following model based on space and velocity

At the time of collision, to the following car there is relation:
2a(s+∆s)=( v’2 - v2)

(1)

For the worst condition, above equation can be simplified as following:
2as=v2

(2)

2.2 Comfortable Car Following Model Based on Acceleration
The acceleration a can be calculated from s and v according to formula (2). Of the
different a, the comfortable status are shown as table 1, the ac represent the critical
comfortable acceleration, the researches show that its value is 2 m/s2.
Table 1. The following car’s status of comfortable car following models

Area
Comfortable
Uncomfortable
Dangerous

v2/2amax

Condition
s > v2/2ac
< s < v2/2ac
s < v2/2amax

Acceleration
a < ac
ac < a < amax
a > amax

1070

Y . Liu and Z . Wu

2.3 The Realization of Comfortable Driver Behavior Model
Actually, the minimum brake distance smin is related to the car’s velocity, the car’s
velocity, and the friction coefficient of road surface. An experience formula of the
relationship is shown as:
smin=v2/ (2µg)

(3)

When considering the boundary conditions and friction coefficient, the
relationships among a, s, v, µ are shown as Fig.2.:

Fig. 2. The relationship among s, v, µ and a

The surfaces in Fig.2.enclosed several blocks, they are represent different physical
conception, we named the relevant blocks as Table 2.
Table 2. The following car’s status of comfortable car following models with COF

Block
Comfortable block

Enclosed by
s > v2/2ac, s > v2/2µg,
0.2<µ<0.9, vmin<v<vmax
Uncomfortable block s < v2/2ac, s > v2/2µg,
0.2<µ<0.9, vmin<v<vmax
Dangerous Block
s < v2/2µg, s=0,
0.2<µ<0.9, vmin<v<vmax

Acceleration
a < ac
ac <a < amax
a > amax

3 Implementation Driver Behavior Modeling of Pervasive
Computing Environment
A wireless speed sensor is equipped to obtain the car’s velocity, a Bushnell Yardage
Pro 800 Compact Rangefinder displacement device is installed to detect the distance,

Comfortable Driver Behavior Modeling

1071

and a dynamic friction coefficient tester is used to determine the friction coefficient..
The architecture of the model of pervasive computing environment is shown in Fig. 4.

Fig. 4. The architecture of the comfortable model in pervasive computing environment

4 Experiments and Conclusions
The experiments are implemented by using a BUICK REGAL 2.5 car of GM, and
the car running on a dry road surface of a highway on a sunny day.
One contribution of this paper is to demonstrate a new car-following model based
on driver’s comfort, while most of the former models are contribute to the safety of
the car or the traffic flow throughput.
Another contribution is the introduction of pervasive computing conception to the
drivers’ behavior modeling researches. The paper combines the drivers’ model with
the pervasive computing concept, and makes the model as a pervasive computing
device into reality to increase the system’s adaptability and reliability.

References
1. Xu Guangyou ,The ubiquitous pervasive computing. China computer, June 9, 2003 general
issue number 1222, year issue number 41.
2. Xiong Jiang, Embedded system and pervasive computing.
3. Strategies for Reducing Driver Distraction from In-Vehicle Telematics Devices: A
Discussion Document (June 2003), Transport Canada TP 14133 E.
4. Driver Behavior Models for Traffic Simulation, Xiaopeng Fang, thesis of Iowa State
University,2001
5. Yoshiyuki Umemura,Driver Behavior and Active Safety (Overview),Special Issue Driver
Behavior and Active Safety,R&D Review of Toyota CRDL Vol. 39 No. 2
6. Johan Bengtsson, Adaptive Cruise Control and Driver Modeling, Printed in Sweden,Lund
University, Lund 2001
7. Xiaopeng Fang, Hung A. Pham1 and Minoru Kobayashi, PD Controller for Car-Following
Models Based on Real Data
8. Pipes, L.A. and Wojcik, C.K., A contribution to theory of traffic flow, SAE Conference
Proceedings – Analysis and Control of Traffic Flow Symposium,(Detroit, 1968), pp. 53-60
9. Ir. J.J. Reijmers, Traffic Guidance Systems, November 26, 2003 Et4-024 P99

