Functional Availability Analysis of Discrete
Transport System Realized by SSF Simulator
Tomasz Walkowiak and Jacek Mazurkiewicz
Institute of Computer Engineering, Control and Robotics,
Wroclaw University of Technology,
ul. Janiszewskiego 11/17, 50-372 Wroclaw, Poland
{Tomasz.Walkowiak,Jacek.Mazurkiewicz}@pwr.wroc.pl

Abstract. The paper describes a novel approach to functional availability analysis of discrete transport systems realized using Scalable Simulation Framework (SSF). The proposed method is based on modeling
and simulating of the system behavior by Monte Carlo simulation. No
restriction on the system structure and on a kind of distribution is the
main advantage of the method. The paper presents some exemplar system modeling. The authors stress the problem of inﬂuence of the functional parameters on ﬁnal system availability. The problem described in
the paper is practically essential for deﬁning an organization of vehicle
maintenance and transport system logistics.

1

Introduction

Decisions related to transport systems ought to be taken based on diﬀerent and
sometimes contradictory conditions. The transport systems are characterized
by a very complex structure. The performance of the network can be impaired
by various types of faults related to the transport vehicles, communication infrastructure or even by traﬃc congestion [8]. The analysis of transport system
functionality can only be done if there is a formal model of the transport logistics.
The classical models used for reliability analysis are mainly based on Markov or
Semi-Markov processes [1] which are idealized and it is hard to reconcile them
with practice. We suggest the Monte Carlo simulation [4] for proper functional
parameters calculation. No restriction on the system structure and on a kind of
distribution is the main advantage of the method [9]. We propose to use the SSF
(Scalable Simulation Framework) [2] instead of dedicated system elaboration.
Our previous works [5], [7], [9], [10] show that it is very hard to prepare the
simulator which includes all aspects of discrete transport. The SSF is a simulation core. It was developed for a usage in the SSFNet [3] a popular simulator
of computer networks. We developed an extension to SSF allowing to simulate
transport systems. We propose a formal model of discrete transport system to
analyze functional aspects of complex systems. The presented in the next chapter discrete transport system model is based on the Polish Post regional centre
of mail distribution.
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2008, Part I, LNCS 5101, pp. 671–678, 2008.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

672

2

T. Walkowiak and J. Mazurkiewicz

Discrete Transport System with Central Node and
Time-Table (DTSCNTT)

The model can be described as follows:
DT SCN T T = CN, N, R, V, I, M, T T ,

(1)

where: CN - central node, N - set of ordinary nodes, R - set of routes, V - set
of vehicles, I - input model, M - set of maintenance crews and TT - vehicles’
time-table.
Commodities: We can discuss several kinds of a commodity transported in the
system. Single kind commodity is placed in a uniﬁed container, and containers
are transported by vehicles. The commodities are addressed and there are no
other parameters describing them.
Nodes: We have single central node in the system. The central node is the
destination of all commodities taken from other - ordinary nodes. Moreover the
length between each two nodes is given.
Input Model: The aim of the system is to transport containers from the central
node to ordinary nodes and in the opposite way. The containers are generated
in each node. The central node is the global generator of commodities driven
to each ordinary nodes of the system. The generation of containers is described
by Poisson process. In case of central node there are separate processes for each
ordinary node. Whereas, for ordinary nodes there is one process. The input
model includes intensities of container generation in each ordinary node (routed
to central node) and a table of intensities of containers for each ordinary node
in the central node.
Vehicles: We assumed that all vehicles are of the same type and are described
by following functional and reliability parameters: mean speed of a journey,
capacity - number of containers which can be loaded, reliability function and
time of vehicle maintenance. The central node is the start and destination of
vehicle travels. The temporary state of each vehicle is characterized by following
data: vehicle state, distance traveled from the begin of the route, capacity of the
commodities. The vehicle running to the end of the route is able to take diﬀerent
kinds of commodity (located in uniﬁed containers, each container includes singlekind commodity). The vehicle hauling a commodity is always fully loaded or
taking the last part of the commodity if it is less than its capacity.
Routes: Each route describes possible trip of vehicles. The set of routes we
can describe as series of nodes:
R = c, v1 , ..., vn , c and vi ∈ N and c = CN.

(2)

Maintenance Crews: Maintenance crews are identical and unrecognized. The
crews are not assigned to any node, are not combined to any route, they operate
in the whole system and are described only by the number of them. The temporary state of maintenance crews is characterized by: number of crews which are
not involved into maintenance procedures and queue of vehicle waiting for the
maintenance.

Functional Availability Analysis of Discrete Transport System

673

Time-Table: Vehicles operate according to the time-table exactly as city buses
or intercity coaches. The time-table consists of a set of routes (sequence of nodes
staring and ending in the central node, times of approaching each node in the
route and the recommended size of a vehicle. The number of used vehicle, or
the capacity of vehicles does not depend on temporary situation described by
number of transportation tasks or by the task amount for example. It means
that it is possible to realize the journey by completely empty vehicle or the
vehicle cannot load the available amount of commodity (the vehicle is to small).
Time-table is a ﬁxed element of the system in investigated time horizon, but it is
possible to use diﬀerent time-tables for diﬀerent seasons or months of the year.
Each day a given time-table is realised, it means that at a time given by
the time table a vehicle, selected randomly from vehicles available in the central
node, departures from central node and loaded with containers addressed to each
ordinary nodes included in a given route. This is done in a proportional way.
Next, after arriving at given node (it takes some time according to vehicle speed
- random process and road length) the vehicle waits in an input queue if there
is any other vehicle being loaded/unload at the same time. There is only one
handling point in each node. The time of loading/unloading vehicle is described
by a random distribution. The containers addressed to given node are unloaded
and empty space in the vehicle is ﬁlled by containers addressed to a central node.
The operation is repeated in each node on the route and ﬁnally the vehicle is
approaching the central node when is fully unloaded and after it is available for
the next route. The process of vehicle operation could be stopped at any moment
due to a failure (described by a random process). After the failure, the vehicle
waits for a maintenance crew (if there are no available due to repairing other
vehicles), is being repaired (random time) and after that it continues its journey.

3

Simulation Methodology

Discrete transport system described in the previous section is very hard to analyze by a formal model. It does not ﬁt the Markov process framework. A common
way of analyzing that kind of systems is a computer simulation. To analyze the
system we must at ﬁrst build a model and then operate the model. The system
model needed for simulation has to encompass the system elements behavior and
interaction between elements. In case of dependability we have to include system element reliability model. Except the system functionality model we have to
model the traﬃc in the system. The data for simulation of a given real exemplar
system consists of system element model (described in the system functionality
meta-model formalism) and a given traﬃc conﬁguration.
Once a model has been developed, it is executed on a computer by an eventsimulation, which is based on a idea of event. The event is described by time of
event occurring, type of event (in case of DTSCNTT it could be vehicle failure)
and element or set of elements of the system on which event has its inﬂuence.
The simulation is done by analyzing a queue of event (sorted by time of event occurring) while updating the states of system elements according to rules related

674

T. Walkowiak and J. Mazurkiewicz

to a proper type of event. The event-simulation program could be written in
general purpose programming language (like C++), in fast prototyping environment (like Matlab) or special purpose discrete-event simulation kernels. One of
such kernels, is the Scalable Simulation Framework (SSF) [2] which is a used for
SSFNet [3] computer network simulator. SSF is an object-oriented API - a collection of class interfaces with prototype implementations. It is available in C++
and Java. SSFAPI deﬁnes just ﬁve base classes: Entity, inChannel, outChannel,
Process, and Event. The communication between entities and delivery of events
is done by channels (channel mappings connects entities) [3]. For the purpose
of simulating DTSCNTT we have used Parallel Real-time Immersive Modeling
Environment (PRIME) [6] implementation of SSF due to much better documentation then that available for original SSF. We have developed a generic class
(named DTSObject) derived from SSF Entity which is a base of classes modeling DTSCNTT objects like: scheduler, node, truck and crew which model the
behavior of presented in section 2 discrete transport system. The eﬀectiveness
of simulation done in PRIME environment is very promising. The tests done on
one batch of simulation of DTSCNTT exemplar described in the next section
needed from 3.9 to 9 seconds on Pentium 2 GHz computer. The time needed
to perform one simulation depends on the number of events presented in the
system, which is a result of DTSCNTT conﬁguration. Due to a presence of randomness in the DTSCNTT model the analysis of it has to be done based on
Monte-Carlo approach. It requires a large number of repeated simulation. The
SSF is not a Monte-Carlo framework but by simple re-execution of the same
code (of course we have to start from diﬀerent values of random number seed)
the statistical analysis of system behavior could be realized [12].

4

Functional Availability of DTSCNTT

The analysis of a given system requires a metric. We propose to use the availability of the system. We deﬁne it as an ability of realising the transportation
task in required time. The availability is a probability measure. Introducing the
following notation:
– T - time measured from the moment when the container was introduced
to the system to the moment when the container was transferred to the
destination (random value),
– Tg - guaranteed time of delivery, if exceeded the container is delayed,
– N(t) - stochastic process describing the number of delayed containers at time
t,
– k - the level of acceptable delay,
we can deﬁne the functional availability Ak (t) as a probability that the number
of delayed containers at time t does not exceed k, i.e.:
Ak (t) = P r {N (t) ≤ k} .

(3)

The calculation of stochastic process N(t) is based on analysing a state of each

Functional Availability Analysis of Discrete Transport System

675

T
a

0

T

T<
- Tg

b

t

0

Tg
Tg

T>
T Tg
> Tg

t
opóznienie
delay

Fig. 1. The delivery in guaranteed time (a) and delayed delivery (b)

not yet delivered container. As illustrated in Fig. 1. we can observe two possible
situations:
(a) - delivery was realised before guaranteed time Tg - there is no delay,
(b) - delivery was delayed - time of delay: T - Tg .

5

DTSCNTT Case Study

For testing purposes of presented DTSCNTT system (chapter 2) and developed
extension of SSF (chapter 3) we have developed an exemplar transport system. It consists of one central node (city Wroclaw, Poland) and three ordinary
nodes (cites nearby Wroclaw: Rawicz, Olesnica and Nysa). The distances between nodes has been set approximating the real distances between used cities
and they equal to: 85, 60 and 30 km. We assumed a usage of 5 trucks (two with
capacity set to 10 and three with capacity 15) with mean speed 50km/h. The vehicles realized 19 trips a day: from central node to ordinary node and the return
trip. Failures of trucks were modeled by exponential distribution with mean time

NET [
Vertex [ID Nys MTTB 0.6] Vertex [ID Raw MTTB 0.4]
Vertex [ID Ole MTTB 0.3]
CeVertex [ID Wro MTTB [Nys 0.5 Raw 0.4 Ole 0.3] ]
Truck [No 2 Speed 50 Size 10 MTTF 1000]
Truck [No 3 Speed 50 Size 15 MTTF 1000]
Trip [Size 10 Start 8.00
Dest[ID Ole Time 8.40]]]
Trip [Size 10 Start 9.30
Dest[ID Ole Time 10.10]]
Trip [Size 10 Start 11.00
Dest[ID Ole Time 11.40]]
Trip [Size 10 Start 12.30
Dest[ID Ole Time 13.10]]
Trip [Size 10 Start 14.00
Dest[ID Ole Time 14.40]]
Trip [Size 10 Start 15.30
Dest[ID Ole Time 16.10]]
Trip [Size 10 Start 17.00
Dest[ID Ole Time 17.40]]
…

Fig. 2. Exemplar DTSCNTT description in DML ﬁle

676

T. Walkowiak and J. Mazurkiewicz

A20(t)
1.00
0.95
0.9
0.85
0.8
0.75
0.7

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900

1000

t
Fig. 3. Functional availability of the DTSCNTT, 5 trucks operate

A20(t)
1.001
0.95
0.9
0.85
0.8
0.75
0.7

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900

1000

t
Fig. 4. Functional availability of the DTSCNTT, 4 trucks operate

to failure equal to 1000h. The repair time was modeled by normal distribution
with mean value equal to 2h and variance of 0.5h. The containers addressed to
ordinary nodes were available in the central node at every 0.5, 0.4 and 0.3 of an
hour respectively. Containers addressed to the central node were generated at
every 0.6, 0.4, 0.3 of hour in following ordinary nodes. There was a single maintenance crew. The availability of the system Ak (t) was calculated with guaranteed time Tg =24h and parameter k =20. Time-table as well as other functional
parameters were described in a DML ﬁle (see example in Fig. 2.). The Domain Modeling Language (DML) [6] is a SSF speciﬁc text-based language which

Functional Availability Analysis of Discrete Transport System

677

includes a hierarchical list of attributes used to describe the topology of the
model and model attributes values.
Based on 10 000 time simulations (in each 100 days) the availability of system
was calculated. Results presented in Fig. 3. shows the periodic changes. The situation is an eﬀect of used time-tables and a method of cointainers’ generation.
The containers are generated during all day (by Poisson process) but according
to a time-table trucks do not operate in the night. The probability of delay increases at the night, but selected number of trucks (5) is satisfactory for given
system. We have also analyzed a system with a reduced number of vehicles (with
4). The resulting value of the availability function is presented in Fig. 4. It could
be noticed that the availability of the system decreases due to lack of suﬃcient
number of trucks. It should be noticed here that looking in the used time-table
and not taking into consideration a randomness of the transport system (failures and traﬃc jams) only three vehicles should be enough to transport all the
generated containers.

6

Conclusion

We have presented a simulation approach to functional analysis of Discrete
Transport System with Central Node and Time-Table (DTSCNTT). The DTSCNTT models behavior of the Polish Post regional centre of mail distribution.
Developed simulation software allows to analyze availability of the system in a
function of all model parameters, like for example changes in a time-table or in
a number of used trucks. Also, some economic analysis could be done following
the idea presented in [5], [11], [12]. It could be used for example for selection of
the optimum value for SLA (service level agreement).
The presented results, i.e. changes of availability in a function of a number
of used trucks shows that presented approach allows to answer a non trivial
question what should be a number of vehicles to fulﬁll some requirements given
to the transport system.
The implementation of DTSCNTT simulator done based on SSF allows to
apply in a simple and fast way changes in the transport system model. Also the
time performance of SSF kernel results in a very eﬀective simulator of discrete
transport system. Therefore, in our opinion introduced exemplar analysis shows
that the described method of transport system modeling can serve for practical
solving of essential decision problems related to an organization and parameters
of a real transport system. The proposed analysis seems to be very useful for
mail distribution centre organization.
Work reported in this paper was sponsored by a grant No. 4 T12C 058 30,
(years: 2006-2009) from the Polish Committee for Scientiﬁc Research (KBN).

References
1. Barlow, R., Proschan, F.: Mathematical Theory of Reliability, Society for Industrial
and Applied Mathematics, Philadelphia (1996)
2. Cowie, J.H.: Scalable Simulation Framework API reference manual (1999),
http://www.ssfnet.org/SSFdocs/ssfapiManual.pdf

678

T. Walkowiak and J. Mazurkiewicz

3. Cowie, J.H., Nicol, D.M., Ogielski, A.T.: Modeling the Global Internet. Computing
in Science and Engineering 1(1), 42–50 (1999)
4. Fishman: Monte Carlo: Concepts, Algorithms, and Applications. Springer-Verlag,
New York (1996)
5. Kaplon, K., Mazurkiewicz, J., Walkowiak, T.: Economic Analysis of Discrete Transport Systems. Risk Decision and Policy 8(3), 179–190 (2003)
6. Liu, J.: Parallel Real-time Immersive Modeling Environment (PRIME), Scalable
Simulation Framework (SSF), User’s manual, Colorado School of Mines Dep. of
Mathematical and Computer Sciences (2006), http://prime.mines.edu
7. Mazurkiewicz, J., Walkowiak, T.: Fuzzy Economic Analysis of Simulated Discrete
Transport System. In: Rutkowski, L., Siekmann, J.H., Tadeusiewicz, R., Zadeh,
L.A. (eds.) ICAISC 2004. LNCS (LNAI), vol. 3070, pp. 1161–1167. Springer, Heidelberg (2004)
8. Sanso, B., Milot, L.: Performability of a Congested Urban-Transportation Network
when Accident Information is Available. Transportation Science 33, 1 (1999)
9. Walkowiak, T., Mazurkiewicz, J.: Hybrid Approach to Reliability and Functional
Analysis of Discrete Transport System. In: Bubak, M., van Albada, G.D., Sloot,
P.M.A., Dongarra, J. (eds.) ICCS 2004. LNCS, vol. 3037, pp. 236–243. Springer,
Heidelberg (2004)
10. Walkowiak, T., Mazurkiewicz, J.: Reliability and Functional Analysis of Discrete
Transport System with Dispatcher. In: Advances in Safety and Reliability, European Safety and Reliability Conference - ESREL 2005, pp. 2017–2023. Taylor &
Francis Group, London (2005)
11. Walkowiak, T., Mazurkiewicz, J.: Simulation Based Management and Risk Analysis
of Discrete Transport Systems. In: IEEE TEHOSS 2005 Conference, pp. 431–436
(2005)
12. Walkowiak, T., Mazurkiewicz, J.: Discrete transport system simulated by SSF for
reliability and functional analysis. In: International Conference on Dependability
of Computer Systems. DepCoS - RELCOMEX 2007, pp. 352–359. IEEE Computer
Society Press, Los Alamitos (2007)

