Research on Technologies of Spatial
Conﬁguration Information Retrieval
Haibin Sun
College of Information Science and Engineering,
Shandong University of Science and Technology,
Qingdao 266510, China
Offer sun@hotmail.com

Abstract. The problem of spatial conﬁguration information retrieval is
a Constraint Satisfaction Problem (CSP), which can be solved using traditional CSP algorithms. But the spatial data can be reorganized using
index techniques like R-tree and the spatial data are approximated by
their Minimum Bounding Rectangles (MBRs), so the spatial conﬁguration information retrieval is actually based on the MBRs and some special
techniques can be studied. This paper studies the mapping relationships
among the spatial relations for real spatial objects, the corresponding
spatial relations for their MBRs and the corresponding spatial relations
between the intermediate nodes and the MBRs in R-tree.

1

Introduction

Spatial conﬁguration retrieval is an important research topic of content-based
image retrieval in Geographic Information System (GIS), computer vision, and
VLSI design, etc. A user of a GIS system usually searches for conﬁgurations
of spatial objects on a map that match some ideal conﬁguration or are bound
by a number of constraints. For example, a user may be looking for a place to
build a house. He wishes to have a house A north of the town that he works,
in a distance no greater than 10km from his child’s school B and next to a
park C. Moreover, he would like to have a supermarket D on his way to work.
Under some circumstances, the query conditions cannot be fully satisﬁed at
all. The users may need only several optional answers according to the degree
of conﬁguration similarity. Of the conﬁguration similarity query problem, the
representation strategies and search algorithms have been studied in several
papers[1,2,3].
In the real world, spatial data often have complex geometry shapes. It will
be very costly if we directly to calculate the spatial relationships between them,
while much invalid time may be spent. If N is the number of spatial objects, and
n the number of query variables, the total number of possible solutions is equal to
the number of n-permutations of the N objects: N !/(N − n)! . Using Minimum
Bounding Rectangles (MBRs) to approximate the geometry shapes of spatial
objects and calculating the relations between rectangles will reduce the calculation greatly. So we can divide the spatial conﬁguration retrieval into two steps:
ﬁrstly the rectangle combinations for which it is impossible to satisfy the query
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part II, LNCS 4488, pp. 531–537, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

532

H. Sun

conditions will be eliminated, and then the real spatial objects corresponding
to the remaining rectangle combinations will be calculated using computational
geometry techniques. To improve the retrieval eﬃciency, the index data structure which is called R-tree[4]or the variants R+-tree[5] and R*-tree[6] can be
adopted.
The next section takes topological and directional relations as examples to
study the mapping relationships between the spatial relationships for MBRs and
the corresponding relationships for real spatial objects; the last section concludes
this paper.

2

Spatial Mapping Relationships

This paper mainly concerns the topological and directional relations for MBRs
and the corresponding spatial relationships for real spatial objects. The ideas
in this paper can be applied to other relationships such as distance and spatiotemporal relations, etc.
2.1

Topological Mapping Relationships

This paper focuses on RCC8[7] (see Fig.1) relations and studies the mapping
relationship between the RCC8 relations for real spatial objects and the RCC8
relations for the corresponding MBRs. Let p and q be two real spatial objects,
p’ and q’ be their corresponding MBRs. If the spatial relation between p and q
is PO (Partly Overlap), then the possible spatial relation between p’ and q’ is
PO(Partly Overlap) or TPP (Tangential Proper Part) or NTPP (Non-Tangential
Proper Part) or EQ (Equal) or TPPi (inverse of Tangential Proper Part) or
NTPPi (inverse of Non-Tangential Proper Part) which can be denoted by the

x
y
x DC y
x
y
x PO y

x
y

x y

y x

x EC y x TPP y x TPPi y
xy

x y

y x

x EQ y x NTPP y x NTPPi y

Fig. 1. Two-dimensional examples for the eight basic relations of RCC8

Research on Technologies of Spatial Conﬁguration Information Retrieval

533

disjunction form PO(p’, q’) TPP(p’, q’) NTPP(p’, q’) EQ(p’, q’) TPPi(p’, q’)
NTPPi(p’, q’). To use R-tree to improve the eﬃciency of the spatial conﬁguration
retrieval, the topological relations in the query condition should ﬁrst be transformed to the corresponding topological relations for the MBRs, which can be
used to eliminate the rectangle combinations that cannot fulﬁll the constraints
from the leaf nodes in the R-tree. The intermediate nodes in the R-tree can also
be used to fast the retrieval process. Let p” be the rectangle that enclose p’,
i.e. the parent node of leaf node p’ in the R-tree, which is called intermediate
node. Given the spatial relation between p’ and q’, the spatial relation between
p” and q’ can be derived. For example, from the spatial relation TPP(p’, q’),
the spatial relation PO(p”,q’) TPP(p”,q’) EQ(p”,q’) TPPi(p”,q’) NTPPi(p”,q’)
can be obtained. It is very interesting that the parents of the intermediate nodes
also have the same property. Table 1 presents the spatial relations between two
real spatial objects, the possible spatial relations that their MBRs satisfy and
the possible spatial relations between the corresponding intermediate node and
the MBR.
Table 1. The spatial relations between two real spatial objects, the possible spatial
relations that their MBRs satisfy and the possible spatial relations between the corresponding intermediate node and the MBR
RCC8
relation RCC8 relation between
between p and q MBRs p’ and q’
DC(p,q)
DC(p’,q’) ∨ EC(p’,q’) ∨
PO(p’,q’) ∨ TPP(p’,q’)
∨
NTPP(p’,q’)
∨
EQ(p’,q’) ∨ TPPi(p’,q’)
∨ NTPPi(p’,q’)
EC(p,q)
EC(p’,q’) ∨ PO(p’,q’)
∨
TPP(p’,q’)
∨
NTPP(p’,q’) ∨ EQ(p’,q’)
∨
TPPi(p’,q’)
∨
NTPPi(p’,q’)
PO(p,q)
PO(p’, q’) ∨ TPP(p’,
q’) ∨ NTPP(p’,q’) ∨
EQ(p’,q’) ∨ TPPi(p’, q’)
∨ NTPPi(p’, q’)
TPP (p,q)
TPP(p’, q’) ∨ NTPP(p’,
q’) ∨ EQ(p’, q’)
NTPP (p,q)

TPPi (p,q)
NTPPi (p,q)
EQ(p,q)

RCC8 relation between p” and q’
PO(p”,q’)
∨TPP(p”,q’)
∨
NTPP(p”,q’)
∨
EQ(p”,q’)
∨TPPi(p”,q’)∨
NTPPi(p”,q’)
∨ EC(p”,q’) ∨ DC(p”,q’)
EC(p”,q’)
∨
TPP(p”,q’) ∨
EQ(p”,q’) ∨
NTPPi(p”,q’)

PO(p”,q’)
NTPP(p”,q’)
TPPi(p”,q’)

∨
∨
∨

PO(p”, q’) ∨ TPP(p”, q’) ∨
NTPP(p”, q’) ∨ EQ(p”, q’) ∨
TPPi(p”, q’) ∨ NTPPi(p”, q’)

PO(p”, q’) ∨ TPP(p”,
NTPP(p”, q’) ∨ EQ(p”,
TPPi(p”, q’) ∨ NTPPi(p”,
NTPP(p’, q’)
PO(p”, q’) ∨ TPP(p”,
NTPP(p”, q’) ∨ EQ(p”,
TPPi(p”, q’) ∨ NTPPi(p”,
EQ(p’, q’) ∨ TPPi(p’, q’) EQ(p”, q’) ∨ TPPi(p”,
∨ NTPPi(p’, q’)
NTPPi(p”, q’)
NTPPi(p’, q’)
NTPPi(p”, q’)
EQ(p’, q’)
EQ(p”, q’) ∨ TPPi(p”,
NTPPi(p”, q’)

q’)
q’)
q’)
q’)
q’)
q’)
q’)

∨
∨
∨
∨
∨

q’) ∨

534

H. Sun

Based on the above mapping relationship and the R-tree, the candidate MBR
combinations can be retrieved eﬃciently, and then a reﬁnement step is needed
to derive the spatial relations among the real spatial objects that the MBRs
enclose, which means that the spatial relation between p and q should be derived
from the spatial relation between p’ and q’. From the spatial relation between
two MBRs, we can derive several possible spatial relations or only one deﬁnite
spatial relation between two real spatial objects that the MBRs enclose. In the
former case the complex geometry computation will be applied whereas it will
be omitted in the latter case. For example, given the spatial relation NTPPi(p’,
q’), we can derive DC(p, q)∨ EC(p, q)∨ PO(p, q)∨ NTPPi (p, q)∨ TPPi (p,
q), the geometry computation must be adopted to ascertain the spatial relation
between p and q. But if we know the spatial relation DC(p’, q’), then spatial
relation DC(p, q) can be derived directly.
2.2

Direction Mapping Relationships

According to Goyal and Egenhofer’s cardinal direction model[?], there are 9
atomic cardinal direction relations(O, S, SW, W, NW, N, NE, E, SE) (see Fig.2)
and totally 218 cardinal direction relations for non-empty connected regions in
the Euclidean space 2 (illustrated by 3 × 3 matrix, see Fig.3) [8].
There are 36 cardinal direction relations for the non-empty and connected regions’MBRs: O, S, SW, W, NW, N, NE, E, SE, S:SW, O:W,
NW:N, N:NE, O:E, S:SE, SW:W, O:S, E:SE, W:NW, O:N, NE:E, S:SW:SE,
NW:N:NE, O:W:E, O:S:N,SW:W:NW,NE:E:SE, O:S:SW:W, O:W:NW:N,
O:S:E:SE, O:N:NE:E, O:S:SW:W:NW:N, O:S:N:NE:E:SE, O:S:SW:W:E:SE,
O:W:NW:N:NE:E, O:S:SW:W:NW:N:NE:E:SE(see Fig.4). This kind of cardinal

NWA

NA

NEA

B
WA

SWA

OA

EA

A
SA

SEA

Fig. 2. Capturing the cardinal direction relation between two polygons, A and B,
through the projection-based partitions around A as the reference object

Research on Technologies of Spatial Conﬁguration Information Retrieval

535

Fig. 3. 218 cardinal direction relations between two non-empty and connected
regions[8]

direction relation has the rectangle shape, so it is also named rectangle direction
relation, otherwise it is called non-rectangle direction relation.
In the following, we study the mapping relationships between the cardinal
direction relations for real spatial objects and the cardinal direction relations for
the corresponding MBRs. First of all, we give a deﬁnition as follows.
Deﬁnition 1. a cardinal direction relation R contains another cardinal direction
relation R’, if all the atomic relations in R’ also exist in R.
The mapping relationships from the cardinal direction relations for real spatial
objects to the ones for their MBRs can be described using the following theorems.
Theorem 1. if the cardinal direction relation between the real spatial objects p
and q is rectangle direction relation R(see Fig.4), the cardinal direction relation
between their MBRs p’ and q’ is also R; if the cardinal direction relation between
the real spatial objects p and q is non-rectangle direction relation R, the cardinal
direction relation between their MBRs p’ and q’ is the rectangle direction relation
R’ in Fig.4 which contains relation R and has the minimum area.
Theorem 1 can be derived by combining Fig.3 and Fig.4. Assume that the cardinal direction relation between two real spatial objects p and q is N:NW:W
which obviously is not rectangle direction relation, from Fig.4 the rectangle direction relation that contains N:NW:W and has the minimum rectangle area is
O:W:NW:N, so the cardinal direction relation between two MBRs p’ and q’ is
O:W:NW:N.

536

H. Sun

O

S

SW

W

NW

N

NE

E

SE

S:SW

O:W

NW:N

SW:W

O:S

E:SE

N:NE

O:E

S:SE

W:NW

O:N

NE:E

S:SW:SE

NW:N:NE

O:W:E

SW:W:NW

NE:E:SE

O:S:SW:W

O:W:NW:N

O:S:E:SE

O:S:SW:

O:S:N:NE:
E:SE

O:S:SW:
W:E:SE

O:W:NW:

W:NW:N

O:S:N

O:N:NE:E

N:NE:E

O:S:SW:W:NW
N:NE:E:SE

Fig. 4. 36 cardinal direction relations for MBRs

Similarly the mapping relationships from the cardinal direction relations
for MBRs to the ones for the possible real spatial objects can be described as
follows.
Theorem 2. if the cardinal direction relation R between two MBRs p’ and q’
contains no more than 3 atomic cardinal direction relations (including 3), the
corresponding cardinal direction relation between the real spatial objects p and q
is also R; otherwise, the possible cardinal direction relations between p and q will
be the subsets of relation R which can be transformed to relation R when p and
q are approximated by p’ and q’.
For example, if the cardinal direction relation between two MBRs is
S:SW:SE(including three atomic relations:S,SW,SE), then the cardinal direction relation between the corresponding two real spatial objects deﬁnitely is
S:SW:SE. If the cardinal direction relation between two MBRs is O:S:SW:W,
the possible cardinal direction relations between two real spatial objects include
O:W:SW, W:O:S,SW:S:O,SW:S:W and O:S:SW:W.
Given the cardinal direction relation between the MBRs p’ and q’, the cardinal
direction relation between p”, which is the parent node of p’ in R-tree, and q’
can be described using the following theorem.
Theorem 3. if the cardinal direction relation between MBRs p’ and q’ is R, the
possible cardinal direction relations between p” and q’ are the rectangle direction
relations containing R.

Research on Technologies of Spatial Conﬁguration Information Retrieval

537

For example, if the cardinal direction relation between p’ and q’ is O:S:SW:W,
the possible cardinal direction relations between p” and q’ will be O:S:SW:W,
O:S:SW:W:NW:N, O:S:SW:W:E:SE and O:S:SW:W:NW:N:NE:E:SE.

3

Conclusions

This paper has studied the spatial conﬁguration information retrieval problem
which includes the mapping relationship among the spatial relations (topological and directional relations) for real spatial objects, the corresponding spatial
relations for the corresponding MBRs and the corresponding spatial relations between intermediate nodes and the MBRs in R-tree. Based on these results, search
algorithms can be designed to solve the spatial conﬁguration retrieval problems.
The research work of this paper is valuable for the information retrieval system
related to spatial data.

References
1. Bergman, L. Castelli, V., Li C-S. Progressive Content-Based Retrieval from Satellite Image Archives. D-Lib Magazine, October 1997.
http://www.dlib.org/dlib/october97/ibm/10li.html.
2. Gupta A., Jain R. Visual Information Retrieval. Communications of ACM, May
1997, 40(5): 70-79.
3. Orenstein, J. A. Spatial Query Processing in an Object-Oriented Database System.
In: Proc. Of the 1986 ACM SIGMOD international conference on Management of
data, 1986, pages 326-336.
4. Guttman, A. R-trees: A Dynamic Index Structure for Spatial Searching. In: Proc.
Of ACM SIGMOD, 1984, pages 47-57.
5. Timos K. Sellis, Nick Roussopoulos, Christos Faloutsos. The R+-Tree: A Dynamic
Index for Multi-Dimensional Objects. In: Proceedings of 13th International Conference on Very Large Data Bases, September 1-4, 1987, Brighton, England, pages
507-518.
6. Norbert Beckmann, Hans-Peter Kriegel, Ralf Schneider, Bernhard Seeger. The R*tree: An Eﬃcient and Robust Access Method for Points and Rectangles. In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGMOD, 1990, pages 322-331.
7. D. A. Randell, Z. Cui and A. G. Cohn. A Spatial Logic Based on Regions and
Connection. In: Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. on Knowledge Representation and Reasoning,
Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, 1992, pages 165-176.
8. S.Cicerone and P. Di Felice. Cardinal directions between spatial objects: the
pairwise-consistency problem. Information Sciences. 2004, 164(1-4): 165-188.

