Extended Clustering Coeﬃcients of Small-World
Networks
Wenjun Xiao1 , Yong Qin1,2 , and Behrooz Parhami3
1

Dept. Computer Science, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou
510641, P.R. China
wjxiao@scut.edu.cn
2
Center of Computer Network and Information, Maoming University, Maoming
525000, P.R. China
3
Dept. Electrical & Computer Eng., University of California, Santa Barbara, CA
93106-9560, USA

Abstract. The clustering coeﬃcient C of a network, which is a measure
of direct connectivity between neighbors of the various nodes, ranges
from 0 (for no connectivity) to 1 (for full connectivity). We deﬁne extended clustering coeﬃcients C(h) of a small-world network based on
nodes that are at distance h from a source node, thus generalizing
distance-1 neighborhoods employed in computing the ordinary clustering coeﬃcient C = C(1). Based on known results about the distance
distribution Pδ (h) in a network, that is, the probability that a randomly
chosen pair of vertices have distance h, we derive and experimentally
validate the law Pδ (h)C(h) ≤ clogN/N , where c is a small constant
that seldom exceeds 1. This result is signiﬁcant because it shows that
the product Pδ (h)C(h) is upper-bounded by a value that is considerably
smaller than the product of maximum values for Pδ (h) and C(h).

1

Introduction

Complex systems with many components and associated interactions abound
in nature, prevail within society, and deﬁne many human artifacts. The interconnection or interaction structure of such systems are typically neither random
(amenable to probabilistic analysis) nor regular (mathematically tractable), rendering the systematic study of their properties a rather challenging undertaking. Interactions in such systems can be modeled by networks/graphs composed
of vertices/nodes and undirected or directed edges/links. A network or graph
G = (V, E)has a set V of N vertices or nodes and a set E of M edges or links,
where each edge is deﬁned by a pair of vertices (ordered pair, for directed graphs).
Two models of actual complex networks have been studied extensively [1,2,3,4]:
the small-world model and the scale-free one. Our focus in this paper is on smallworld networks that feature localized clusters connected by occasional long-range
links, leading to an average distance between vertices that grows logarithmically
with the network size N.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 67–73, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

68

W. Xiao, Y. Qin, and B. Parhami

Watts and Strogatz [2] studied mechanisms via which a regular network can
be transformed into a small-world network, with little or no change in the vertexdegree distribution, and quantiﬁed the parameters that characterize the resulting
structures. One feature shared by small-world networks is that their clustering
coeﬃcients are fairly high compared with random networks[2]. Clustering coeﬃcient is deﬁned as follows. Let a vertex v of G have k(v) neighbors; that
is, v has degree k(v). These k(v) neighbors can potentially be connected via
k(v)(k(v) − 1)/2 edges. The fraction of this maximum possible number of edges
that actually exist between neighbors of v is its clustering coeﬃcient Cv ; the
average of clustering coeﬃcients over all v ∈ V is the clustering coeﬃcient C of
the network G. A network with C close to 1 may consist of highly connected
clusters or cliques, perhaps with sparser connections between the local clusters.

2

Extended Clustering Coeﬃcients

We extend the clustering coeﬃcient of Watts and Strogatz [2] in the following
way. Deﬁne the h−neighbors of a vertex v as vertices of G that are at distance h (measured in number of hops) from v. Assume that v has kh (v) such
h−neighbors, where k1 (v) is the same as k(v) deﬁned earlier (see Section 1).
Then there can be at most kh (v)(kh (v) − 1)/2 edges connecting h−neighbors
of vertex v. The fraction Cv (h) of allowable edges that actually exist between
h−neighbors v is the h−clustering coeﬃcient of v. We assume that Cv (h) = 1
when kh (v) = 1, which also covers the special case h = 0. The average of Cv (h)
over all v ∈ G is the h−clustering coeﬃcient C(h) of G. The 1−clustering coefﬁcient C(1) is the clustering coeﬃcient C as deﬁned in Section 1.
Thus, while the deﬁnition of clustering coeﬃcient is based on the immediate
neighborhood of vertices, extended clustering coeﬃcient relates to a wider neighborhood deﬁned by the distance parameter h. Using experimental data from a
wide variety of actual complex networks, along with a deterministic model of
small-world networks that we have developed, we seek to relate C(h) and the
distance distribution Pδ (h) of a network, deﬁned as the probability that a randomly chosen pair of vertices are at distance h from each other.
Note that all distances referred to in this paper are shortest distances. However, in view of the results of Kim et al. [5], distances obtained from a routing
algorithm with localized decisions are not fundamentally diﬀerent from shortest
distances in complex networks. Thus, our results are expected to remain valid
when this latter deﬁnition of distance is used in lieu of shortest distance.

3

Experimental Observations

For an N −vertex network with M edges, we have Pδ (0) = 1/N and Pδ (1) =
2M/N 2 > 1/N . Beyond h = 1, however, a precise expression for the value
of Pδ (h) cannot be supplied, except in the case of certain regular networks.
However, for many networks (small-world or otherwise), the value of Pδ (h) rises
with h until it reaches a maximum value and then declines as the distance h gets

Extended Clustering Coeﬃcients of Small-World Networks

69

closer to the network diameter D. This is conﬁrmed experimentally for several
complex networks of practical interest in Fig1b, Fig2b.
For extended clustering coeﬃcients, the trend begins by a decrease in clustering, from C(0) = 1 to C(1) = C, and is then followed by further reductions.
This is owing to the fact that as h increases, the number qh of nodes at distance h from a given node increases, and such nodes are apt to belong to several
cliques; hence, the presence of many edges between them is quite unlikely. As h
approaches D, however, a diﬀerent eﬀect may take hold. Consider, for example,
one extreme case where each node in the network is at distance D from exactly
one node (it has a single diametrically opposite node). This leads to C(D) = 1.
In this same situation, C(D − 1) is likely to be large as well, given the common
presence of multiple diametral paths to the same opposite vertex. Note that the
preceding argument suggests that C(h) can be large when h approaches D; it
does not imply that C(h) must be large in this case. Figures 1c and 2c conﬁrm
these trends.
Given the opposing trends of Pδ (h) (up, then down) and C(h) (down, then
possibly up), one might be led to believe that the product Pδ (h)C(h) has an
upper bound. Based on the evidence presented in Fig1a and Fig2a, we conjecture
that this is in fact the case. That is, for a constant c in the vicinity of and seldom
exceeding 1, we have:
(1)
Pδ (h)C(h) ≤ clogN/N
In the special case of h = 1, equation (1) implies Pδ (1)C(1) ≈ logN/N . We
have Pδ (1) = 2M/N 2 ≈ logN/N for small-world networks. This is consistent
with C(1) = C being large for such networks.

4

Model-Based Validation

We now present additional evidence on the validity of equation (1), using a
model of deterministic small-world networks that we have developed [6]. In fact,
it was through this model that we ﬁrst became aware of the trend represented
in equation (1) and experimentally conﬁrmed in Fig1 and Fig2. A review of our
deterministic model, which is based on Cayley graphs [7], has been provided
in the supporting information, where we also show that the model yields the
clustering coeﬃcient:
C=

at(at − 1)
(at + t − l)(at + t − l − 1)

(2)

In this model, t = log2 N and a = (2l − 1)/t is a free tuning parameter that
is related to the interconnection density, thereby aﬀecting the value of C. Note
that for very large networks (N, t → +∞), C tends to a2 /(a + 1)2 when a is a
constant. By suitably choosing a, we can obtain diﬀerent clustering coeﬃcients,
while maintaining a small vertex degree equal to at + t − l = (a + 1)log2 N − 1.
Unlike actual networks for which the computation of C(h) is extremely diﬃcult, our deterministic model is amenable to mathematical analysis that yields

70

W. Xiao, Y. Qin, and B. Parhami

Fig. 1a. The plot of Product(Pδ (h)C(h)) versus h in the maximum component Δ of
NCSTRL graph [9], with 6396 vertices and diameter of 31

Fig. 1b. The plot of distance distribution(Pδ (h)) versus h in Δ

an approximate closed-form expression for the extended clustering coeﬃcients.
In our deterministic model, the number m of adjacent vertex pairs among the
h−neighbors of any vertex is given by the expression:
m = (2l − 1)(2l−1 − 1)

t−l
h−1

(3)

Extended Clustering Coeﬃcients of Small-World Networks

71

Fig. 1c. The plot of C(h) versus h in Δ

Fig. 2a. The plot of Product(Pδ (h)C(h)) versus h in the maximum component Δ1 of
Linux graph [10] with 5285 vertices and diameter of 17

On the other hand, the number kh (v) of h−neighbors of a vertex v is bounded
as:
t−l
t−l
t−l
≤ kh (v) ≤ (2l − 1)
+
(4)
(2l − 1)
h−1
h−1
h

72

W. Xiao, Y. Qin, and B. Parhami

Fig. 2b. The plot of distance distribution(Pδ (h)) versus h in Δ1

Fig. 2c. The plot of C(h) versus h in Δ1

Given that the extended clustering coeﬃcient C(h) is proportional to m/(kh (v))2 ,
we readily ﬁnd:
t−l
C(h) ≈ 1/
(5)
h−1
In a companion paper[8], we have derived the distance distribution for smallworld networks:
logN
Pδ (h) ≈
/N
(6)
h

Extended Clustering Coeﬃcients of Small-World Networks

73

Here, we have logN ≈ D. Because the diameter of our deterministic network
model is D = t − l + 1, we conclude:
Pδ (h) ≈

t−l−1
h

/N = (t − l + 1)

t−l
h−1

/(hN )

(7)

Equations (5) and (7) lead to:
Pδ (h)C(h) ≤ clogN/N

(8)

Equation (8) conﬁrms our hypothesis in equation (1), thereby supplementing the
previously supplied experimental evidence of its validity.

5

Conclusion

We have shown that extended clustering coeﬃcients are generalizations of ordinary clustering coeﬃcient and are governed by laws that are also generalizations
of those pertaining to the latter. We have presented experimental and analytical evidence that the inequality Pδ (h)C(h) ≤ clogN/N holds for small-world
networks. This result is signiﬁcant because it shows that the product Pδ (h)C(h)
is upper-bounded by a value that is considerably smaller than the product of
maximum values for Pδ (h) and C(h). Thus, extended clustering coeﬃcients offer new insights into the structure of small-world networks and open up further
avenues for exploration of their properties. Additionally, diﬀerent shapes for the
variations of C(h) and Pδ (h)C(h), exempliﬁed by Fig1 and Fig2, can be used to
categorize small-world networks in order to facilitate their study.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank M. E. J. Newman for providing the NCSTRL data used in
Fig. 1. Research of W. Xiao is supported by the Natural Science Foundation of
China and Guangdong Province.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Barabsi, A.-L., & Albert, R. (1999) Science 286, 509-512
Watts, D. J., & Strogatz, S. H. (1998) Nature 393, 440-442.
Albert, R., & Barabsi, A.-L. (2002) Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 47-97.
Newman, M. E. J. (2003) SIAM Rev. 45, 167-256.
Kim, B. J., Yoon, C. N., Han, S. K., & Jeong, H. (2002) Phys. Rev. E65, 027103.
Xiao, W. J., & Parhami, B. (2006) Info. Proc. Lett. 97, 115-117.
Biggs, N. (1993) Algebraic graph theory (Cambridge Univ. Press).
Xiao, W.J., & Parhami, B. (2005) On conditions for scale-freedom in complex
networks, submitted for publication.
9. Newman, M. E. J. (2001) Phys. Rev. E 64, 016131.
10. Myers, C. R. (2003) Phys. Rev. E 68, 046116.

