Robust Phase Tracking for High Capacity Wireless
Multimedia Data Communication Networks
Taehyun Jeon
Seoul National University of Technology,
Dept. of Electrical Engineering,
172 Gongneung-2Dong, Nowon-Gu
139-743 Seoul, Korea
thjeon@snut.ac.kr

Abstract. This paper proposes an algorithm for tracking of the residual phase
errors incurred by carrier and sampling frequency offset in the OFDM
transmission systems which is suitable for high speed and high capacity
wireless multimedia communication networks. The proposed scheme utilizes
the degree of the channel fading in the frequency domain in the offset tracking
procedure which improves the error estimation accuracy and the tracking
performances. This scheme also contributes to the increase of the throughput
and the network capacity by reduction of the packet error rate or equivalently
probability of re-transmission events which are critical QoS requirements for
multimedia data transmissions.
Keywords: ubiquitous network, QoS, carrier frequency offset, OFDM.

1 Introduction
The demands for access to the high quality multimedia data any time any where have
been increased dramatically with the introduction of the concept of ubiquitous
networks. The requirements for such a high capacity data transmission include
enhanced data retrieval under various channel and interference environments as well
as the data rate increase up to hundreds or even to gigabits per second ranges
depending on the application areas. The orthogonal frequency division multiplexing
(OFDM) system achieves high data rates by simultaneous transmission of multiple
data symbols through subcarriers which are orthogonal to each others [1]. As in the
general synchronous digital communication systems, the carrier frequency difference
between transmitter and receiver sides in the OFDM plays an important role in the
entire system performance. Another important impairment is the sampling frequency
offset which is generated in the process of digital-to-analog (D/A) and analog-todigital (A/D) conversion in both sides, respectively [2].
This paper proposes a reliable estimation and tracking method for phase errors
based on the channel information in the OFDM systems. In this scheme the received
signal processed by the frequency domain equalizer is used for the error estimation
and the channel gain for each subcarrier is utilized to provide the improved reliability.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 733–736, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

734

T. Jeon

2 Phase Error Detectors
In this section the detection methods for phase errors are described which are caused
by the local oscillators’ carrier frequency difference and sampling clock frequency
difference at transmitter and receiver sides. For better understanding of the proposed
algorithm one of the widely used OFDM based local area wireless data transmission
systems is assumed [3].
2.1 Phase Errors by Carrier Frequency Offset
The phase error caused by carrier frequency offset (CFO) can be approximated as
the same for all subcarriers in the frequency domain within one OFDM symbols.
Here the CFO phase error can be estimated as the average value over all
corresponding subcarriers within one symbol period. In case only the pilot
subcarriers are utilized for the error estimation the estimated phase error by CFO is
represented as follows:

θˆi =

1
Np

∑φ

(1)

i, j
j∈{ pilot _ index}

where pilot _ index represents a set of subcarrier indices where the pilots are located
and N p the total number of pilot subcarriers within one OFDM symbol. Also φi , j is
the estimated phase error values contained in the received signal sample where i and
j represent indices for OFDM symbol and subcarrier, respectively.
When payload signals are also used for the phase error estimation the error detector
uses slightly modified procedure considering the locations and the involved number
of data subcarriers. The combined form of phase error estimation can be represented
as follows when both the pilot and the payload data with channel quality information
are utilized:

θˆi =

∑

2

j∈{ pilot _ index}

Np

∑

Hˆ j φ i , j +

j∈{ pilot _ index}

Hˆ j

2

∑

2

j∈{ data _ index}

+ Nd

∑

Hˆ j φ i′, j

j∈{data _ index}

Hˆ j

2

(2)

where the data _ index represents a set of indices where payload data are located.
Also N d is the total number of subcarriers associated with payload data and φi,′ j is
the estimated phase error based on data subcarriers. The estimated channel gain in j th
subcarrier is represented as Hˆ which is obtained using the preamble part appeared at
j

the beginning portion of the packet. The estimation performance is expected to be
improved when the channel information for each subcarrier is involved in the phase
error estimator. In that case the channel with higher gain contributes more in the

Robust Phase Tracking for High Capacity Wireless Multimedia

735

estimation process while the channel experiencing more fading less contribution
which can provide more reliable results.
2.2 Phase Errors by Sampling Frequency Offset
The presence of sampling frequency offset in the time domain is reflected into the
linearly varying phase error in the frequency domain. Here the slope of the phase
error in the frequency domain corresponds to the sampling frequency offset.
Detection of the slope based on the pilot subcarriers can be summarized as follows
when the well known linear regression method is applied:

αˆ i =

∑ j ⋅φ

j∈{ pilot _ index}

∑j

i, j

(3)

2

j∈{ pilot _ index}

where αˆ i is the estimated slope. Also i and j represent indices for OFDM symbol
and subcarrier, respectively. The slope estimation optimized in least mean squared
sense utilizing channel quality, payload data and the pilot can be easily derived as
follows:

αˆ i =

∑

2

j∈{ pilot _ index}

∑

Hˆ j ⋅ j ⋅ φi , j +

j∈{ pilot _ index}

2

Hˆ j ⋅ j 2 +

∑

Hˆ j ⋅ j ⋅ φi′, j

∑

Hˆ j ⋅ j 2

j∈{data _ index}

2

2

(4)

j∈{data _ index}

Here the squared channel gain for the corresponding subcarriers is used for the
estimation which is expected to improve the estimation and tracking performances.

3 Simulation Results
In this section four representative tracking schemes are compared based on the BER
performances. In all cases the maximum offset 40ppm is assumed which the IEEE
802.11a/g system allows. Also the packet structure follows the above mentioned
high speed wireless LAN system with 500 byte payload data per packet modulated
with BPSK. The RMS delay spread value is assumed to be 50ns. The pilot based
scheme shows 1.9dB degradation and ‘Decision + Pilot’ case 0.7dB compared to
the ideal performance. On the other hand the performance of ‘Decision + Pilot +
CSI’ shows comparable performance to the ideal one. As the simulation results
show, the channel state information (CSI) is very effective in the fading channels
(additional 1.0dB over the ‘Decision + Pilot’). The performance advantage of the
payload data based scheme over conventional pilot based one is about 1.0dB gain as
shown in Fig. 1.

736

T. Jeon

Id e a l
T ru e D a ta A id e d
D e c is io n + P ilo t
P ilo t
D e c is io n + P ilo t + C S I

1.00E +00
1.00E -01
1.00E -02
R
E 1.00E -03
B
1.00E -04
1.00E -05
1.00E -06
6

7

8

9

10

11

EbNo

Fig. 1. BER simulation results for 50ns delay spread channel

4 Conclusion
This paper proposes an improved phase tracking algorithm where both carrier
frequency offset and the sampling frequency offset are estimated and tracked to
reduce the packet error rate which is one of the major QoS factors for high capacity
multimedia wireless network. In the proposed method the estimation reliability is
improved by adopting channel gain weight or channel information on the phase error
estimation process. Computer based simulation results are also discussed to verify the
effectiveness of the scheme.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by Material and Component R&D program funded by
Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Energy of Korea (under grant 10027927).

References
1. J. A. C. Bingham: Multicarrier modulation for data transmission: An idea whose time has
come. IEEE Communication Magazine, vol. 28 (1990) 4-14
2. B. Yang, K. Letaief, R. Cheng, Z. Cao: Timing Recovery for OFDM Transmission. IEEE
JSAC, vol. 8, no. 11 (2000) 2278-2291
3. J. Terry, J. Heiskala: OFDM Wireless LAN, A Theoretical and Practical Guide. Sam
Publishing (2002)

