Virtual Reality and Desktop as a Combined
Interaction-Visualisation Medium for
a Problem-Solving Environment
E.V. Zudilova and P.M.A. Sloot
Section Computational Science
Faculty of Science, University of Amsterdam
Kruislaan 403, 1098 SJ Amsterdam, The Netherlands
[elenaz|sloot]@science.uva.nl

Abstract. The paper addresses the problem of how to make a human-machine
interaction user-friendlier within a problem-solving environment. Two different
projection modalities – virtual reality and desktop solution - are compared in
respect to interaction capabilities provided by the Virtual Radiology Explorer
(VRE) – case study of this research. The VRE is a problem-solving
environment for vascular reconstruction, developed by the Section
Computational Science of the University of Amsterdam. The potential users of
the VRE are physicians, whose attitudes and motivations vary. The combination
of virtual and desktop interaction modes within the same environment may help
to satisfy the wider range of VRE users, in comparison to the case when only
one projection modality is used. A Personal Space Station is considered as a
possible solution for deploying this concept.

1 Introduction
A problem-solving environment (PSE) provides a primary (or end) user with a set of
hardware and software resources for building a specific framework to solve a target
class of problems. Ideally this framework is to be built in such a way that a user can
exploit modern technologies without specialised knowledge of underlying hardware
and software.
In reality the situation is far from ideal. It is supposed that a primary user knows
how to use simulation and visualisation programs (libraries, modules, software
components, etc.) and that he is able to characterise a problem to be solved using a
specific definition language. Most of developers do not take into account the fact that
a primary user of a PSE is a scientist, who focuses mostly on his research area, and he
is not very experienced as a computer user and needs intuitive interaction capabilities
and a feedback adapted to his skills and knowledge.
PSEs’ developers focus today more and more on modern advanced technologies
concerning also the projection equipment used as an interaction-visualisation
P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2659, pp. 1025–1034, 2003.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

1026

E.V. Zudilova and P.M.A. Sloot

medium. The choice of projection equipment today is mostly task-related or even
spontaneous. As a result, a human-machine interaction provided by PSEs is far from
intuitive. Existing projection modalities have not been investigated yet in respect to
usability factors. Meanwhile, the selection of an appropriate projection modality in
accordance with user’s tasks, preferences and personal features has to be used as a
basis for building a motivated PSE.
The PSE introduced in this paper is a framework for rapid prototyping of an
exploration environment that permits a user to explore interactively the visualised
results of a simulation and manipulate the simulation parameters in near real-time,
where a pre-operative planning of a vascular reconstruction procedure is a test case
for making experiments.
Section 2 of the paper contains the description of the Virtual Radiology Explorer
(VRE): its functionality, architecture and main interaction capabilities. Section 3
classifies users of the VRE and their needs in respect to different projection
modalities. In section 4 two different approaches of deploying interactionvisualisation capabilities within a PSE are presented. The Virtual Operating Theatre
and the Individual Desktop Environment are differentiated by functional and
interaction capabilities needed by different groups of users of the VRE. The notion of
a Personal Space Station is introduced as a possible solution to combine two these
mediums within the same environment.

2 The Simulated Environment for Vascular Reconstruction
2.1 Introduction to the Vascular Reconstruction
Vascular diseases affect arteries and veins. Vascular disorders in general fall into two
categories: aneurisms and stenosis. An aneurysmal disease is a balloon like swelling
in the artery. Stenosis is a narrowing or blockage of the artery. The purpose of the
vascular reconstruction is to redirect and increase blood flow or repair a weakened or
aneurysmal artery if necessary.
There are several imaging techniques that can be used to detect vascular disorders.
3D data acquired by computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) is converted into a set of 2D slices that can be displayed and evaluated from
various perspectives and at different levels. Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA)
is a technique for imaging blood vessels that contain flowing blood. It is very popular
among cardiovascular specialists because of its ability to non-invasively visualise a
vascular disease.
The verification of the operation plan is one of the most complicated tasks in
vascular surgery. Different treatments for vascular diseases exist today. They include
adding shunts and bypasses in the case of aneurysms and applying thrombolysis
techniques, balloon angioplasty, bypasses and stent placement for a stenosis. The best
treatment is not always obvious because of the complexity of a vascular disease and
because of another diseases that a patient may have.

Virtual Reality and Desktop as a Combined Interaction-Visualisation Medium

1027

2.2 A Design Concept
The Virtual Radiology Explorer (VRE) gives a possibility to verify whether the
selected treatment is the best in the current circumstances.
The VRE is a PSE, that puts a user into an experimental cycle simulated by a
computer and let him apply his expertise to find better solution for the treatment of a
vascular disease. The criterion of the success of a treatment is the normalisation of a
blood flow in the affected area. The procedure of adding a bypass is of the most
interest to us as it can be used both for treatment of aneurysms and stenosis.
The design concept of the VRE is represented on Fig.1.

Fig. 1. A design concept

A simulation part of the VRE simulates the parameters of a patient’s blood flow,
i.e. velocity, pressure and shear stress. A user monitors the simulation process and
controls the blood flow parameters. He has a possibility to add a bypass and to check
whether a blood flow was normalised or not. He can also change the visualisation
parameters, such as sample rate, scale, colour palette, light effects, etc.
The input for conducting experiments is scanned data of a patient stored in a
database, which also contains an archive of interesting cases and interesting vascular
images. This information is useful for both diagnostics and planning a treatment.
Fig.2 represents the current architecture of the VRE system, where the starting
point is a scanner, and the front-end to the system is the Distributed Real-time
Interactive Virtual Environment (DRIVE) system – a PC based environment,
including a single-wall projection device developed by our group in the University of
Amsterdam [1, 12].
The concept of interaction in virtual reality was selected as a basis for building the
DRIVE system. Stereovision is the normal way almost everyone sees in the real world
[4]. The virtual reality permits to build an environment where users interact freely
with a 3D space and entities within it.

1028

E.V. Zudilova and P.M.A. Sloot

The working prototype of the VRE is provided with a multi-modal interface
described in [10]. It combines natural input modes of context sensitive interaction by
voice, hand gestures and direct manipulation of virtual 3D objects. We called this
interaction mode the ‘Virtual Operating Theatre’, as a user 'plays' a role of a vascular
surgeon applying a treatment of a vascular disease on a simulated patient [2].
The functionality of the VRE has been described in earlier publications [2, 3, 10].
Data conversion, segmentation, LBM-grid [5] generation, fluid flow simulation,
surface and volume rendering are complicated computational tasks that need
additional resources. But they are not very interesting in respect to human-machine
interaction, as most of them are non-interactive or just can be run, paused or stopped
by a user.

Fig. 2. Experimental set-up for the vascular reconstruction

2.3 Interaction Capabilities
Human-machine interaction within the VRE is concentrated mainly on retrieving data
about a patient from a Medical DataBase (DB), conducting interactive measurements
and grid editing.
Grid editing provides the possibility to edit the initial geometry of an artery: to
remove insignificant elements or restore the fragments lost during the segmentation.
Grid editing permits a user to create a bypass and place it on an artery. A bypass is a
graft rerouting a blood flow around blockages. Usually it is a piece of vein taken from
elsewhere in the body or an implant made from an organic material.
Measurements are important for diagnostics. Clinical decision-making relies on
evaluation of the vessels in terms of a degree of narrowing for stenosis and dilatation

Virtual Reality and Desktop as a Combined Interaction-Visualisation Medium

1029

(increase over normal arterial diameter) for aneurysm. The selection of a correct
bypass (its shape, length, diameter) also depends on sizes and geometry of an artery.
The interactive measurement component of the VRE [3] provides the possibility to
measure quantitatively a distance, angle, diameter and some other parameters
characterizing a 3D object in a virtual world. For conducting a measurement, a user
has to position a corresponding number of active markers on an object.
A free clipping engine, which we are developing currently, is also an interactive
component of the VRE. It permits to build clipping planes of different orientations in
a 3D space. Having made a section of a 3D object by means of a clipping plane, a
user can look inside an artery. Moving a clipping plane he will see the original data
obtained from a scanner slice by slice.

3 User Attitudes to Different Projection Modalities
3.1 Users
The VRE users are divided into two main groups (see Fig. 3):
−
−

System managers;
Primary users.

A system manager is responsible for maintenance and support of primary users, local
software and hardware availability, remote data transfer and management of
distributed computational resources. A system manager deals with system and

Fig. 3. User Classification

1030

E.V. Zudilova and P.M.A. Sloot

resource management: reliable network connection, secure authentication of primary
users, access to computational-visualisation resources, availability of staff for specific
equipment (MRA/MRI/CT scanners), etc.
Primary users are people, who use the VRE as a tool for conducting experiments. It
is expected that the VRE will be used for the interactive decision support by vascular
surgeons, radiologists (both diagnosis and interventional) and technologists. Vascular
technologists are people from scientific or radiography background. They conduct
patients' testing using special equipment, including MRA/MRI/CT scanners, for
diagnosis of arterial and venous diseases. The VRE can also be used for training of
medical students and novice physicians.
Potential users of the VRE differentiate by their preferences, skills, motivation,
cognitive features and stress factors [11]. As a result, their expectations about the
interaction within the VRE also vary.
User comfort is very important for the success of any software application. The
working prototype of the VRE is almost finished. That’s why we focus our today’s
efforts mostly on the improvement of the interaction and visualisation capabilities
within the VRE. The primary users are of the most interest to us because most of them
are inexperienced computer users and they expect that a PSE will provide a humanmachine interaction similar to the interaction in a real world.
3.2 Users’ Needs: Virtual Operating Theatre or Personal Desktop Environment?
A human-machine interaction depends to a great extent on projection equipment
selected for deploying an interaction-visualisation medium. Today’s existing solutions
differentiate by information and visual design, provided forms of navigation,
locomotion, selection and manipulation.
The research presented in this paper is focused on comparison of two projection
modalities: the Virtual Operating Theatre introduced in section 2 and Personal
Desktop Environment, which is an interaction-visualisation mode supported by
standard PC/PDA applications.
The heuristic evaluation [6] of the VRE and the first user interviews, conducted
recently, show that the concept of the Virtual Operating Theatre does not satisfy all
VRE users.
It was already mentioned above that the DRIVE system was selected as projection
equipment for deploying a concept of the Virtual Operating Theatre. One of the
challenges of the DRIVE system is that it provides a shared interaction environment
[12].
‘One-to-one’ semi-structured interview, conducted recently to identify the
important variables for user profiling, shows that there is a possibility that some
surgeons and interventional radiologists will prefer to use a personal desktop version
of the exploration environment for accomplishing every-day tasks. As for the shared
environment, it may happen, that it will be used only for the collaborative work, i.e.
for training or medical conferences when the diagnosis and possible treatments are
discussed within a group of people. Both hypotheses will be checked via series of

Virtual Reality and Desktop as a Combined Interaction-Visualisation Medium

1031

semi-structured interviews. The preferences of technologists and diagnosis
radiologists with respect to different projection modalities are not obvious currently
and are also part of future analyses.
Like it was mentioned above, the VRE system can be used as a training
environment for novice physicians.
Two modes of interactive training exist [11]:
−
−

Lecture mode;
Tutorial mode.

If it is a ‘lecture mode’, a lecturer, responsible for all training components,
including theoretical, demonstrational and practical parts of a course, guides a class.
In this case the concept of the Virtual Operating Theatre is a good solution accepted
under the condition that the number of students in a group is optimal. A ‘tutorial
mode’ is oriented to students who want to study material independently. The
individual environment will satisfy them most of all. At the moment the VRE can be
used only in a lecture mode because the concept of the Virtual Operating Theatre does
not fit well to a tutorial mode of interactive training.
Such factors as users’ preferences and motivation, discussed above, have an
influence on the selection of an appropriate projection modality. But there exist one
more factor, which is the most important in this respect. This factor is called
‘simulator sickness’.
A simulator sickness [4, 9] is a kind of motion sickness except that it occurs in a
simulated environment without actual physical motion. The simulator sickness occurs
in conjunction with the virtual reality exposure. Users having simulator sickness
cannot work in a virtual reality. According to [9] almost a quarter of computer users
have simulator sickness. So approximately the same proportion of the VRE users will
be unable to work with its virtual environment. For this type of users desktop remains
the only possible solution.

4 A Personal Space Station as a Combined Interaction Medium
A Personal Space Station (PSS) is a relatively new concept for the implementation of
an interaction-visualisation environment that may help to solve problems mentioned
above [4].
The goal of a PSS is to allow a user to interact directly with a virtual world. A PSS
consists of a mirror in which a stereoscopic image is reflected. The user reaches under
the mirror to interact with the virtual objects directly with his hands or by using taskspecific input devices. The main advantage of a PSS is that it combines both elements
of desktop and virtual projection modalities within the same environment. And it is
possible to switch in between if necessary.
A PSS is an individual environment by definition, but there is a possibility to build
a shared environment where users can manipulate the same virtual objects working on
different PSSs. More information about the PSS concept can be found in [7].

1032

E.V. Zudilova and P.M.A. Sloot

Fig. 4. Grid-editing tool of the desktop version of the VRE

The idea to combine virtual and desktop projection modalities within the same
interaction-visualisation medium looks very attractive. In this case different types of
users will be able to work within the same environment having a minimal feeling of
discomfort. But building such combined medium is not an easy task. First of all, we
have to take into account, that interaction in virtual and desktop projection modalities
is different in respect to navigation, locomotion and manipulation capabilities [4, 8,
9]. To provide the possibility to switch between virtual and desktop interaction modes
within the VRE, its current interface has to be changed significantly, as it is oriented
currently mostly on the interaction in a virtual reality.
Let us compare a procedure of adding a bypass in virtual and desktop projection
modalities. In a virtual environment a user manipulates 3D objects. He deals with 3D
representations of an artery and a bypass. For building a bypass within the VRE a
spline primitive is used. The procedure of adding a bypass in a virtual environment
comes down to re-scaling of a spline and its correct positioning on an artery. For these
manipulations a user has a wand. To manipulate successfully in a 3D virtual world a
user should possess some special motor skills of navigation and manipulation, which
sometimes are not trivial and depend on the level of implemented interaction
capabilities.
As for the interaction in a desktop environment, user does not need additional
motor skills. The main problem here is that within desktop applications we cannot
manipulate 3D objects directly, we always deal with 2D projected representations of
these objects [9]. Fig. 4 presents a mock-up of the graphical editor for adding a bypass
within a desktop version of the VRE. 3D representation of objects does not have a big
sense for a desktop environment. It is just a passive viewer, while a user adds a
bypass operating with several projections of an artery, which orientations are predefined manually.

Virtual Reality and Desktop as a Combined Interaction-Visualisation Medium

1033

The same situation we have with a clipping procedure. In the case of virtual reality
a user can change orientation of a clipping plane using a wand. He can navigate in a
virtual world, look inside an artery and even walk through. In a desktop version
additional interface capabilities have to be applied. For instance, a user can select
slices of interest be means of a menu or a slider. A unique identification number will
help to define a concrete slice.
As for interactive measurements, like it was already mentioned in section 2, a user
first has to add active markers. Markers are building blocks of distance, angle and
linestrip measurements [3]. The number of necessary active markers depends on a
measurement to be done. For measuring a distance, a user has to add 2 markers, if it is
angle – 3, for conducting linestrip or tracing measurements – at least 2. At the
moment the interactive measurement component is available only for the virtual
version of the VRE. Switching to a desktop projection modality leads to a necessity of
deploying extra menus and sliders to simplify the work of a user in a projected 3D
world.

5 Discussion and Future Work
In this paper a PSE for simulated vascular reconstruction has been introduced. The
work is still in progress and one of the crucial issues to focus on is the improvement
of interaction capabilities within it. The heuristic evaluation conducted recently and
the initial stage of user profiling show that the human-machine aspects depend to a
great extent on a projection modality selected for deploying an interactionvisualisation medium.
As the primary users of the VRE are physicians who are usually not very familiar
with modern computer technologies, it is very important to make the process of their
interaction within a PSE as much comfortable as possible.
Two concepts – the Virtual Operating Theatre and the Individual Desktop
Environment – have been presented. It has been shown that both virtual reality and
desktop solution are claimed by the VRE users. That’s why we decided to combine
virtual and desktop interaction capabilities within one medium. A PSS may help to
bring this idea to life. Its main advantage is that it permits to switch from one to
another projection modality if necessary. The experimental version of a PSS is
currently being built in the University of Amsterdam within the Token 2000 project
“Distributed Interactive Medical Exploratory for 3D Medical Images”.
At the same time we are deploying a desktop version of a grid editing tool and free
clipping engine. It is also planned to build a desktop version of an interactive
measurement component of the VRE.
The final goal of this research is to investigate navigation, locomotion,
manipulation and measurement capabilities within the Virtual Operating Theatre and
the Individual Desktop Environment. The VRE running on a PSS will be an
experimental environment for this research. Of course, of most interest to us are the
attitudes of real users exploiting the VRE in their daily activities. For these case
studies we will collaborate with the Amsterdam Medical Centre, the Leiden
University Medical Centre and the Rotterdam Medical Centre.

1034

E.V. Zudilova and P.M.A. Sloot

Acknowledgements. The authors would like to thank Robert Belleman, Roman
Shulakov, Hans Ragas Denis Shamonin and Daniela Gavidia (Section Computational
Science, UvA) for the contribution to the development of the VRE; and Henriette
Cramer and Dr. Vanessa Evers (Social Informatics Department, UvA) for the input to
the usability studies.

References
1.

Belleman R.G., Stolk B., de Vries R.: Immersive Virtual Reality on commodity hardware,
Proceedings of the 7th annual conference of the Advanced School for Computing and
Imaging, pp. 297–304. ASCI, May 2001 (2001).
2. Belleman R.G., Sloot. P.M.A.: Simulated Vascular Reconstruction in a Virtual Operating
Theatre. CARS 2001 Conference (CARS2001), Berlin, Germany, June 2001 (2001).
3. Belleman R.G., Kaandorp J.A., Dijkman D., Sloot P.M.A: GEOPROVE: Geometric
Probes for Virtual Environments, Proc. of HPCN Europe '99, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands, pp. 817–827 (1999).
4. Bowman D.G., Hodges L.F.: User Interface Constraints for Immersive Virtual
Environment Applications. Graphics, Visualization and Usability Center Technical Report
GIT-GVU-95–26 (1995).
5. Kandhai B.D., Koponen A., Hoekstra A.G., Kataja M., Timonen J. and Sloot P.M.A.:
Lattice Boltzmann Hydrodynamics on Parallel Systems, Computer Physics
Communications, vol. 111, pp. 14–26 (1998).
6. Nielsen J.: Usability Engineering, Academic Press (2000).
7. Mulder J.D., van Liere R.: The Personal Space Station: Bringing Interaction within reach.
Center for Mathematics and Computer Science, CWI, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
(2001) http://www.cwi.nl/~robertl/papers/2002/laval/.
8. Pierce J., Forsberg A., Conway M.J., Hong S., Zeleznik R.: Image Plane Interaction
Techniques in 3D Immersive Environments, Proceedings of 1997 Symposium on
Interactive 3D Graphics, pp. 39–43 (1997).
9. Raskin J.: The Humane Interface: New Directions for Designing Interactive Systems,
Addison-Wesley Pub Co (2000).
10. Zudilova E.V., Sloot P.M.A., Belleman R.G.: A Multi-modal Interface for an Interactive
Simulated Vascular Reconstruction System, Proc. of the IEEE International Conference on
Multimodal Interfaces, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA, October 2002, pp. 313–319
(2002).
11. Zudilova E.V., Sloot P.M.A.: A First Step to a User-Centered Approach to a Development
of Adaptive Simulation- Visualization Complexes, Proc. of the International Conference
of the Systemics, Cybernetics and Informatics, Orlando, Florida, USA, July 2002, V. V,
pp. 104–110 (2002).
12. The University of Amsterdam Distributed Real-time Interactive Virtual Environment
(UvA-DRIVE) webpage. http://www.science.uva.nl/~robbel/DRIVE/

