Dynamics of Content-Based Networks
Duygu Balcan1 and Ay¸se Erzan1,2
1

2

Department of Physics, Faculty of Sciences and Letters
Istanbul Technical University,
Maslak 34469, Istanbul, Turkey
balcand@itu.edu.tr, erzan@itu.edu.tr
G¨
ursey Institute, P.O.B. 6, C
¸ engelk¨
oy 34680, Istanbul, Turkey
erzan@gursey.gov.tr

Abstract. Content-based networks are introduced and their topological
properties are outlined. A content-based model with Random Boolean
dynamics, designed to mimic the gene regulation network, exhibits an increase in the number and complexity of attractors for increasing number
of nodes. However, contrary to expectations based on Mean Field calculations for random scale-free networks, the attractors are not chaotic,
even for average connectivities in excess of 2. Thus, the present model
oﬀers a promising tool for understanding complex biological networks.

1

Introduction

Complex networks [1, 2, 3, 4] have become an essential tool for understanding
coarse grained properties of discrete, distributed systems with often highly speciﬁc interactions as, for example, in genomic or proteomic networks [5, 6], which
rely on recognition and binding mechanisms. Independently of the nature of the
interaction, we submit that the speciﬁcity of the network connections can be
modelled by requiring a certain amount of information to be shared between
the nodes. We have coined the term “content-based” to denote networks where
a certain information content coded in a common alphabet characterises each
node. In two previous papers [7, 8] a null-version of such a model with random
strings of letters, was formulated and simulations as well as analytical results
regarding its topological properties were provided. (An earlier, more ambitious
version of such a model was proposed by Reil [9].) In the present paper, we
extend our model to incorporate certain features of the gene regulation network
in a more realistic fashion [10, 11], and also include a dynamics, provided by
randomly assigned Boolean functions at the nodes, in the same spirit as the
Random Boolean Network (RBN) models introduced by Kauﬀman [12, 13].
In the following section we outline our content-based model and summarise
earlier results. In Section 3 the details of the extended model and the dynamics
will be introduced. In Section 4, preliminary results on the dynamics, and in
Section 5 a short discussion will be presented.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part III, LNCS 3993, pp. 1083–1090, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

1084

2

D. Balcan and A. Erzan

A Content-Based Null Model

In our original model a linear code of length L, which can be thought of as
an “artiﬁcial chromosome,” has elements which are randomly assigned from an
alphabet containing r + 1 letters with the probability distribution P (x),
P (x) = pδ(x − r) +

1−p
r

r−1

δ(x − ρ) .

(1)

ρ=0

Each “gene”, Gi , is deﬁned as the string between two successive occurrences of
the letter “r” on the chromosome, Gi ≡ (xi,1 , . . . , xi,j , . . . , xi,li ) where xi,j = r
and li is the length of the ith gene. This results in an exponential distribution
of string lengths, P (l) ∝ (1 − p)l . The model chromosome thus has only three
parameters, the length L, besides p and r appearing in the above distribution.
We now associate a network with this model chromosome, by assigning a node
to each “gene,” and postulating an interaction matrix wij based on the string
matching condition, thus:
wij =

1 if Gi ⊂ Gj
0 otherwise

.

(2)

It should be noted that the linear codes associated with the “genes” do not
necessarily represent a nucleotide sequence but rather should be considered as
the information content of that node. The probability of ﬁnding an edge between
two nodes with string-lengths l and k, directed from the ﬁrst to the second, is
p(l, k) = 1 − (1 − r−l )k−l+1 .
The resulting network is small-world type, having a large clustering coeﬃcient
and very small average shortest path length.[7] It is very robust to random
removal of nodes, and we conjecture that the percolation threshold is 0, as for
scale-free networks with exponents γ ≤ 3 [3, 14]. Moreover, the network exhibits
“Highly Optimised Tolerance” as deﬁned by Carlson and Doyle [15].
The in- and out-degree distributions are displayed in Fig.1. The out-degree
distribution has a continuous regime, decaying as a power law with an exponent
γ1 , followed by an oscillatory part whose envelope with an exponent γ2 where [8]
γ2 =

1 ln r + ln(1 − p)
,
2 ln r − ln(1 − p)

and

γ1 =

1
+ γ2 .
2

(3)

The length distribution of the sequences identiﬁed with the nodes changes the
topology of the network. Taking a Gaussian distribution for the lengths yields
in- and out-degree distributions both similar to that shown in Fig. 1a, but with
a sharper cut-oﬀ than for the case of the exponential length distribution.

3

A Content-Based Approach to Dynamics of Gene
Regulation

The dynamics of gene regulation networks has been modelled by Random Boolean Networks (RBN) [12, 13], where the genes at the nodes take Boolean values

Dynamics of Content-Based Networks

1085

Fig. 1. The out-degree and in-degree distributions (for L = 1.5 × 104 and L = 4 × 104
averaged over 2 × 104 random realisations of the random string). Numerical results are
indicated by circles, the solid lines are the theoretical expression. See Ref. [8].

σi (t), i = 1, . . . , N , indicating their state of activation (“on” or “oﬀ”), determined by randomly assigned Boolean functions with inputs from other genes.
The networks may be wired randomly, or with ﬁxed in-degree. Here we present
a model designed to mimic the dynamics of gene regulation, and which extends
the content-based model of the preceding section.
In our extended model (see Fig.2) each gene, corresponding to a node of the
regulatory network, is represented by a linear code having two distinct regions:
i) a regulatory sequence (RS) through which the activation of this gene is regulated by the binding of transcription factors (TFs), and ii) a coding region
which gets translated either into a TF or a structural protein (also see [9, 11]).
The sub-sequences occurring in a RS constitute the possible “binding sites” for
the TFs.
Let us denote the regulatory and coding regions of the ith gene by ρi and πi ,
i = 1, . . . , N , where the lengths of the two regions, lρi and lπi may be chosen
from diﬀerent distributions. In this study we have taken the minimum length of
the codes associated with the TFs, and the corresponding “binding sites,” to be
lmin = 1. Larger values may be used to tune the cut-oﬀ of the degree distribution
at large degrees.
Each character in the strings ρi or πi is chosen from an alphabet of r letters
with uniform probability 1/r. We will denote the mth subsequence of the string
(m)
ρi by ρi , where m ≡ (ν, l) with ν specifying the ﬁrst letter, and l, the length
of the sub-sequence. Note ν = 1, . . . , lρi and l ≤ lρi − ν + 1.
An interaction between a pair of genes is now deﬁned via a sequence-matching
condition (corresponding to Eq.(2)) between the TF of the ith gene and subsequences in the RS of the jth gene. Deﬁning
(m)

wij

(m)

=

1 if πi = ρj
0 otherwise

,

(4)

1086

D. Balcan and A. Erzan

the element of adjacency matrix between the ith and jth nodes becomes wij =
(m)
(m)
1 − m [1 − wij ], being nonzero only if at least one of the wij = 1. Note that
wij = wji , in general.
The activation state of the system at time t, Σ(t) ≡ (σ1 (t), . . . , σN (t)), evolves
under a set of Boolean operators associated with each node of the network. The
(m)
(m)
input to the Boolean operators Bj are the “binding states” bj (t) = wij σi (t) of
(m)

(m)

the sub-sequences ρj . If there exists a protein matching the sub-sequence ρj in
the regulatory sequence of the jth gene, and if the gene coding this protein is “on”
at time t ( σi (t) = 1), then it is assumed that this protein will bind the said sub(m)
sequence, in which case bj (t) = 1; otherwise it is zero. For those sub-sequences
which have no matches, the “binding states” are set identically equal to zero.
(m)
The truth table deﬁning the operator Bj ({bj (t)}) is constructed by as(m)

signing to each set {bj } of binding states, a value 1 or 0, with probability q or 1 − q as illustrated in Fig.2. Note that nodes with identical RSs will
have identical Boolean operators associated with them. Given an initial state
of the system, Σ(0), the dynamics of the system is now given by Σ(t + 1) =
(B1 (t), . . . Bi (t), . . . BN (t)).

Fig. 2. A small network with four nodes (A,B,C,D) and their associated RS and TF
sequences are shown in panel (a). The directed edges satisfy the matching conditions
between the TFs and sub-sequences of the RSs. The truth table for the Boolean function
associated with the RS of node A is shown on the left hand side of panel (b). The ﬁrst
six columns show the binding states of the “binding sites” a,b,. . .,abc. The last column
gives the value BA which has been randomly assigned to the set of binding states in
that row (not all the sets are shown).

4

Simulation Results

We have simulated the dynamics on the content-based random Boolean networks
deﬁned above, with identical distributions for the string lengths associated with
the RS and TF regions of each node i, choosing either (truncated) exponential

Dynamics of Content-Based Networks

1087

Fig. 3. Average values of the number, lengths, basin sizes and transient times for the
attractors of the dynamics for Gaussian (•) and exponential (◦) string-length distributions. We have taken r = 2, p = 0.5. The distributions are truncated and normalised
over the interval [1, 25]. The “Gaussian” distribution has l = 13, σ 2 = 50, whereas
the “exponential” distribution has a characteristic length of ξ 10.

or Gaussian distributions. The choice of an exponential length distribution was
motivated by the fact that it lends itself to analytical treatment [8]. However,
a careful analysis [11] of the length distribution of the binding sites in the regulatory regions of yeast [18, 19] reveals that it is a somewhat skewed, unimodal
distribution with a mean around 15 and a variance of about 4, when expressed in
binary code. We adjusted the parameters of the Gaussian distributions we used
so as to give networks that are not very sparse. Work is in progress to choose
diﬀerent appropriate length distributions for the TFs and the short binding sites
that they recognize, and the regulatory regions (RSs) in which the binding sites
are embedded. [20]
For systems having a ﬁnite number N of nodes, the volume of the phase
space Ω = 2N , is also ﬁnite. If we start from an initial conﬁguration and follow
its trajectory we will revisit some already visited states and fall into a cyclic
orbit known as an attractor of the system. The mean values of na and la , the
number and length of the attractors, give us some clue about the system’s stability and versatility. We ﬁnd (see Fig.3) that na , la as well as the average
transient time τ increase linearly with system size N , for both the Gaussian
and exponential string length distributions. However in all cases, the exponential
has higher growth rates with N for the above quantities, whereas the Gaussian
length distribution gives more stable results.
It is of interest to compare our ﬁnding with those of Aldana [16] who has
simulated Random Boolean dynamics on random scale-free networks, especially
with regard to whether the behaviour is ordered (where diﬀerences in initial

1088

D. Balcan and A. Erzan

conditions are wiped out), critical, or “chaotic,” by which we would like to
understand that the lengths of the orbits grow exponentially with N . The results
we get for the distribution of the number of precursors of phase points, and the
distribution of the number and length of the attractors, are very similar to those
found by Aldana [16] for scale-free networks with γc = 2.5 for p = 1/2, exhibiting
“critical” or borderline behaviour. The scaling exponents for our content-based
network in the large N limit are decidedly smaller than this value, and would
rather be expected to show chaotic behaviour within Aldana’s approach. This
unexpected stability of the dynamics on content-based networks also holds for
the mean connectivities: For the relatively small N ≤ 16 realisations which we
have simulated, the average undirected connectivities are smaller than 2 for the
truncated Gaussian, and larger than 2 for N ≥ 9, for the exponential length
distribution.
We have also simulated the average overlap function x(t) ,
x(t) ≡ 1 −

1
N

N

|Σ(t) − Σ (i) (t)|

,

(5)

i=1

where Σ (i) (0) diﬀers from Σ(0) at the ith node. The average is performed over
104 realisations of the network, and all Σ(0). Following the trajectory of this
quantity under successive steps of the dynamics, we ﬁnd, for each value of N
considered, that it converges to a set of points in a rather small but ﬁnite interval
lying below unity, as shown in Fig. 4, which becomes shifted to smaller values
for larger N , as both na and la grow. Even for small N , na > 1 with small
but ﬁnite probability, and the phase points to which trajectories originating in
diﬀerent basins of attraction converge are separated by ﬁnite distances. In the
presence of periodic orbits of lengths 1 ≤ li , one obtains a set of M
2 such ﬁnite

Fig. 4. The long-time trajectories of the overlap function for diﬀerent network sizes
5 ≤ N ≤ 13, for the exponential length distribution. Averages have been taken over 104
network realisations and all pairs of conﬁgurations having initial overlap x(0) = 1−1/N .

Dynamics of Content-Based Networks

1089

distances between pairs phase points, where M = ni a li . Thus, the persistence
of distances between randomly chosen points in phase space does not automatically signal “chaotic” behaviour, but the existence of multiple and/or periodic
attractors. The evolution of the x = 1 ﬁxed point with N and its consequences
for the phase diagram, [17] is under further investigation.

5

Discussion

In conclusion, let us note that the content-based network which we have proposed oﬀers ample possibilities for the modelling of biological networks. Due to
the interactions that can arise between sub-sequences of suﬃciently long codes,
we see that networks with topological properties similar to those observed today [6] can arise spontaneously, without the need to be assembled from scratch
by evolutionary processes.
The Boolean Dynamics on our content-based network yields an increase in the
number and complexity of the attractors with the number of nodes, and seems
to be near-critical, although, on the basis of the Mean-Field arguments in [16]
one would expect “chaotic” behaviour. We note that the expression patterns of
yeast have recently been analyzed by Zivkovi´c et al. [21], and they ﬁnd both
periodic and stochastic behaviour, considering the diﬀerential expression levels
of the genes. The discrete nature of the present model does not allow us to make
detailed comparisons with their results. Nevertheless, we also ﬁnd patterns where
subsets of genes are going through cycles of diﬀerent lengths, while some nodes
are frozen in one or the other state, and that certain perturbations to the state
of expression may switch the expression pattern to that of a neighbouring basin
of attraction.
Acknowledgements. It is a pleasure to thank M. Mungan and A. Kabak¸cıo˘
glu,
with whom we have collaborated on some of the results reviewed here, for many
useful discussions. AE gratefully acknowledges partial support from the Turkish
Academy of Sciences.

References
1. Bollobas, B.: Modern Graph Theory. Springer-Verlag, New York (1998)
2. Pastor-Satorras, R., Vespignani, A.: Evolution and Structure of the Internet: A
Statistical Physics Approach. Cambridge University Press, London (2004)
3. Dorogovstsev, S.N., Mendes, J.F.F.: Evolution of Networks. Adv. Phys. 51, (2002)
1079–1187
4. Albert, R., Barab´
asi, A.-L.: Statistical Mechanics of Complex Networks. Rev. Mod.
Phys. 74 (2002) 47–97
5. Sole, R.V., Pastor-Satorras, R.: Complex Networks in Genomics and Proteomics.
In: Bornholdt, S., Schuster, H.G. (eds.): Handbook of Graphs and Networks. WileyVCH Verlag, Berlin (2002)
6. Barab´
asi, A.-L., Oltvai, Z.N.: Network Biology: Understanding the Cell’s Functional Organization. Nat. Rev. Genet. 5 (2004) 101–113

1090

D. Balcan and A. Erzan

7. Balcan, D., Erzan, A.: Random model for RNA interference yields scale free network. Eur. Phys. J. B 38 (2004) 253–260
8. Mungan, M., Kabak¸cıo˘
glu, A., Balcan, D., Erzan, A.: Analytical solution of a
stochastic content-based network model. J. Phys A: Math Gen. 38 (2005) 9599–
9620
9. Reil, T.: Dynamics of gene expression in an artiﬁcial genome - implications for
biological and artiﬁcial ontogeny. In: Floreano, D., Nicoud, J.D., Mondada, F.,
(eds.): Advances in Artiﬁcial Life. Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Berlin
Heidelberg, Springer-Verlag (1999) 457–466
10. Alberts, B. et al.: Molecular Biology of the Cell. Chapter 9. Garland Science, N.Y.
(2002)
11. Kabak¸cıo˘
glu, A., Mungan, M., Balcan, D., Erzan, A.: in preparation
12. Kauﬀman, S.A.: Metabolic stability and epigenesis in randomly connected nets. J.
Theor. Biol. 22 (1969) 437–467
13. Kauﬀman, S.A.: The Origins of Order: Self-organization and Selection in Evolution.
Oxford University Press, N.Y. (1993)
14. Cohen,R., Erez,K., Ben-Avraham, D., Havlin,S.: Resilience of the Internet to Random Breakdowns. Phys. Rev. Lett. 85 (2000) 4625–4628
15. Carlson, J. M. and Doyle, J.: Highly Optimised Tolerance: A mechanism for power
laws in designed systems. Phys. Rev. E 60, (1999) 1412–1427
16. Aldana, M.: Boolean dynamics of networks with scale-free topology. Physica D 185
(2003) 45–66
17. Derrida B., Eckmann, J.-P., Erzan, A.: Renormalisation groups with periodic and
aperiodic orbits. J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 16 (1983) 893–906
18. Lee, T.I. et al. : Transcriptional Regulatory Networks in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Science 298 (2002) 799-804
19. Harbison, C.T. et al. : Transcriptional regulatory code of a eukaryotic genome.
Nature 431 (2004) 99-104
20. Oikonomou, Th. and Provata, A.: Non-extensive trends in the size distribution
of Coding and Non-coding DNA sequences in the Human Genome. Eur. Phys. J.
B, in press. The length distributions for the coding (non-coding) regions of the
human genome are found to display diﬀerent power law tails, here interpreted as
indicative of short (long) range correlations, depending on the exponents. Note,
however, that some of the so called intergenic non-coding regions actually code the
highly conserved binding sites for the transcription factors.See Refs. [10, 19].
21. Zivkovi´c, J., Tadi´c, B., Wick, N., and Thurner, S. :Statistical Indicators of Collective Behaviour and Functional Clusters in Gene Networks of Yeast. Eur. Phys. J.
B, in press.

