Modeling and Simulation of High-Speed Machining
Processes Based on Matlab/Simulink
Rodolfo E. Haber1,2,*, J.R. Alique1, S. Ros1, and R.H. Haber3
1

Instituto de Automática Industrial (CSIC),
km. 22,800 N-III, La Poveda, 28500
Madrid, Spain
rhaber@iai.csic.es
2
Escuela Politécnica Superior,
Ciudad Universitaria de Cantoblanco,
Calle Francisco Tomás y Valiente, 11
28049 – Madrid, Spain
Rodolfo.Haber@ii.uam.es
3
Departamento de Control Automático,
Universidad de Oriente, 90400, Cuba

Abstract. This paper shows the mathematical development to derive the
integral-differential equations and the algorithms implemented in MATLAB to
predict the cutting force in real time in high speed machining processes. This
paper presents a cutting-force-based model able to describe a high-speed
machining process. The model considers the cutting force as an essential output
variable in the physical processes taking place in high-speed machining. For the
sake of simplicity, only one type of end mill shapes is considered (i.e.,
cylindrical mill) for real-time implementation of the developed algorithms. The
developed model is validated in slot-milling operations. The results corroborate
the importance of the cutting-force variable for predicting tool wear in highspeed machining operations.
Keywords: modeling; complex systems; high-speed machining.

1 Introduction
One of the basic tasks manufacturing systems have to perform today is machining,
especially high-speed machining (HSM), a real case of a complex electromechanical
system [1]. The idea of characterizing the machining process using mathematical
models to yield an approximate description of the physical phenomenon aroused the
interest of many researchers [2]. That work has been carried on, and it has enabled
computational tools to be developed for modeling and simulating the conventional
machining process, relying on classic modeling and identification strategies.

*

Corresponding author.

V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3516, pp. 627 – 634, 2005.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

628

R.E. Haber et al.

At the present time, modeling high-speed machining processes as a complex
electromechanical process, especially high-speed milling, is a very active area of
investigation that is peppering the scientific community with challenges [3,4]. Highspeed machining has now been adopted and put into regular use at many companies,
and yet certain points of how to monitor cutting-tool condition have been worked out
only partially as yet, largely for lack of a mathematical model of the process that can
feasibly be used in real-time applications. This paper is aimed at deriving a
mathematical model and characterizing the high-speed cutting process in high-speed
milling operations through the study of the dynamic behavior of cutting force.
Previous work concerning conventional machining has been borne in mind as the
essential starting point for this work [5].
A mathematical model is essential for understanding the dynamic behavior of
metalworking processes and improving their operation on the basis of time or
frequency responses. Increasingly, both experimental models and analytical models
are being used in metalworking for the obtaining, manufacturing and processing (e.g.,
shaping and cutting) of metal materials. When a new product or metal part (e.g.,
mold) is being designed, the item must pass simulation testing on the process
involved (e.g., the cutting process) before work ever begins on the item’s physical
manufacture. How useful simulations ultimately are depends largely on how faithfully
the mathematical models they use describe the real behavior of the cutting process.
Moreover, computational methods are essential to yield an adequate accuracy in the
prediction and real-time implementation of the model.
The main goal of this paper is to derive a mathematical model from the
characterization of the physical processes taking place during high-speed machining
and to implement the model in MATLAB/SIMULINK. The paper is organized into
five sections. Section 1 describes the state of the art, analyzes some previous work on
the subject, gives a quick description of high-speed machining and finally outlines
some questions related with the implementation of HSM models in MATLAB.
Section 2 presents the kinematics of the model, considering the geometrical form of
the helix for the cylindrical mill. Section 3 addresses the mathematical formulation of
the proposed model and sets up the integral-differential equations for calculating
cutting force in the time domain. Section 4 gives the results yielded by the simulations
and tests in real time. Lastly, the paper frames some conclusions, looks ahead to some
possible future work and discusses the lines opened to investigation.

2 Geometrical Model of the Tool
Geometrical modeling of the helical cutting edge includes the kinematic and dynamic
analysis of the cutting process. Predicting cutting forces requires a system of
coordinates, the helix angle and the angular distance of a point along the cutting edge
[6]. The mathematical expressions that define this geometry in a global coordinate
system are presented below in the geometric model, using classic vector notation.
G
Vector r (z ) (figure 1) drawn from point O to a point P in cylindrical coordinates
is expressed mathematically in equation 1.

Modeling and Simulation of High-Speed Machining Processes

G
G
G
G
G
G
G
r j = x j i + y j j + z j k = r (φ j )(sin φ j i + cos φ j j ) + z φ j k

( )

629

(1)

where φ j is the radial rake angle of a point P at tooth j. Point P lies at an axial depth
of cut ap in the direction of axis Z, at a radial distance r (z ) on the XY plane, with an
axial rake angle κ (z ) and a radial lag angle of ψ (z ) .

Fig. 1. Tool geometry

The geometry of the tool is represented mathematically, considering that the helical
cutting edge wraps parametrically around a cylinder. The mathematical model
dictated for the cutting edge considers that the edge is divided into small increments,
where the cutting coefficients can vary for each location. The initial point of reference
to the cutting edge of the tool ( j = 1) is considered to be the angle of rotation when
z = 0 is φ . The radial rake angle for the cutting edge j in a certain axial position z is
expressed as:

φ j (z ) = φ +

j

∑φ

p

− ψ ( z)

(2)

n =1

The lag angle ψ (z ) appears due to the helix angle θ . This angle is constant in the
case of a cylindrical mill. In the generalized model for the geometry of a mill with
helical teeth, the tool diameter may differ along the length of the tool, depending on
the shape of the tool. An infinitesimal length of this cutting edge may be expressed as
dS = dr = r 2 (φ ) + ( r ′(φ )) 2 + ( z ′(φ )) 2 dφ , r ′(φ ) =

dr (φ )
dz (φ )
, z′ =
dφ
dφ

(3)

630

R.E. Haber et al.

Chip thickness changes as a function of the radial rake (φ ) and axial rake (κ ) :

h j (φ j ) = s tj sin φ j ⋅ sin κ

(4)

For a cylindrical mill, the following conditions are defined for finding the general
solution:
r ( z) =

D
2

κ = 90º ψ = kθ z kθ = (2 tan θ ) / D

(5)

3 Dynamic Model of Cutting Forces
The force differentials ( dFt ) , ( dFr ) , ( dFa ) act on an infinitesimal element of the
cutting edge of the tool [7]:
dFt = K te dS + K tc h j (φ , κ )db
dFr = K re dS + K rc h j (φ , κ )db

(6)

dFa = K ae dS + K ac h j (φ , κ )db
dz
. In order to facilitate finding the mathematical
sin κ
relations inherent in this set-up, very small time increments are used. The positions of
the points along the cutting edge are evaluated with the geometrical model presented
herein above.
Furthermore, the characteristics of a point on the cutting surface are identified
using the properties of kinematic rigidity and the displacements between the tool and
the workpiece. The constants or cutting coefficients (Ktc,, Krc,, Kac, Kte,, Kre,, Kae) can
be found experimentally using cutting forces per tooth averaged for a specific type of
tool and material [8,9]. We might point out that these coefficients are highly
dependent on the location (axial depth) of the cutting edge. How these coefficients are
found shall not be addressed in this paper.
Cutting forces can be evaluated employing a system of Cartesian coordinates. After
transforming and total cutting forces as a function of φ are:

It is also considered that db =

Nf

Fx (φ ) =

∑ (F

xj (φ j ( z ))

j =1

∑

dFtj sin φ j

j =1

Nf

∑ (F

zj (φ j ( z ))

j =1

∑ ∫ [− dF
Nf

(Fyj (φ j ( z )) =

j =1

Fz (φ ) =

− dFtj cosφ j

j =1

Nf

Fy (φ ) =

∑ ∫ [− dF
Nf

=

z1

rj sin φ j sin κ j

z2

rj cosφ j sin κ j

z1

∑ ∫ [− dF
Nf

=

z2

j =1

z2

z1

rj cosκ j

]

− dFaj sin φ j cosκ j dz

]

− dFaj cosφ j cosκ j dz

(7)

]

0 − dFaj sin κ j dz

where z1 and z2 are the integration limits of the contact zone at each moment of
cutting and can be calculated from the geometrical model described herein above. For

Modeling and Simulation of High-Speed Machining Processes

631

the numerical calculation, the axial depth of cut is divided into disks having an
infinitesimal height dz. The differentials of the cutting forces are calculated along the
length of the cutting edge in contact, and they are summed to find the resulting forces
for each axis Fx (φ ) , F y (φ ) , Fz (φ ) in an angle of rotation.
The exact solution can be found by substituting, making κ = 90 D , and integrating,
we obtain the exact solution for cylindrical mill:

⎧ stj
− K tc cos 2φ j ( z ) + K rc 2φ j ( z ) − sin 2φ j ( z )
⎪
⎪ 4k β
Fx, j (φ j ( z )) = ⎨
⎪+ 1 K sin φ ( z ) − K cos φ ( z )
j
re
j
⎪ k β te
⎩

[

[

[

]]⎫⎪

]

⎫
⎧ − s tj
K tc (2φ j ( z ) − sin 2φ j ( z ) + K rc cos 2φ j ( z ) ⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪ 4k β
F y , j (φ j ( z )) = ⎨
⎬
1
⎪
⎪+
K cos φ j ( z ) − K re sin φ j ( z )
⎪
⎪ k β te
⎭
⎩

[

]

[

Fz , j (φ j ( z )) =

[

1
K ac s tj cos φ j ( z ) − K aeφ j ( z )
kβ

z j , 2 (φ j ( z ))

⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎭ z j ,1 (φ j ( z ))

z j , 2 (φ j ( z ))

(8)

]

]zz

z j ,1 (φ j ( z ))

j , 2 (φ j ( z ))
j ,1 (φ j ( z ))

where z j ,1 (φ j ( z )) and z j ,2 (φ j ( z )) are the lower and upper limits, respectively, that
establish the axial depth of cut at lip j of the mill.

4 Simulations and Experimental Validation
The algorithms were implemented in MATLAB, drawing upon the mathematical
models [10]. Despite MATLAB is not a computer algebra system, it is very useful as
software tool for doing numerical computations with matrices and vectors. It can also
display information graphically and includes many toolboxes for several research and
applications areas. MATLAB was chosen for the advanced numerical methods that
are available, the possibility it affords of running simulations and applications in real
time and the portability of the programs that are developed with its use (i.e., it is
possible to generate C/C++ programs from MATLAB files). Neither Matlab toolbox
was used for programming the model.
The main difficulties are choosing the cutting coefficients and the properties of the
materials, which were taken from earlier work on the subject [11]. The workpiecematerial properties that were used for the simulation in the MATLAB environment
are the properties of GGG-70 cast iron with nodular graphite. In this study, in the
simulation and in the real tests, two cutting conditions for high-speed milling
operations were regarded: Vc=546 m/min, sp=14500 rpm, f=1740 mm/min, ap = 0.5
mm, ae = 0, as = 12 mm, θ=30o, H = 25.0 mm, D = 12.0 mm where D is the tool
diameter [mm], H is the total tool cutting-edge height [mm], θ is the helix angle
[degrees], ap is the axial depth of cut along the Z axis [mm], ae is the radial depth of

632

R.E. Haber et al.

cut at the starting point (φst) [mm], as is the radial depth of cut at the stopping point
(φex) [mm], f is the feedrate [mm/min], Vc is the cutting speed [m/min], sp is the
spindle speed in [rpm].
The constants used in the simulation and in the experimental validation were Ktc =
2172 N/mm2, Krc = 850 N/mm2, Kte=17.3 N/mm, Kre = 7.8 N/mm, Kac = 726 N/mm2,
Kae = 6.7 N/mm. These constants or cutting coefficients referring to the material and
the tool were drawn from the available literature, due to their similarity to the
characteristics of the tool/material set-up used in the study in question.
The real-time model validation tests were conducted at a KONDIA HS1000 highspeed machining center equipped with a Siemens 840D open CNC. Actual cutting
force signal was measured using a Kistler 9257 dynamometric platform installed on
the testbed. Measurement was done by means of a DAQBOARD-2005 dataacquisition card at a sampling frequency of 50 kHz. A Karnasch 30.6472 cylindrical
mill 12 mm in diameter was selected to validate the model developed under the
procedure described herein. The chosen test piece, measuring 200x185x50 mm, was
made of GGG-70 iron and was machined in a spiral pattern. The real cutting
conditions chosen were the same as considered above for the simulation. A view of
the cutting tool used in the tests (a), the workpiece and its profile to be mechanized
(b) and the machine-tool laboratory (c) is shown in figure 2.

Fig. 2. Cutting tool for experiments, b) experimental piece, c) partial view of the Laboratory for
machine tool research

Figure 3 shows the real behavior of cutting forces Fx, Fy and Fz and the resulting
force FqT for the case analyzed. The model’s response is shown as a solid line.

Modeling and Simulation of High-Speed Machining Processes

633

Fig. 3. Measured (straight line) and predicted by model (dashed line) cutting force for a new
tool in high speed slot cutting

The average resulting cutting force Fe estimated by the model is 56.7N and the
average resulting cutting force FqT measured in a real high-speed cutting operation is
55.6N. The error criterion E =

(FqT − Fe )⋅ 100

FqT

, is 4.5%.

5 Conclusions
This paper reports some results in modeling the high-speed cutting process and the
validation of the model in question. The mathematical model implemented and
assessed in MATLAB has two fundamental, co-dependent parts. The first is a
multiple-input system that defines the model’s kinematics, where constants and
variables describe the tool geometry, the material type and the cutting parameters.
The second addresses the dynamics, represented by integral-differential equations. In
the case of cylindrical mill the exact analytical solution is found, inasmuch as the
limits of integration and the boundary conditions along the tool geometry can be preestablished.
On the basis of the literature to which we have had access, this paper constitutes
the first successful attempt in the implementation and application of computationally
efficient algorithms for predicting cutting force in high-speed machining processes.
With such models available, there is now a short-term way of dealing with essential
questions concerning the surface finish and stability of high-speed cutting operations.

634

R.E. Haber et al.

Despite the success in the application of Matlab, computer algebra in the
formulation and solution of more complex cutting tools, as well as the use of the
interface to communicate Mathematica and Matlab will be explored during future
research.

References
1. Haber R. E., J.E. Jiménez, J.L. Coronado, A. Jiménez: Modelo matemático para la
predicción del esfuerzo de corte en el mecanizado a alta velocidad, Revista Metalurgia
Madrid 40(4) (2004) 247-258.
2. Bukkapatnam S.T.S, A. Lakhtakia, S.R.T. Kumara: Analysis of sensor signals shows
turning on a lathe exhibits low-dimensional chaos, Physics Review E 52 (3) (1995) 23752387.
3. Haber R. E., J.E. Jiménez, C.R. Peres, J.R. Alique: An investigation of tool wear
monitoring in a high-speed machining process, Sensors and Actuators A: Physics 116
(2004) 539-545.
4. Cantillo K. A., R. E. Haber Guerra, A. Alique, R. Galán, CORBA-based open platform for
processes monitoring. An application to a complex electromechanical process. In: Bubak
M., Albada G.D., Sloot P.M.A., Dongarra J. (eds.): Computational Science ICCS2004,
Lecture Notes in Computer Science 3036 (2004) 531-535.
5. Altintas Y.: Manufacturing Automation: metal cutting mechanics, machine tool vibrations,
and CNC design, Cambridge University Press, USA, 2000.
6. Yucesan G., Y. Altintas: Prediction of ball end milling forces, J. Eng. Ind. Trans. ASME 1
(1) (1996) 95-103.
7. Altintas Y., P. Lee: Mechanics and dynamics of ball end milling forces, J. Manuf. Sci.
Eng.-Trans. ASME 120 (1998) 684-692.
8. Fu H. J., R.E. Devor, S.G. Kapoor: A mechanistic model for the prediction of the force
system in face milling operation, J. Eng. Ind. Trans. ASME 106 (1) (1984) 81-88.
9. 9. Budak E., Y. Altintas, E.J.A. Armarego: Prediction of milling force coefficients from
orthogonal cutting data, J. Eng. Ind. Trans. ASME 118 (1996) 216-224.
10. The Math Works Inc. Users manual Matlab 6.5 Release 13, Natick, Massachusetts, 2003.
11. Engin S., Y. Altintas: Mechanics and dynamics of general milling cutters Part I: helical
end mills Int. J. Mach. Tools Manuf. 41 (2001) 2195-2212.

