Risk Assessment Method Based on Business
Process-Oriented Asset Evaluation for
Information System Security
Jung-Ho Eom, Seon-Ho Park, Young-Ju Han, and Tai-Myoung Chung
Internet Management Technology Laboratory,
Department of Computer Engineering,
School of Information and Communication Engineering,
Sungkyunkwan University,
300 Cheoncheon-dong, Jangan-gu,
Suwon-si, Gyeonggi-do, 440-746, Republic of Korea
{jheom,shpark,yjhan}@imtl.skku.ac.kr and tmchung@ece.skku.ac.kr

Abstract. We presented risk assessment methodology focused on
business-process oriented asset evaluation and qualitative risk analysis
method. The business process-oriented asset evaluation is to evaluate asset’s value by the degree of asset contribution related to business process.
Namely, asset’s value is diﬀerent according to the importance of department to which asset belongs, the contribution of asset’s business, and
security safeguard, etc. We proposed new asset’s value evaluation applied to the weight of above factors. The weight is decided by evaluation
matrix by Delphi team. We assess risk by qualitative method applied
to the improved international standard method which is added the effectiveness of operating safeguard at information system. It reﬂects an
assumption that they can reduce risk level when existent safeguards are
established appropriately. Our model derives to practical risk assessment
method than existent risk assessment method, and improves reliability
of risk analysis.

1

Introduction

As information communication technology has developed steeply, business dependence on IT system is raising rapidly. As IT system has occupied important
role in business, it begins to increase the concern of security on IT system. To
protect IT system eﬀectively, it ﬁrstly needs to analyze overall IT system risks.
That is a risk assessment included the identiﬁcation and valuation of assets,
threat analysis, vulnerability analysis, the existing safeguards analysis and risk
evaluation[1,4,5]. We have been studying on develop substantial risk assessment
This research was supported by the MIC(Ministry of Information and Communication), Korea, under the ITRC(Information Technology Research Center) support
program supervised by the IITA(Institute of Information Technology Advancement)
(IITA-2006-C1090-0603-0028).
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part III, LNCS 4489, pp. 1024–1031, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Risk Assessment Method

1025

method which could be evaluated risk level according to asset importance in
organization. We focus on asset analysis reﬂected an organization’s information system(IS) characteristics and environment for assessing risk eﬀectively. So,
we applied business process-oriented asset analysis which an asset’s importance
could be diﬀerent in organization’s business-process viewpoint, even if assets
have same costs. Section 2 describes related work, section 3 presents our model
and section 4 demonstrates application of our model. Finally, we conclude in
section 5.

2
2.1

Related Works
Risk Assessment

Risk assessment is to assess a combination of the potential adverse business
impacts of unwanted incidents and the levels of vulnerabilities and threats. The
risk is a measure of the exposure to which an IS and the associated organization
may be subjected. The risk assessment’s goal is to identify and assess the risks
to which the IS and its assets are exposed, in order to select appropriate and
justiﬁed safeguards. Thus, the risk assessment is based on the values of the assets,
the levels of threats and vulnerabilities and the existing/planned safeguards.
The risk assessment method has two types; qualitative and quantitative methods. The former uses the rating scale which is evaluated with asset, threat and
vulnerability rating. The Delphi team decides rating scale with a degree of asset
sensitivity, capability and motivation of threat and severity and exposure of vulnerability. The Table 1 is the method of rating scale in ’CSE Manuals ITSG-04’
[8]. A degree of asset sensitivity is divided into 5 scales; little/no loss or injury
(1), minor loss or injury (2), serious loss or business process could be negatively
aﬀected (3), very serious loss/injury, business process could fail (4), high loss or
grave injury to an organization’s or business process will fail (5).
Table 1. The matrix of risk assessment
Scale of Threat
1
2
..
Scale of Vulnerability 1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 5 ..
1
2
Asset
3

Threat assessment is same as vulnerability assessment method. So, risk assessment is evaluated by combination with asset, vulnerability and threat scale.
The latter uses annual loss expectancy(ALE) in [12]. ALE deﬁnes damage
that may be imposed to IT asset by monetary unit. ALE is used in quantitative
analysis representatively since NIST proposed evaluation method by FIPS-65
document in 1979. ALE production method is as following.

1026

J.-H. Eom et al.

ALE = Asset value(AV ) × Exposure f actor(EF ) × T hreat f requency(T F )
Asset value and threat frequency is computed in asset and threat analysis.
Exposure factor(EF), which displays a degree of asset’s exposure against threat,
is computed from the ratio of the related safeguard/operating safeguard and
non-establishing safeguard on the basis of the relation of asset and threats.
2.2

The Method of Asset Analysis

An asset is a component or part of a total information system to which an organization directly assigns value[7,9]. An asset analysis identiﬁes all assets within a
risk analysis boundary, classiﬁes into the same kind of asset, and ﬁnally assesses
value of each asset. An asset analysis’ goal is to identify the most critical components of the organization so that they can be examined for vulnerabilities[5,7].
We observed an existent asset analysis method in the 3 viewpoints; classiﬁcation,
evaluation and level.
– ISO TR-13335 : This researches techniques for the successful management of
IT security, and can be used to assess security requirements and risks [1,2,3].
• Classiﬁcation: Classify the boundaries of review into asset types such as
information/data, hardware, software, equipment, documents, etc.
• Evaluation: Evaluate by the cost of obtaining and maintaining the asset,
and the potential adverse business impacts from loss of 3 security factors.
• Evaluation Scale: negligible(0)-low(1)-medium(2)-high(3)-very high(4)
– CSE MG-3 : This expands on the standards stated in the Government Security Policy of Canada, provides speciﬁc guidance for risk assessment, and
safeguards throughout the information technology system lifecycle [8].
• Classiﬁcation: Hardware, software, interfaces, personnel, supporting systems and utilities, and access control measures
• Evaluation: Evaluate based on its replacement cost, its intrinsic value
and the consequences, impact or injury resulting from asset compromise.
• Evaluation Scale: negligible-low-medium-high-very

3

The Proposed Methodology

The proposed methodology is the business-process oriented risk assessment
methodology. We assess IS asset with the relationship of business-process than
asset’s physical value such as purchase cost, annual maintenance expense and
so on. We considered that they have a diﬀerent value according to IS assets
contribution to business process, even if they are same kind of asset. We focus on business process-oriented risk assessment methodology according to the
contribution degree of asset in the organization’s business.

Risk Assessment Method

3.1

1027

Business Process-Oriented Asset Evaluation

We classify assets by asset 7 types in the general IS components such as H/W,
S/W, network, information, application, user and environment. Then, we reclassify by a business-process oriented method [11].
The proposed asset evaluation considers that asset value could be diﬀerent
according to department utilization, business contribution, user position, etc.,
even if assets have same type. For example, it has a diﬀerent value between
ﬁnancial and plan department, even if they are the same kind of PC. For example,
it is Department A’s server B, application D used with job C, data G, and user
E. The examples of standards of speciﬁc factors for the business process-oriented
evaluation method are as following:
– Department Utilization(DU) department’s IT utilization according to
the organization business
– Business Contribution(BC) Asset importance contributing to the organization on business
– User Position(UP) Task importance handling by user in the IS
– Security Safeguard(SS) Suitability of the safeguard that is established
against risk
Table 2 shows an example of an improved asset classiﬁcation which represents
the relationship between the asset type and business-process oriented factors.
Table 2. An example of the proposed asset classiﬁcation method
ASSET
H/W
S/W
NETWORK
Disk Sever MS Oﬃce Security Program Router LAN
BUSINESS
USER.1
CONTRI DU USER.2
BUTION
USER.n

Asset.N

We applied weight to analyze asset according to the scale of business processoriented classiﬁcation factors. Weight factors can be applied from 1 to n reﬂected
an IS environment and business process. Also, weight is classiﬁed into ﬁve levels
such as very low, low, medium, high, very high, and applied on a scale of 1 − 5.
We selected two business process-oriented classiﬁcation factors such as department utilization and business contribution, but you can select more factors according to the organization’s requirement and Delphi team’s opinion.
We made up conversion table for converting quantitative asset cost into the
qualitative value as like Table 4 . Delphi team has to create a conversion table based on an average between the organization’s maximum and minimum
quantitative asset value.
In this step, we have to evaluate the business process-oriented asset value(BPAV). If the qualitative value is QV, the B-PAV formula is as follows;

1028

J.-H. Eom et al.
Table 3. The evaluation standard of BU and DC

Level Scale
Standard
Very low
1 do not use virtually IS; business weight is less than 20%
Low
2 business dependence on IS is low; business weight is 20-40%
D Medium
3 If using an IS, business is gone easy; business weight is 40-60%
U High
4 Most business is achieved due to IS; business weight is 60-80%
Very high 5 If an IS is not used, business is impossible;
business weight is more than 80%
Very low
1 don’t use virtually IS; don’t inﬂuence in operation
Low
2 Business dependence on an IS is low; the most basic business
B Medium
3 If using an IS, business is gone easy; business achieve certainly
C High
4 Most business is achieved by IS; essential to the organization
Very high 5 If not using an IS, business is impossible;
critical business related to operation

B − P AV = QV ∗ W
W is weight which uses a scale of business process-oriented classiﬁcation factor.
W = (W 1 + W 2 + W 3 + + W n)/n
3.2

Risk Evaluation Method

We evaluate risk by such as asset value(AV), threat frequency(Tf), exposure
degree(Ed) and eﬀectiveness degree of safeguard(SED). AV is B-PAV. ED is
evaluated by vulnerability assessment method in CSE Manuals ITSG-04. Delphi
team can acquire Tf’s rates through questionnaire or interview with system
and security administrators or statistic log ﬁle of control systems directly. Risk
evaluation formula is as following;
R = B − P AV ∗ T f ∗ Ed ∗ SED
SED inﬂuences in protection level according to implementation result(IR), and
means diﬀerent protection degree(PD) on each threat. Also, because there are
various kinds of safeguard in a threat, each safeguard value should be reﬂected.
And because eﬀectiveness of safeguard is no actual 100%, The value of SED is;
S = 1 − (SIR ∗ SP D ).
So, R = B − P AV ∗ T f ∗ Ed ∗ [1 − (SIR ∗ SP D )].

4

Application of Proposed Method

We take any enterprise as an example. The company has such departments
as R&D, ﬁnancial and plan departments, and uses router($350). It has only a
ﬁrewall for protect IS.
Firstly, we have to convert physical cost into qualitative value by conversion
table. Delphi team decides the weights with the evaluation standard of the business process-oriented classiﬁcation factor. For example, the R&D department
UNIX is more important than the Financial Departments. And the Financial

Risk Assessment Method

1029

Table 4. An example of conversion table
Qualitative value
Level
Scale Standard of the asset physical cost
Very low
1
The asset physical cost is less than $100
Low
2
The asset physical cost is $100-300.
Medium
3
The asset physical cost is $300-600.
High
4
The asset physical cost is $600-900.
Very high
5
The asset physical cost is $1,000.

Department’s ﬁrewall is more important than the Plan Departments. If we perform like this method, we can decide weight value of each asset. If we evaluate
the asset by the Table 4, each B-PAV value is as following Table 5.
Table 5. The result of weights decision and B-PAV calculations
weights decision
B-PAV calculations
R&D Financial Plan
R&D Financial Plan
Asset QV DU BC DU BC DU DC W B-PAV W B-PAV W B-PAV
Router 3 2 2 5
4
4 2 2
6
4.5 13.5 3
9

Tf’s values were derived by Delphi Team which combines experts in the arena
of IS security and referred ’In the past 12 months, which of the following breaches
have you experienced?’ in InfoSecurity News May 1997. Tf is considered such
15 items as computer virus, accidental errors and abuse of access privileges and
so on. Ed is evaluated by Delphi Team based on vulnerability assessment in
CSE Manuals. SP D was derived following Table 6 which represents according to
ISO/IEC JTCI/SC27 IT security management guideline. SIR was derived from
safeguard list in [3]. It classiﬁed 5 levels according to implementation results.
We can calculate SED with Table 6. Router’s SED value is 0.65 according to
SP D and SIR is 0.5 and 0.7. Firewall has direct relation to the threat, and is
enough to reﬂect security procedure. And Table 7 is risk assessment value.
If we compare international standard with the proposed method, we evaluate
risk reﬂected organization’s business process, and have more accurate risk assessment considered eﬀectiveness of existent safeguard. As applying correct risk
assessment’s results, we can establish security policy and appropriate safeguard
against risk. In here, we compare router’s risk value in 3 viewpoints; international standard, method applied to only business process-oriented asset value
and proposed method.
As you see Fig.1, if we assess router’s risk at each department, its risk is
same. But router’s risk is diﬀerent if applied to business process-oriented asset
evaluation result or the proposed risk assessment method. As ﬁnancial department takes charge of an organization’s budget which handles business expanse
and employee’s salary, if information is leaked out or destructed from threat, an

1030

J.-H. Eom et al.
Table 6. The values of Tf ,Ed , SP D and SIR

Tf

SP D

SIR

Sever UNIX Router
Sever UNIX
Router
7.3
5.1
3.7
Ed
4
3.5
2.5
Value
Description
0.0 No relation safeguard and the threat
0.165 Safeguard has indirect relation to the threat
0.5 Safeguard has direct relation to the threat
0.865 Safeguard established for the threat
0.1 No safeguard
0.3 Identiﬁed risk, but no concrete safeguard and occasional protect
0.5 set up protection procedure and start to implement safeguard
0.7 Reﬂecting procedure and apply safeguard
0.9 Perform the latest safeguard

Table 7. Risk value
R&D Financial Plan
B-PAV 6
13.5
9
Tf
3.7
3.7
3.7
Router Ed
2.5
2.5
2.5
SED 0.65
0.65
0.65
R 36.08 81.17 54.11

Fig. 1. The result of risk assessment for router

organization will be seriously impacted. So, in ﬁnancial department viewpoint,
router’ value with business importance may be high, and risk level may be higher
accordingly, and security safeguard may be established strongly.

5

Conclusion

We proposed risk assessment methodology based on business process-oriented
asset evaluation and risk evaluation method. We have studied on our research in

Risk Assessment Method

1031

2 aspects; business process-oriented asset analysis and concrete risk evaluation
formula. The former focuses on asset value according to the importance of business process. Asset value depends on a business contribution of asset. The latter
focuses on risk calculation. Our model applies international standard method to
eﬀectiveness of existent safeguard. It represents that risk value can be reduced
by safeguard’s ﬁtness in information system. In future, we will apply our model
to risk reduction method. We think that our model’s result derives to select the
suitable safeguard against risk.

References
1. ISO/IEC TR 13335(Part 1): Concepts and Models for IT Security, ISO/IEC
JTC1/SC 27, 1996.
2. ISO/IEC TR 13335(Part 2): Managing and Planning IT Security, ISO/IEC
JTC1/SC 27, 1997.
3. ISO/IEC TR 13335(Part 3): Techniques for the Management of IT Security,
ISO/IEC JTC1/SC 27, 1997.
4. NIST Special Publication 800-30: Computer Security-Risk Management Guide,
NIST, 2001.
5. B. D. Jenkins, ’Security risk analysis and management’, Countermeasures Inc,
1998.
6. BS 7799: Guide to Risk Assessment and Risk management, BSI, 1998.
7. C. J. Alberts et al,’OCTAVE: Operationally Critical Threat, Asset, and Vulnerability Evaluation’, Software Engineering Institute Carnegie Mellon, 1999.
8. CSE MG-3: A Guide to Risk Assessment and Safeguard Selection For Information
Technology Systems, Communications Security Establishment, Jan. 1996.
9. Risk Analysis and Management Standards for Public Information Systems
Security-Concepts and Models, TTA-Korea, 1998.
10. Risk Analysis and Management Standards for Public Information Systems
Security-Risk Analysis, TTA-Korea, 2000.
11. Jung-Ho Eom, et. al, ’Two-Dimensional Qualitative Asset analysis Method based
on Business Process-Oriented Asset Evaluation’, Journal of KIPS, pp.79-85, Dec.
2005.
12. Kang Kim, et. al, ’A Risk Analysis Model For information System Security’, journal
of KIPS, pp.60-67, Sep. 2002.

