Efficient Population Diversity Handling Genetic
Algorithm for QoS-Aware Web Services Selection*
Chengwen Zhang, Sen Su, and Junliang Chen
State Key Lab of Networking and Switching Technology,
Beijing University of Posts & Telecommunications(BUPT)
187# 10 Xi Tu Cheng Rd., Beijing 100876, China
zwjcbj2007@gmail.com, {susen, chjl}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract. To maximize user satisfaction during composition of web services, a
genetic algorithm with population diversity handling is presented for Quality of
Service(QoS)-aware web services selection. In this algorithm, the fitness
function, the selection mechanism of the population as well as the competition
mechanism of the population are represented. The population diversity and
population fitness are used as the primary criteria of the population evolution.
By competing between the current population and the historical optimal
population, the whole population evolution can be done on the basis of the
whole population evolution principle of the biologic genetic theory. Prematurity
is overcome effectively. Experiments on QoS-aware web services selection
show that the genetic algorithm with population diversity handling can get more
excellent composite service plan than the standard genetic algorithm.

1 Introduction
Web service is a software application identified by an URI [1]. How to create robust
service compositions becomes the next step work in web services [2] and has attracted
a lot of researches [3], [4], [16], [17]. Since the web services with the same functions
and different QoS are increasing, and the web services requesters always express their
functional requirements as well as their global QoS constraints, a determination needs
to be made to select which services are used in a given composite service on the basis
of multiple QoS attributes in order to maximize user satisfaction. Hence, QoS-aware
web services selection plays an important role in web services composition [5], [6]. In
the past years, the researches about web services selection have gained considerable
momentums [9], [10], [11], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19].
To figure out QoS-aware web services selection, some approaches are made with
the help of semantic web [9], [10], [11], and the others are based on the QoS attributes
computation [15], [16], [17], [18], [19]. But it is obvious that the latter approaches are
*

The work presented in this paper was supported by the National Basic Research and
Development Program (973 program) of China under Grant No. 2003CB314806; the
National Natural Science Foundation project of China under Grant No. 90204007; the
National Natural Science Funds for Distinguished Young Scholar of China under Grant No.
60125101; the program for Changjiang Scholars and Innovative Research Team in University
(PCSIRT); BUPT Education Foundation.

V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part IV, LNCS 3994, pp. 104 – 111, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

Efficient Population Diversity Handling Genetic Algorithm

105

more suitable solutions to satisfy the global QoS requirement. It is a combinatorial
optimization issue that the best combination of web services is selected in order to
accord with the global constraints.
Genetic Algorithm is a powerful tool to solve combinatorial optimizing problems
[12]. The design of a genetic algorithm has the greatest influence on its behavior and
performance [20], especially the fitness function and the selection mechanism.
Since keeping the individual diversity is a perfect means to overcome the
premature phenomenon, it may be a good way to add the diversity handling into the
genetic algorithm. Some diversity studies were in [13], [14], [22], [23], which paid
less attention to the population evolution making use of the population diversity.
Following the above analyses, we present a genetic algorithm with population
diversity handling, which enables the population to evolve on the basis of the whole
population evolution principle of the biologic genetic theory.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. After a review of the literature
of the QoS-aware web services selection using QoS computation in section 2 and the
diversity of genetic algorithm in section 3, Section 4 presents the genetic algorithm
with population diversity handling we propose in detail. Section 5 describes the
simulations of the proposed algorithm and discusses results aiming to support the
work. Finally, section 6 is our conclusions.

2 Quality Computation-Based Selection of Web Services
According to Std. ISO 8402 [7] and ITU E.800 [8], QoS may include a number of
nonfunctional properties such as price, response time, availability, reputation. Thus,
the QoS value of a composition service can be achieved by the fair computation of
QoS of every component web services. There are some techniques in the literatures,
including some traditional optimization techniques [15], [16], [17] and strategies
based on Genetic Algorithm (GA) [18], [19].
The QoS computation based on the QoS matrix is a representative solution. To
normalize the QoS matrix to rank the web services was proposed in [15], however, it
was only a local optimization algorithm but not a global one for services selection.
Other works in the area of QoS computation include [16], [17], which proposed local
optimization and global planning. But, both had limitation to some extent.
The genetic algorithm is well suitable for the QoS-aware services selection
belonging to the class of NP-hard [19]. In [18] and [19], the authors proposed only a
coding manner of chromosome or the fitness function for the service selection with
little further information about the rest parts of the genetic algorithm, such as the
selection mechanism.

3 Diversity of Genetic Algorithm
This section describes some diversity control means presented in [13], [14], [22],
[23]. In [13], the affinity was defined by means of the information entropy of every
gene of chromosome. Finally, the individual with higher fitness and lower affinity had
higher priority to evolve. Also, the low diversity of the population was raised by a

106

C. Zhang, S. Su, and J. Chen

procedure aiming at maintaining high diversity of the population in [14]. In [22], an
individual diversity controlling approach was used to attain the global optimum
without getting stuck at a local optimum. And, a fuzzy controller changed the
crossover rate and the mutation rate in [23], in order to maintain the proper population
diversity during the GA’s operation.
According to the biology genetic theory, the evolution of a population is a process
during which all of individuals have higher and higher fitness to the environments.
From the point of the view of the population, the population diversity evolves from
high diversity at initial stage to low one at terminal stage during the population
evolution. Hence, comparing population diversity between two populations produced
at different generations is a feasible way to evaluate whether the current population
has higher evolution extent than the former one, and the population evolution can be
handled by the population diversity. Thus, we propose a genetic algorithm with
population diversity handling to overcome the local optimal solution.

4 Genetic Algorithm with Population Diversity Handling
In this section, we present a genetic algorithm with diversity handling in order to
resolve quality-driven selection. The main difference between our GA and the
standard GA is that our GA includes the competition mechanism of the population
that does not be expressed by the standard GA.
4.1 Fitness Function
Some QoS models and QoS computation formulas for composite service were
available in [17], [19]. But, via comparison in experiments, the optimal solution based
on the QoS computation formula in [19] is better than the one based on [17].
Consequently, the QoS computation formula in [19] is adopted, and the objective
function is defined in (1):
f (g ) =

∈

∑
∑

(Q

j

× w

j

)

k

× w

k

)

j

(Q

.

(1)

k

Where wj,wk [0,1], and wj,wk are real positive weight factors, represent the weight
of criterion j and k for which end users show their favoritism concerning QoS by
providing values respectively. The sum of all of them is 1. Qj and Qk denote the sum
of QoS values of the individual j and k respectively.
End users usually assert their function requirements as well as the global
constraints, e.g. Cost<60, Time<150. The individual whose QoS violates the
constraints will be rejected in [19]. However, this approach belongs to the absolute
rejection. It influences the diversity of the population seriously and always results in a
local optimal solution. The individual disobeying the constraints should be selected
proportionally into the next generation population on a basis of a certain technique.
The most common method is penalty technique for constrained optimization
problems. Hereby, the fitness function with penalty character is defined in (2):

Efficient Population Diversity Handling Genetic Algorithm

j =1

2

+ Pj

n

F it ( g ) = f ( g ) − λ ∑ (

R

jM a x

107

− R

) .
jM in

(2)

Where RjMax, RjMin are the maximum value and minimal value of the No.j quality
constraint respectively, n is the number of quality constraints, λ is a parameter used
to adjust the scale of penalty value. Pj represents the calculation value of a Qi or some
Qis and these values are limited by a quality constraint. The following is the definition
of Pj:
−

Pj
∆ Pj = {

R

0
R

jM a x

−

jM in

Pj

;

;
Pj;

R

jM in

Pj

>
R jM a x
≤ P j ≤ R jM a x
<
R jM in

4.2 Design of Diversity
According to the definition of information entropy [14], Hj(N) is the information
entropy of the jth locus where N is the number of chromosome and H(N) is the
information entropy of all of N chromosomes. Clearly, the smaller the information
entropy is, the worse the diversity is.
Firstly, the definition for individuals is (3):
d

i

=

1
N

N

∑

H ( 2 ).

j=1

(3)

Where di is used for the diversity of the ith individual, N is the number of
chromosomes, H(2) is the information entropy of the ith individual between itself and
all of the rest of the population.
Secondly, the population diversity can be acquired from H(N).
4.3 Selection Mechanism of Individuals
The individual with high diversity and with high fitness will survive at higher rate.
However, some sets of experiments show that introducing the information entropy to
the diversity of the individuals always increases the running time greatly, and can not
get obviously more optimal solution than without the diversity of the individuals.
Thus, the individuals are selected only according to the fitness value.
4.4 Selection Mechanism of the Population
According to the evolution theory based on natural selection of Darwin, the species
evolve in the form of the whole group but not individuals. During the evolution
process of the population, in addition to the individuals evolution should be
controlled, the whole population evolution should also be handled by means of some
policies that prevent the population from degeneration and help to find the optimal
solution. In this paper, a selection mechanism of the population is taken into
consideration. The historical optimal population is always kept and participates in the
competition process between itself and the current population. The population with
lower expectation value is known as degeneration and is replaced by the one with
higher expectation value.

108

C. Zhang, S. Su, and J. Chen

The expectation value e of the population evolution is calculated in (4):
e =

F it ( g )
.
1 + H (N )

(4)

From (4), we can see that the population with high average fitness and with low
diversity will survive at higher rate. So, (4) represents the control mechanism of the
diversity because the population with low diversity is promoted and the population
with high diversity is suppressed.
Both the maximum of the population fitness and the result of subtracting the
minimal fitness of the individuals from the maximal fitness of the individuals are not
adopted at the e calculation formula, because the average fitness can cover all of
individuals and the others can not reflect the real status of the population, especially
in the worst concentricity.
4.5 Structure of Genetic Algorithm with Population Diversity Handling
Hitherto, some important elements in the GA for QoS-driven web services selection
have been proposed. Here, the structure of the GA is available in sequence as figure 1.

Fig. 1. Structure of the genetic algorithm with population diversity handling

The outstanding point of this paper includes the holding mechanism and
competition mechanism of the historical optimal population that ensure the whole
population evolution.

5 Experiments
To verify the excellence of the GA of the population diversity handling we have
proposed, numerous simulation comparisons between itself and the standard GA had
been performed on QoS-aware web services selection. All the experiments were taken

Efficient Population Diversity Handling Genetic Algorithm

109

on the same software and hardware, which were Pentium 1.6GHz processor, 512MB
of RAM, Windows XP Pro, development language JAVA, IDE Eclipse 3.1. The same
data were adopted, including workflows of different sizes, 15-50 candidate web
services for each task and 5 QoS data for each web service. A simplified
representation of web service was used, including an ID number, some QoS data that
were retrieved according to some principles in the range of defined values.
The two GAs were set up with the same population size, crossover operation and
probability, mutation operation and probability, the fitness function, the selection
algorithm of the individuals and the selection mechanism of the individuals. QoS
model in [17] was used for both of them. The population diversity handling is the
only difference between the two GAs.
The data of the experiments were collected with two methods: statistic data and
process data. Figure 2 plotted the fitness function evolution across GA generation.
Table 1 presented statistic experiment results of the average fitness and time for the
maximal fitness.
Figure 2 was the population size 200, crossover probability 0.7, mutation
probability 0.1. The upper curve stood for the GA of population diversity handling
and the lower one stood for the standard GA in figure 2. This means the GA of
population diversity handling could have larger fitness value than the standard GA.

0. 18
0. 16
0. 14
Fitness

0. 12
0. 1
0. 08
0. 06
0. 04
0. 02
0

0

250 500

750 1000 1250 1500 1750 2000 2250 2500 2750 3000 3250 3500 3750 4000 4250 4500 4750 5000
Gener at i on

Fig. 2. Fitness comparision when tasks number 30

As shown in table 1, the statistic data were collected after the two GAs running for
50 times with the population size 200, iterations 500, crossover probability 0.7 and
mutation probability 0.1. In table 1, the N(ew) represented the GA of population
diversity handling and the O(ld) for the standard GA, the time comparison of N and O
was the time when the maximal fitness value appears with unit as ms.
Table 1. Statistic Data
Tasks Num

Average fitness (N:O)

Time (N:O)

20

0.125:0.076

7882:2569

30

0.093:0.053

11307:2976

As described above, it is the introduction of the holding mechanism and
competition mechanism of the historical optimal population on the basis of the

110

C. Zhang, S. Su, and J. Chen

population diversity that ensures that the GA of population diversity handling can get
more optimal solution than the standard GA, and to some extent overcome the
premature phenomenon of the standard GA. The service composed by the GA of
population diversity handling is better than the one composed by the standard GA.
However, it can be seen that the execution time of the GA of population diversity
handling is longer than the standard GA at the cost of the holding mechanism and
competition mechanism of the historical optimal population. The general indication
given by the simulations is that the weaknesses are including the long running time
and slow convergence. These would require refining the convergence and shrinking
the running time by means of the original population policy and mutation policy, etc.

6 Conclusions
The QoS-aware web services selection is an active research area. In this paper, we
present a structure of genetic algorithm characterized by the population competition
mechanism. Prematurity is overcome effectively through the conservation of the
historical optimal population and the competition between the historical optimal
population and the current population.
We also verify the formulas that we use in the genetic algorithm through
experiments and the results show that the genetic algorithm with population diversity
handling can get more excellent composite service plan than the standard GA.
Providing adaptive capability of genetic algorithms is an active research area [21].
Therefore, how to design a self-adaptive genetic algorithm for QoS-aware selection is
one of our future works. Work-in-process is devoted to better extend the approach as
follows: accelerating the convergence of the GA of population diversity handling,
supplying the self-adaption.

References
1. W3C.Web Services Architecture.http://www.w3.org/TR/2004/NOTE-ws-arch-20040211/
(2004)
2. F. Curbera, R. Khalaf, N. Mukhi, etc.: The Next Step in Web Services. Commnincation of
the ACM, 46(10) (2003) 29-34
3. Nikola Milanovic, Miroslaw Malek: Current Solutions for Web Service Composition.
IEEE Internet Computing (2004) 51-59
4. B. Orriens, J. Yang, M P Papazoglou: Model Driven Service Composition. In the First
International Conference on Service Oriented Computing (ICSOC’03) (2003)
5. D. A. Menascé: QoS Issues in Web Services. IEEE Internet Computing, 6(6) (2002) 72–75
6. D. A. Menascé: Composing Web Services:A QoS View. IEEE Internet Computing (2004)
88-90
7. ISO 8402, Quality Vocabulary
8. ITU-T Recommendation E.800 (1994), Terms and Definitions Related to Quality of
Service and Network Performance Including Dependability
9. M. Tian, A. Gramm, H. Ritter, J. Schiller: Efficient Selection and Monitoring of QoSAware Web Services with the WS-QoS Framework. IEEE/WIC/ACM International
Conference on Web Intelligence (WI'04) (2004)

Efficient Population Diversity Handling Genetic Algorithm

111

10. A. Soydan Bilgin, Munindar P. Singh: A DAML-Based Repository for QoS-Aware
Semantic Web Service Selection. Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Web Services (ICWS’04) (2004)
11. Chen Zhou, Liang-Tien Chia, Bu-Sung Lee: DAML-QoS Ontology for Web Services.
IEEE International Conference on Web Services (ICWS'04) (2004)
12. M. Srinivas, L. M. Patnaik: Genetic Algorithm:a Survey. IEEE (1994) 17-26
13. Chun J S, Kim M K, Jung H K. Shape Optimization of Electromagnetic Devices Using
Immune Algorithm. IEEE Trans on Magnetics, 33(2) (1997) 1876-1879
14. Yasuhiro TSUJIMURA, Mitsuo GEN: Entropy-Based Genetic Algorithm for Solving
TSP.The Second International Conference on Knowledge-Based Intelligent Electronic
Systems (1998) 285-290
15. Y. Liu, A. H. Ngu, L. Zeng: QoS Computation and Policing in Dynamic Web Service
Selection. In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on World Wide Web
(WWW), ACM Press (2004) 66-73
16. L. Zeng, B. Benatallah, M. Dumas, J. Kalagnanam, Q. Z. Sheng: Quality Driven Web
Services Composition. Proc. 12th Int’l Conf. World Wide Web (WWW) (2003)
17. Liangzhao Zeng, Boualem Benatallah, Anne H. H. Ngu,etc.: QoS-Aware Middleware for
Web Services Composition. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 30(5) (2004)
311-327
18. LiangJie Zhang, Bing Li, Tian Chao,etc.: On Demand Web Services-Based Business
Process Composition.IEEE (2003) 4057-4064
19. G. Canfora, M. Di Penta, R. Esposito, M. L. Villani: A Lightweight Approach for QoS–
Aware Service Composition. ICSOC (2004)
20. R. Ignacio, G. Jesús, P. Héctor,etc.: Statistical Analysis of the Main Parameters Involved
in the Design of a Genetic Algorithm. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics—Part C: Applications and Reviews, 32(1) (2002) 31-37
21. R. Hinterding, Z. Michalewicz, A. E. Eiben: Adaptation in Evolutionary Computation: a
Survey. IEEE EC (1997) 65-69
22. Hisashi Shimodaira: DCGA: A Diversity Control Oriented Genetic Algorithm. The Ninth
IEEE International Conference on Tools with Artificial Intelligence (1997) 367-374
23. Kejun Wang:A New Fuzzy Genetic Algorithm Based on Population Diversity.IEEE
International Symposium on Computational Intelligence in Robotics and Automation
(2001) 108-112

