Experience of Remote Sensing Information Modelling
with Grid Computing
Guoyin Cai1, Yong Xue1,2*, Jiakui Tang1, Jianqin Wang1, Yanguang Wang1,
Ying Luo1, Yincui Hu1, Shaobo Zhong1, and Xiaosong Sun1
1
Laboratory of Remote Sensing Information Sciences, Institute of Remote Sensing
Applications, Chinese Academy of Sciences, P. Box 9718, Beijing 100101, China
2
Department of Computing, London Metropolitan University, 166-220 Holloway Road,
London N7 8DB, UK
{y.xue@londonmet.ac.uk, cgywj@126.com}

Abstract. In this paper, we focused on the remote sensing information
modeling and determination using Grid computing platform. We have
underdone the experiments using remotely sensed images for thermal inertial
modeling in Condor system that is one of the Grid Projects existed nowadays
worldwide. We divided remote sensing data into several parts and run them on
Condor pool and on one single machine. From these tests, the relationship
among the work efficiency of image processing in Condor system and the
number of the separated parts of image and the number of machines in this
system is presented. Given a certain number of machines, a most efficient
image size is existed among varies sized images. Besides, the possible causes of
the longer put-off in this process are given, and some possible methods to
resolve this problem are also presented. It is feasible to use Grid computing
system such as Condor to process remote sensing data. And if the postpone
problem can be resolved, the work efficiency of Grid systems will be high.
Even with so many problems, it is a good thing that Grid systems do many
things for you during all of us are in sleep. Our next major task will concentrate
on realizing an arithmetic that can read and divide remote sensing images based
on image size and number of machines in Grid system automatically, and
transfer results back to the submitted machine as a whole data file.

1 Introduction
Remote Sensing data is characterized by largeness and instantaneousness. Space
missions involve the download, from space to ground, of many raw images per day.
The analysis and sharing of these huge amounts of data is a big challenge for the
remote sensing community. The emerging computational grid technologies are
expected to make feasible the creation of a computational environment handling many
PetaBytes of distributed data, tens of thousands of heterogeneous computing
resources, and thousands of simultaneous users from multiple research institutions
(Giovanni et al. 2003).
Grid is an integrated computing and resources environment, or a location for
computing resources. Grid can absorb all kinds of resources for computing, and
*

Corresponding author

M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3039, pp. 989–996, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

990

G. Cai et al.

transfer them into available, reliable, standard and economic computing ability.
Besides computers, computing resources also include web communication abilities,
data, instruments and equipments, and even people (Foster and Kesselman 1998).
Grid was firstly proposed from using for reference of electric power web. The final
goal of the grid is that users can use grid as so convenient as using electric power.
Grid can provide final users with common computing abilities that have no
relationship with geographic location and computing facilities. Computing abilities
provided by Grid cannot be obtained before. The core of Grid is that Grid breaks
through various forced constrains on computing resources. It can make people use this
computing resources with a new more free and more convenient way to resolve more
complicated problems. Finding answers from gird is grid computing, which is a
generalized definition. The narrow sense definition of grid computing means
organizing distributed computers to resolve complicated science and engineering
computing problems cooperatively.
Within the DataGrid project funded by the European Union, an experiment aiming
to demonstrate the use of grid technology for remote sensing applications has been
carried out. The first results obtained can be found from the paper by Giovanni et al.
(2003). Aloisio et al. (2000) presented and discussed an architecture that allows
transparent access to remote supercomputing facilities from a web gateway. The
implementation exploits the Globus toolkit and provides users with fast, secure and
reliable access to parallel applications. They showed the usefulness of their approach
in the context of Digital Puglia, an active digital library of remote sensing digital data.
The paper by Aloisio and Cafaro (2003) presented an overview of SARA/Digital
Puglia (Synthetic Aperture Radar Atlas), a remote sensing environment that shows
how grid technologies and high performance computing can be efficiently used to
build dynamic earth observation systems for the management of huge quantities of
data coming from space missions and for their on-demand processing and delivering
to final users. SARA/Digital Puglia is a grid-enabled, high performance digital library
of remote sensing images, developed in a joint research project with CACR/Caltech,
ISI/USC and the Italian Space Agency.
Dobashi et al. (2003) proposed an image-based modeling of clouds where realistic
clouds were created from satellite images using metaballs. The intention of the paper
was for applications to space flight simulators, the visualization of the weather
information, and the simulation of surveys of the earth. In the proposed method, the
density distribution inside the clouds was defined by a set of metaballs. Parameters of
metaballs, such as center positions, radii, and density values, were automatically
determined so that a synthesized image of clouds modeled by using metaballs was
similar to the original satellite image. They also proposed an animation method for
clouds generated by a sequence of satellite images taken at some interval. The
usefulness of the proposed method was demonstrated by several examples of clouds
generated from satellite images of typhoons passing through Japan.
There are three categories of use of remote sensing data, i.e., processing, analysis,
and thematic information modelling and determination. Remote sensing processing
involves calibration, transformation, etc. The classification and segmentation etc.
from mathematical algorithms are the remote sensing data analysis. It is the thematic
information modeling and determination to retrieve in-direct information from remote
sensing data via physical models. In this paper, we focused on the remote sensing

Experience of Remote Sensing Information Modelling with Grid Computing

991

information modeling and determination using Grid computing platform. We have
underdone the experiments using remotely sensed images for thermal inertial
modeling. First, we will explain the Grid testbed used in the experiments. Following
the results, we will discuss the possibilities of use of Grid computing for remote
sensing information modelling. Finally, the conclusion and further development will
be addressed.

2 Grid Computing Testbed
Because of largeness of remote sensing data, it will take a lot of time to process them.
It is necessary to have a more efficient processing system to do it. Correspondingly,
one of the Grid project-Condor can play a role of sparing time, improving work
efficiency (http://www.cs.wisc.edu/condor/overview), which will change our image
processing to a large extent, so that the remote sensing can fully exerts its important
role of rapid and instantaneous monitoring.
Condor is one of the grid projects in the world. It is the product of the Condor
Research Project at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Compared with the HighPerformance Computing (HPC), Condor provides a High-Throughput Computing
(HTC). What the Condor cares is not the number of computed floats in a second, but
how many workloads can be done in a period of time. The core of Condor is
efficiently using of available resource (http://www.cs.wisc.edu/condor/htc.html).
Condor is a specialized workload management system for compute-intensive jobs.
Like other full-featured batch systems, Condor provides a job queuing mechanism,
scheduling policy, priority scheme, resource monitoring, and resource management.
Users submit their serial or parallel jobs to Condor, Condor places them into a queue,
chooses when and where to run the jobs based upon a policy, carefully monitors their
progress, and ultimately informs the user upon completion (http://www.cs.wisc.edu/
condor/description.html). Condor has two powerful means, one is that it can make
available resources more efficient by putting idle machines to work; the other is that it
can expand the resources available to users.
Our Grid computing testbed is built on Windows 2000 operating system. It is
composed of five Pentium 4 PCs. Three of them have memories of 512MB with a
2.6GHz frequency of central processing unit (CPU). The other two have memories of
256MB with a CPU frequency of 2.0GHz. They are connected by local area network
(LAN) whose velocity is 100.0Mbps. The installation and configuration of release
6.4.7 of Condor software has been performed on all mentioned PCs by following the
instructions reported in http://www.cs.wisc.edu/condor/manual/v6.4. Vanilla
environment was adopted in our test. Vanilla is best suitable for Windows platform,
but it has no checkpoint and remote system call, two of which are two important
exceptional features of Condor. Vanilla environment has no shared file systems, but
provide a default file transfer mechanism (see Condor manual at
http://www.cs.wisc.edu/condor/manual/v6.4), so lots of files should be transferred to
the executable machines before running. The machines in our Condor pool are Hu,
Zhong, Wang, Jennyjordan, and Irsa-cgy. Hu is the Condor Manager and the
submitter is Irsa-cgy. Irsa-cgy is also used as the single machine for data processing.

992

G. Cai et al.

3 Remote Sensing Information Modelling
Our goal is to test the feasibilities of using Grid Computing (Condor system) for Earth
surface geophysical parameters determination from remote sensing data, and to
examine the work efficiency.
The concept of thermal inertia was introduced to try to take into account both the
specific heat and the thermal conductivity in identifying a quantity that would indicate
the reluctance of the surface of the Earth (or whatever) to respond to a given heat
input. That is, large thermal inertia gives small amplitude oscillations/variations in
the surface temperature over a 24-hour period. Let us consider initially the effects of
specific heat and thermal conductivity separately. For a given heat input, a large
specific heat, c, leads to small temperature changes and this is indicative of a large
thermal inertia. However, for a given heat input, for a large value of the thermal
conductivity (i.e. for a good thermal conductor) more heat is taken away to lower
layers and so the surface temperature rise is less. That is, a large thermal
conductivity, K, leads to more heat conducted below surface, which in turn leads to a
smaller surface temperature rise and this is also indicative of a large thermal inertia.
What is actually done, therefore, is to define thermal inertia

P= Kρc

(1)

where ρ = density. The ρ is included because what matters here is the specific heat
capacity per unit volume whereas c, the specific heat capacity, is usually defined as
the heat capacity per unit mass (Cracknell and Xue 1996).
Xue and Cracknell (1995) have developed an operational thermal inertia model.
This model will be used in the experiments. The Earth surface albedo and daily
maximum surface temperature difference are needed to calculate the thermal inertia
values. The Earth surface albedo can be derived from visible band remote sensing
data and surface temperature can be determined from thermal band data. Two
overpass remote sensing data can be used to calculate the daily maximum surface
temperature difference. The Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer (AVHRR)
data of daytime at 14:30pm and nighttime at 2:30am were obtained from NOAA
(National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration) satellite. The location of images
(84º8’52.63”E - 96º9’29.82”E, 38º7’21.37”N - 32º1’52.11”N) is at the border
between Qinghai and Xinjiang where a heavy earthquake occurred on November 14,
2001. The image size is 3000 x 3000.

4 Results and Analysis
Our major tasks of the experiments are testing the working situations of various
divisions of images and various sized images running in a single machine and in
Condor pool. Firstly, it will mainly for testing the feasibility of using Condor pool to
process images and examine how many separated parts of an image has the best work
efficiency for Condor pool to run. An image was processed in a single machine whose
name is irsa-cgy and the result was recorded. And then the image was divided into 3,
4, 5, and 10 parts in turn. Those separated images were submitted to Condor pool to

Experience of Remote Sensing Information Modelling with Grid Computing

993

process respectively, each of them was submitted to Condor pool 10 times, and the
results were collected. Secondly, based on the above result, the relationship between
image size and the work efficiency of Condor pool would be tested and established.
Remote sensing images of 1200 x 720, 1200 x 1000, 3000 x 720, 3000 x 810 and
3000 x 1800 were divided into 3 parts respectively, and then submitted them into
Condor pool to run. Each of them was also submitted 10 times.
Table 1. Returned and compiled results from Condor system
Postpone time (second)
Executing time (second)
Total time（from submitting）
Executable machine

Task 1
16
18
34 seconds
Jennyjordan

Task 2
16
18
34 seconds
wang

Task 3
33
14
47 seconds
zhong

Table 1 shows a sample result returned from Condor pool, which records the total
information of Condor pool’s working including submitted time, executable time,
terminal time, machines for executing tasks, and problems occurred during this
process. It is feasible to using Condor to process images.
Figure 1 shows the average total time curve and average postpone time curve of
tasks running in our Condor pool from 3, 4, 5 and 10 parts of an image with size of
1200 x 1000. Our tests show that it has the best work efficiency to separate an image
into 3 parts to run in Condor pool. Figure 1 shows that the average postpone time and
the average total running time is in a positive proportion, and the postpone time
accounts for a lot in the total time.
70
60
50

time (s)

40
30

Average postpone

20

Average total time

10
0
3 parts

4 parts

5 parts

10 parts

parts of remote sensing image
Fig. 1. Average postpone time and average total time curves of the different parts of image with
size of 1200 × 1000

994

G. Cai et al.

350

Average Postpond Time

300

Total time

250
200
150
100
50
0
Post pond t i me Post pond t i me Post pond t i me Post pond t i me Post pond t i me
f or si ze
f or si ze
f or si ze
f or si ze
f or si ze
5400, 000
2430, 000
2160, 000
1200, 000
864, 000

Fig. 2. Returned and compiled results from separated 3 parts of different sized remote sensing
images

Table 2. Several parameters to the different sized images
×104 (time unit s)

Time from Condor Time from S.M1 Accelerate index Postpone/total

A.P2 for size 540

219.4

Total time for 540

314.4

A.P for size 243

0.5757

0.69783715

84

0.680162

0.667746289

73

0.69723

0.618274435

39

0.789474

0.609311741

30

0.680272

0.653817082

82.466667

Total time for 243

123.5

A.P for size 216

64.733333

Total time for 216

104.7

A.P for size 120

30.1

Total time for 120

49.4

A.P for size 86.4

28.833333

Total time for 86.4
1

181

44.1
2

: S.M=Single Machine; : A.P.= Average postpone time

Experience of Remote Sensing Information Modelling with Grid Computing

995

Figure 2 shows the returned results of different sized image submitted into Condor
pool. It indicates that the most suitable size images for Condor pool exists. To our five
machines Condor pool, the best efficiency image size is 1200×1000. But, even the
best one, its total running time is longer than the time from a single machine. Table 2
shows the accelerate index which can better indicate system efficiency (Chen and Li
2003). In our system, accelerate index has not exceed 1, which is a very low
efficiency. Table 2 also shows the postpone time accounts for more than 60 percent of
total time. One important factor to influent Condor’s work efficiency is its long
postponing time. Its major possible causes are:
• Transfer files are large and web velocity is low. Generally speaking, remote
sensing image data are large, so Condor system needs to transfer many different
files to the executable machines before running, and then the executable machines
will transfer result files back to the submitted machine. During this process,
Condor need to compress files at the submitted machine before transmission, and
then recompress files at the executable machine before running, thus, the limited
web band will limit file transfer, and then influence work efficiency. Besides,
Condor needs to move executable file to the remote executable machines. Which
also adds workload to the web band.
• Machine numbers in Condor pool. Relatively, the more the machines are in Condor
pool, the less files the Condor system needs to transfer to each executable machine.
When task number is less then the machine number, Condor will allocate all of
tasks to machines for one time, so it is no necessary to check whether there are
available machines and transfer files for second time. Which decreases the
postpone time and increases the work efficiency. But it is not the case that the more
the machines are, the better the condor system is. Under the circumstance of
certain web band, more files that need to move also increase put-off time (Chen
and Li 2003).
• It takes time that Condor Manager checks whether the remote machines’ disk is
enough to accommodate files and Condor system’s inner message
communications.
Condor focus on the HTC, not the HPC, so it is natural that the postpone time is
longer in Condor.

5 Conclusion and Further Development
It is feasible to use Grid computing system such as Condor to process remote sensing
images. And if the postpone problem can be resolved, the work efficiency of Grid
systems will be high. Even with so many problems, it is a good thing that Grid
systems do many things for you during all of us are in sleep. Our next major task will
concentrate on realizing an arithmetic that can read and divide remote sensing images
based on image size and number of machines in Grid system automatically, and
transfer results back to the submitted machine as a whole data file.
We can do nothing about web band, but we can increase our machines in Grid
system by connecting machines of our two offices together. Then we will do the
remote sensing images on Grid system, and the results can be compared with what we
have obtained, so that discovery and resolve more problems.

996

G. Cai et al.

Acknowledgement. This publication is an output from the research projects "CAS
Hundred Talents Program", "Digital Earth" (KZCX2-312) funded by Chinese
Academy of Sciences and “Dynamic Monitoring of Beijing Olympic Environment
Using Remote Sensing” (2002BA904B07-2) funded by the Ministry of Science and
Technology, China.

References
1. Aloisio G; Cafaro M., 2003, A dynamic earth observation system. PARALLEL
COMPUTING 2003, Vol 29, Iss 10, pp 1357-1362.
2. Aloisio, G; Cafaro, M; Falabella, P; Kesselman, C; Williams, R., 2000, Grid computing on
the web using the Globus toolkit. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 1823, 32-40.
3. Chen Fulong, and Li Ming dong, 2003, Parallel Processing Based on LAN, Journal of
Sichuan Teachers College (Natural Sciences), Vol.24, No.1: 59-62.
4. Cracknell, A. P. and Xue, Y., 1996, Thermal Inertia Determination from Space - A Tutorial
Review. International Journal of Remote Sensing, 17(3), 431-461.
5. Dobashi, Y., Nishita, T., Yamashita, H., and Okita, T., 2003, Modeling of Clouds from
Satellite Images Using Metaballs. www.grid.org
6. Foster, I. and Kesselman, C., (Editors). 1998, The Grid: Blueprint for a new Computing
Infrastructure. (Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Inc.)
7. Giovanni, N. A., Luigi, F. B., and Linford, J., 2003, Grid technology for the storage and
processing of remote sensing data: description of an application. In Proceedings of the
society of photo-optical instrumentation engineers (SPIE), Vol. 4881, 677-685, 2003.
8. Xue, Y. and Cracknell，A. P., 1995, Advanced thermal inertia modeling. International
Journal of Remote Sensing, Vol.16, No.3, 431-446.
9. An Overview of the Condor System, Condor Team, 2003, available from
http://www.cs.wisc.edu/condor/overview
10. High-Throughput Computing, Condor Team, 2003, available from
http://www.cs.wisc.edu/condor/htc.html
11. Condor Version 6.4.7 Mannual, Condor Team, 2003, available from
http://www.cs.wisc.edu/condor/manual/v6.4
12. What is Condor? Condor Team, 2003, available from
http://www.cs.wisc.edu/condor/description.html

