Synchronization in Network Structures:
Entangled Topology as Optimal Architecture for
Network Design
Luca Donetti1,3 , Pablo I. Hurtado1,2 , and Miguel A. Mu˜
noz1
1

Departamento de Electromagnetismo y F´ısica de la Materia, and Instituto Carlos I
de F´ısica Te´
orica y Computacional
Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Granada, 18071 Granada, Spain
2
Laboratoire des Collo¨ıdes, Verres et Nanomat´eriaux,
Universit´e Montpellier II, Montpellier 34095, CEDEX 5 France
3
Departamento de Electr´
onica y Tecnolog´ıa de Computadores
Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Granada, 18071 Granada, Spain
donetti@ugr.es, phurtado@onsager.ugr.es, mamunoz@onsager.ugr.es

Abstract. In these notes we study synchronizability of dynamical
processes deﬁned on complex networks as well as its interplay with network topology. Building from a recent work by Barahona and Pecora
[Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 054101 (2002)], we use a simulated annealing algorithm to construct optimally-synchronizable networks. The resulting
structures, known as entangled networks, are characterized by an extremely homogeneous and interwoven topology: degree, distance, and
betweenness distributions are all very narrow, with short average distances, large loops, and small modularity. Entangled networks exhibit
an excellent (almost optimal) performance with respect to other ﬂow or
connectivity properties such as robustness, random walk minimal ﬁrstpassage times, and good searchability. All this converts entangled networks in a powerful concept with optimal properties in many respects.

1

Introduction

It is broadly recognized that most complex systems in Nature are organized as
intricated network patterns [1, 2]. This observation has triggered an intense research eﬀort aimed at understanding the organizing principles of these networks,
their structural properties, and the interplay between topology and dynamics
[1, 2]. It was recently recognized that the classical models of random networks
developed in graph theory were unable to describe the random but structured,
hierarchical network patterns found in Nature. Since then, a number of paradigmatic models (as small-world and scale-free nets [2]) have seen the light. They
mimic some of the striking properties observed in real complex networks. In
any case, network structures play an important role in many contexts ranging
from brain neural circuits, cellular function webs, ecosystems, social networks,
food webs, etc., to power grids, Internet or the world wide web. While most of
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part III, LNCS 3993, pp. 1075–1082, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

1076

L. Donetti, P.I. Hurtado, and M.A. Mu˜
noz

the initial eﬀort was put into understanding the topological properties of networks, the interest has gradually shifted towards the analysis of the interplay
between topology and the dynamics of network components. In general, each
element (node) in a network undergoes a dynamical process while coupled to
other nodes. The system collective behavior depends strongly on the eﬃciency
of communication paths, which is in turn dictated by the underlying network
topology. In this way, the network structure determines to a large extent the
possibility of a coherent response.
Complete synchronization is the most prominent example of coherent behavior, and is a key phenomenon in systems of coupled oscillators as those characterizing most biological networks or physiological functions [3]. For instance,
synchronized neural ﬁring has been suggested as specially relevant for neural
signal transmission [4]. From a more technological point of view, precision synchronization of computer clocks in local area networks and the Internet is essential for optimal network performance. Moreover, in an interesting twist, the
dynamics toward synchronization has been recently used as a dynamical process
unveiling the underlying community structure in complex networks [5].
Here we study how synchronous behavior is aﬀected by the network structure.
The range of stability of a synchronized state is a measure of the system ability
to yield a coherent response and to distribute information eﬃciently among its
elements, while a loss of stability fosters pattern formation [6]. Here we answer
the following question: which is the topology that maximizes the network synchronizability? [7]. We will construct such optimal topologies, for any ﬁxed number
of nodes and links, by employing an optimization procedure. The resulting structures, that we call entangled networks, are optimal not only for synchronizability,
but also regarding other ﬂow or connectivity properties.
The paper is structured as follows. In section 2 we summarize the spectral
approach to synchronization, following Ref. [6]. In section 3 we introduce the
optimization procedure to obtain networks with optimal synchronizability. Section 4 discusses the relation between the emerging structures and other optimal
network designs in the literature. Finally, conclusions and further developments
are presented. A shorter presentation of this work has been published before [7].

2

Spectral Approach to Synchronization in Networks

Consider N identical oscillators at the nodes of an undirected and unweighted
graph. The state of an oscillator is represented in general by a vector xi , i ∈
[1, N ], where N is the number of nodes. The network is characterized by its
Laplacian matrix L, with elements Lii = ki (the degree of node i), Lij = −1 if
nodes i and j are connected, and Lij = 0 otherwise. L is therefore a symmetric
matrix with zero-sum rows and real, non-negative spectrum. The dynamics of
the i-th node can then be represented in a very general form as,
N

dxi
= F(xi ) − σ
Lij H(xj ) .
dt
j=1

(1)

Synchronization in Network Structures

1077

Here F(x) and H(x) are unspeciﬁed evolution and coupling functions, respectively. In particular, F(x) controls the dynamics of the uncoupled oscillators,
while H(x) speciﬁes how variables at diﬀerent nodes couple together. Most dynamical processes studied in the literature regarding synchronization can be
recasted in forms equivalent to eq. (1) (see [6] for more general couplings).
In the synchronized state all oscillators behave identically at all times. That
is, xi (t) = xs (t) ∀i ∈ [1, N ], where xs (t) is solution of the uncoupled equation
x˙ s = F(xs ) (x˙ represents the time derivative of x). The N − 1 synchronization
constraints x1 (t) = x2 (t) = . . . = xN (t) deﬁne a synchronization manifold.
This manifold is invariant owing to the zero-sum row condition in the Laplacian
matrix L [6]. We are interested here in the stability of the synchronized state.
For that, we introduce small perturbations ξi such that xi = xs + ξi , and expand
N
to ﬁrst order to arrive at: ξ˙i = j=1 ∂F(xs )δij − σLij ∂H(xs ) · ξi , where ∂M
stands for the Jacobian of a matrix M. Diagonalization of L transforms these
equations into a set of N independent equations for the normal modes [6, 7]:
dyk
= ∂F(xs ) − σλk ∂H(xs ) · yk
dt

,

(2)

where λk , k ∈ [1, N ], are the eigenvalues of L, 0 = λ1 ≤ λ2 ≤ . . . ≤ λN . All the
resulting equations have the same form y˙ = ∂F(xs ) − α∂H(xs ) · y for some
positive constant α. The synchronized state xs will be stable if and only if all the
perturbations fade away in time. This is equivalent to demanding the maximum
Lyapunov exponent ηmax (α) associated with the normal modes orthogonal to
the synchronization manifold to be negative. The function ηmax (α) has been
called the master stability function in literature [6], and its dependence on α has
an universal “V-shape” for most oscillating systems. In particular, ηmax (α) is
negative only in an interval αA < α < αB . The synchronized state will be stable
if all the non-trivial eigenvalues of L, {λk : k = 2, . . . , N }, lie within the interval
[αA /σ, αB /σ]. The following inequality then guarantees that there always exists
a coupling strength σ for which the synchronized state is stable,
Q≡

αB
λN
<
λ2
αA

.

(3)

It is important to notice that the left hand side in the above inequality depends
exclusively on the network topology, while the right hand side depends only on
the dynamics (through xs , F and H). The σ range for which the synchronized
αB
], is larger for smaller eigenratios Q. In this way,
state is stable, σ ∈ [ αλA2 , Qλ
2
networks with very small Q will exhibit very good (robust) synchronization properties for a generic dynamics. The aim of this paper is to ﬁnd and characterize
network topologies minimizing the eigenratio Q.

3

Optimizing Synchronizability: Entangled Networks

Most studies up to now have explored the value of the eigenratio Q for diﬀerent
pre-existing network topologies found in literature, as for instance small-world

1078

L. Donetti, P.I. Hurtado, and M.A. Mu˜
noz

eigenratio Q

35
random graph
small-world
linear chain
scale-free

30
25
20
15
10
5
1

10

100

1000

10000

100000

iterations
Fig. 1. Evolution of the eigenratio Q during the optimization procedure for diﬀerent
initial conditions. Here N = 50, k = 4. In all cases, the algorithm converges to very
homogeneous networks as the one depicted, with very similar values of Q.

or scale-free networks, trying to identify key topological features aﬀecting Q. In
this way, it has been reported that small-worlds have smaller Q than regular
or purely random graphs [6], and this has been attributed to a smaller average
distance between nodes in small-worlds. However, other works [8] have concluded
recently that Q decreases as some heterogeneity measures decrease, even if the
average distance between nodes increases in the process. On the other hand,
synchronizability is enhanced in weighted complex networks [9].
In this paper we undertake a constructive approach to determine the network
topology that optimizes synchronization. In order to do so, we devise a modiﬁed
simulated annealing algorithm [10] to numerically minimize Q. We start from
graphs with N nodes and a ﬁxed average degree k . At each step, a new graph
is obtained by the random deletion of m links and addition of m new ones, where
m is extracted from an exponentially decaying distribution [7]. The new graph
is rejected if the resulting network is disconnected; otherwise, it is accepted with
probability p = min(1, [1 − (1 − q)δQ/T ]1/(1−q) ), where δQ = Qf inal − Qinitial
is the eigenratio change in the rewiring, and T is a temperature-like parameter.
For q → 1 we recover the standard Metropolis algorithm with Hamiltonian Q,
while q = −3 turns out to be the most eﬃcient value (results do not depend on
the choice of the deformation parameter q, but convergence times do [10]). The
ﬁrst N rewirings are performed at T = ∞, and they are used to calculate a new
T such that the largest δQ among the ﬁrst N ones would be accepted with a
large probability. T is kept ﬁxed for 100N rewiring attempts or 10N accepted
ones, whichever occurs ﬁrst. Then T is decreased by 10% and the process is
repeated until there are no more changes during ﬁve successive temperature
steps, assuming in this case that the optimal network topology has been found.
Most of these details can be modiﬁed without aﬀecting the ﬁnal outcome. The
major drawback in the algorithm is that Q is a global observable slow to compute.
For small enough N (≤ 30), the emerging optimal topology found is unique, while
for larger N (we have optimized networks with N up to 2000) the output may
change slightly from run to run, meaning that the eigenratio absolute minimum
is not always reached due to the presence of metastable states. Nevertheless, the

Synchronization in Network Structures

1079

35

25

original
ﬁxed degree

30

20

25

10

random graph
1D graph
small–world

5

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

Δk

3

3.5

20
15
10
5

0
0

Q

111111
000000

Q

15

4

4.5

0

50000

100000

150000

time steps

Fig. 2. Left: Q vs standard deviation of the degree distribution for N = 50, k = 4 and
three diﬀerent initial conditions. Center: sketch of pair rewiring trial. Right: Eigenratio
Q vs algorithmic steps for both minimization procedures (see text).

ﬁnal values of Q are very similar for diﬀerent runs (see Fig. 1), meaning that a
reasonably good approximation to the optimal topology is always found [7].
We measure diﬀerent topological observables during the minimization process
to unveil the main traits of the emerging structures. In simple terms, we observe
that as Q decreases the network becomes more and more homogeneous. This
means that the standard deviation of distributions of most topological observables decreases as Q decreases. This is true in particular for the node degree
distribution, see Fig. 2.a. We have used this degree homogeneity to improve the
eﬃciency our optimization procedure by initializing the algorithm with regular
networks (i.e. all nodes with the same degree), and restricting the rewiring steps
to changes that leave the degree of each node unchanged (by randomly selecting pairs of links and exchanging their endpoints; see Fig. 2.b). The resulting
algorithm converges much faster to the optimal network, and yields lower ﬁnal
eigenratios Q when the original one get trapped in a metastable state (Fig 2.c).
In Figs. 3.a-b we show the standard deviation of the average node-to-node
distance and average betweenness, respectively, versus Q during an optimization run started from a random regular graph. Both observables exhibit the
aforementioned tendency towards homogeneity. Particularly remarkable is the
narrow betweenness distribution (Fig. 3.b), which is in marked contrast with
the broad betweenness distributions observed in networks with strong community structure [11]. In addition, the averaged distance and betweenness also tend
to decrease with Q, though they are less sensitive than their corresponding standard deviations, see Figs. 3.c-d. Another key feature of the optimal structures
is the absence of short loops. This can be characterized by the girth (length
of the shortest loop) or, better, via the average size of the shortest loop passing through each node. This last magnitude is shown in Fig. 3.e, where it is
evident that the optimal network has very large average shortest loops. In particular, the clustering coeﬃcient is zero for the optimal nets since no triangles
are present.
In general, we call the emerging optimal structures entangled networks:
all sites are very much alike (strong homogeneity) and the links form a very

1080

L. Donetti, P.I. Hurtado, and M.A. Mu˜
noz
a

c

b

12.5

e

d

Q

10
7.5
5
0

0.01

Δd

0

50

100 150

Δb

2.8

2.9

3

44

d

48

4

5

b

Fig. 3. Standard deviations of the node distance distribution (a), standard deviation
of the betweenness distribution (b), average distance (c), average betweenness (d), and
shortest-loop average length (e) as a function of the eigenratio Q

intricated or interwoven structure (lack of communities, poor modularity, and
large shortest loops). Every single site is close to any other one (short average distances) owing not to the existence of intermediate highly connected hubs
(as in scale free networks), but as a result of a very “democratic” or entangled structure in which properties such as site-to-site distance, betweenness, and
minimum-loop size are very homogeneously distributed (see Figs. 1.b, 3.a-b).
Sharp distributions are also typical of random graph, where randomness alone
produces a statistical homogeneity. However in this case, a much stronger homogeneity is produced during the optimization of Q, as Figures 3.a-b show.

4

Relation to Other Optimal Topologies

A natural question concerns the relation between entangled networks and other
optimal architectures found in the literature. For instance, recent work [12] has
focused on the optimization of network robustness against random and/or intentional removal of nodes (attacks). For random graphs in the large-N limit,
it is concluded that the most robust networks are obtained when the degree
distribution only has a few peaks. In particular, random k-regular graphs turn
out to be the global optimal solution against both errors and attacks in the
robustness-optimization problem [12]. In this case, the error (fr ) and attack (fa )
percolation thresholds coincide, fr = fa ≡ fc (N, k), with fc (N, k) < fc (∞, k) =
(k − 2)/(k − 1). A natural question now is whether further Q−minimization
of these random regular graphs has some eﬀect on the network robustness. As
shown in [7] the minimization of Q improves signiﬁcantly the network robustness, conﬁrming that entangled networks are optimal from the robustness point
of view. This is because entangled topologies include correlations, absent in random networks, which enhance their resilience. In addition, there is also evidence
that networks with properties similar to those of entangled graphs maximize
reliability against link removal [7].
Diﬀerent models of traﬃc ﬂows on complex network have been recently studied [13, 14]. In principle highly inhomogeneous scale-free networks perform well
when the traﬃc is low; hubs can provide fast transition times, while they easily

Synchronization in Network Structures

1081

jam when the traﬃc increases. With the model of [14] it has been shown that if
the density of traveling information packets is above a given threshold, the optimal network topology is a highly homogeneous, isotropic conﬁguration, strongly
resembling entangled graphs. In a similar way, it has been recently reported
[15] that the interplay between network growth processes and evolutionary selection rules gives rise in some cases to very homogeneous structures with large
minimal-loops that strongly resemble entangled networks (see Fig. 3.c in [15]).
Also, during our optimization procedure, λN is observed to change very little
with respect to λ2 , and therefore, minimizing Q is equivalent for all practical purposes to maximizing λ2 . This provides another interesting connection with graph
theory, where it is known that regular graphs with a large λ2 (i.e.large spectral
gap), are good expanders (see [16, 7] for a deﬁnition and applications). Expander
graphs are very important in computer science for various applications (as the
design of eﬃcient communication networks or construction of error-correcting
codes) and can be proved to exhibit a rapid decay of random-walk distributions
towards their stationary state [17]. This converts entangled graphs in (almost)
optimal for many information ﬂow processes.

5

Summary and Outlook

We have introduced the concept of “entangled networks” [7]. These are constructed using an optimization principle by imposing the eigenvalues of the
Laplacian matrix to have a quotient λN /λ2 as small as possible, guaranteeing in
this way a robust synchronizability and coherent behavior. The emerging topologies are extremely homogeneous: all nodes look very much alike (constituting a
topology radically distinct from scale free networks). Also, the node-to-node average distance tends to be small while the average shortest loops are very large,
and there is no modular (or community) structure. Entangled networks exhibit
optimal synchronization properties, but they are also optimal or almost-optimal
for other communication or ﬂow properties: robustness and resilience against errors and attacks, traﬃc ﬂow in the presence of congestion, relaxation properties
of random walks, etc. These connections make of entangled networks a key tool
in the context of complex networks.
An interesting issue concerns the existence of entangled networks in Nature.
Their construction requires a global optimization process which is unlikely to
occur in natural evolving systems. Presently, we are working on the identiﬁcation of local evolutionary rules which give rise to locally-optimal synchronizable
network patterns, or other feasible approximations to entangled networks.

Acknowledgments
We thank D. Cassi and P.L. Krapivsky for useful discussions, and B. Tadi´c and
S. Thurner for inviting us to the ICCS06. Financial support from the Spanish
MCyT under project No. FIS2005-00791, EU COSIN-project-IST2001-33555,
and EU HPRN-CT-2002-00307 (DYGLAGEMEM) are also acknowledged.

1082

L. Donetti, P.I. Hurtado, and M.A. Mu˜
noz

References
1. Barab´
asi, A.-L.: Linked: The New Science of Networks, Perseus Publishing, Cambridge (2002); Pastor-Satorras, R., Vespignani, A.: Evolution and Structure of the
Internet, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge (2004).
2. Dorogovtsev, S.N., Mendes, J.F.F.: Evolution of Networks, Adv. Phys. 51, 10791187 (2002); Albert, R., Barab´
asi, A.-L.: Statistical Mechanics of Complex Networks, Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 47-97 (2002). Krapivsky, P.L., Redner, S.: A Statistical
Physics Perspective on Web Growth, Computer Networks 39, 261-276 (2002).
3. Pikovsky, A., Rosenblum, M., Kurths, J.: Synchronization: A Universal Concept in
Nonlinear Sciences, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (2001); Glass, L.: Synchronization and Rhythmic Processes in Physiology, Nature 410, 277-284 (2001).
4. Belykh, I., de Lange, E., Hasler, M.: Synchronization of Bursting Neurons: What
Matters in the Network Topology, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 188101 (2005); Cossart, R.,
Aronov, D., Yuste, R.: Attractor Dynamics of Network Up States in the Neocortex,
Nature 423, 283-288 (2003).
5. Arenas, A., D´ıaz-Guilera, A., P´erez-Vicente, C.J.: Synchronization Reveals Topological Scales in Complex Networks, ArXiv cond-mat/0511730.
6. Barahona, M., Pecora, L.M.: Synchronization in Small-World Systems, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 89, 054101 (2002); Pecora, L.M., Carrol, T.L.: Master Stability Functions
for Synchronized Coupled Systems, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 2109-2112 (1998); Pecora,
L.M., Barahona, M.: Synchronization of Oscillators in Complex Networks, Chaos
and Complexity Letters, 1(1), 61-91 (2005).
7. Donetti, L., Hurtado, P.I., Mu˜
noz, M.A.: Entangled Networks, Synchronization,
and Optimal Network Topology, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 188701 (2005).
8. Nishikawa, T., et al. : Heterogeneity in Oscillator Networks: Are Smaller Worlds
Easier to Synchronize?, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 014101 (2003); Hong,H., et al.: Factors
that Predict Better Synchronizability on Complex Networks, Phys. Rev. E 69,
067105 (2004).
9. Chavez, M. et al. : Synchronization is Enhanced in Weighted Complex Networks,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 218701 (2005).
10. Penna, T.J.P.: Traveling Salesman Problem and Tsallis Statistics, Phys. Rev. E
51, R1-R3 (1995).
11. L. Donetti and M. A. Mu˜
noz, Detecting Network Communities: a new systematic
and powerful algorithm, J. Stat. Mech.: Theor. Exp. (2004) P10012-P10027.
12. Valente, A.X.C.N., Sarkar, A., Stone, H.A.: Two-Peak and Three-Peak Optimal
Complex Networks, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 118702 (2004).
13. B. Tadi´c, S. Thurner, G. J. Rodgers: Traﬃc on complex networks: Towards understanding global statistical properties from microscopic density ﬂuctuations, Phys.
Rev. E, 69, 036102 (2004).
14. Guimer`
a, R., et al. : Optimal Network Topologies for Local Search with Congestion,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 248701 (2002).
15. Colizza, V. et al.: Network Structures from Selection Principles, Phys. Rev. Lett.
92, 198701 (2004).
16. Sarnak, P.: What is an Expander?, Not. Am. Math. Soc. 51, 762-763 (2004).
17. Lovasz, L.: Random Walks on Graphs: A Survey, in Combinatorics, Paul Erd¨
os is
Eighty, vol. 2, pp. 1-46, Keszthely, Hungary (1993).

