Introduction to the ICCS2006 Workshop on Dynamic
Data Driven Applications Systems
Frederica Darema
National Science Foundation, Arlington VA 22230, USA
darema@nsf.gov

Abstract. The Dynamic Data Driven Application Systems (DDDAS) concept
entails the ability to incorporate dynamically data into an executing application
simulation, and in reverse, the ability of applications to dynamically steer
measurement processes. Such dynamic data inputs can be acquired in real-time
on-line or they can be archival data. DDDAS offers the promise of improving
modeling methods, augmenting the analysis and prediction capabilities of
application simulations, improving the efficiency of simulations and the
effectiveness of measurement systems.
The scope of the present workshop provides examples of research and
technology advances in enabling the DDDAS capabilities.

1 Introduction
The Dynamic Data Driven Application Systems (DDDAS) [1,2] concept entails the
ability to incorporate dynamically data into an executing application simulation, and
in reverse, the ability of applications to dynamically steer measurement processes.
Such dynamic data inputs can be acquired in real-time on-line or they can be archival
data. The DDDAS concept offers the promise of improving modeling methods,
augmenting the analysis and prediction capabilities of application simulations,
improving the efficiency of simulations and the effectiveness of measurement
systems. Advances and technology capabilities required and enabled through the
DDDAS concept are discussed in [3 and 4], and are fostered through the DDDAS
Program [5] announced in 2005, with seeding efforts in the area having started
previously (2000 – 2005) through the NSF ITR Program [6]. The DDDAS Program
was co-sponsored by multiple Directorates and Offices of NSF, NOAA and NIH, and
in cooperation with Programs in the European Community and the United Kingdom
[referenced in 5].
In [4 and 5] it is emphasized the need for synergistic multidisciplinary research in
applications modeling, in mathematical and statistical algorithms, in measurement
methods and data management, and in computer systems software that’s necessary to
enable DDDAS capabilities. Furthermore in [4] the case is made that the DDDAS
concept requires and will push for infrastructure that goes beyond the traditional
notions of computational grids and provide new directions and capabilities in
CyberInfractrucure environments [7]. While fundamental research advances are
imperative to enable DDDAS capabilities, and the impact of DDDAS to scientific and
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part III, LNCS 3993, pp. 375 – 383, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

376

F. Darema

engineering fields is becoming widely recognized, there is increasing acceptance of
the DDDAS potential to many industrial environments and such opportunities are
manifested through the participation of industry in a number of the research projects.
The efforts presented in this workshop provide examples of technologies and
capabilities that are being developed based on the DDDAS concept and supporting
DDDAS environments. In www.cise.nsf.gov/dddas, a listing of all projects funded
under the DDDAS rubric can be found; the papers presented here represent a sample
of the range of projects and scope of the technical areas pursued. This introduction
provides an overview and the context of the work presented. The present workshop is
the fourth of a series of workshops on the DDDAS topic that have been organized as
part of ICCS, starting with ICCS’03. Other community outreach activities include the
NSF sponsored workshops [1 and 8].

2 Overview of Work Presented in This Workshop
The papers presented in this workshop represent ongoing research projects each
addressing a number of aspects along the technical opportunities derived from the
DDDAS concept as well as the challenges and technical advances required to enable
DDDAS capabilities. With the exception of projects in [21] and [32-35], all other
projects are enabled with the support of the ITR and DDDAS programs referenced
above.
Several of the papers presented address application simulations whose capabilities
are enhanced by dynamic data inputs into the executing application/simulation. Many
of the papers presented involve multidisciplinary work to develop new capabilities
along the four components: applications and algorithms, together with advances in
computer systems software and measurement methods. While the emphasis of each
project on each of the four components may vary, in most of these papers the
application advances and enablement are made in synergism with in the underlying
software technology, supporting the development of the complex DDDAS
applications, their dynamic runtime support requirements and interfaces to control
measurement systems. Several papers provide examples of simulation controlled
measurement processes (instruments and sensor networks). Most of the work on
mathematical algorithms tolerant and stable to dynamically streamed data is done in
the context and together with the development of the application models. In all cases
the mathematical algorithms and systems software development is done in the context
of specific applications driving and validating the developed technologies.
The projects discussed in [9-19 and 22-30] enable improved analysis and
prediction capabilities of application simulations and/or speeding up the computation
times together with improved quality of simulations, and in a feedback loop the
simulations control of measurements, sensors and other instruments.
In projects [9-12], the applications are in the areas of environmental and natural
resource management. In [9] the project employs previous work performed by the
investigators in the Instrumented Oil-Field DDDAS project that has enabled a new
generation of data-driven, interactive and dynamically adaptive strategies for
subsurface characterization and oil reservoir management. This previous work has led
to the implementation of advanced multi-physics, multi-scale, and multi-block

Introduction: Dynamic Data Driven Applications Systems

377

numerical models and an autonomic software stack for DDDAS applications. The
software stack implements a Grid-based adaptive execution engine, distributed data
management services for real-time data access, exploration, and coupling, and selfmanaging middleware services for seamless discovery and composition of
components, services, and data on the Grid. This paper investigates how these
solutions can be leveraged and applied to address another DDDAS application of
strategic importance, e.g. the data-driven management of Ruby Gulch Waste
Repository. Work conducted in [10] develops capabilities to convert a traditional data
collection sensor and ocean model into a DDDAS enabled system for identifying
contaminants, dynamically coupling different models, simulations, and sensing
strategies, in a symbiotic manner. The paper in [11] is centered on methods for
detection, management and mitigation of threat in drinking water distribution
systems; it involves real-time characterization of any contaminant source and plume,
design of control strategies, and design of incremental data sampling schedules. This
requires dynamic integration of time-varying measurements along with analytical
modules hat include simulation models, adaptive sampling procedures, and
optimization methods. These modules are compute-intensive, requiring multi-level
parallel processing via computer clusters. Since real-time responses are critical, the
computational needs must also be adaptively matched with available resources. This
requires a software system to facilitate this integration via a high-performance
computing architecture such that the measurement system, the analytical modules and
the computing resources can mutually adapt and steer each other. The paper describes
the development of such an adaptive cyberinfrastructure system facilitated by a
dynamic workflow design. The paper in [12] is aimed at understanding environmental
change through the deployment of next-generation wireless sensor networks and
assimilating heterogeneous data, assessing the relative value and costs of data
collection, and scheduling activities accordingly. Thus, they are dynamic, data-driven
distributed systems that integrate sensing with modeling and prediction in an adaptive
framework. Integration of a range of technologies will allow estimation of the value
of future data in terms of its contribution to understanding and cost. This balance is
especially important for environmental data, where sampling intervals will range from
meters to entire landscapes, and from seconds to years in duration. The paper
describes a general framework for dynamic data-driven wireless network control that
combines modeling of the sensor network and its embedding environment, both in
and out of the network, and describes a range of challenges that must be addressed,
and an integrated suite of solutions for the design of dynamic sensor networks.
The papers in [13-15] are in application areas dealing with security and crisis
management and mitigation. The paper in [13] is developing a prototype emergency
response system. This dynamic data driven application system (DDDAS) uses
wireless call data, including call volume, who calls whom, call duration, services in
use, and cell phone location in formation to utilize the cell phones of a city to serve as
an ad hoc mobile sensor net, measuring the movement and calling patterns of the
population. Social network theory and statistical analysis on normal call activity and
call locations establish a baseline. A detection and alert system monitors streaming
summary cell phone call data. Abnormal call patterns or population movements
trigger a simulation and prediction system. The project in [14] is concerned with
applying Dynamic Data Driven Application Simulations (DDDAS) to monitor and

378

F. Darema

manage surface transportation systems. Building upon activities such as the VehicleInfrastructure Integration initiative, a hierarchical DDDAS architecture will be
created that includes coupled in-vehicle, roadside, and traffic management center
simulations. The overall architecture and further advances incorporating the DDDAS
concept will be deployed to implement and evaluate the effectiveness of the intended
system for a portion the Atlanta area in the context of a hypothesized emergency
evacuation scenario. The paper in [15] will apply DDDAS capabilities developed by
the investigators that allow to study interaction between fire and agent models during
a fire evacuation. The analysis from that research can be used to validate proposed
ideas in evacuation and building designs to ensure safety of buildings given various
agent behaviors. Through study of the interactions, a better understanding is gained of
how to improve building design, evacuation strategies and regulations, as well as
training first responders.
The papers in [16-17] are addressing application areas of critical infrastructure
management and protection, such as electrical power systems management The
paper in [16] is focused in developing methods and approaches for maintaining
acceptable electric transmission system reliability and optimized electric energy
delivery, requires innovations in sensing, diagnostics, communications, data
management, processing, algorithms, risk assessment, decision-making (for
operations, maintenance, and planning), and process coordination. The work
presented is a comprehensive approach to develop methods and processes in these
areas, driven by the ultimate objective to develop a hardware-software prototype
capable of auto-steering the information-decision cycles inherent to managing
operations, maintenance, and planning of the high-voltage electric power transmission
systems. The paper in [17] is also concerned with fault-tolerant operation of largescale electric power systems through efficient and methods that employ the DDDAS
concept to enable fast and robust reduced-order-modeling and filtering methods and
merging of data from multiple sources.
The papers in [18-21] address methods for structural monitoring and fault-tolerance
in structures like buildings and aircraft. Paper [18] discusses methods and
implementation scope supporting a dynamic data driven application system for material
and structural health monitoring as well as critical event prediction. The dynamic data
driven paradigm is exploited to promote application advances, application measurement
systems and methods, mathematical and statistical algorithms and systems software
infrastructure relevant to this effort. These advances are intended to enable behavior
monitoring and prediction as well as critical event avoidance on multiple time scales.
Paper [19] uses DDDAS to enable structural sensing and control. Paper [20] is
employing DDDAS for evaluation of fluid-thermal systems wherein a complete
specification of the boundary conditions is not known a priori and experimental
diagnostics are restricted to a limited region of the flow-field. The methodology is
applied to the configuration of a heated jet injected into a laminar boundary layer
where the jet temperature is not known a priori. Papers [21, 37] use DDDAS to
improve methods for analysis, prediction of atmospheric contaminant propagation and
inversion for identification of the origin of the contaminant, employing the concept to
steer sensors and stream up-to-date information to enhance reduced order models and
PDE solvers approaches, in a feed-back control loop.

Introduction: Dynamic Data Driven Applications Systems

379

Papers [22-26] address topics of atmospheric, aqueous and ambient environmental
systems such as: In [22] a data assimilation technique for coupled ionospheric and
thermospheric dynamics. Using a frozen linear dynamics matrix for the time update of
the error covariance and the evaluation of the Kalman filter gain, and demonstrating
the performance of the data assimilation technique on a section of the ionosphere.
Paper [23] uses the DDDAS concept to simultaneously factor position and amplitude
errors for improved prediction of path of rapidly changing mesoscale events like
hurricanes. In [24], in the context of a marine biology application, observing systems
facilitate scientific studies by instrumenting the real world and collecting
corresponding measurements, with the aim of detecting and tracking phenomena of
interest. Thos project focuses on a class of observing systems, which are embedded
into the environment, consist of stationary and mobile sensors, and react to collected
observations by reconfiguring the system and adapting which observations are
collected next. Paper [26] reports on an ongoing effort to build a Dynamic Data
Driven Application System (DDDAS) for short-range forecast of weather and wildfire
behavior from real-time weather data, images, and sensor streams. The system
changes the forecast as new data is received. The methods involve applying an
ensemble Kalman filter in time-space with a highly parallel implementation, and
demonstration of the validity of the derived system by using a DDDAS test-bed
approach and data collected from an earlier fire.
Applications in [27-29] are in the areas of health and behavioral sciences. The
project in [27] uses the DDDAS concept to enable a dynamic data-driven planning
and control system for laser treatment of cancer. The research includes development
of a general mathematical framework and a family of mathematical and
computational models of bio-heat transfer, tissue damage, and tumor viability,
dynamic calibration, verification and validation processes based on laboratory and
clinical data and simulated response, and (3) design of effective thermo-therapeutic
protocols using model predictions. At the core of the proposed systems is the
adaptive-feedback control of mathematical and computational models based on a
posteriori estimates of errors in key quantities of interest, and modern Magnetic
Resonance Temperature Imaging (MRTI), and diode laser devices to monitor
treatment of tumors in laboratory animals. This approach enables an automated
systematic model selection process based on acceptance criteria determined a priori.
The methodologies to be implemented involve uncertainty quantification methods
designed to provide an innovative, data-driven, patient-specific approach to effective
cancer treatment. Paper [28] presents a case of interdisciplinary collaboration in
building and using a set of tools to compute the flows in a branched artery, to
compare them with prior physical flow visualization, and to interpret them with
further users in mind. The geometry is of a typical epicardial coronary artery with a
side branch. The incompressible Navier-Stokes equations are solved with the hybrid
spectral/hp element solver Nektar, and simulations were visualized in the CAVE, an
immersive 3D stereo display environment, which facilitates interpretation of
simulated features. Paper [29] describes a novel approach towards the development
of new design architectures and research test-beds for advanced Brain Machine
Interfaces (BMIs) to help paralyzed patients, and others with motor disabilities, regain
(artificial) motor control and autonomy. It addresses a critical design challenge in
deriving the functional mapping between the subject’s movement intent and actuated

380

F. Darema

behavior. Inspired by motor control research, this paper considers a predictive
framework for BMI using multiple adaptive models trained with supervised or
reinforcement learning in a closed-loop architecture that requires real-time feedback.
In this framework, BMIs require a computing infrastructure capable of selectively
executing multiple models on the basis of signals received by and/or provided to the
brain in real time. Middleware currently under investigation to provide this datadriven dynamic capability is discussed. Paper [30] presents a dynamic data-driven
framework for tracking gestures and facial expressions from monocular sequences.
The system uses two cameras, one for the face and one for the whole body view for
processing in different scales. Specifically, and for the gesture tracking module, the
system tracks the hands and the head, obtaining as output the blobs (ellipses) of the
ROIs, and detects the shoulder positions with straight lines. For the facial expressions,
the approach is to extract the 2D facial features, using a fusion between KLT tracker
and a modified Active Shape Model, and then we obtain the 3D facemask with fitting
a generic model to the extracted 2D features. The main advantages of the system
pursued are: adaptivity, i.e. robustness to external conditions, such as lighting, and
independent from the examined individual, and computational efficiency, providing
us results off- and online with a rates higher than 20frames/sec.
In [31] the work presented employs artificial intelligence (AI) approaches to enable
the management of a data driven simulation system, in particular with regard to
adaptive selection of data and refinement of the model on which the simulation is
based. The approaches used consider two different classes of intelligent agent that can
control a data driven simulation: (a) an autonomous agent using internal simulation to
test and refine a model of its environment and (b) an assistant agent managing a datadriven simulation to help humans understand a complex system (assisted modelbuilding). In the first case the agent is situated in its environment and can use its own
sensors to explore the data sources. In the second case, the agent has much less
independent access to data and may have limited capability to refine the model on
which the simulation is based. This is particularly true if the data contains subjective
statements about the human view of the world, such as in the social sciences. For
complex systems involving human actors, the paper pursues an architecture in which
assistant agents cooperate with autonomous agents to build a more complete and
reliable picture of the observed system.
The paper in [32] presents tools that serve to capture and apply a scientist’s insight
about opportunities for, and limitations of, simulation adaptation, and reports on the
two ongoing collaborations that serve to guide and evaluate the methods pursued. One
of the intended consequences of utilizing simulations in dynamic, data-driven
application systems is that the simulations will adjust to new data as it arrives. These
adjustments will be difficult because of the unpredictable nature of the world and
because simulations are so carefully tuned to model specific operating conditions.
Accommodating new data may require adapting or replacing numerical methods,
simulation parameters, or the analytical scientific models from which the simulation is
derived. This research project emphasizes the important role a scientist’s insight can
play in facilitating the runtime adaptation of a simulation to accurately utilize new data.
The papers [33-36] present work that can be evolved as enabling algorithmic and
computer systems software technologies supporting DDDAS environments. In [33]
web services, service oriented architecture and model driven architecture approaches

Introduction: Dynamic Data Driven Applications Systems

381

are discussed; in [34] advanced visualization methods, in [35] multivariate signal
analysis methods are discussed, and in [36] knowledge-based methods for data
management approaches are presented. The methods discussed in these papers are
needed advances for capabilities such as dynamic composition of DDDAS applications and dynamic data management interfaces.

3 Summary
The DDDAS concept opens new capabilities in application and measurement methods
and systems. Through efforts that have started developing DDDAS systems, such
promise begins to materialize, and we are in a steady path towards accomplishing that
objective. The progress made is exemplified by the projects presented here.

Acknowledgements
I’m indebted to all my colleagues at NSF, NIH and NOAA, as well as the cooperating
EU-IST and e-Sciences programs, who have worked with me on the DDDAS
Program Solicitation and in cosponsoring the funded projects.

References
1. NSF Workshop, March 2000; www.cise.nsf.gov/dddas
2. F. Darema, Dynamic Data Driven Applications Systems: A New Paradigm for Application
Simulations and Measurements, ICCS’04
3. F. Darema, Grid Computing and Beyond: The Context of Dynamic Data Driven
Applications Systems, Proceedings of the IEEE, Special Issue on Grid Computing, 3/05
4. F. Darema, Dynamic Data Driven Applications Systems: New Capabilities for Application
Simulations and Measurements, ICCS’05
5. DDDAS-Dynamic Data Driven Applications Systems Program Solicitation (NSF 05-570);
www.cise.nsf.gov/dddas
6. NSF Information Technology Research (ITR) Program (1999-2004)
7. Cyberinfrastructure Report http://www.communitytechnology.org/nsf_ci_report
8. NSF Sponsored Workshop: DDDAS-Dynamic Data Driven Applications Systems, Jan 1920, 2006 [www.cise.nsf.gov/dddas]
9. Manish Parashar, Vincent Matossian, Hector Klie, Sunil G. Thomas, Mary F. Wheeler,
Tahsin Kurc, Joel Saltz, and Roelof Versteg; Towards Dynamic Data-Driven Management
of the Ruby Gulch Waste Repository
10. Craig C. Douglas, J. Clay Harris, Mohamed Iskandarani, Chris R. Johnson, Robert Lodder,
Steve Parker, Martin J. Cole, Richard Ewing, Yalchin Efendiev, Raytcho Lazarov, and
Guan Qin; Dynamic Contaminant Identification in Water
11. Kumar Mahinthakumar, Gregor von Laszewski, Ranji Ranjithan, Downey Brill, Jim Uber,
Ken Harrison, Sarat Sreepathi, and Emily Zechman; An Adaptive Cyberinfrastructure for
Threat Management in Urban Water Distribution Systems:
12. Paul G. Flikkema, Pankaj K. Agarwal, James S. Clark, Carla Ellis, Alan Gelfand, Kamesh
Munagala, and Jun Yang; Model-Driven Dynamic Control of Embedded Wireless Sensor
Networks

382

F. Darema

13. Greg R. Madey, Gabor Szabo, and Albert-László Barabási; WIPER: The Integrated
Wireless Phone Based Emergency Response System
14. Richard M. Fujimoto, Randall Guensler, Michael Hunter, Hoe Kyoung Kim, Jaesup Lee,
John Leonard II, Mahesh Palekar, Karsten Schwan, Balasubramanian Seshasayee;
Dynamic Data Driven Application Simulation of Surface Transportation Systems
15. Alok Chaturvedi, Angela Mellema, Sergei Filatyev, Jay Gore; DDDAS Approach to Fire
and Agent Evacuation Modeling: Case Study of Rhode Island Nightclub Fire
16. James D McCalley, Vasant G Honavar, Sarah M Ryan, William Q Meeker, Ronald A
Roberts, Daji Qiao, Yuan Li; Auto- Steered Information-Decision Processes for Electric
System Asset Management
17. E. H. Abed, N. S. Nmachchivaya, T. J. Overbye, M. A. Pai, P. W. Sauer and A. Sussman;
Data-Driven Power System Operations
18. C. Farhat, J. G. Michopoulos, F.K. Chang, L.J. Guibas, and A.J. Lew; Towards a Dynamic
Data Driven System for Structural and Material Health Monitoring
19. Asad Awan, Ahmed Sameh, and Ananth Grama; The Omni Macroprogramming
Environment for Sensor Networks
20. D. Knight, T. Rossman and Y. Jaluria; Evaluation of Fluid-Thermal Systems by Dynamic
Data Driven Application Systems
21. Volkan Akcelik, George Biros, Andrei Draganescu, Omar Ghattas, Judith Hill, and Bart
van BloemenWaanders; Inversion of Airborne Contaminants in a Regional Model
22. S. Kim, J. Chandrasekar, A. Ridley, D. S. Bernstein; Data Assimilation Using the Global
Ionosphere-Thermosphere Model
23. Sai Ravela; Amplitude-Position formulation of Data Assimilation
24. Hyung-Jin Son and Theodore B. Trafalis; Detection of Tornados Using an Incremental
Revised Support Vector Machine with Filters
25. Leana Golubchik, David Caron, Abhimanyu Das, Amit Dhariwal, Ramesh Govindan,
David Kempe, Carl Oberg, Abhishek Sharma, Beth Stauer, Gaurav Sukhatme, Bin Zhang;
A Generic Multi-scale Modeling Framework for Reactive Observing Systems: an
Overview
26. Craig C. Douglas, Jonathan D. Beezley, Janice Coen, Deng Li, Wei Li, Alan K. Mandel,
Jan Mandel , Guan Qin, and Anthony Vodacek; Demonstrating the Validity of a Wildfire
DDDAS
27. J. T. Oden, K. R. Diller, C. Bajaj, J. C. Browne, J. Hazle2, I. Babu¡ska, J. Bass, L.
Demkowicz, Y. Feng, D. Fuentes, S. Prudhomme, N. Rylander,R. J. Sta_ord, and Y.
Zhang; Development of a Computational Paradigm for Laser Treatment of Cancer
28. P. D. Richardson, I.V. Pivkin, G.E. Karniadakis, D.H. Laidlaw; Blood Flow At Arterial
Branches: Complexities To Resolve For The Angioplasty Suite
29. José Fortes, Renato Figueiredo, Linda Hermer-Vazquez, José Príncipe and Justin C.
Sanchez; A New Architecture for Deriving Dynamic Brain-Machine Interfaces
30. D. Metaxas, G. Tsechpenakis, Z. Li, Y. Huang, A. Kanaujia; Dynamically Adaptive
Tracking of Gestures and Facial Expressions
31. Catriola Kennedy and Georgios Theodoropoulos;: Intelligent Management of Data Driven
Simulations to Support Model building in the Social sciences
32. Paul Reynolds, David Brogan, Joseph Carnahan, Yannick Loiti`ere, and Michael Spiegel;
Capturing Scientists’ Insight for DDDAS
33. Adel Torkaman Rahmani, Vahid Rafe, Saeed Sedighian and Amin Abbaspour; An MDAbased Modeling and Design of Service-Oriented Architecture
34. Anthony Jones and Dan Cornford; Advanced Data Driven Visualisation for Geo-spatial
Data

Introduction: Dynamic Data Driven Applications Systems

383

35. Liu Bo, Zhao Jun, and Qian Jixin; Design and Analysis of Test Signals for System
Identification
36. XiaoDong Gao and Zhiping Fan; The Research on the Method of Process-based
Knowledge catalog & Storage and its Application in Steel Product R&D
37. Emil M. Constantinescu, Adrian Sandu, Gregory R. Carmichael, Tianfeng Chai, John H.
Seinfeld, and Dacian D¢aescu; Localized Ensemble Kalman Data Assimilation for
Atmospheric Chemical Transport Models

