Integrating Ajax into GIS Web Services for
Performance Enhancement
Seung-Jun Cha1, Yun-Young Hwang1,
Yoon-Seop Chang2, Kyung-Ok Kim2, and Kyu-Chul Lee1,*1
1

Department of Computer Engineering, Chungnam National University, Korea
2
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute(ETRI), Korea
{junii, yyhwang, kclee}@cnu.ac.kr, {ychang, kokim}@etri.re.kr

Abstract. In the GIS(Geospatial Information System) Web Services,
SOAP/MTOM shows best performance when transferring large size of data
between services. SOAP/MTOM uses XOP for message optimizing method, so
data serialization and deserialization time is reduced. Additionally, integrating
Ajax(Asynchronous JavaScript and XML) approach into GIS visualization Web
Services have performance enhancement, because it provides more interactive
user experience. Ajax, one of the technologies of “Web 2.0”, is appeared after
Dot Com bubble is occurred. The intent is to make web pages feel more
responsive by exchanging small amounts of data with the server behind the
scenes, so that the entire web page does not have to be reloaded each time the
user requests a change.
Keywords: Ajax, Web Services, GIS.

1 Introduction
Over the past decade GIS(Geographic Information Systems) technology has evolved
from the traditional model of stand-alone systems to distributed models. Distributed
GIS services will be implemented more extensively by using Web Services. But
there is on additional problem: large amounts of data need to be moved among users
and providers, so as to enable the first to perform their designated task. Since
geographic-related data are usually large in size this exchange becomes more and
more difficult despite the improvements in communication. But among SOAP
message transfer methods, SOAP/MTOM[1], which is using XOP for optimizing
message transfer, shows best performance when transferring large size of data
between services.
The bursting of the dot-com bubble in the fall of 2001 marked a turning point for
the web. The companies that had survived the collapse seemed to have some things in
common. Dot-com collapse marked some kind of turning point for the web, so it is
called “Web 2.0”. Ajax(Asynchronous JavaScript and XML) is one of the Web 2.0’s
technologies. It provides asynchronous communication between the client and the
*

Corresponding author.

Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part II, LNCS 4488, pp. 562–568, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Integrating Ajax into GIS Web Services for Performance Enhancement

563

server. Integrating Ajax approach into GIS visualization Web Services have
performance enhancement for user interface. [11]
This paper describe the model which is integrated Ajax into GIS Web Services,
and decide how to evaluate performance between using Ajax and non-Ajax in GIS
Web Services. Through the evaluation of the performance between Web Services
using Ajax and Web Services using non-Ajax, results indicate integrated Ajax into
Web Service model shows good performance Enhancement is approved.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: a brief discussion of OGC GIS Web
Services and Ajax is given in section 2. Section 3 shows comparisons with related
work, and section 5 contains the introduction of integrated model. A definition of
performance evaluation and test results are described in Section 6. Conclusions are
followed in section 7.

2 Background
2.1 OGC GIS Web Services
Geographic Information Science has a lot to benefit by the adoption of the service
computing model. As mentioned also in the introduction geographic information
comes from different and diverse sources and in different formats. This is especially
true for the environmental related information which has to combine not only data
from different sources by also models and software.[8]
Technically, Web Services technologies have provided the necessary standards
for applications in different domains to integrate with GIS data and services,
significant accomplishments in GIS Web Services have led to several exemplifying
map and image services that adhere to Web Services standards and bring terabytes
of geospatial data and digital maps to enterprise developers who house no GIS
data.
The OGC(Open Geospatial Consortium) has successfully executed efforts for GIS
Web Services(OWS) initiative has undergone multiple phases – including the Web
Map Server(WMS), Web Feature Server(WFS), Web Coverage Server(WCS), and
OGC Web Service Architecture, which support application developers in integrating a
variety of online geoprocessing and location services.
2.2 Ajax(Asynchronous JavaScript and XML)
Ajax is a style of web application development that used a mix of modern web
technologies to provide a more interactive user experience. Ajax is not a technology.
It is an approach to web applications that includes a couple of technologies. These are
JavaScript, HTML, Cascading Style Sheet(CSS), Document Object Model(DOM),
XML and XSLT, and XMLHttpRequest as messaging protocol. [2]
These core technologies forming Ajax are mature[6], well-known and used in web
applications widely. Ajax became so popular because it has a couple of advantages

564

S.-J. Cha et al.

for the browser based web applications developers. It eliminates the stop-start nature
of interactions, user interactions with the server happen asynchronously, data can
manipulated without having to render the entire page again and again in the web
browser, and requests and responses over the XMLHttpRequest protocol are
structured XML documents. This enables developers easily integrate Ajax
applications into Web Services.

3 Related Works
Previous researchers have described about applying Web Services to GIS. The
paper[3] indicates about GIS Web Services about satellite imaging. It says there are
problems when using GIS Web Services, because of sending large size of data. The
paper[7] describes about developing GIS visualization Web Services for geophysical
applications. Since images and capabilities documents can be too large and
transferring these data over the internet is cumbersome, its first priority is researching
technique for improving WMS performance.
Related to the Ajax, The paper[6] introduced integrating the model of Ajax
approach into GIS Web Services. It describes of invoking Web Services in the Ajax
Model but it is only theoretical so it has nonexistence of implementation.
Our study differs from previous studies in that we compare performance among
standard SOAP, SwA/MIME, and SOAP/MTOM. So, the paper[9] indicated the
result. When we send large size of data(raster and vector), SOAP/MTOM shows the
best performance. And there are no studies of implementing and evaluating
applications for GIS Web Services using Ajax.

4 Integrated Ajax into GIS Web Services
In Ajax, the client communicated with the server by using XMLHttpRequest method.
XMLHttpRequest provides asynchronous access to the server simply like the
Googlemap. Its performance seems better because web pages using Ajax can appear
to load relatively quickly since the payload coming down is much smaller in size. So
roundtrip time is less than the classic web application.
Web Services provide integrated environments within distributed system. When
the client makes a request for receiving images from the server, the server runs inner
JSP which can access specific Web Service of providing image files. And then the
server saves them to its repository. The client’s working process must be waited until
response message is arrived from the server, because the client requests
synchronously.
In the model integrated Web Services with Ajax (Fig. 1), as both Ajax and Web
Services are used together, two different side’s advantages are applied. So it can
integrate Web Services from different platform’s application and access to the server
asynchronously. It enhances user interface and reduces roundtrip time.

Integrating Ajax into GIS Web Services for Performance Enhancement

565

Fig. 1. Integrated Web Services with Ajax

5 Performance Evaluation Between Using Ajax and Using
Non-Ajax in GIS Web Services
When an application is launched, images which may be displayed on the screen are
fetched from the server. If the server does not have those images, the server requests
for fetching images from specific Web Service. User may wait for looking displayed
images for the moment. During that time, Ajax is executed, so it fetches extra images
roundabout from Web Services to the server. When user drag the screen for watching
another images, already fetched image is displayed faster.
5.1 Evaluation Metrics and Method
5.1.1 Consideration Characteristic of Fetching Time in Ajax
The time when user look at displayed images, the server creates a XMLHttpRequest
Object and executes it. Extra images are fetched from Web Services to the server in
that operation. So it takes less than user’s waiting time. (Fig. 2 – )

①

Fig. 2. Evaluation metrics

566

S.-J. Cha et al.

5.1.2 Image Fetching Time
Displayed images must be fetched from Web Service regardless of using Ajax.
Because the request using Ajax is asynchronous, images fetching time is less than
using non-Ajax’s fetching time. (Fig. 2 - , )

②③

5.1.3 User Response Time
When users drag the screen, addition images must be fetched. Non-Ajax application is
not include images in themselves, so it accesses Web Services for fetching images
every time. But Ajax application has already fetched necessary images, so they are
displayed faster. (Fig. 2 - , )

④⑤

5.2 Evaluation Environments and Test Data Design
For the test, we need three computers. The configuration of the client systems is:
▪ Pentium 4-1.66GHz processor
▪ 1Gbytes of memory
▪ Windows XP Pro.
The configuration of the server systems is:
▪ Pentium 3-1GHz *2 (Dual CPU) processors
▪ 2Gbytes of memory
▪ RedHat Linux 9
The configuration of the Web Server systems is:
▪ Pentium 4-1.66GHz processor
▪ 1Gbytes of memory
▪ RedHat Linux 9
All computers are connected in commonly used network. So test data is selected by
considering generally used data. Google map use 20Kbytes of image tile so the tests
are performed by receiving 20Kbytes of image.
5.3 Evaluation Results
The result of consideration of fetching time in Ajax is presented in Table 1. It takes
almost 2 seconds while all images(12 tiles) are fetched. It shows that 2 seconds is
reasonable time to fetch images while user waited.
In images fetching time, we compare Web Services using Ajax with Web Services
using non-Ajax. Fig. 3 shows that if only one image is fetched, the one takes longer
than the other, because it has some overheads at XMLHttpRequest method. But, if
multiple images are fetched the other takes longer than the one, because Ajax can
communicate asynchronously.
Table 1. Consideration characteristic of fetching time

Ajax

1
186ms

3
475ms

6
938ms

9
1410ms

12
1988ms

Integrating Ajax into GIS Web Services for Performance Enhancement

3000

567

2737

2500
2030

)s2000
(m
e1500
im
T
1000

1988
1410

1299

Ajax
non-Ajax

938

500

681
475

186
155

0

1

2

3

4

5
6
7
8
Number of images

9

10

11

12

Fig. 3. Image fetching time

Fig. 4 indicated the user roundtrip time. In Web Services using Ajax the server has
already read extra images and save them to its repository. So when the client requests
mages, it can read them directly and the server does not need to connect Web
Services. However in non-Ajax application, when the client requests images the
server must connect Web Services for fetching images every time. So it takes longer
than before. The roundtrip time is most important factor for user interface. If
roundtrip time measured less, users realize that the application has good performance.
The more evaluation data comes to many, the more gaps we get.
4000

3792

3500
3000
)s 2500
(m
e 2000
im
T 1500

2609
1544

1000
500
0

672
222
47
1 2

190
3

4

438
5 6 7 8 9
Number of Images

1290

Ajax
non-Ajax

767
10 11 12

Fig. 4. User response time

6 Conclusion
Our research is for performance enhancement in GIS Web Services.
performed evaluation experiments of SOAP and its variants for the
efficiency. Our tests indicate that SOAP performance is improved
SOAP/MTOM for sending protocol, in both raster data and vector data.

So we have
transmission
when using
It is because

568

S.-J. Cha et al.

SOAP/MTOM uses XOP optimizing mechanism so that serialization time and
deserialization time is reduced. Especially in vector data, a standard SOAP message is
made by embedding vector data as elements or attributes. Although total message size
using SwA/MIME and SOAP/MTOM is bigger than standard SOAP because of
tagging, roundtrip time is less than that. It is because SwA/MIME and SOAP/MTOM
consist of small SOAP message and attachments exist in boundaries.
In addition to precede test, GIS Web Services’ performance may have
enhancement by using asynchronous technology. So we have chosen Ajax
technology, one of the Web 2.0 technologies. Ajax provides asynchronous
communication when the client request required images to the server. Web Services
and Web Services using Ajax comparison results that Web Services using Ajax
represent good performance in images fetching and user roundtrip time because it
fetches them beforehand.
These results will contribute to integration construction’s main technology of GIS
systems. And also they will also contribute that in Web Services of dealing with large
size of data used in GIS system, its performance should be enhanced.

Acknowledgement
This research was supported by the Ministry of Information and Communication,
Korea, under the College Information Technology Research Center Support Program,
grant number IITA-2006-C1090-0603-0031.

References
1. Gudgin, M., et al., 2005, SOAP Message Transmission Optimization Mechanism, (on-line)
http://www.w3.org/TR/soap12-mtom/
2. Jesse James Garret, Ajax: A New Approach to Web Applications. 2005. 2, http://
www.adaptivepath.com/ publications/essays/archives/000385.php
3. Kotzinos, D., et al., GIS Web Services and Satellite Imaging as a Framework for
Environmental Monitoring: The Design and Implementation of a Vegetation Indices
Calculation Test Case, Computer Science Department, University of Crete, Greece
4. Mitra, N., 2003, SOAP Version 1.2 Part 0:Primer, (on-line) http:// www.w3.org/ TR/
2003/ soap12-part0/
5. Ng, A., et al., 2005, A Study of the Impact of Compression and Binary Encoding on SOAP
performance, Department of Computing, Macquarie University, Australia
6. Sayar, A., et al., 2006, Integrating AJAX Approach into GIS Visualization Web Services,
Community Grids Lab, Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana
7. Sayar, A., et al., Developing GIS Visualization Web Services for Geophysical
Applications, Community Grids Lab, Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana
8. Tu, S., et al., 2006, Web Services for Geographic Information System, IEEE internet
Computing, pp. 13-15
9. Seung-Jun, C., et al., A Performance Evaluation of SOAP Variants for GIS Web Services,
ISRS 2006 PORSEC, Vol 2(2006), 615-618
10. Tim O’Reilly, What Is Web 2.0. Design Pattern and Business Models for the Next
Generation of Software, O’REILLY, 2005. 9
11. Ying, Y., et al., 2004, A performance Evaluation of Using SOAP with Attachments for eScience, School of Computer Science, Cardiff University1.1 Checking the PDF File

