Network Topology in Immune System Shape
Space
John Burns and Heather J. Ruskin
School of Computing,
Dublin City University,
Dublin 9, Ireland
{jburns,hruskin}@computing.dcu.ie
http://www.dcu.ie/computing/msc/index.html

Abstract. We consider the emergent network topology of an immune
system shape space at the end of primary response. We extend the formalism of shape space in order to model the relationship between activated immune lymphocytes and stimulant antigen presentation cells by
way of a graph consisting of a pair G = (V, E) of sets. The vertex set
V is the set of activated genotypes, while the edge set E connects such
activated immune lymphocytes and stimulant antigen presentation cell
in shape space. This paper shows how shape space graph edge weighting can be viewed, from the biological perspective, as the vigour with
which an activated cytotoxic immune cell suppresses the infected antigen presentation cell which stimulated it. In this research, we also identify critical vertices (called α-vertices). These α-vertices act as bridging
vertices in that they join subgraphs of unrelated immune response. As a
consequence of this, such α-vertices ideally model immune cytotoxic lymphocyte memory cells. By representing memory cells as highly connected
vertices, we show how such cells play a signiﬁcant role in the elimination
of pathogenic agents.

1

Introduction

In this paper we present results from recent work carried out to model the emergence of shape diversity within the immune system. Previously [1], we introduced
a new process by which two formalisms, usually separately addressed, may be
integrated. These formalisms are known as shape space and physical space. We
highlighted a means by which localised dynamics eﬀect global (or shape space)
condition, and how global condition in turn may feed information down to local
physical space. This approach is now further reﬁned by treating shape space as a
self-organising, dynamic network in 2-dimensional space. The system is considered to be exposed to a set of genetically varied pathogens in order to simulate
normal human immune experience over a ﬁxed period of time. We then study
the cytotoxic lymphocyte activation patterns which emerge naturally in shape
space. The results presented here show that, at the end of primary response, a
network of activated cytotoxic lymphocytes and pathogen challengers emerges
in shape space.
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3038, pp. 1094–1101, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

Network Topology in Immune System Shape Space

1095

The main contribution of this work is as follows: We present a means to
model the genotype (or shape) space of the immune system as set of connected,
directed and weighted subgraphs. These subgraphs, will, by way of the emergence of critical (or α-) vertices, merge over time. We show that disruption
to α-vertex formation degrades immune response more severely than does the
disruption of other (which we call β-) vertices. Disruption is likely to occur whenever a viral mutation is a factor, for example, Human Immune Virus (HIV) or
Inﬂuenza. The means by which such graphs grow, and how rewiring of vertices
improves response over time, is also investigated. This work demonstrates that
edge weighting can be viewed, from the biological perspective, as the vigour with
which an activated cytotoxic immune cell suppresses the infected antigen presentation cell which stimulated it. In shape space, this weighting is the distance
(d) from α- and β- vertices to the stimulant pathogen (eﬀectively, it is the length
of the edge).

2

The Model

In this section we ﬁrst review some important features of our previous work, and
introduce new detail. For a full exposition of both shape and physical space, the
reader is directed to [4]. The shape space formalism was introduced by [5] as a
way to represent antibody-antigen binding dynamics. Further research reﬁned
this model, notably [6] and [7]. The features of cytotoxic lymphocyte (CTL) cells
and antigen presentation (APC) cells which govern the dynamics of cell binding
(known as the antigenic determinant), may be represented by N parameters.
If the N parameters are combined into a vector, the antigenic determinant for
each APC and each CTL can be considered as points within an N -dimensional
Euclidean space of length Lss . Some notational conventions are observed in the
work which follows (where upper-case letters refer to shape space, and lower
case, to physical space), and this convention is summarised as follows:
1. (CT L+ , ctl+ ): activated cytotoxic lymphocyte cells which are ready to attack
and remove infected antigen presentation cells. These cells are often referred
to as armed eﬀectors. The recirculation patterns of ctl+ are diﬀerent from
ctl− , in that ctl+ will leave the lymphatic compartment and migrate to
the location of infection detection. Alteration of recirculation patterns is a
common feature of cellular immune response in healthy [8] and diseased [9]
immune systems.
2. (AP C + , apc+ ): infected antigen presentation cells (typically, dendritic cells)
which, having engulfed a virus particle, has gone on to present characteristic
viral peptide fragments on its surface.
At the start of each simulation, shape space is characterised by two (non-zero)
subpopulations: CT L− and AP C + , representing the number of precursor cytotoxic lymphocyte and active infected antigen presentation cell genotypes respectively. A further subpopulation (called CT L+ ), arises once an AP C + is detected
by a CT L− . CT L+ are activated cytotoxic lymphocyte genotypes. The CT L+

1096

J. Burns and H.J. Ruskin

subpopulation level increases each time another detection occurs, such that the
total CT L− approaches 0. Denoting CTL and APC genotype vectors as c and
a respectively, we further develop shape space as follows: Surrounding each c is
a disc of radius ρ 1 . Any a located within this disc will be subject to a clearance
pressure inversely proportional to the distance (d) between the c and a in shape
space (d = ||c − a||). Our approach is to place into shape space an increasingly
diverse set of antigen challenges and test the varying immune response.
Shape space may be further explored using graph theory [10] to model the
relationship between AP C + and CT L+ . In this approach, shape space is a graph
consisting of a pair G = (V, E) of sets satisfying E ⊆ [V ]2 . The set of vertices
V is made up of both CT L+ and AP C + . Edges connect an AP C + to the set
of CT L+ stimulated by its presence to become activated. Each G is directed
and weighted. An initial set of vertices is introduced at time τ0 based on model
startup parameters. At any time τk > τ0 , a new vertex may be added in shape
space with probability dependent both on an apc+ and ctl− being neighbours in
physical space (P (N )) and the distance (d) between AP C + and CT L− in shape
space is less than or equal to some threshold ρˆ (P (d ≤ ρˆ)). The outcome of both
events are independent of each other, so the probability of a new vertex being
added is: P (newvertex) = P (N )P (d ≤ ρˆ) for any given {AP C + , CT L− } conjugate. A newly added vertex is designated CT L+ (indicating it has been recruited
from the CT L− pool). Whenever a new vertex is added, an edge is added by
joining the new vertex to the vertex which stimulated its activation. Thus the
relationship represented by an edge between two vertices can be understood as:
the CT L+ was recruited from the CT L− pool by the presence of the AP C + ,
and, the CT L+ acts against the stimulant AP C + :
CT L−

AP C +

CT L+

attacks

and

CT L+

(1)

AP C +

(2)

respectively.
A new edge is added whenever a new vertex is, but also, whenever a new
α-vertex appears. An α-vertex is one which although emerges in response to one
individual AP C + actually eﬀects pressure on other AP C + . As shown in Fig. 1,
the α-vertex acts against three AP C + genotypes (as the AP C + is the median
vertex in each subgraph, we use the notation mi ). In so doing, it connects the
otherwise unconnected subgraphs of Q, R and S. The importance of the α-vertex
is clear: α-vertices are promiscuous, not only targeting the stimulant infected cell
but also other AP C + nearby in shape space (Fig. 1, the m1 , m2 and m3 vertices,
respectively). The emergence of such vertices marks a diversity threshold of
immune response (αcrit ) which once reached, favours a full and healthy clearance
of infected cells from the lymphatic compartment. Such α-vertices are unique in
that they participate in Eqn.(2) without having ﬁrst participated in Eqn.(1).
Clearance pressure acts along directed edges which are deﬁned by the triple:
1

Clearly, with N = 2, the area of this disc is πρ2 .

Network Topology in Immune System Shape Space

1097

R

m2

5

α

m3

3

4

Q

m1

S

Fig. 1. Three subgraphs with median vertices (stimulant AP C + ) at mi . Leaves (βvertices) represent activated cytotoxic lymphocyte genotypes (CT L+ ). The α-vertex is
also a CT L+ , but is one which though originally activated by m1 now aﬀects clearance
pressure against both m2 and m3 .
→

E := {(e, x, y)|e ∈ E; x, y ∈ V ; e = xy}
With respect to Fig. 1, the α-vertex clearance pressure acts in three directions
→
(for i = 1, .., 3): e i = (ei , α, mi ).
Rewiring of edges happens whenever a subpopulation of AP C + disappears,
to be replaced by a later AP C + . From the biological point of view, the disappearance of a subpopulation of AP C + happens whenever the viral genotype
challenge is completely eradicated. Rewiring can be viewed as a secondary immune response to some further antigenic challenge. Consistent with [11], we refer
the AP C + as the median vertex (mi ) in a subgraph S. Rewiring is a three step
process as follows:
(i)

The median vertex mi is deleted from the graph and the vertices connected
to it become disconnected.
(ii) A new median vertex mj (i = j) is introduced, representing a new viral
infection in the system.
(iii) Each leaf 2 (or β-vertex) rewires to the new median mj . Depending on the
location of mj in shape space, there is a probability that not all leaves will
reconnect to the median vertex (due to d > ρˆ) and such leaves will remain
unconnected until a more central vertex appears. In biological terms, the
disappearance of a stimulus AP C + usually results in a gradual decline of
the eﬀector response, to some small, non-zero level which remains as a form
of immune memory.
2

A leaf is a vertex of deg(1).

1098

J. Burns and H.J. Ruskin

40
30
y
20
10
0

0

10

20

y

30

40

50

(b)

50

(a)

20

30

40

50

0

10

20

x

x

(c)

(d)

30

40

50

30

40

50

40
30
y
20
10
0

0

10

20

y

30

40

50

10

50

0

0

10

20

30
x

40

50

0

10

20
x

Fig. 2. Four representations of immune shape space at the end of exposure to ﬁve
antigen genotypes (R1,..,4 ). The emergence of the α-indexes is indicated by the dashed
edges appearing ﬁrst when the system has been exposed to three antigens (b), with
R4 . At exposure to ﬁve antigens (d), with R4 , the number of α-vertices is ﬁve, and all
ﬁve of the subgraphs are linked to form one.

3

Results

Fig. 2 shows the state of shape space at the end of primary response. Progressive
exposure to varied antigens (values drawn from R) is shown from (a) to (d). In
(d), the model has been exposed to 5 diﬀerent and unrelated antigenic challenges, in much the same way that a maturing immune system would be at the
end of 3 − 4 years of development. The only parameter varied during simulation
execution is R. In (a) and (b), the central (or median) vertex is connected by a
set of edges to leaves which appear in response to the prior appearance of the
median vertices. Biologically, the infected antigen presentation cell, once recognised, triggers a process (known as clonal expansion) which eventually results
in the immune system applying clearance pressure against the infected cell (and
all cells presenting the same viral genetic material). In (b), when the system has
been exposed to two infections, the subgraphs remain unconnected, indicating
that no clearance pressure is applied cross-reactively, and there are no α-vertices.
At the point of third antigen challenge, (c), there emerges two α-vertices (acting
on the lower two subgraphs). The edges connecting the α-vertices are shown as

1099

60
20

40

APC Density

80

100

Network Topology in Immune System Shape Space

5

10

15

20

25

Monte Carlo timestep

Fig. 3. Clearance rates of apc+ for R4 , under ﬁve diﬀerent regimes of α-vertex disruption: 1 to 5 (respectively ✸ × +
and ◦), sampled 25 times during model execution
and representing some 6 days of real-world time. Selective knock-out (or disruption
due to pathogen mutation) of an α-vertex reduces the eﬃcacy of infected cell detection and clearance. When all ﬁve vertices have been disrupted (shown by the circle),
only ≈ 60% of infected cell clearance takes place. In all cases, the β-vertex response
remained healthy. In viral pathogens known to mutate slowly (inﬂuenza) or quickly
(HIV), immune memory (our α-vertices) can often be less eﬀective (as the viral target
drifts in shape space). The ﬁgure shown here oﬀers some insight into consequences of
memory cell disruption.

a broken line. At this point, the third infection to appear has caused an activation pattern which results in cross-reactive pressure applied against it. This
pressure (by way of the α-vertex) is signiﬁcant, because it does not emerge over
the normal time period of clonal expansion (usually some 3 − 5 days). Rather,
the pressure is applied instantaneously as the α-vertices exist a priori and are
therefore primed in advance. When four infections have been experienced by the
system (Fig. 2 (c)), three of the subgraphs have merged into one, by way of some
4 α-vertices. When the ﬁfth unrelated infection is encountered by the system,
a complex network of subgraphs, connected by some 5 α-vertices, has coalesced
into one graph. Once the subgraphs merge, the dynamical immune process of
up- and down regulation may be explained as follows:
(i) The appearance of m1 stimulates the development of both α- and β- vertices
in R.
(ii) In turn, α-vertex acts to reduce (or down-regulate) m2
(iii) The down-regulation of m2 causes a down regulation in β-vertices of Q (as
their source of stimulation declines)

1100

J. Burns and H.J. Ruskin

And this process may be summarised thus:
↑ m1 ⇒↑ {α, β ∈ R} ⇒↓ m2 ⇒↓ {β ∈ Q}
Once αcrit = 5 has been reached, the removal of any further infections which
may arise is achieved by way of the rapid appearance of α-vertices, and rapid
increase in edge density of the connected, weighted graph G in shape space. In
Fig. 3, the relative importance of the α-vertices over the β-vertices is shown. This
ﬁgure shows the model clearance rate of AP C + from the lymphatic compartment during exposure to ﬁve infections. However, in each case, we have explored
the eﬀects of disrupting α-vertices. Disruption will occur whenever an AP C +
drifts from its original shape space coordinates (∆x, ∆y). Drift is likely to arise
whenever an AP C + mutates (for example, in the case of HIV). Disruption to
one or two α-vertices does not seriously degrade clearance, but results in an
average reduction of eﬃciency of ∼ 15%. This is intuitive: the importance of the
α-vertex lies not in one individual but in the cumulative eﬀect of all. Further
disruption results in progressively worse clearance ability. Disruption of all ﬁve
α-vertices reduces infected cell clearance by around 35%. We would not expect a
total immune failure even under full disruption, as there still remains a healthy
and eﬀective β-vertex response. Each simulation is repeated 30 times, and the
results are averaged. The results shown here were obtained from ﬁve separate
model simulation runs (for R4 ), at each stage, a further α-vertex was suppressed
and the edges connecting subgraphs consequentially did not emerge.

4

Discussion and Conclusions

In this research we have provided an outline of how the immune system shape
space may be usefully extended to model the process by which infectious agents
may be targeted by cells which have been primed in response to a previous
and unrelated infection. Using an approach based on graph theory, we identiﬁed two qualitatively diﬀerent vertex types: α and β. Although both vertex
types form part of the cellular eﬀector response, we have shown that an eﬀective
immune response depends largely on successful α-vertex activation for eﬃcacious response, and only to a lesser extent, on β-vertices. We have seen how
disruption to α-vertex activation results in a suppressed response characteristic
of chronic infection. In the results presented we have proposed that α-vertices
have strong biological equivalent: cytotoxic lymphocyte memory cells. Such cells,
having been primed by way of previous immune challenge, require less time to
respond, and, crucially, tend to be beneﬁcially cross-reactive. This ﬁnding supports [12] and others. Disruption to α-vertices results in a signiﬁcantly degraded
pathogen clearance than disruption to β-vertices does. This supports the theory
that during primary and secondary response, some cytotoxic genotypes are more
important than others [12]. The network implication of α-vertices is that each
edge connection formed from a median vertex to an α-vertex acts as a back-bone
in joining disparate subgraphs. As these subgraphs connect, two related further
questions arise (i) up and down regulation of competing CT L+ across subgraphs

Network Topology in Immune System Shape Space

1101

and (ii) the emergence of a balanced graph3 . We have already shown how upand down- regulation may be explained by extending shape space as an evolving
graph (or network).

References
1. Burns, J., Ruskin, H.: A Model of Immune Suppression and Repertoire Evolution.
In: Sloot, P.M.A., Gorbachev, Y.E., (eds.): Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
Vol. 2660. Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg New York (2003) 75-85
2. Albert, R., Barabasi, A.: Topology of Evolving Networks: Local Events and Universality. Phys. Rev. Lett. 85(24) (2000) 5234-5237
3. Buseyne, F., and Riviere, Y.: The ﬂexibility of the TCR allows recognition of a large
set of naturally occurring epitope variants by HIV-speciﬁc cytotoxic T lymphocytes
Int. Immunol. (13) (1999) 941-950
4. Burns, J., Ruskin, H.: Viral Strain Diversity and Immune Response - a Computational Model. In: Hamza, M.H., (ed): Proceedings of the IASTED International
Conference, Biomedical Engineering. ACTA Press (2003) 60-65
5. Perelson, A.S., Oster, G.F.: Theoretical Studies of Clonal Selection: Minimal Antibody Repertoire Size and Reliability of Self-Non-Self Discrimination. J. Theor.
Biol. 81(4) (1979) 645-670
6. de Boer, R.J., Segel, L.A., Perelson, A.S.: Pattern formation in one- and twodimensional shape-space models of the immune system. J. Theor. Biol. 155(3)
(1992) 295-333
7. Smith, D., Forrest, S.: Deriving shape space parameters from immunological data.
J. Theor. Biol. 189 (1997) 141-150.
8. Janeway, C.A., Travers, P., Walport, M., Capra, J.D.: Immunobiology. The Immune System in Health and Disease. 4th edn. Churchill-Livingston (1999)
9. Wick, D.: The Disappearing CD4+T Cells in HIV Infection: a Case of Overstimulation?. J. Theor. Biol. 197 (1998) 507-516
10. Diestel, R.: Graph Theory. 2nd edn. Spinger (1997)
11. Wuchty, S., Stadler, P.: Centers of complex networks. J. Theor. Biol. 223 (2003)
45-53
12. Brehm, M.A., Pinto, A.K., Daniels, K.A., Schneck, J.P., Welsh, R.M., Selin, L.K.:
T cell immunodominance and maintenance of memory regulated by unexpectedly
cross-reactive pathogens Nat. Immunol. 3(7) (2002) 627-634

3

A graph G is balanced if the maximum ratio of edges to vertices, taken over all
subgraphs of G, occurs at G itself

