Immersive Open Surgery Simulation
Ali Al-khalifah, Rachel McCrindle, and Vassil Alexandrov
School of Systems Engineering, The University of Reading, Whiteknights PO Box 225,
Reading RG6 6AY, UK
{a.h.al-khalifah, r.j.mccrindle, v.n.alexandrov}@rdg.ac.uk
http://www.sse.rdg.ac.uk

Abstract. Realistic medical simulation has great potential for augmenting or
complimenting traditional medical training or surgery planning, and Virtual Reality (VR) is a key enabling technology for delivering this goal. Although,
medical simulators are now widely used in medical institutions, the majority of
them are still reliant on desktop monitor displays, and many are restricted in
their modelling capability to minimally invasive or endoscopic surgery scenarios. Whilst useful, such models lack the realism and interaction of the operating
theatre. In this paper, we describe how we are advancing the technology by
simulating open surgery procedures in an Immersive Projection Display CAVE
environment thereby enabling medical practitioners to interact with their virtual
patients in a more realistic manner.

1 Introduction
Virtual reality (VR) is a key technology for enabling medical practitioners to visualize and interact with their models/datasets. Indeed, the potential for VR as a modelling and simulation tool for medical training or surgery planning has already been
demonstrated through a number of research-based and commercial simulation systems [1, 2, 3]. However, the majority of these systems are desktop based applications and hence lack the presence, immersion, interactive and collaborative
elements possible from developing VR applications within a CAVE environment.
Additionally, with the exception of the US Department of Defence who are developing an immersive trauma related military medical training system [4], the majority of these applications have been restricted to modelling specific endoscopic
surgical procedures.
Simulation of open surgical procedures presents a new set of challenges for researchers and developers. These challenges exist due to the complex procedures that
must be modelled such as tissue deformation, suturing, incisions and bleeding of the
patient, as well as the delicate movements and responses of the surgeon’s hand. The
nature of these procedures mean that open surgery simulations cannot be as realistically modelled on a desktop display as can an endoscopic surgical procedure.
In this paper we describe our initial work in simulating an open surgical procedure
within a CAVE based environment.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part I, LNCS 3991, pp. 868 – 871, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

Immersive Open Surgery Simulation

869

2 The Application
The aim of our virtual immersive application is to simulate the real-life scenario of an
operating theatre with a patient lying on the operating table surrounded by surgeons
and other medical staff. Through our modelling of this scenario, users of the system
can surround the virtual patient and interact with it in the same manner as that of a
real surgical team interacting with a real patient.
To achieve this we have initially focussed on two types of modelling procedures surface deformations and model/object manipulations. Using a 3-D wand, the
application enables the user to arbitrarily deform a pre-defined surface, the abdomen
in this case, such that the virtual body can be cut open and the internal organ
structures - stomach, liver, kidneys, small intestine, and the heart - exposed ready for
medical intervention. Through this approach realism is added to the model as the
elastic tissue of the human body can be stretched or squeezed when it come into
contact with other objects or structures. This is an important characteristic for an open
surgery medical simulation application.

3 Environment and Implementation
The CAVE used for the simulation is a large box shaped display device composed of
4 flat screens (three walls and a floor) approximately 10x10x10 foot in dimensions.
Five to six users may step inside the CAVE space at any one time and further collaboration may also occur with other CAVE based users across a network. Stereoscopic
images are back projected onto the screen by special projectors. In order for users to
see the images inside the CAVE as 3D objects special liquid crystal shutter glasses
are worn. Interaction with the displayed model is via a head tracking device and a 3D
6 degree of freedom mouse known as a ‘wand’. In this application the wand simulates
scalpel interaction.
The application is coded in the C language using the popular graphics interface
OpenGL and CAVElib. OpenGL is used to model all surface and deformable objects
as well as other scene aspects such as light and material properties. CAVElib is used
to implement the environment interaction and for routines such as tracking, navigation, and dynamic object manipulation. The software tools were selected on the basis
of their availability, ease of use and compatibility with most operating platforms.
Organ models are imported into the model as individual data files, converted from
various formats such as 3D-Studio (.3ds), VRML (.wrl) and SGI-Inventor (.iv) using
Deep Exploration [5].

4 Results
As can be seen from Figure 1 the developed application allows us to simulate a collaborative operating environment as well as simple tissue deformation and manipulation operations and exposure of the organs pertinent to the surgical procedure being
conducted (Fig 2a and 2b). Object and tool manipulations are also implemented that
enable the user to interact with static non-deformable models such as surgical tools.

870

A. Al-khalifah, R. McCrindle and V. Alexandrov

Fig. 1. Surgeon Interacting with the Virtual Patient

Fig. 2a and 2b. The abdominal is opened by deforming its surface and internal organs displayed ready for interventions

5 Evaluation
In order to gain feedback on our simulations and to ascertain views of practitioners on
the applicability of virtual reality for medical training and surgery planning, a study,
conducted via questionnaires and CAVE-based demonstrations, is underway. Initial
results are encouraging as part-shown in Tables 1 and 2; based on feedback from 30
participants including medical consultants, general practitioners, researchers, surgeons, and medical educators.
Table 1. Initial feedback results in Percentages (Part 1)
Survey Question

Agree

Not Sure

Disagree

Medical practitioners will eventually benefit from the immersive
simulation technology
Immersive displays such as the CAVE provide more powerful tools and
features to the medical profession than a desktop display
The CAVE can be a potential medium for future medical open surgery
simulations
I would use this technology to simulate open interventions

41

28

31

47

24

29

26

52

22

23

57

20

Immersive Open Surgery Simulation

871

However, whilst the results show a general appreciation and acceptance of VR
simulations, we have found that visual simulation alone may not be adequate to convince the medical community of the applicability of VR technology in meeting their
full expectations. For example, a haptic interface will be a major enhancement to open
surgery simulation adding further realism and enhancing interactions with the environment and patient.
Table 2. Initial feedback results in Percentages (Part 2)
Survey Question
Rate the usefulness of the CAVE in particular for medical simulations
Rate the usefulness of VR in general for medical simulations
How far would you like to see immersive CAVE technology

High

Neutral

Low

41
53
43

12
22
34

47
25
23

6 Conclusions and Further Work
We have successfully implemented a simple immersive application that simulates an
open surgery procedure, allowing the user to open the abdominal cavity, observe
deformation of elastic tissue, and to interact with internal organs. This type of surgery
is hugely demanding in terms of computer power and complexity of operations involved and hence this application barely scratches the surface of such complex applications. However, it gives us a strong basis on which to develop further complex
procedures and operations. The major advantage of this application is that through
exploiting the CAVE technology, it supports the crucial elements associated with
open surgery operations such as, immersion, interactivity, presence, collaboration and
multi-user interactions. Initial feedback from practitioners involved in medical education and surgery planning has been encouraging and generally positive.
We will continue to develop the complexity of our open surgery models and simulations. Collaboration between users located at geographically different locations is
being further developed. Haptic rendering inside the CAVE is another area of interest
that when implemented will greatly improve the realism of open surgery simulations.

References
1. Liu A., Tendick F., Cleary K., Kaufmann C.: Survey of Surgical Simulation: Applications,
Technology, & Education. Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual Env. (2003), 599-614
2. Hollands R. J., Trowbridge E. A. A virtual reality training tool for the arthroscopic treatment of knee disabilities. University of Sheffield, UK (2005)
3. Vidal F. P., Bello F., Brodlie K., John N. W., Gould D., Phillips R., Avis N. J. Principles
and Applications of Medical Virtual Environments. Eurographics 2004 State of the Art reports (2004)
4. Immersion Corporation. http://immr.client.shareholder.com/ReleaseDetail.cfm?ReleaseID=
111797 (2005)
5. Right Hemisphere. http://www.righthemisphere.com/ (2005)

