Title:

A Mathematical Model for Project Time Compression Problems in CPM/PERT
Type Network, and Develop A New Approach based on the Surrogating Method
for Solving These Problems.

Author:

Mohammadi, H.
Department of Industrial Engineering, Tehran South Unit, Islamic Azad University
Tehran, Iran, h_Mohammadi@azad.ac.ir

Extended Abstract:

This paper develops a mathematical model for project time compression
problems in CPM/PERT type networks. It is noted this formulation of the
problem will be an adequate approximation for solving the time compression
problem with any continuous and non-increasing time-cost curve. This model is
kind of Mixed Integer Linear Program (MILP) with zero-one variables.
In addition, this paper proposes a new approach for solving these
problems. The Benders’ decomposition procedure for analyzing this model has
been developed, and its shortcomings have been highlighted.
Here, the special nature of the problem is exploited, which allowed us to
develop a new algorithm based on the surrogating method. The biggest obstacle
associated with Benders’ decomposition is the solution of master problem.
I will show that the main constraints of the master problem will be
replaced by the strongest surrogate constraint. The generated problem with the
strongest surrogate constraints is a valid relaxation of the main problem with
zero-one variables. However, the special structure of the problem in conduction
with the strongest surrogate constraint method, make the master problem to
have one constraint with zero-one variable. The optimal solution of this binary
variable problem is straightforward. In this procedure an initial solution
generated for reduction number of iterations.

In addition, the required computer programs have been prepared by the
author to execute the algorithm.
An illustrative example solved by the new algorithm, and two methods are
compared by several numerical examples. Computational experience with these
data shows the superiority of the new approach.
Some of the advantages of the new approach compared with Benders’
decomposition procedure are listed bellow:
•

Replacing the integer subproblems by linear problems.

•

Reduction number of integer programming problem to one.

•

Generation of a good initial solution.

•

Finding a good lower bound for the objective function in the first step of
the new approach.

•

Reduction of the computational time.

