Lecture Notes in Computer Science

1

Lattice-Boltzmann based large-eddy simulations
applied to industrial flows
Jos Derksen
Kramers Laboratorium, Applied Physics Department, Delft University of Technology, Prins
Bernhardlaan6, 2628 BW Delft, The Netherlands
jos@klft.tn.tudelft.nl

Abstract. A procedure for simulating single-phase, turbulent fluid flow based
on lattice-Boltzmann discretization of the Navier-Stokes equations is described.
In the large-eddy approach to turbulence modeling, the Smagorinsky subgridscale model, supplemented with wall damping, is applied exclusively. The assumptions underlying the model are discussed. Simulation results of some sample flow systems from chemical engineering practice are presented, with an
emphasis on experimental validation, and grid effects.

1 Introduction
The performance of many industrial processes relies on turbulent flows. In agitated
tanks, in tubular reactors, in bubble columns, and in fluidized beds, the turbulent
fluctuations (that cover broad spatial and temporal spectra) enhance heat and mass
transfer, control bubble and particles size distributions due to break-up and coalescence, and create contact area to facilitate chemical reactions. As a result, there definitely is a need for good insight, and accurate predictions of turbulent flows in process equipment. Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) is one of the tools that (to
some extent) might be able to satisfy this need. In CFD, the mass and momentum
balances that govern fluid flow are solved numerically. Because one of the characteristics of turbulence is its wide range of scales, a full representation (i.e. a Direct Numerical Simulation (DNS)) of the flow would require unrealistic amounts of computer resources. As an example, consider the flow with a macroscopic Reynolds
UL
number Re =
= 10 4 . The smallest dynamic flow scale ηK (i.e. the Kolmogorov
ν
scale) is related to the macro-scale through η K = L Re −3 / 4 . A DNS would require a
spatial resolution at least equal to ηK. As a result, to cover all length scales of the flow
in three dimensions, a grid of 1,0003=109 cells has to be defined. Nowadays, these
numbers start becoming feasible on massively parallel computer platforms [1].
There are, however, a few reasons not to pursue DNS of strongly turbulent flows
in chemical engineering. In the first place, with a view to industrial applications,
Re=104 is still considered a low value. In full-scale process equipment, the Reynolds

Lecture Notes in Computer Science

2

number easily amounts to several millions. In the second place, the purpose of our
research is to apply CFD as a scale-up, or design tool. This implies that it has to be
possible to study alternative reactor designs, and process conditions within a limited
amount of time, and on computer platforms widely available in academia and industry. In the third place, again with a view to the applications, the flow simulations are
not the final goal of our efforts. They need to be related to the process, which next to
fluid dynamics involves other physical and chemical phenomena. A good balance has
to be found with respect to the computational efforts for modeling the various aspects
of the process.
The alternative to DNS is turbulence modeling. Based on assumptions regarding
turbulent fluctuations on the small scales (e.g. related to their supposedly universal
character, their tendency to isotropy and equilibrium) turbulence models can be devised that distinguish between resolved and unresolved (i.e. modeled) phenomena. In
the field of turbulence modeling, a division can be made between models based on
the Reynolds Averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS) equations, and Large-Eddy Simulations (LES). For industrial (chemical engineering) applications, RANS modeling has
a much longer tradition than LES. This is related to the lesser demand for computational resources of the former approach. In a RANS simulation, the grids can be
coarser since only the average flow is explicitly simulated, and (in most cases) timedependence is not taken into account. Furthermore, use can be made of symmetry in
the boundary conditions. A large-eddy simulation shows a strong resemblance to a
direct simulation: the three-dimensional, time-dependent Navier-Stokes equations are
discretized to a grid that is (necessarily) too coarse. By viewing the flow field on the
grid as a low-pass filtered representation of the true field, and by modeling the interaction between the filtered flow and the (unresolved) flow at length scales smaller
than the grid spacing (the subgrid-scale (SGS) motion), the flow system is simulated.
The three-dimensionality, and time-dependence of LES make them much more
computationally demanding than RANS simulations. Fine grids are required to meet
the criteria for SGS modeling in LES [2]. I think, however, that it is worthwhile pursuing an LES approach to industrial flows for the following reasons. In the first place,
by resolving the time-dependent flow field at high resolution, we are better able to
account for the non-linearity’s encountered in process modeling (e.g. chemical reactions, nucleation of crystals in flowing supersaturated liquids, transport of solid particles in a gas stream). In the second place, better flow field predictions are expected
from LES in the case of inherently transient flows. By its very nature, turbulence is
time-dependent in an incoherent and unpredictable way. If, on top of the turbulent
fluctuations, coherent time-dependence is introduced through boundary conditions (as
is the case in turbo machinery applications, or in stirred tanks), or through a macroscopic instability in the flow (such as vortex core precession in swirling flow), RANS
based models might fail. In the closure models for the RANS equations, no clear
spectral distinction exists between resolved and unresolved fluctuations (this in contrast to LES, where the grid makes the distinction). As a result, RANS closure models
that are designed for non-coherent, turbulent fluctuations might (erroneously) affect
the macroscopic, coherent fluctuations brought about by e.g. the boundary conditions.

Lecture Notes in Computer Science

3

In this paper, some examples of LES applied to industrially relevant, turbulent
flows will be discussed. But first, our numerical method will be treated, which is
based on lattice-Boltzmann discretization of the Navier-Stokes equations. Second, a
brief account of subgrid-scale modeling will be given. The examples comprise of
agitated flow systems (stirred tanks), and swirling flows (with cyclone separators as
the application).

2 Lattice-Boltzmann Discretization
Lattice-Boltzmann modeling of fluid flow has evolved from lattice-gas cellular automata (see e.g. the text book by Rothman & Zaleski [3]). The starting point of these
particle-based methods is principally different from that of more traditional ways of
numerical fluid flow modeling, such as finite element or finite volume methods. In
the latter method, the continuous equations governing fluid flow are discretized. Lattice-gas and lattice-Boltzmann schemes start with a discrete system that can be
proven to obey the Navier-Stokes equations.
The discrete system that mimics fluid flow is a set of (fictitious) particles residing
on a uniform lattice. Every time step, particles move to neighboring lattice sites,
where they exchange momentum (i.e. collide) with particles coming in from other
directions. The collision rules, and the topology of the lattice can be defined in such a
way that macroscopically the Navier-Stokes equations are recovered [4]. The elegance of the method is its simplicity, and the locality of its operations. This locality
(i.e. the absence of global numerical operations) is also responsible for an important
advantage of the method: it can be run efficiently on distributed memory, parallel
computer platforms. If the computational domain is decomposed into subdomains,
each of which is assigned to a different computer, only information at subdomain
boundaries needs to be communicated in a parallel computation.
Lattice-Boltzmann methods have been applied to many problems involving fluid
flow (see e.g. the review article by Chen & Doolen [4]). Many of the applications
involve laminar flow in complexly shaped geometries (e.g. porous media modeling),
interfacial phenomena, and multiphase flows. In the first papers on the direct simulation of turbulence with lattice-Boltzmann methods, the focus is on the comparison
with well-established methods in this field, e.g. spectral methods [5], hence at that
stage the capabilities of the lattice-Boltzmann method with respect to complex
boundary conditions were not employed. Large-eddy simulations with latticeBoltzmann schemes have been reported by Hou et al. [6], Somers [7], and Eggels [8].
We use PC based computer hardware for our lattice-Boltzmann based large-eddy
simulations. By connecting the PC’s (Dual-Pentium III 700 MHz machines running
under Linux) through 100 BaseTX (100 Mbit/s) switched Ethernet, a Beowulf cluster
of computers is formed that can efficiently handle large jobs. A lattice-Boltzmann
simulation on 3603 (i.e. 47 million) cells, typically requires ten processors, 4 Gbyte of
memory, and some 40 hours of wall-clock time to simulate one integral time scale
(e.g. one impeller revolution in a stirred tank) of the flow.

Lecture Notes in Computer Science

4

3 Subgrid-scale Modeling
The most widely used model in LES is the Smagorinsky model [9]. It is an eddyviscosity SGS model based on the assumption of local equilibrium between production and dissipation of turbulent kinetic energy. The expression for the eddy-viscosity
(νe) reads:
ν e = λ mix

2

1  ∂ui ∂u j
+
2  ∂x j ∂xi






2

(1)

with λmix a mixing length, and ui the resolved (i.e. the grid scale) velocity in the i-th
coordinate direction. In the Smagorinsky model, the mixing length is proportional to
the grid spacing ∆: λ mix = cs ∆ , with cs a constant. This constant can be estimated
from turbulence theory under the assumption of local equilibrium: cs=0.165. Note that
the eddy-viscosity depends on the grid spacing. In case the grid spacing approaches
zero, the eddy-viscosity vanishes, which should be, as zero grid spacing implies a
direct simulation (i.e. a simulation without the need for an SGS model).
In many simulations, especially of shear driven turbulence, the value of cs is chosen between 0.06 and 1.2 [10]. This is because, especially near walls, the equilibrium
assumption breaks down, and the length scales become too small to resolve, even for
an LES. By decreasing the mixing length relative to the grid, the lack of spatial resolution is (artificially) compensated for.
The vicinity of walls poses more problems to the Smagorinsky model: the turbulence near the wall becomes anisotropic (fluctuations in the wall-normal direction are
suppressed), and at the wall the SGS Reynolds stresses should become zero. These
effects are not a priori accounted for in the model. The eddy-viscosity concept implies isotropic turbulence at the subgrid-scales throughout the flow domain, including
the wall region. The problem of non-zero wall stresses can be repaired by applying
wall-damping functions that force the eddy-viscosity (and as a result the SGS Reynolds stresses) to zero. In our studies we apply Van Driest wall damping functions
([11], [12]):

 y + 
λ mix = cs ∆ 1 − exp − + 
 A 




with y+ the dimensionless distance to the wall ( y + =

(2)

y u*
), and A+ a constant (A+=26).
ν

The wall shear velocity u* can (for instance) be estimated from u* = Cµ1 / 4 k . This
estimate originates from k-ε RANS modeling, Cµ is a constant (0.09 in the standard
version of the model), and k is the turbulent kinetic energy.
In summary, the Smagorinsky model is not an obvious choice when attempting
LES of flows in complexly shaped domains with intrinsic time-dependence. In the
first place because of the presence of walls that pose principle problems related to

Lecture Notes in Computer Science

5

anisotropy and resolution. In the second place because of the time-dependence, that
will keep the flow off-equilibrium at least in parts of the flow domain. Dynamic SGS
modeling (as introduced by Germano et al. [13]) might overcome some of the difficulties discussed here. In dynamic modeling, a double low-pass filter operation is
applied to the flow, with the aim of determining local values of the "constant" cs.
However, some problems (e.g. related to the stability of the method), even in simple
flow geometries have been reported [2].
For the lack of better models, the Smagorinsky SGS model has been applied exclusively in our studies. The issues raised above with respect to the validity of this
SGS model require critical evaluation and experimental validation of the simulated
flow fields. In this respect, the extent to which the solution depends on the grid spacing requires special attention.

3 Applications

3.1 Agitated flows
Blending, crystallization, suspension polymerization, particle coating, are some examples of processes carried out in stirred tanks. A revolving impeller generates a
turbulent flow in a cylindrical vessel that (apart from the impeller) contains all sorts
of static internals, e.g. baffles to prevent solid body rotation of the fluid, draft tubes to
direct the flow, heat exchangers, nozzles for injection of reactants, etc. From experiments (e.g. [14-16]) it is well known that impellers generate complex vortex structures. These vortex structures are largely responsible for the mixing capacity of the
flow system, and are associated with strong, anisotropic turbulent activity.
In order to standardize experimental and numerical work on stirred tank flow, a
few de facto standard tank and impeller configurations can be identified. A standard
tank has a height to diameter ratio of one, and has four, 90o-spaced baffles at its perimeter with a width of one tenth of the tank diameter. In a previous paper, large-eddy
simulations on the flow driven by a Rushton turbine have been discussed [17]. In the
present paper, results on flow simulations in a standard tank, equipped with a 45opitched blade turbine will be presented. The geometry is fully defined in Fig. 1. This
geometry was chosen because of the availability of a detailed experimental study by
ND 2
Schäfer et al. [16] on the flow field inside such a tank at Re =
= 7 ,300 (with N
ν
the impeller's angular velocity in rev./s, D the tank diameter, and ν the kinematic
viscosity of the fluid).
In Fig. 1, a snapshot of the simulated flow field is presented. From this figure, the
inhomogeneous character of the flow is obvious. A strongly turbulent, inclined impeller stream, directs fluid from the impeller towards the tank bottom. At the tank's
outer wall, fluid (on average) moves in the upward direction. The stream at the tank

Lecture Notes in Computer Science

0.33T

D=0.329T

0.017T

0.066T

H=T

0.1T

6

0.092T
0.053T
T

vtip
Figure 1. Left: stirred tank geometry. The tank has four, 90o spaced baffles, with a small wall
clearance. The impeller has four pitched blades under a 45o angle. The top surface is closed.
Right: single realization of the flow in a vertical plane midway between two baffles in terms of
velocity vectors at Re=7,300. The simulation employed a 2403 grid. The spatial resolution of
the vector plot is (in axial and radial direction) twice as low as the actual resolution of the
simulation.

wall is not strong enough to reach the top surface of the tank. About halfway the tank
height, fluid near the outer wall is sucked into the impeller region. As a result, there is
a large part of the tank volume with quiescent fluid.
In Fig. 2, experiment and simulations are compared in terms of the phase-average
flow (i.e. the flow averaged over all angular positions of the impeller), in the vertical
plane located midway between two baffles. The major flow features in the experimental field are the large, counter-clockwise circulation loop that approximately
covers the lower half of the tank, and a clockwise rotating secondary loop in the vicinity of the bottom and the axis. The top half of the tank hardly shows coherent flow
structures. In the simulations, presented in Fig. 2, the grid size has been varied, and
wall damping has been switched off and on. The coarsest grid (1203 nodes) has trouble in properly representing the primary circulation (its core being too high, and at
too small radial position), as well as the secondary circulation (it extends almost to
the impeller, whereas in the experiments it is limited to approximately 35% of the
impeller bottom clearance). Predictions on the primary circulation significantly improve in case of the 2403 grid. The influence of the wall damping functions is limited,
and mainly related to the separation point of the primary circulation from the tank’s
outer wall: wall damping slightly shifts the separation point upwards, in better agreement with experiments. The secondary circulation is still too big on the 2403 grid, its

Lecture Notes in Computer Science

7

0.5vtip
Figure 2. Phase-averaged flow in the vertical plane midway between two baffles at Re=7,300.
From left to right, and from top to bottom: experimental data [16]; LES on a 1203 grid without
wall damping functions; LES on a 2403 grid without wall damping functions; LES on a 2403
grid with wall damping functions; LES on a 3603 grid without wall damping functions; LES on
a 3603 grid with wall damping functions. Per simulation, the averaging extended over at least
12 impeller revolutions. The LES results have been linearly interpolated to the experimental
grid.

vertical size is some 50% of the impeller clearance, irrespective of wall damping. The
impact of wall damping functions on the simulation results is most pronounced for
the 3603 grid. This indicates that the grid has become sufficiently fine to feel the influence of details of the boundary layer (the y+ values of the grid points nearest to the
tank’s outer wall typically amounted to 2.0). The separation point is located much too
low for the 3603 simulation without wall damping, but is almost perfectly predicted
with wall damping. The size of the secondary circulation strongly benefits from the
finer grid: it corresponds well with the experimental data.
Phase-averaged data obscure the details of the flow around the impeller blades. By
conditionally averaging the flow at specific impeller positions, the action of the impeller on the fluid can be studied in more detail. In Fig. 3, phase-resolved LES results
are confronted with experimental data [16]. Most striking flow feature is the tip vortex that is generated at the trailing edge of the inclined blade. It is a persistent phe-

Lecture Notes in Computer Science

8

vtip

Figure 3. Phase-resolved velocity field at four different impeller angles (from left to right: 0o;
16o; 30o; 60o) in the vicinity of the turbine (the field of view is indicated in the right diagram)
at Re=7,300. Top row: experiments [16]. Bottom row: LES on a 2403 grid. The LES results
have been linearly interpolated to the experimental grid.

nomenon, in the sense that after two blade passages the vortex can still be distinguished in the phase-resolved flow field. The position, size, and shape (squeezed for
small angular impeller positions, circular for larger angles) are well represented by
the LES.
3.2 Swirling Flows
Swirling flows are challenging from a CFD viewpoint. They exhibit all sorts of, often
counterintuitive, flow phenomena. A few examples are flow reversal, strongly anistropic turbulence, subcritical behavior, and (quasi) periodic fluctuations [18]. Our
motivation for swirling flow studies lies in their application for separation of process
streams containing phases with different density: Hydrocyclones are widely employed in the oil industries for separation of water and oil; gas cyclones are used for
separating solid particles from a gas stream. Results on our large-eddy simulations of
cyclonic flow have been published elsewhere [19]. In this paper, I would like to focus
on a different flow geometry, see Fig. 4. This so-called vortex tube was used in an
experimental study by Escudier et al. [20]. In the latter article, it was demonstrated
U
t= 0.15 D

inlet slit
De

D

exit

D e= D ... 0.18 D
L =3.8 D

Figure 4. Vortex tube geometry as defined by Escudier et al. [20]. Fluid enters through a tangential slit, and exits through a contraction.

9

Lecture Notes in Computer Science

10

vtan/U

12

vax /U

4

0

-10

0

0

6

4

0

0

-6

2
0.5

0
0

-2

-0.5

-1

0

r/R

1

-1

0

r/R

1

-1

0

r/R

1

-1

0

r/R

1

Figure 5. Average tangential velocity (left two columns), and axial velocity (right two columns). Comparison between experiments (symbols), LES with D=132∆ (solid lines), and
D=82∆ (dashed lines). First and third column: z=0.7D; second and fourth column: z=3.6D.
From bottom to top: De/D=0.73; De/D=0.45; De/D=0.33.

that downstream geometrical conditions had strong impact on the swirling flow in the
entire geometry. The high-quality LDA data, and the visualizations presented in [20]
were used to critically test the performance of our simulation procedures. One of the
interesting issues here is to what extent the (isotropic) Smagorinsky SGS model [10]
is capable of representing a flow system from which it is well know that isotropic
RANS models (e.g. the k-ε model) are inadequate [21].
In the experimental paper, the exit diameter was varied between De=D to
De=0.18D, with D and De defined in Fig. 4. For the LES, three geometries were selected: De=0.73D, De=0.45D, and De=0.33D. For these three cases, the Reynolds
Ut
number was fixed at Re =
= 1,900 , with U the (superficial) inflow velocity, and t
ν
the width of the inlet slit (see Fig. 4). This (atypical) definition of Re follows the
experimental work. Reynolds numbers e.g. based on the superficial exit velocity, and
diameter of the exit tube show much higher values (up to 51,000 for De=0.33D),
indicating that subgrid-scale modeling is definitely necessary. The three geometrical
layouts chosen were discretized on two grids: a coarse grid with D=82∆, and a fine
grid with D=132∆, as a result, six simulation cases were defined. From our experi-

Lecture Notes in Computer Science

10

|u|/U
A:
B:
C:

0.4
1.0
2.0

1.2
3.0
6.0

2.0
5.0
10

Figure 6. Visualization of the flow near the contraction. Left: experiment (dye injection) [20];
right LES snapshots with D=132∆ (the contours indicate absolute velocity). From top to bottom: De/D=0.73 (Reexp=200, ReLES=1,900); De/D=0.45 (Reexp=650, ReLES=1,900); De/D=0.33
(Reexp=1,600, ReLES=1,900). The rectangle in part C relates to the velocity vector field.

ence with cyclonic flow [20], we know that wall damping functions have to be applied to get a realistic representation of the swirling flow.
Velocity profiles of the tangential and axial velocity are presented in Fig. 5. The
axial (i.e. z) position of the profiles, as indicated in the captions, is measured from the
closed end wall of the vortex tube (located at the left side in Fig. 4). The profiles at
z=0.7D are close to the end wall, the profiles at z=3.6D are close to the contraction
into the exit tube. The impact of the exit pipe diameter on the entire flow is evident.
The levels of the axial and tangential velocities strongly increase if the exit pipe diameter is made smaller (please note the different vertical scales in Fig. 5). Qualitatively, the flow features apparent from the profiles are well represented by the LES:
the Rankine type of vortices as indicated by the tangential velocity profiles; the axial
velocity deficit near the vortex core for the larger exit pipe configurations; the presence/absence of "shoulders" in the profiles of axial velocity. Quantitatively, the spatial resolution is (as it was for agitated flow systems) a key issue. The simulations
with De=0.33D that have the largest velocity gradients clearly lack spatial resolution.
The trend, however, is in the right direction: the finer the grid, the better the predictions.

Lecture Notes in Computer Science

11

In the experiments, vortex breakdown was observed in the exit pipe. Vortex
breakdown [22] is an abrupt change in the structure of a swirling flow. In bubble type
vortex breakdown, a stagnation point is spontaneously formed at some position along
the axis of the swirling flow. Vortex breakdown can trigger a laminar-turbulent transition. Figure 6 shows the experimental evidence: In cases B and C, a bubble-shaped
dye structure can be observed just downstream the contraction indicating vortex
breakdown. Upstream (left) of the bubble, a laminar vortex core can be observed,
downstream (right) there clearly is turbulent flow. The simulations excellently represent this flow structure (a one-on-one comparison can in fact only be made for case
C, where the experimental and numerical Reynolds number are close); and the laminar-turbulent transition associated with it. The stagnation point character of the
breakdown is clear from the vector plot in Fig. 6.
We may conclude that the (isotropic) Smagorinsky SGS model is able to resolve
the major features of this swirling flow system. It should be noted, however, that (due
to a lack of experimental data) we were not able to do a critical assessment of the
turbulence characteristics (such as kinetic energy and Reynolds stresses).

4 Summary
A procedure for large-eddy simulations in complexly shaped flow geometries has
been presented. The three-dimensional, time-dependent flow information that can be
generated this way might be beneficial in modeling industrial processes. LatticeBoltzmann discretization of the Navier-Stokes equations provided us with a means to
reach high spatial, and temporal resolution. At the same time, we have limited ourselves to uniform, cubic grids. In many applications, especially if boundary layer
flow is of critical importance, local grid refinement is required. In the latticeBoltzmann community, various options for non-uniform, and even arbitrarily shaped
grids have been proposed (e.g. [23]). To my best knowledge, no generally accepted
method has evolved yet.
The assumptions underlying the Smagorinsky subgrid-scale model have been discussed. In the applications presented here, many of these assumptions could not be
met: stirred tanks do not have equilibrium turbulence; the turbulence in swirling
flows is highly anistropic. Still, the results presented on these flow systems show
fairly good agreement with experimental data.
Reliable experimental data are (still) of key importance for turbulent flow modeling. Experimental data guide the trends that are observed when varying numerical
(e.g. the grid-spacing) and modeling parameters in the simulations.

Lecture Notes in Computer Science

12

References
1.

2.
3.
4.
5.

6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.

15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

Porter, D.H., Woodward, P.R., Anderson, S.E., Winkler, K.H., Hodson, S.W.:, Numerical
simulation of compressible turbulence. University of Minnesota, Los Alamos National
Laboratory, http://www.lcse.umn.edu/research/lanlrun (1997)
Lesieur, M., Métais, O.: New trends in large-eddy simulation of turbulence. Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics 28 (1996) 45
Rothman, D.H., Zaleski, S.: Lattice-gas cellular automata. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge (1997)
Chen, S., Doolen, G.D.: Lattice Boltzmann method for fluid flows. Annual Review of
Fluid Mechanics 30 (1998) 329
Martinez, D.O., Matthaeus, W.H., Chen, S., Montgomery, D.C.: Comparison of spectral
method and lattice-Boltzmann simulations of two-dimensional hydrodynamics. Physics of
Fluids 6 (1994) 1285
Hou, S., Sterling, J., Chen, S., Doolen, G.D.: A lattice-Boltzmann subgrid model for high
Reynolds number flows. Fields Institution Communications 6 (1996) 151
Somers, J.A.: Direct simulation of fluid flow with cellular automata and the latticeBoltzmann equation. Applied Scientific Research 51 (1993) 127
Eggels, J.G.M.: Direct and large-eddy simulations of turbulent fluid flow using the latticeBoltzmann scheme. International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow 17 (1996) 307
Smagorinsky, J.: General circulation experiments with the primitive equations: 1. The
basic experiment. Monthly Weather Review 91 (1963) 99
Eggels, J.G.M.: Direct and large eddy simulation of turbulent flow in a cylindrical pipe
geometry. PhD thesis, Delft University of Technology (1994)
Van Driest, E.R.: On turbulent flow near a wall. Journal of Aerodynamic Science 23
(1956) 1007
Hinze, J.O.: Turbulence. McGraw-Hill, New York 1959
Germano, M., Piomelli, U., Moin, P., Cabot, W.: A dynamic subgrid-scale eddy-viscosity
model. Physics of Fluids A 3 (1991) 1760
Yianneskis, M., Popiolek, Z., Whitelaw, J.H.: An experimental study of the steady and
unsteady flow characteristics of stirred reactors. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 175 (1987)
537
Stoots, C.M., Calabrese, R.V.: Mean velocity field relative to a Rushton turbine blade.
AIChE Journal 41 (1995) 1
Schäfer, M., Yianneskis, M., Wächter, P., Durst, F.: Trailing vortices around a 45o pitchedblade impeller. AIChE Journal 44 (1998) 1233
Derksen, J.J.,. Van den Akker, H.E.A.: Large eddy simulations on the flow driven by a
Rushton turbine. AIChE Journal 45 (1999) 209
Escudier, M.P., Bornstein, J., Maxworthy, T.: The dynamics of confined vortices. Proceedings of the Royal Society London A 382 (1982) 335
Derksen, J.J., Van den Akker, H.E.A.: Simulation of vortex core precession in a reverseflow cyclone. AIChE Journal 46 (2000) 1317
Escudier, M.P., Bornstein, J., Zehnder, N.: Observations and LDA measurements of confined turbulent vortex flow. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 98 (1980) 49
Hoekstra, A.J.: Gas flow field and collection efficiency of cyclone separators, PhD thesis,
Delft University of Technology (2000)
Escudier, M.P.: Vortex breakdown: observations and explanations. Progress in Aerospace
Sciences 25 (1988) 189

Lecture Notes in Computer Science

13

23. He, X., Doolen, G.: Lattice-Boltzmann method on curvilinear coordinate system: flow
around a circular cylinder. Journal of Computational Physics 134 (1997) 306

