Multicast Routing Protocol
with Heterogeneous and Dynamic Receivers*
Huimei Lu, Hongyu Hu, Quanshuang Xiang, and Yuanda Cao
School of Computer Science and Technology,
Beijing Institute of Technology, Postcode 10 00 81,
5# Zhongguancun south road, Haidian district, Beijing, P.R. China
{Blueboo, ydcao}@bit.edu.cn,
{hu_hong_yu, xiangquanshuang}@163.com

Abstract. This paper aims to design an effective multicast routing supporting
heterogeneous and dynamic receivers. Multicast data is assumed to be layered
cumulatively. The multicast tree constructed fulfills the QoS requirements
imposed by heterogeneous receivers in terms of the layer of the data and its
corresponding bandwidth, and consumes network resource as little as possible.
Besides the general state information of the topology and the available
bandwidth, two kinds of group-specific state information such as the distribution
of multicast tree and the highest receivable layer of on-tree nodes are maintained
at a router to calculate a feasible graft path to the multicast tree. Simulation
results demonstrate that the proposed protocol obtains low routing message
overhead, high success routing ratio and optimization usage of network
bandwidth.

1 Introduction
Supporting heterogeneous receivers in a multicast session is particularly important in
large networks as, e.g., the Internet, due to the large diversity of end-system and
network access capabilities [1]. To accommodate heterogeneous receivers, multicast
data can be encoded into a base layer and several successive enhancement layers, and
then receivers in a multicast session can receive different layers according to their
bandwidth capabilities. One approach to realize this is that the source sends all the
layers of a session on a single IP multicast group along and the involved routers decide
which layers to forward. This is called network level schemes [2][3] which aim to find
a multicast tree that can support heterogeneous QoS requirements of the receivers.
Research works that support heterogeneous multicast with dynamic receivers can be
found in Refs.[2][4]. The problem in these researches is that when the receiver
computes the feasible path, it excludes paths without enough residual bandwidth from
consideration even though part of the path lies on the multicast tree and bandwidth has
already been reserved. Thus, if the quality level of the new receiver is higher than that
of on-tree nodes, it maybe fails to find an existing feasible path. QDMR-LD [5] is
* This work was supported by the national Natural Science Foundation of China under contract
number 60503050 and University Basic Foundation of Beijing Institute of Technology under
contract number BIT UBF 200511F4212.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part IV, LNCS 3994, pp. 81 – 86, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

82

H. Lu et al.

designed to support dynamic receivers. When a new receiver wants to join, it floods
join-request messages towards the multicast tree. The join-request message is
forwarded based on RBMF mode [6]. QDMR-LD has high success routing ratio and
minimal bandwidth usage. But, it is a fully distributed algorithm and is based on
flooding, which causes excessive routing message overhead.
Most of the previous researches are based on the general network information such
as, topology and link states. Through careful observation, we find some group-specific
information plays great role in an effective routing algorithm.
This paper proposes a new multicast routing for dynamic and heterogeneous
receivers (MRDH), which is designed to inherit the merits of QDMR-LD and solve its
disadvantage. Besides the general state information of the topology and the available
bandwidth, two kinds of group-specific state information such as the distribution of
multicast tree and the highest receivable layer of on-tree nodes are selected to be
maintained in this study. Based on the above state information, a routing algorithm is
designed which calculate a feasible tree branch locally and effectively.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the network model,
the data model and the routing formulation. Section 3 gives a detailed description of the
protocol. Simulation results are demonstrated in Section 4. Section 5 draws our
conclusions.

2 System Model
2.1 Network Model
The network is modeled as a digraph N=(R,SN,C), where R is the set of routers , SN is
the set of all physical subnets and C is the set of joints between routers and physical
subnets. The bandwidth available on subnet sni is denoted as b(sni). The network
topology structure is described by the graph constructed by cycles, rectangles and edges
which represent subnet, router and NIC on the router respectively, as shown in Fig. 1.
A multicast tree T is a sub-graph of N, which can be represented as T=(RT,SNT)
(RT⊆R,SNT⊆SN),where RT is the set of routers, including the relay routers on the
multicast tree, and SNT is the set of the subnets connecting the routers belong to RT. In
Fig. 1, for example, a source lies in subnet sn1, and two receivers lie in subnet sn5 and
sn10 respectively. The tree covers routers of R1, R2, R5, and subnets of sn3, sn7.
Rvr.1: 2

Src sn1

sn2

sn8

sn5

R1

sn3

R2

sn4

R3

sn7

R4

sn9

R5

sn6

Rvr.2: 1

Fig. 1. Network model

sn10

Multicast Routing Protocol with Heterogeneous and Dynamic Receivers

83

2.2 Traffic Model for Layered Data
There are two kinds of layering schemes: cumulative and non-cumulative [1]. In this
paper, we suppose traffic is encoded cumulatively. The signal is encoded hierarchically
into L layers with the first layer containing the most essential information, and
information in Layer i is less significant than those in Layer i-1, but more significant
than those in Layer i+1. Thus, a signal with higher layers has better quality and at the
same time requires more bandwidth for transmission. Only layers that a given subnet
can manage are forwarded. In Fig. 1, suppose the source encoded the data into 2 layers.
Receiver 1 has high access capability, and its request is 2 layers. Receiver 2 is a mobile
phone, and its request is 1 layer.
2.3 Routing Formulation
For any on-tree router Ru(Ru∈RT), it stores a multicast routing entry, composed by the
multicast source, the group address, the upstream router and the set of downstream
routers and their respective layers. The quality level of router Ru ,denoted as lu, is
represented by the max layer among all the layers of downstream routers.
Considering Ru receives a join-request with l layers, if l> lu, it can not decide whether
it can satisfy the request independently. However, if it keeps the highest receivable
layer MRu, it can make a decision by itself. The value of MRu is decided by the highest
receivable layer of the upstream router Rt and the available bandwidth of the upstream
subnet sn. Its calculation method refers to (1).
MRu=min(MRt, f(f-1(lu)+b(sn))).

(1)

Where, function f defines the relationship between the data layer and the corresponding
bandwidth. For example, In Fig. 1, MR2=2. For router R5, if the available bandwidth on
subnet sn7 is high enough, its highest receivable layer is 2.The highest receivable layer
of a multi-access subnet is represented by the max value of that of down-stream routers.
Formulation. When a new receiver d intends to join a group with k layers, it sends the
join-request to its designated router Rd. Rd will try to find a path from any on-tree nodes
u to itself, denoted as P(u,Rd), which satisfies the following constraints:
MRu ≥ k.
b(Pi(u,Rd))=min{b(sn)|(sn∈Pi(u,Rd))&(sn∉SNT)}≥f-1(k) .
h(P(u,Rd))=min{h(Pi(u,Rd))|i=0,..N}. h(P) means the hops on path P

(2)
(3)
(4)

3 Proposed Protocol
In this section, we describe our protocol in detail, especially the join situation where a
new receiver wants to join a multicast group.
When a receiver wants to join a multicast group, it issues a join-request message
with k layer and forwards the message to its Designated Router. DR calculates a
feasible path P(u,Rd) locally. Fig. 2 shows the detailed calculation procedure.

84

H. Lu et al.

1. Procedure calculateFeasible(N, T, k)
2. {
3.
Vs {sn| sn∈SNT } {Ri| Ri∈RT }; /*select on-tree nodes as source nodes.*/
4.
Pmin=∅;
5.
foreach (v∈Vs) {
6.
if (MRv)≥k) {
7.
Vs’=Vs-{v};
8.
N’ N-Vs’; /*exclude those on-tree nodes except the v node */
9.
foreach (sn∈N’) {
10.
if(b(sn)<f-1(k)) N’=N’-{sn};
/*exclude those subnet which bandwidth can not satisfy the constraint*/
11.
} /* for */
12.
Pi(v, Rd)=dijikstra(N’, v, Rd );
13.
Pmin= Pmin∪ Pi(v, Rd);
14.
} /* if */
15. }/* for */
16. P(v, Rd)= arg min{h(P)| P∈Pmin};/* shortest is select among all feasible
paths.*/
17. }

＝

∪

＝

Fig. 2. The algorithm for calculation of a feasible graft path

If the feasible graft path exists, DR sends a join-request message along the path to
inform associated routers to set up connection; Otherwise DR refuses the receiver’s
join request.
When an off-tree router receives the join-request message, it simply sends the
message according to the path information stored in the message. When an on-tree node
receives the message, it first checks whether its current highest receivable layer is
higher or equal to the new receiver’s join request layer. If it is not, it replies DR a retry
message to re-calculate again to find another feasible path. Else, it then checks whether
its current layer is higher or equal to the request layer. If it is not, it will continue to
forward the join-request to the upstream router; else it will do the followings: (1)
Update the multicast routing entry by adding the new downstream routers and its
receivable layer; (2) Reserve corresponding bandwidth caused by the additional layer;
(3) Reply the set-up message to the new downstream router. When the set-up message
arrives at DR finally, the new receiver has been connected to the multicast tree. It
should be noted that the network information should be updated and broadcasted in the
range of the whole network wide because both the bandwidth on the graft path and the
distribution of the multicast tree are changed.

4 Simulation Results
The simulation study is conducted on the Network Simulator (NS-2) [8] platform and
on the topology of CERNET [9]. MRDH is compared with two dynamic algorithms,
QDMR-LD[5], QMRP-LD [7] and one static algorithm Maxenchuk [3] in three
performance metrics which are defined as follows:

Multicast Routing Protocol with Heterogeneous and Dynamic Receivers

85

Avg. msg. overhead= total number of Join-request msg. sent / total number of join
members
Success ratio = number of new receivers accepted / total number of join members
Bandwidth used per member = total bandwidth used by successful receivers / number
of new successful receivers.
In our experiment, the bandwidth of each group is uniformly distributed from 2 to 6
Mbps. Video data is encoded into three layers: a base layer, a most significant layer,
and an enhancement layer with the bit rates being 30%, 50%, and 20% of the total video
respectively. 500 groups are launched gradually in this experiment. The source and the
members of each group are selected randomly however only the simulation results of
the middle join rate (10 nodes among 36 nodes join to each group as the member) is
shown for the length limitation of this paper. The receiving capability of each receiver
is randomly selected among 1, 2, 3 layers.
Fig. 3 gives the simulation results of the three performance metrics. MRDH
computes a feasible graft path locally and then sends a join-request message along the
path to set up the branch. QMRP-LD unicasts a join-request message from the DR
towards the core. If a router in the unicast path does not satisfy the QoS requirement,
the join-request message backtracks to the former router and then is flooded to all
neighbor routers. As shown in Fig. 3(a), the message overhead of MRDH is much
lower than that of QDMR-LD, and almost as low as that of QMRP-LD when the group
number is small; but becomes much lower than that of QMRP-LD when group number
increases. In Fig. 3(b), with the increase of group number, the percentage of receivers
accepted decreases more significantly under QMRP-LD, while decreases gently under
MRDH, QDMR-LD and Maxenchuk’s algorithm. QMRP-LD relies on unicast routing
to find a feasible path without considering the network bandwidth already reserved for
a multicast session. Therefore, the success ratio under QMRP-LD is lower than that of
MRDH. In Fig. 3(c), the multicast tree constructed under MRDH is more efficient in
resource usage compared to that under QDMR-LD and QMRP-LD, and close to that
under Maxenchuk’s algorithm for one of the most important aims of Maxenchuk’s
algorithm is to minimize the total bandwidth resources used.

MRDH
QDMR-LD
QMRP-LD

10 members per group

The Aver. Bw used per Member (Mbps)

100

200

10 members per group

90

150

The Success Ratio (%)

The Join Request Messages per Group (#)

，

100

50

MRDH
QDMR-LD
QMRP-LD
Maxenchuk

80
70
60
50
40
30

0

100

200

300

The Groups Number (#)

(a)

400

500

10 members per group
5.6

5.2

MRDH
QDMR-LD
QMRP-LD
Maxenchuk

4.8

4.4

4.0

20

0

6.0

0

100

200

300

The Groups Number (#)

(b)

400

500

0

20

40

60

80

The Groups Number (#)

(c)

Fig. 3. Performance comparison of (a) the message overhead; (b) the success routing ratio; (3)
the average bandwidth used per member under different algorithms

In conclusion, MRDH has the following prominent advantages: (1) MRDH can
calculate in a centralized way by storing two kinds of group-specific information.
Feasible paths are calculated locally by DRs, the message overhead for searching

86

H. Lu et al.

feasible paths tends to be very low. (2) If the network state information is up-to-date,
the success ratio tends to be high. Unlike others routing, MRDH does not rely on any
unicast routing. Hence, every router knows the bandwidth reserved for existing
multicast group, which improves the probability of finding an existing feasible path. (3)
The network bandwidth usage is optimized. The graft path is the shortest path among
all the feasible paths. It leads to efficient use of network resources.
Certainly, MRDH has to maintain a global state, which limits its usage in large
networks. But the above pros confirm that MRDH is an effective multicast routing in
small range of networks.

5 Conclusions
In this paper, we study the problem of constructing a multicast tree for heterogeneous
and dynamic receivers. We demonstrate that by maintaining the distribution of
multicast tree and the highest receivable layer of on-tree nodes, feasible paths can be
calculated locally. We then describe our protocol in a detailed way. Simulation results
shows that our routing tends to have low message overhead, high routing success ratio
and optimization usage of network bandwidth.

References
1. Li, B., Liu, J.C.: Multirate Video Multicast over the Internet: An Overview. IEEE Network.
Volume 17.(2003)2-6
2. Lui, K.-S., Wang, J., Xiao, L., Nahrstedt K.: QoS Multicast Routing with Heterogeneous
Receivers. In: Proceedings of IEEE GLOBECOM. (2003) 3597-3601
3. Maxemchuk, N. F.: Video Distribution on Multicast Networks. IEEE Journal on Selected
Areas in Communications. Volume 15. (1997) 357-372
4. Wang, B., Hou, J. C.: QoS-Based Multicast Routing for Distributing Layered Video to
Heterogeneous Receivers in Rate-based Networks. In: Proceedings of IEEE INFOCOM.
(2000) 480-489
5. Lu, H.M., Xiang Y., Shi M.L., Yang M.: A QoS-Based Dynamic Multicast Routing
Algorithm for Streaming Layered Data. Journal of Software. Volume 15. (2004) 928~939
6. Lu, H.M., Xiang Y., Shi M.L., Yang M.: A New Bandwidth and Delay-Constrained
Distributed Multicast Routing. ACTA ELECTRONICA SINICA. Volume 20. (2002)
1978-1981
7. Chen, S., Nahrstedt, K., Shavitt, Y.: A QoS-Aware Multicast Routing Protocol. In:
Proceedings of IEEE INFOCOM. (2000) 1594-1603
8. Network Simulator ns-2.available from http://www.isi.edu/nsnam/
9. CERNET. Available from http://www.edu.cn/HomePage/cernet_fu_wu/about_cernet/

