Extensive Epidemic Spreading Model Based on
Multi-agent System Framework
Chunhua Tian, Wei Ding, Rongzeng Cao, and Shun Jiang
IBM China Research Laboratory, Beijing 100094, China
{chtian,dingw,caorongz,jshun}@cn.ibm.com

Abstract. In current epidemic spreading study, continuous system dynamics
model and discrete agent model are often regarded as two types of incompatible
models. However these two types of models may coexist in large-scale epidemic
simulation. A multi-agent based framework for such coexisting is proposed in
this paper consisting of location agents with hierarchical structure, participant
agents to denote host, pathogen, or medium, and event agent to model the epidemic outbreak, control policy, etc. Transformation algorithm is provided for the
communication between locations with different types of epidemic models. Such
a framework is illustrated by SARS (Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome)
outbreak case.
Keywords: Epidemic Spreading Model, Epidemic Simulation, Multi-Agent
System.

1 Introduction
Epidemics spreading simulation is an important approach for epidemics control policy
analysis. Currently there are two types of models [1], continuous system dynamics
model (i.e., continuous differential equation) and purely discrete agent model with
great difference in state variables. States variables in system dynamics model are the
size of the groups, while that in multi-agent model are health state of agents.
From SIR (Susceptible, Infective, Recovered) model, many extensional system
dynamics model are developed, such as SIS, SEIR (‘E’ denotes “Exposed”), MSEIR
(‘M’ denotes “maternal antibody protection”), etc. All these models assume that the
population being affected by a disease is "well mixed" and either not distributed or
geographically distributed in a uniform manner.
With the application of computer simulation, more complicated and practicable
models are proposed considering spatial dimension, traffic network, diversity of
population and many other important factors in epidemic spreading. EpiSims [2] is an
agent-based modeling platform, which relies on TRANSIMS (TRanportation Analysis
SIMulation System) to emulate social behavior and traffic flow. However this approach often requires large amounts of computing resources even for small city scenario. To avoid such disadvantage, in STEM (Spatial and Temporal Epidemiological
Modeler) by Ford et al. uses continuous modeling for large areas while agent based
model for specific areas [3].
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 129–133, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

130

C. Tian et al.

In current application, either continuous or discrete model is adopted in simulation.
However, there are many scenarios requiring the coexisting of both types of models.
For example, data availability (city vs. countryside), monitoring focus, multiple epidemics outbreak at the same time. The purpose of this paper is to propose a hybrid
model for the common simulation platform.

2 Epidemic Spreading Model Framework
2.1 Epidemics Outbreak Scenario
The system architecture for epidemics simulation is shown in Fig. 1. At the core, there
are “participant” model to emulate the behavior of host, pathogen, and medium.
“Location” model to describe the geographic feature. Another key model is “social
contact network” model to describe the interaction between participants and locationbased activities. For modern society, transportation network has been a key channel
for local epidemics to become pandemics. So the traffic model is often a key data
source to construct social contact network. Demography data is used to construct
participant distribution in geography, age, sex and other factors which may be needed
in participant modeling. Outbreak scenario includes the flowing 3 types of factors. 1)
Epidemics outbreak event to describe when certain or several types of epidemics
outbreak. 2) Pathogen evolution event. 3) Environment change event such as weather,
nature disaster, etc, which may impact on host/vector behaviors or epidemic spreading. Control policy event to describe the detailed policy and when it is put into action.
The first three factors are often called as outbreak scenario.
Simulator
Disease
knowledge
Basic reproduction
model

Census

Participant
Within-host model

Disease diffusion
over time-space
Social Contact
Network

Environment-mediated
transmission

Location

Traffic Data

Activity-based
disease load

Outbreak
Scenario

Control
Policy

Fig. 1. Epidemic Simulation Architecture

2.2 Multi-agent Framework
Participant agents can be divided into two categories, individual or aggregate. Continuous epidemics model is often applied to aggregate participant agents, where each

Extensive Epidemic Spreading Model Based on Multi-agent System Framework

131

agent denotes a group of host, pathogen, mediums in a location. Discrete epidemic
model is correlated with individual participant agent.
However, the computation of these two types of models differs a lot. In multiagent, there is an identifier with each agent. While system dynamics model only cares
about the size of each group. So when these two types of models coexist, the transformation method is needed.
1) An agent moves from a location with discrete model to a location with continuous model
The group corresponding to the agent’s state size increases 1. As long as the agent
stays at the location, during each period update, the state of the agent is determined
according to uniform probability. The travel behavior of the individual agent is not
depended on the aggregate agents.
2) A unit flow from a location with system dynamics model to a location with
multi-agent system
Generate a virtual agent with state as the flow state. Its behavior is configured according to the aggregate agent. When virtual agent leaves for another location with
multi-agent model, it remains the same. When virtual agent leaves for another location with system dynamics model, it is annihilated in corresponding state group.
2.3 Metamodel
To support the co-existing and extensibility of continuous and discrete model, interface
breakdown hierarchy shown in Fig. 2 is adopted. At the top of the hierarchy is the
interface IDiseaseModel. It represents the abstract idea of a model of a disease process.
In particular, it contains the state transition diagram although no detailed computational
process that generates the transitions from one state of a particular disease model to
another. IDiseaseModel is extended by the interface ISDDiseaseModel for continuous
model and IMASDiseaseModel for discrete model, which expands abstraction by introducing the state transition computation process.

Fig. 2. Metamodel of Epidemic Spreading Model

132

C. Tian et al.

3 Illustration
SARS outbreak case in 2003 is adopted to illustrate different modeling technologies.
At first, the continuous model, BloComp(2,7) model proposed by Zhang et al. [4] is
adopted to study SARS spreading dynamics in Beijing. Based on our adaptive parameter estimation algorithm, the simulation results (solid curve) have high approximation to the reported data (dotted curve) from Chinese Minister of Health [5], just as
Fig. 3(a) on the incidence of healthcare workers. The difference of most days is kept
within 15% except a big error in April 30.

60
50
40

hincidence

30

6-6

5-23

5-16

5-9

5-2

4-25

5-30

hincidence
_r

20
10
0

(a) Simulation result of incidence number of
healthcare workers

(b) Simulation tool snapshot

Fig. 3. SARS Spreading Simulation Tool & Result

Since most public SARS data are reported at the administration level of provinces.
In the study the SARS spreading process across the China show in Fig. 3(b), Beijing
is model as an agent model, while other provinces are modeled by continuous model.
In the agent model, social network is generated according to the demography data
such as age, job, and activity models. The people contact is stochastically generated
according to the social network and agent activity model. Unfortunately traffic data
across provinces is not directly available to us. For illustration purpose, national
statistics on annual people transportation volume is adopted. Average daily traffic
volume between two provinces is generated according to their population. The distribution in each state (that is, susceptible, exposed and infectious in free environment)
is generated according to their proportion in the total population.

4 Conclusion
Due to the heterogeneity of data availability, the co-existing of continuous differential
model and agent model is inevitable in epidemic simulation. Based on multi-agent
framework, the architecture, method and model synthesizes the types of models are
proposed in this paper. SARS outbreak case is adopted to verify the feasibility of such
an approach.

Extensive Epidemic Spreading Model Based on Multi-agent System Framework

133

References
1. Hethcote, H. W.: The mathematics of infectious diseases. SIAM Review 42 (2000) 599-653.
2. Eubank, S., Guclu, H., et al.: Modelling disease outbreaks in realistic urban social networks.
Letters to Nature 429 (2004) 180-184.
3. Ford, D. A., Kaufman, J. H., Eiron, I.: An extensible spatial and temporal epidemiological
modeling system. International Journal of Health Geographics 5 (2006) 4.
4. Zhang, J., Lou, J., Ma, Z., Wu, J. H.: A compartmental model for the analysis of SARS
transmission patterns and outbreak control measures in China. Applied Mathematics and
Computation 162 (2005) 909–924.
5. Chinese Minister of Health: SARS Report, http://168.160.224.167.

