HPC Opportunities and Challenges in e-Science
Fabrizio Gagliardi
Microsoft Research, Technical Computing,
EMEA and LATAM Director
Phone: +41 78 844 6476
fabrig@microsoft.com

Abstract. In the last few years a new paradigm has emerged in science:
extensively use of simulation techniques and software modeling, running
on a distributed high performance computing electronic infrastructure.
This paradigm is referred to as electronic Science or e-Science. Besides
computer simulation, it uses huge amounts of distributed and shared
data captured by instruments or sensors and/or stored in databases,
analyzed to provide new results for science. This distributed HPC and
data ecosystem enables the sharing of acquired knowledge, remote access
to resources and above of all a world-wide scientiﬁc collaboration.
Keywords: e-Science, Grid computing, Cloud, elastic computing,
multi-core architectures.

The EU Datagrid project was one of the ﬁrst examples of Grid computing going in this direction, which was followed by the EGEE (Enabling Grids for Escience) project. The research community and the High Energy Physicists at
CERN were among the ﬁrst to adopt Grid computing. The EGEE projects has
to date integrated more than 50.000 CPUs in Europe and beyond, and 20 Peta
Bytes (millions of GigaBytes) of storage, serving multiple application communities including HEP, Bioinformatics, Astrophysics, Computational Chemistry,
Earth Sciences, Fusion. Some business/industrial applications are also adopting
this distributed HPC computing model such as automotive, ﬁnance, multimedia, and there also a few examples of e-Government ones such as in the civil
protection area.
Thus, Grid computing has delivered an aﬀordable and high performance computing infrastructure to scientists all over the world for solving intense computing problems within constrained research budget. Business or industrial entities
have also used similar technologies to increase the usage of their computing infrastructure and reduce their total cost of ownership (TCO). In addition, Grid
computing is leveraging the advanced research networks to deliver an eﬀective
and irreplaceable channel for international collaboration.
Issues which hinder a wider adoption of grid technology in e-Science and industry have to do with the cost of operations and the overall complexity of
the Grid, which aims at delivering secure and reliable services over widely distributed non homogeneous resources belonging to diﬀerent administrative domains. The EGEE project, for instance, is spending more than 30 million € per
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2008, Part I, LNCS 5101, pp. 18–19, 2008.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

HPC Opportunities and Challenges in e-Science

19

year (around half is covered by the EC) to run and support the 50.000 CPUs infrastructure (operations, middleware development and certiﬁcation, application
support, training, dissemination, etc.). Besides the operational expenditures, one
should take into account the depreciated capital expenditures of the infrastructure. Hardware costs of the 50.000 CPUs and the 20PB storage should be in
the order of 100 million Euros, depreciated over 5 years, results for another 20
million Euros per year.
Power consumption and heat dissipation are also becoming an important new
factor that needs to be considered seriously. Taking the rough estimation of 10%
of the hardware costs, this should add another 10 Euros per year operational
expenditures. Supposing that the (over-provisioned) connectivity costs are covered anyway by the National Research Networks, this sums up to around 60
million € per year. This is comparable to the estimated 48M € ﬁgure that the
EGEE usage would have cost, if performed with Amazon Elastic Computing and
Simple Storage Services (presented by the EGEE project director in the 2008
EGEE User Forum). Although calculations are not accurate, they show that the
grid and the cloud now are in the same order of costs.
Thus elastic computing, Computing on the Cloud, Data Centres and Service
hosting are oﬀering on demand CPUs and storage with similar pricing. As an
example, Amazon Elastic Computing (EC2) oﬀers a small instance CPU hour
for 0,10 USD, and is quite easy to use. In addition, it charges 0,10 USD per
GB for data transfer in and 0,18 USD for data transfer out (of their systems).
For datasets that stay at the Amazon system, one has to use the Amazon S3
services, which have an additional cost of 0,15 USD per GB per month. Other
major stakeholders in the market such as SUN, Google and IBM are moving in
the same direction towards oﬀering similar services of on-demand computing,
storage and hosting.
Emerging multi-core architectures and CPU accelerators promise potential
breakthroughs, and in the future one might not have to rely on computer clusters,
the cloud and the grid, rather aﬀord her/his own personal supercomputer desk
top or desk side
Microsoft is actively investigating this ﬁeld, and the Technical Computing
in Microsoft Research, is supporting e-Science initiatives in collaboration with
leading scientists around the world. We need to advance in making computing
easy to use for the scientists to concentrate their energy in real science and not
the computing tools!

