On Identity-Based Cryptography and Grid
Computing
H.W. Lim and M.J.B. Robshaw
Information Security Group
Royal Holloway, University of London
Egham, Surrey, TW20 0EX, UK
{h.lim, m.robshaw}@rhul.ac.uk

Abstract. In this exploratory paper we consider the use of IdentityBased Cryptography (IBC) in a Grid security architecture. IBC
has properties that align well with the demands of Grid computing
and we illustrate some trade-oﬀs in deploying IBC within a Grid system.

1

Introduction

Continual improvements to computing power, storage capacity, and network
bandwidth are permitting computing technologies of previously unheard sophistication. Nevertheless, there remain increasing demands for more computational
power and resources and Grid computing has been proposed as a mechanism to
provide such demands. In order to realise the Grid vision, a sound and eﬀective
security architecture is of the utmost importance, and there are many complications due to the interoperable, heterogenous, scalable, and dynamic qualities
of a Grid deployment.
Independently of Grid computing, a variant of traditional public key technologies called Identity-based Cryptography (IBC) has recently received considerable attention. In [4] Shamir introduced identity-based cryptosystems in
which the public key can be generated from a publicly identiﬁable information
such as a person’s e-mail address. The corresponding private key is generated
and maintained by a Private Key Generator (PKG) (or Trusted Authority).
More recently, work by Boneh and Franklin [1] on identity-based encryption has
inspired much new research in the ﬁeld. The potential of IBC to provide more
immediate ﬂexibility to entities in a security infrastructure may well match the
qualities demanded by Grid computing. In particular, the properties of IBC
that allow generation of keying information on the ﬂy oﬀers a good opportunity
to consider IBC as an alternative approach to Grid security.

The full paper is available at http://www.isg.rhul.ac.uk/∼hwlim/.
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3036, pp. 474–477, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

On Identity-Based Cryptography and Grid Computing

2

475

Alternative Approach to Grid Security

The Globus Toolkit (GT)1 , in its latest 3.0 version, is currently the most popular open source software toolkit for building Grid systems. The security services
provided by the GT rely upon a security architecture called Grid Security Infrastructure (GSI), which is based on PKI and Transport Layer Security (TLS)
communication protocol. The focus is primarily on authentication (including
cross-domain), message protection, and single sign-on and identity delegation
through proxy credentials [3]. The major components are as follows.
Virtual Organisation (VO). A dynamic collection of users and resources
that potentially span multiple administrative domains and governed by a
set of deﬁned sharing rules.
User. A subscriber to a Grid. The user can belong to a VO or multiple VOs
and he may share part or all of his local resource to other users.
Resource. This comprises from any sharable resource including hardware and
software. A user can be a resource to other users if he could oﬀer part or all
of his local resource.
Community Authorization Service (CAS). Each VO has its own CAS to
maintain a set of policies and communicate those policies to the resources.
Community Policy. A local database that stores policies imposed on each user
of a VO.
Grid Certiﬁcate Authority (CA). An independent, trusted and potentially
shared CA for a VO. It certiﬁes and signs certiﬁcates for the VO members.
PKI is an authentication enabling technology and it is widely used in the
GT. Using a combination of secret key and public key cryptography, it enables
a number of other security services including data conﬁdentiality, data integrity,
and key management. Within the GT, when a user (say Alice) wishes to send
a job request to a resource (Resource X), she needs to authenticate herself to
her CAS Server. The CAS Server establishes Alice’s identity and rights using
a local policy database maintained at Community Policy. It then issues Alice a
signed policy assertion containing her identity and rights. Alice sends the policy
assertion and her certiﬁcate to Resource X. Resource X authenticates Alice and
veriﬁes her VO membership. It also enforces VO’s policies stated in the assertion
and local policies in regard with VO and Alice herself. Once these are done, Alice
is authorized to use Resource X.
The identity token used in Grid is provided through an X.509 public key
certiﬁcate. It contains a public key, a subject name in the form of a distinguished
name (DN), and a validity period that is signed by a Grid CA [6]. Each entity’s
public key can be transmitted in a X.509 certiﬁcate as part of a TLS connection handshake. Upon completion of a handshake protocol which includes key
exchange messages from both parties, the parties can begin to transfer data securely over the established communication channel. In Grid, a private/public
key pair is usually generated by each individual (user/resource). Should a user
1

The Globus Toolkit, http://www-unix.globus.org/toolkit/

476

H.W. Lim and M.J.B. Robshaw

realise or suspect that his private key has been compromised, then the holder
himself is held accountable for the notiﬁcation of the exposed key to the Grid
CA in order to have his certiﬁcate revoked as soon as possible.
Despite the importance of PKI, there is an increased research focus on IBC.
The main stimulus for this trend is the problem of managing certiﬁcates and
their associated keys using PKI (refer to the full paper for further description).
In the full paper we explore whether IBC may be used to alleviate similar problem in a Grid environment and perhaps provide other advantages. To illustrate
the properties of IBC, suppose Alice, through an IBC-based system, wants to
send an encrypted message to Bob using an identity-based cryptosystem. Alice
does not need to verify the authenticity of Bob’s public key (by retrieving Bob’s
public key certiﬁcate). Instead Alice simply encrypts the message with an identifying public key, e.g. ‘bob@xyz.com’. Clearly, Alice needs to know the public
parameters or system parameters of Bob’s PKG. If Bob does not already possess
the corresponding private key, he has to obtain it from his PKG. If the PKG
is satisﬁed that Bob is the legitimate receiver of the message, the PKG uses a
master key to generate the private key that matches Bob’s public key string.
The major technical diﬀerence between IBC and PKI is the binding between the
public/private keys and the individual. This is achieved by using certiﬁcates in
PKI. For IBC, the public key is bound to the transmitted data while the binding
between the private key and the individual is managed by the PKG [2].
To see how IBC could be applied in a Grid environment, we presume that
Alice and Bob both belong to the same VO. When Alice wishes to communicate
securely with Bob, in principle she could simply encrypt the message with public
key string:
‘Bob’s DN

timestamp’.

She neither needs Bob’s public key certiﬁcate nor veriﬁes his identity as the
authentication task has been indirectly transferred to the PKG. Note that Bob
needs to authenticate himself to the PKG before he receives the appropriate
corresponding private key. In addition, one can add more granularity to impose
restrictions on the receiving party. For instance, if Alice wants to ensure that her
job request can be read by Resource X only and no other resource, she can in
principle encrypt her job descriptions and the associated policy assertion with
public key string that includes Resource X’s role:
‘Resource X’s DN

role

timestamp’.

The potential shown by IBC in generating public key instantly without
performing certiﬁcate lookup and veriﬁcation oﬀers the ﬂexibility that closely
matches the dynamic qualities of the entities within the Grid environment as
they join and leave the VO. However, IBC-based cryptography also has a drawback since each entity needs an authenticated and secure channel with the PKG
when retrieving his private key. Thus IBC is a relatively new technology in
comparison with PKI and the full implications have yet to be considered in its
application to a Grid system. However, some ﬁrst steps are taking place and

On Identity-Based Cryptography and Grid Computing

477

we note that Stading [5] has recently developed an IBC-based key management
mechanism for use within a distributed system.

3

Conclusions

The development of Grid computing is one of today’s most important technical problems and the security issues within a Grid deployment are numerous
and complicated. Current implementations rely heavily on traditional PKI as
a way of supporting many security services. In the full paper we explore the
potential beneﬁts of IBC within a Grid infrastructure and we suggest that IBC
might have the right properties to provide an alternative security solution for
Grid systems. However, true possibilities of integrating identity-based mechanisms within a Grid infrastructure will become clearer with more research.
Nevertheless, this interaction could be promising, and the inherent qualities of
IBC appear to closely match the demands of a dynamic environment like Grid
where the availability of new or current resources can change swiftly over time.

References
1. D. Boneh and M. Franklin. Identity-Based Encryption from the Weil Pairing. In
J. Kilian, editor, Proceedings of Advances in Cryptology - CRYPTO 2001, pages
213-229. Springer-Verlag LNCS 2139, 2001.
2. K.G. Paterson and G. Price. A Comparison between Traditional Public Key Infrastructures and Identity-Based Cryptography. Information Security Technical Report,
8(3):57-72, 2003.
3. L. Pearlman, V. Welch, I. Foster, C. Kesselman, and S. Tuecke. A Community Authorization Service for Group Collaboration. In Proceedings of the 3rd IEEE International Workshop on Policies for Distributed Systems and Networks (POLICY’02),
pages 50-59, June 2002.
4. A. Shamir. Identity-based cryptosystems and signature schemes. In G. R. Blakley
and D. Chaum, editors, Proceedings of Advances in Cryptology - CRYPTO ’84,
pages 47-53. Springer-Verlag LNCS 196, 1984.
5. T. Stading. Secure Communication in a Distributed System Using Identity Based
Encryption. In Proceedings of 3rd IEEE International Symposium on Cluster Computing and the Grid (CCGrid 2003), pages 414-420, May 2003.
6. M.R. Thompson, D. Olson, R. Cowles, S. Mullen, and M. Helm. CA-based
Trust Model for Grid Authentication and Identity Delegation. Global Grid
Forum (GGF) Grid Certiﬁcate Policy Working Group, June 2003. Available
at http://www.gridforum.org/documents/GFD/GFD-I.17.pdf, last accessed in
November 2003.

