Direct and Homogeneous Numerical Approaches
to Multiphase Flows and Applications
Roman Samulyak1 , Tianshi Lu2 , and Yarema Prykarpatskyy1
1
Center for Data Intensive Computing,
Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, NY 11973, USA
{rosamu, yarpry}@bnl.gov
2
Department of Applied Mathematics and Statistics,
SUNY at Stony Brook, Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA
tlu@sunysb.edu

Abstract. We have studied two approaches to the modeling of bubbly
and cavitating ﬂuids. The ﬁrst approach is based on the direct numerical simulation of gas bubbles using the interface tracking technique. The
second one uses a homogeneous description of bubbly ﬂuid properties.
Two techniques are complementary and can be applied to resolve diﬀerent spatial scales in simulations. Numerical simulations of the dynamics
of linear and shock waves in bubbly ﬂuids have been performed and compared with experiments and theoretical predictions. Two techniques are
being applied to study hydrodynamic processes in liquid mercury targets
for new generation accelerators.

1

Introduction

An accurate description of cavitation and wave propagation in cavitating and
bubbly ﬂuids is a key problem in modeling and simulation of hydrodynamic processes in a variety of applications ranging from marine engineering to high energy
physics. The modeling of free surface ﬂows imposes an additional complication
on this multiscale problem.
The wave propagation in bubbly ﬂuids have been studied using a variety
of methods. Signiﬁcant progress has been achieved using various homogeneous
descriptions of multiphase systems (see for example [1,2,13,15] and references
therein). The Rayleigh-Plesset equation for the evolution of the average bubble
size distribution has often been used as a dynamic closure for ﬂuid dynamics
equations. This allows to implicitly include many important physics eﬀects in
bubbly systems such as the drug, viscosity, and surface tension. Numerical simulations of such systems require relatively simple and computationally inexpensive numerical algorithms. Nevertheless, homogeneous models cannot capture all
features of complex ﬂow regimes and exhibit sometimes large discrepancies with
experiments [13] even for systems of non-dissolvable gas bubbles. Homogeneous
models are also not suitable for modeling phase transitions in bubbly ﬂuids such
as boiling and cavitation.
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3039, pp. 653–660, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

654

R. Samulyak, T. Lu, and Y. Prykarpatskyy

A powerfull method for multiphase problems, direct numerical simulation,
is based on techniques developed for free surface ﬂows. Examples of numerical
simulations of a single vapor bubble undergoing a phase transition on its surface are given in [9,14]. Systems of bubbles in ﬂuids were modeled in [7] using
the incompressible ﬂow approximation for both ﬂuid and vapor and a simpliﬁed
version of the interface tracking. In this paper, we describe a direct numerical
simulation method for systems of compressible bubbles in ﬂuids using the method of front tracking. Our FronTier code is capable of tracking and resolving
topological changes of a large number of ﬂuid interfaces in 2D and 3D spaces. We
present the simulation results of the wave dynamics of linear and shock waves
in bubbly systems and compare them with classical experiments.
The direct numerical simulations of wave dynamics in bubbly ﬂuids in large
3D domains remain, however, prohibitively expensive even on supercomputers.
Homogeneous models can eﬀectively be used for such systems, especially if the
resolving of spatial scales smaller then the distance between bubbles is not necessary. To model cavitating and bubbly ﬂuids within the homogeneous approximation, we have recently developed and implemented in the FronTier code a
two-phase equation of state (EOS) model based on the isentropic approximation. Therefore both direct and homogeneous approaches have advantages and
disadvantages and can be used to resolve diﬀerent temporal and spatial scales
in numerical simulations.
Two numerical approaches are being used to study hydrodynamic processes
involving cavitation and bubble dynamics in liquid mercury targets for new generation accelerators such as the Spallation Neutron Source (SNS) and the Muon
Collider/Neutrino Factory (MC). Hydrodynamic insbabilities and cavitation in
the MC mercury jet target will create complications for the machine operation.
The collapse of cavitation bubbles in the SNS mercury target, resulting in the
pitting of steel walls, has been the most critical problem reducing the target
lifetime. The injection of layers of gas bubbles in mercury has been proposed
as a possible pressure mitigation technique. These processes must be studied by
means of large-scale numerical simulations.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe brieﬂy the direct
and homogeneous methods for the modeling of bubbly ﬂows. Section 3 contains
results of the numerical simulation of linear and shock waves in bubbly liquids
using the direct and homogeneous techniques. We discuss classical shock tube
experiments and applications to liquid mercury targets. Finally, we conclude the
paper with a summary of our results and perspectives for future work.

2
2.1

Modeling of Multiphase Flows
Direct Method

In the direct method, we model a liquid – vapor or liquid – non-dissolvable gas
mixture as a system of one phase domains separated by free interfaces. The FronTier code represents interfaces as lower dimensional meshes moving through a

Direct and Homogeneous Numerical Approaches to Multiphase Flows

655

volume ﬁlling grid [4,5]. The traditional volume ﬁlling ﬁnite diﬀerence grid supports smooth solutions located in the region between interfaces. The dynamics of
the interface comes from the mathematical theory of Riemann solutions, which
are idealized solutions of single jump discontinuities for a conservation law. The
FronTier code is capable of tracking simultaneously a large number of interfaces
and resolving their topological changes (the breakup and merger of droplets) in
two- and three- dimensional spaces. Away from interfaces, FronTier uses high
resolution hyperbolic techniques. Diﬀerent equation of state models are used for
gas/vapor bubbles and the ambient liquid. Though computationally intensive,
such an approach is very accurate in treating important eﬀects in bubbly ﬂows
including phase transitions in boiling and cavitating ﬂuids. The method makes
it possible to resolve spatial scales smaller than the typical distance between
bubbles and to model some non-equilibrium thermodynamics features such as
ﬁnite critical tension in cavitating liquids.
2.2

Homogeneous Method

The advantage of the homogeneous method compared to the direct one is its
computational simplicity and, as a result, low computational requirements for
the simulation of large systems. The homogeneous ﬂow approximation provides
a simple technique for analyzing two-phase (or multiple phase) ﬂows. It is accurate enough to handle a variety of practically important processes. Suitable
averaging is performed over the length scale which is large compared to the distance between bubbles and the mixture is treated as a pseudoﬂuid that obeys
an equation of state (EOS) of a single component ﬂow [15].
We have recently developed [11] a simple isentropic homogeneous equation of
state for two-phase liquids and implemented the corresponding software library
in the FronTier code. The isentropic approximation reduces by one the number on independent variables deﬁning the thermodynamic state. As a result, all
thermodynamic states in our EOS are functions of only density. The proposed
EOS consists of three branches. The pure vapor and liquid branches are described by the polytropic and stiﬀened polytropic [10] EOS models, respectively,
reduced to a single isentrope. The two branches are connected by a model for
the liquid-vapor mixture
P = Psat,l + Pvl log

ρsat,v asat,v 2 (ρsat,l + α(ρsat,v − ρsat,l ))
,
ρsat,l (ρsat,v asat,v 2 − α(ρsat,v asat,v 2 − ρsat,l asat,l 2 ))

where ρsat,v , ρsat,l , asat,v , asat,l are the density and the speed of sound of vapor
and liquid in saturation points, respectively, Psat,l is the liquid pressure in the
saturation point, α is the void fraction
α=

ρ − ρsat,l
,
ρsat,v − ρsat,l

and the parameter Pvl is
Pvl =

ρsat,v asat,v 2 ρsat,l asat,l 2 (ρsat,v − ρsat,l )
.
ρsat,v 2 asat,v 2 − ρsat,l 2 asat,l 2

656

R. Samulyak, T. Lu, and Y. Prykarpatskyy

These expressions were derived by integrating an experimentally validated model
for the sound speed in bubbly mixture [15]. A set of the EOS input parameters
most of which are measurable quantities allows to ﬁt the two-phase EOS to
thermodynamics data for real ﬂuids. Details on the EOS model are presented in
[11].
The FronTier code with two-phase EOS modes has been applied to study the
interaction of mercury with an intensive proton pulse in the geometry typical
for mercury thimble neutrino factory experiments. The use of two-phase EOS
has led to improvement over single phase EOS simulations [12] of the mercury
surface evolution.

3
3.1

Numerical Results
Direct Numerical Simulations

In this section, we present results of the direct numerical simulation of the dynamics of linear and nonlinear waves in bubbly liquids. The schematic of the
numerical experiment setup is depicted in Figure 1. The liquid contains nondissolvable gas bubbles at normal conditions. The bubble radius is 0.12 mm and
the void fraction is 1.55 · 10−4 . The region around a long column of bubbles was
chosen as the computational domain. As the ﬁrst order approximation, we can
assume that the pressure waves are axisymmetric. The inﬂuence of neighboring
bubbles can be eﬀectively approximated by the Neumann boundary condition on
the domain walls. Therefore the wave propagation in bubbly ﬂows was reduced
to an axisymmetric two-dimensional problem.

Liquid

Tracked surface bubbles

Incident acoustic or shock wave

Computational domain

Fig. 1. Schematic of the numerical experiment. The computational domain contained
100 bubbles

Our ﬁrst numerical experiments were performed with small amplitude linear
waves in bubbly ﬂuids. Measuring the dispersion relation and the attenuation
rates from simulations, we found that results are in good agreement with Fox,

Direct and Homogeneous Numerical Approaches to Multiphase Flows

657

Curley and Larson’s experiments [3] as well as theoretical predictions [15]. The
numerical and theoretical results are depictured in Figure 2.

Fig. 2. Dispersion relation in bubbly ﬂows. The bubble radius is 0.12mm, void fraction
is 1.55 · 10−4 , and the pressure is 1.0 bar. The amplitude of the incident pressure wave
is 0.1 bar. Grid size is 90 × 10800, δ is the damping coeﬃcient

Figure 3 depicts results of experiments and numerical simulations of the
interaction of shock waves with bubbly layers. We measured shock velocities
and plotted shock proﬁles for bubbles consisting of diﬀerent kinds of gases. The
shock speeds agreed with the theoretical prediction of [13] very well (with the
diﬀerence less than 3%). The shock proﬁles agreed with experiments of Beylich
and Gulhan [1] qualitatively and partly quantitatively. Some discrepancy in the
amplitude of pressure oscillations can be explained by grid related numerical
errors. To improve the accuracy and performance of the direct method, we have
been working on the adaptive mesh reﬁnement method for the FronTier code.
Current simulations performed on 90 × 10800 grids required several days of
CPU time on a parallel cluster of Pentium processors. Both simulations and
experiments showed that the amplitude of pressure ocsillations in the bubbly
layer after the passage of the shock front is smaller for the gas with larger
polytropic index.
We have also performed preliminary numerical simulations of the interaction
of bubbly mercury with a strong proton pulse in the SNS target. The use of layers
of gas bubbles has been proposed as a pressure mitigation technique which may
reduce the cavitation induced erosion and extend the target lifetime. Preliminary
results conﬁrmed the usefulness of this mitigation method.

658

R. Samulyak, T. Lu, and Y. Prykarpatskyy
0.9

0.9

He

N2

0.8

0.7

0.7

0.6

0.6

P/P −1

0.5

0.5

0

P/P0 −1

0.8

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2
0.1

0.1
0
0

0.5

1

1.5

2

t (ms)

2.5

3

3.5

0
0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

t (ms)

Fig. 3. Experiments of Beylich and Gulhan [1] (top) and FronTier numerical simulations (bottom) of shock waves in bubbly liquids. The bubble radius is 1.18mm, the void
fraction is 2.5 · 10−3 , the ﬂuid pressure is 1.1 bar, and the initial shock pressure is 1.727
bar. Grid size is 35×7000. Shock proﬁles were measured 40 cm from the interface

3.2

Numerical Simulation of Interaction of Mercury with Protons
Using the Homogeneous Model

In this section, we present numerical simulation results of the interaction of free
surface mercury with strong proton pulses using FronTier code with the homogeneous two-phase EOS model. To study the inﬂuence of proton pulse induced
thermal shocks on mercury targets, a series of experiments were conducted at
the Alternating Gradient Synchrotron (AGS) at BNL and On-Line Isotope Mass
Separator facility (ISOLDE) at CERN [6,8]. We will discuss here some experimental and numerical simulation results of the mercury thimble studies.
The volume of the thimble excavated in a stainless steel bar is 1.3 cm3 . It
consists from bottom to top of a half sphere (r = 6 mm), and a vertical cylinder
(r = h = 6 mm). The mercury has a free surface in up-direction, where it can
expand to. The mercury interacts with a proton pulse of approximately Gaussian
distribution. The pulse intensity range is 0.6−17·1012 protons at energy 24 GeV.
We have performed numerical simulations of the mercury splash evolution
in the thimble using the FronTier code with the two-phase EOS (Figure 5).
We have studied the evolution of the mercury splash in the thimble at diﬀerent
values of the proton intensity and the r.m.s. spot size of the beam, and obtained
a good agreement with experimental data. However, numerical simulation do
not capture some experimentally observable ﬁne eﬀects in the splash evolution
such as the reduction of the splash velocity during ﬁrst 2 microseconds after

Direct and Homogeneous Numerical Approaches to Multiphase Flows

659

the arrival of the proton pulse [6]. This discrepancy can be explained by the
incomplete thermodynamics of our EOS. In the future, these simulations will
also be performed using the direct method with full thermodynamics and the
phase transition support.

Fig. 4. Numerical simulation of the mercury splash in the thimble

4

Conclusions

We have developed the direct and homogeneous approaches within the FronTier
code for the simulation of bubbly ﬂuids. Through the comparison of numerical simulations with experiments and theoretical predictions on the propagation
of linear and shock waves in bubbly ﬂuids, the direct approach which uses the
method of front tracking and the FronTier code has been validated. The direct
method has a variety of current and potential applications. It is being applied for
numerical simulations of the interaction of bubbly mercury with strong proton
pulses in the SNS target. The use of layers of gas bubbles has been proposed as a
pressure mitigation technique which may reduce the cavitation induced erosion
and extend the target lifetime. Preliminary simulations have demonstrated an
eﬀective reduction of the peak pressure. The mass transfer across bubble surfaces due to the phase transition is being implemented in the code. This will
allow to simulate systems of vapor bubbles in boiling and cavitating liquids. To
improve the numerical resolution and performance of the code, an adaptive mesh
reﬁnement method will be used in future simulations.
To model cavitating and bubbly ﬂuids within the homogeneous approximation, we have developed and implemented in the FronTier code a two-phase
equation of state (EOS) model based on the isentropic approximation. This approach is especially suitable if spatial scales smaller than the distance between
bubbles can be neglected for global studies of the wave dynamics. It requires

660

R. Samulyak, T. Lu, and Y. Prykarpatskyy

coarser grids compared to the direct numerical simulation method and often signiﬁcantly smaller CPU time. The code has been applied to study the interaction
of mercury with an intensive proton pulse in the geometry typical for mercury
thimble neutrino factory experiments. The simulations are in good quantitative
agreement with experiments. The direct and homogeneous approaches are complementary and can be used to resolve diﬀerent temporal and spatial scales in
numerical simulations.
Acknowledgments. The authors are grateful to James Glimm, Xiaolin Li, and
Harold Kirk for fruitful discussions. Financial support has been provided by the
USA Department of Energy, under contract number DE-AC02-98CH10886.

References
1. Beylich, A.E., G¨
ulhan, A.: On the structure of nonlinear waves in liquids with gas
bubbles. Phys. Fluids A 2 (1990) 1412 – 1428
2. Caﬂisch, R.E., Miksis, M.J., Papanicolaou, G.C., Ting, L.: Eﬀective equations for
wave propagation in bubbly liquids. J. Fluid Mech. 153 (1985) 259 – 273
3. Fox, F.E., Curley, S.R., Larson,G.S.: J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 27 (1955) 534
4. Glimm, J., Grove, J.W., Li, X.L., Shyue, K.M., Zhang, Q., Zeng, Y.: Three dimensional front tracking. SIAM J. Sci. Comp. 19 (1998) 703 – 727
5. Glimm J., Grove J., Li X.-L, and Tan D.C.: Robust computational algorithms for
dynamic interface tracking in three dimensions. SIAM J. Sci. Comp. 21 (2000)
2240 – 2256
6. Fabich, A., Lettry J.: Experimental Observation of Proton-Induced Shocks and
Magneto-Fluid-Dynamics in Liquid Metal. In Proceedings NuFact 01, NIM A,
(2001)
7. Juric, D., Tryggvason, G.: Computation of boiling ﬂows. Int. J. Multiphase Flow
24 (1998) 387 – 410
8. Kirk, H., et al.: Target studies with BNL E951 at the AGS. Particles and Accelerators 2001, June 18-22 (2001) Chicago IL
9. Matsumoto, Y., Takemura, F.: Inﬂuence of internal phenomena on gas bubble
motion. JSME Int. J. 37 (1994) 288 – 296
10. Menikoﬀ, R., Plohr, B.: The Riemann problem for ﬂuid ﬂow of real materials. Rev.
Mod. Phys. 61 (1989) 75 – 130
11. Samulyak, R., Prykarpatskyy, Y.: Richtmyer-Meshkov instability in liquid metal
ﬂows: inﬂuence of cavitation and magnetic ﬁelds. Mathematics and Computers in
Simulations (2003). In press
12. Samulyak, R.: Numerical simulation of hydro- and magnetohydrodynamic processes in the Muon Collider target. Lecture Notes in Comp. Sci., Vol. 2331. SpringerVerlag, Berlin Heidelberg New York (2002) 391 – 400
13. Watanabe, M., Prosperetti, A.: Shock waves in dilute bubbly liquids. J. Fluid
Mech. 274 (1994) 349 – 381
14. Welch, S.W.: Local simulation of two-phase ﬂows including interface tracking with
mass transfer. J. Comp. Phys. 121 (1995) 142 – 154
15. Wijngaarden, L. Van: One-dimensional ﬂow of liquids containing small gas bubbles.
Ann. Rev. Fluid Mech. 4 (1972) 369-396

