Independent Zone Setup Scheme for
Re-configurable Wireless Network
Jae-Pil Yoo,1 Kee-cheon Kim,1 and SunYoung Han1
School of Computer Science & Engineering. Konkuk University, Seoul, Korea,
+82-2-450-3518

Abstract. ZRP (Zone Routing Protocol), is especially considered to be
suitable for moves of dynamic nodes and scalability of RWN. In configuring the ZRP zone, if we remove redundant function of a node, we can
get performance improvement in routing. This improved performance of
routing is usually from configuring a ZRP zone in which a node doest not
have functioning zone head, relaying (internal) node, and peripheral node
simultaneously. In such cases, internal routing information size based on
link state can be significantly reduced. Hop count is also reduced when
routing is reduced and routing loop prevention steps are taken. In this
paper1 we introduce a zone setup scheme based on ZRP in which a node
does not have overlapping function as head and relay, and border. Also
we introduce a routing scheme for proposed new zone setup scheme.

1

Introduction

RWN (Re-configurable Wireless network) is a scalable network in which a number of nodes can moves around dynamically. A node itself has a sending or
receiving wireless interface and with these interfaces nodes can communication
each other. When they communicate each other, each node needs to relay some
traffic for others without relying on fixed transmission infrastructure. We assume
that almost all the nodes in RWN have limited wireless transmission radius and
power supply.
Routing protocol that reflects features mentioned above is classified into two
types: proactive scheme and reactive scheme. Proactive is a scheme that all the
nodes constantly and periodically exchange network path information prior to
sending packets such as OSPF [1]. On the other hand, reactive scheme sends
path setup signal only when it is needed. It is also called ‘on-demand’ scheme
[2][3]. But it needs packet buffering. Since all the nodes using proactive scheme
already know their destination path information before they send data traffic,
they are able to send data traffic without delay or buffering. In spite of its merits,
the use of proactive scheme heavily depends on the number of nodes in RWN.
Therefore, it has a scalability problem. In order to overcome this problem, various
clustering (grouping) scheme were introduced [4][5][6][7][8]. Clustering scheme is
1

This work was supported by grant No. R01-2001-000-00349-0(2002) from the Basic
Re-search Program of the Korea Science Engineering Foundation.

P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2658, pp. 917−924, 2003.
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

918

J.-P. Yoo, K.-c. Kim, and S. Han

to grouping local nodes into a cluster and then separates inter-cluster routing
information and intra-cluster routing information for routing efficiency. One of
above scheme is ZRP, ZRP uses hybrid scheme; proactive method for intra-zone
routing such as link-state and on-demand based reactive method for inter-zone
routing for dynamic RWN

2

ZRP and Independent Zone Setup Scheme for RWN

ZRP is a hybrid of reactive and proactive scheme [9][10]. A zone is established
as setting the zone center node as the central point of zone and the zone center
node has n-hop radius within the zone, in which nodes make maximum n-hop
path. Intra-zone routing protocol such as IARP monitors intra-zone routing information and keeps routing table constantly. Inter-zone routing protocol such as
IERP finds paths using so-called border-casting. If the zone center node named
zone head needs to send some packets to the destination, it sends query packets
to its peripheral nodes using border-casting, which groups the same zone. At
the same time, one of peripheral nodes that receives query packet also functions
as a center node of a certain zone. This node checks whether the destination
node resides in its zone or not. If the destination exists, that node sends reply
packet to the source node in the reverse order. If not, it repeats border-cast to its
peripheral nodes. When a query packet travels around zone’s center nodes and
peripheral nodes, it adds node’s unique ID to its packet header. Finally, when a
source node receives a reply packet, it sets reverse path of the reply packet as
a routing path. In case of ZRP routing, all the nodes have their zones and also
belong to other zones. Each node has functions of zone head, relaying (internal)
nodes, and peripheral nodes simultaneously. The number of zones matches exactly with the number of nodes. It means that the number of different intra-zone
routing information is set on each zone. Figure 1 Depicts ZRP zone topology.
Solid line circles (cells) are needed to route from the source ‘node S’ to the destination ‘node D’. Dotted line circles (cells) also represent each zone, but it does
not participate in routing from ‘node S’ to ‘node D’
However, if we possibly prevent a zone area from overlapping each other, and
we only permit overlapping peripheral nodes, each node in RWN should function
as a center node, internal node, or peripheral node. A node will function as a
center node, peripheral node or a relay node when setting up a zone. This removal of overlapping zones results in simplification of node function and routing
efficiency and it also reduce the traffic that is used to prevent the routing loop.
In case of the existing ZRP, each node belongs to many different zones depending on n-hop radius. It means that if a node belongs to ten different zones, it
must monitor different ten routing information. But if we keep zones not to be
overlapped, a node does not have to function as a center, internal, and peripheral
node at the same time, all the nodes in a zone only need to keep its internal
routing information.
At this time, the only problem is to configure the initial zone that does
not overlap and keeps the zone without overlaps constantly. If we just adopt

Independent Zone Setup Scheme

919

Fig. 1. Zone Topology of ZRP and an example of its IERP operation

Fig. 2. Newly configured Independent Zone Topology and an example of its IERP
operation

920

J.-P. Yoo, K.-c. Kim, and S. Han

previous research result for setting up a simple cluster or hierarchical cluster
[5][6], it is not easy to reflect zone radius of ZRP. It results in imbalance of each
zone. After all, we need new algorithm for a zone configuration that does not
overlap that named independent zone. We also need a scheme that maintains
overlap-free zones even when the node moves and zones with modified routing
schemes. Figure 2 depicts a newly configured independent zone topology and an
example of its IERP operation. Solid line circles (cells) are needed to route from
the source ‘node S’ to the destination ‘node D’. Dotted line circles (cells) also
mean each zone, but it does not participate in routing from ‘node S’ to ‘node
D’. The details of its operation will be explained in the coming sections of this
paper.

3
3.1

Algorithms for Independent Zone Scheme
Independent Zone Configuration

Algorithm as follows, tries to make a zone without overlaps during the initial
zone configuration allowing as many nodes as possible in a zone radius. Once a
zone is configured, it starts making another zone and shares a peripheral node
that belongs to each zone to make a connection from one to others.
a) Each node finds out the number of the neighbor node contained within suitable signal strength. Such signal strength also becomes an n-hop radius of
independent zone.
b) Each node exchanges neighbor counts with its neighbors. A node that has
maximum neighbor node count becomes the center node of an independent
zone. It informs their neighbors that it is the center node of the zone for
them to join a specific zone. It implicitly tells that all the nodes once joined
to a specific zone are not to respond to a zone configuration request except
for the peripheral nodes. (Center node for zone X: cX, internal node for zone
X: iX, peripheral node for zone X: pX)
c) This step finds candidate zones. A center node for zone X, cX, selects one of
its peripheral nodes, pX, and delegates pX to configure the zone by sending
request message. pX temporarily becomes a center node, cA, of the virtual
zone A. And then, cA (=pX) tries to find out the peripheral node p’A that
has the largest neighbor count in its ‘virtual zone A’. Undoubtedly, neighbor
count means the number of nodes that does not configure the zone at that
time. To find out a node that has the largest number of neighbors, we need
to just apply step a). If the nodes are uniformly distributed, the peripheral
node p’A with the largest neighbor count would be located in a straight
line from cX via pX, that is to say, p’A will be the farthest peripheral node
belongs to the virtual zone A from cX. This scheme makes each zone not to
be overlapped each other and allows a zone to have the maximum number
of nodes as possible. Fig.3 depicts this step.
d) p’A with the largest neighbor count configures a new zone Y. At the same
time, p’A becomes a center node cY of zone Y. Step b) can be applied in

Independent Zone Setup Scheme

921

configuring the zone. At this time, pX naturally belong to the zone Y. so pX
also becomes pXY, it then acts as a peripheral node of zone X and zone Y
at the same time.
e) Repeat step c) and d) to extend the zone coverage. If a node heard requesting
messages to configure a zone that already belongs to a certain zone, it just
discards the requesting message.
f) During the step 1 through 5, if some nodes could not configure a zone for
the critical time value, they just make zones with them. Also, step b) can be
applied in configuring the zones. However, a configured zone needs to have
at least on minimum peripheral node sharing with other zones to constitute
a routing path.

Fig. 3. Finding next candidate zone

3.2

Independent Zone Maintenance

a) Movement of a node within a zone does not affect the external routings. It
only affects the internal routing information. So it easily fixes up the internal
routing information changes
b) If a peripheral node of a zone moves to another location, and if the peripheral
node just breaks routing path between two zones, one of the center node of
two zones needs to strengthen the signal power to find out the substitute
peripheral node to connect the two broken zones.
c) If the center node of a zone moves to another location, and if the nodes
within the zone cannot communicate each other, the zone should be divided
into two zones to restore the connection. Some time later, if some nodes
reach a location that connects the split zones into one, they can be merged.

922

J.-P. Yoo, K.-c. Kim, and S. Han

3.3

Independent Zone Routing

A source node s of a zone X, sX, needs to follow the following steps to find a
routable path to the destination node d of zone Z, dZ.
a) sX tries to find out dZ in its routing table belongs to zone X. if dZ is found
in the internal routing table of sX, sX can send packets to dZ directly .
b) If sX could not find dZ, sX border-casts query message to all the peripheral
nodes pX in the zone X.
c) One of the peripheral node pX in zone X may also belongs to other zones
and also has many routing tables depends on the number of zones it belongs
to. So, pX that receives a query message tries to find out the destination
node dZ in its routing table except for the zone from which query message
arrived.
d) If dZ is not found in each routing table on the peripheral node, pX bordercasts the query message to the rest of the peripheral nodes except for the
zone from which query message came.
e) Repeats c), d) until source node sX finds the destination node dZ.

4

Performance Evaluation

The results of our simulation are presented in the following graphs. We use
the assumption that a network of 200 nodes moves in an area of 1000x1000m
Squares. In this model every node can select a random location and moves
there at a uniformly chosen speed of between 0 and 1m/s. We ignored bordercasting delay and IARP retrieving delay setting as 0ms respectively. A node
can send query packets by maximum of ten times in one second.

Fig. 4. Traffic per Route Query after initial setup

Independent Zone Setup Scheme

923

Figure 4 illustrates the transmitted packets of basic ZRP and the proposed
scheme supporting the independent zone with IERP operation. The number
of transmitted packets depends on the zone radius. But, in most cases, the
proposed scheme shows less IERP operation packets in a network. IERP
Operation is mostly depends on the number of zones. So it is natural that the
proposed scheme is more efficient than the basic ZRP, because the proposed
scheme has by far less number of zones than that of the basic ZRP. Besides,
the proposed scheme just needs nearly half the number of zones than the
basic ZRP with IERP operation.

Fig. 5. Control Traffic variation due to mobile

Figure 5 illustrates the transmitted packets of basic ZRP and the proposed
scheme supporting the independent zone with re-configuration due to the
movement of a node. Basic ZRP shows when a zone radius grows larger,
much more control traffic flows on the network. In case of the proposed
scheme, when its zone radius is small, it uses much traffic to re-configure
the zone than the basic ZRP. However, as the zone radius grows larger, it
uses less traffic to re-configure the zone in comparison with the basic ZRP.
We expect that intra-zone movement and inter-zone movement ratio causes
this result. With the smaller zone radius, almost all the movement of node
are considered to be the inter-zone movement. So it needs to re-configure the
zone frequently. But the larger zone radius means more inter-zone movement.
So it will have less chance to re-configure the zones.

5

Conclusion

In this paper, we proposed a new independent zone configuration scheme
for ZRP in which a node does not have multiple functions as head, internal,

924

J.-P. Yoo, K.-c. Kim, and S. Han

and peripheral node. We also introduced a modified routing scheme for the
newly established zone scheme. This scheme tries to make a zone without
overlaps during the initial zone configuration and allows as many nodes as
possible in a zone radius. This new independent zone configuration scheme
has the following advantages as shown in the performance evaluation. Internal routing information size based on the link state can be significantly
reduced. A hop count is reduced and the routing loop prevention steps are
possible with less cost. Out simulation results tells us that our independent
zone scheme is more suitable for less dynamic large RWN.
Zone re-configuration algorithm of the proposed scheme is more complex
than ZRP since It needs to keep the zone not to be overlapped all the time.
This produces negative performance especially for dynamically moving node
in narrow radius zone. Since the performance of RWN is affected by such
parameters as node movement and zone radius, as a future research, we will
research on the dynamically adaptive RWN to such parameters to enhance
the performance.

References
1. J. Moy., OSPF version 2. RFC 2178, Internet Engineering Task Force, July
1997.
2. C.E. Perkins and E.M. Royer., Ad-Hoc On-Demand Distance Vector Routing.
In Proceedings of the Second Annual IEEE Workshop on Wireless and Mobile
Computing Systems and Applications, February 1999.
3. J.J.Garcia-Luna-Aceves and M.Spohn, Source-Tree Routing in Wireless Networks, In Proc, IEEE ICNP 99, th
7 Intl, Conf. On Network Protocols, Toronto,
Canada, Oct 1999.
4. D.J. Baker and A. Ephremides., A Distributed Algorithm for Organizing Mobile
Radio Telecommunication Networks. In Proceedings of the Second International
Conference on Distributed Computer Systems, April 1981.
5. C.-C. Chiang., Routing in Clustered Multi-hop, Mobile Wireless Networks.In
Proceeding of ICOIN Nobemver,1996.
6. M. Gerla and J.T.-C. Tsai, Multi-cluster, Mobile, Multimedia Radio Network,
Wireless Networks, October 1995.
7. R. Krishnan, R. Ramanathan, and M. Steenstrup., Optimization Algorithms
for Large Self-Structuring Networks. In Proceedings of IEEE INFOCOM ’99,
March 1999.
8. J. Zavgren., NTDR Mobility Management Protocols and Procedures. In Proceedings of the IEEE Military Communications Conference, November 1997.
9. Z.J. Hass and M.R. Pearlman., The Performance of Query Control Schemes for
the Zone Routing Protocol. In Proceedings of SIGCOMM ’98, September 1998.
10. M.R. Pearlman and Z.J. Haas., Determining the Optimal Configuration of the
Zone Routing Protocol. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas of Communications,
August 1999.

