Design and Distributed Computer Simulation of
Thin p+ –i–n+ Avalanche Photodiodes Using
Monte Carlo Model
Mikhail Yakutovich
Belarussian State University

Abstract. The output current of an avalanche photodiodes (APD’s)
ﬂuctuates in the absence of light as well as in its presence. The noise in
APD’s current arises from three sources: randomness in the number and
in the positions at which dark carrier pairs are generated, randomness
in the photon arrival number, and randomness in the carrier multiplication process. A Monte Carlo model has been used to estimate the excess
noise factor in thin p+ –i–n+ GaAs avalanche photodiodes. As this approach is computation intensive, simple parallel algorithm considering
heterogeneous cluster based on MPICH was designed and implemented.
Very good performance gain was achieved. It was found that APD model provides very good ﬁts to the measured gain and noise and as such
provides an accurate picture of the device operation. In this way, various
device structures can be analyzed prior to their experimental realization.
Through ”computer experiments” like this outlined here, the eﬀect of various geometries and material compositions on device performance can
be assessed and optimal designs achieved.

1

Introduction

The avalanche photodiode (APD) is used in optical communications systems
to convert a light signal into an electrical signal. The APD has internal gain,
multiplying the signal current by the process of impact ionization in which a
very energetic electron or hole creates a secondary electron-hole pair. A newly
generated carrier must travel some distance (the dead space) in order to gain
suﬃcient energy from the electric ﬁeld to initiate an ionization event. The multiplication process introduces noise as a result of randomness in the ionization path
length. The consequent variability in the generation of secondary carriers results
in ﬂuctuations in the total number of carriers produced per initial photocarrier,
or multiplication. This noise component was ﬁrst quantiﬁed by McIntyre [1,2]
who found the following expression for the mean square noise current per unit
bandwidth:
i2 = 2qIp M 2 F ( M )
(1)
where q is the electronic charge, Ip is the primary photo-current, M is the
average current multiplication, and F ( M ) is the excess noise factor given by
F ( M ) = k M + (2 − 1/ M )(1 − k)
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3039, pp. 515–522, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

(2)

516

M. Yakutovich

k is the ratio of the electron ionization coeﬃcient α and the hole ionization coeﬃcient β. If the primary photocarrier is a hole then k = α/β and if it is an
electron then k = β/α. However, recent experimental measurements on GaAs
APD’s [3,4,5,6] have shown a signiﬁcant reduction in excess noise factor as iregion thickness decreases below one micron. A carrier starting with near zero
energy, relative to the band edge, will have an almost zero chance of having an
ionizing collision until it has gained suﬃcient energy from the electric ﬁeld to attain the necessary energy to permit impact ionization [7,8]. Numerous analytical
and numerical techniques have been proposed to address the nonlocal nature of
impact ionization. Attempts to predict the ionization coeﬃcients using Monte
Carlo [9] and analytical techniques [10] have shown that, on average, carriers
must travel a distance over which the potential drop is equivalent to 1.5 − 2 times the ionization threshold energy before the probability of ionization, of a
carrier which has not yet had an ionizing collision, rises to a steady-state, or
”equilibrium,” level.
Several techniques can potentially model the avalanche process while accounting for deadspace eﬀects. These calculations would ideally be carried out
using a Monte Carlo model with a full band structure (FBMC) calculated by
the pseudopotential method, which provides the most realistic description of the
transport. In recent years, full-band calculations have considerably advanced the
understanding of impact ionization by showing that most carriers initiate events
from higher lying bands producing secondary carriers with signiﬁcant energy.
The conventional Keldysh formula for the ionization rate, Rii , which assumes
a quadratic energy dependence, has also been shown to overestimate the ionization probability [11,12,13,14]. Stobbe [13] noted that diﬀerent band structure
assumptions can give diﬀerent forms of the ionization rate which means that the
accuracy of FBMC models for device simulations is questionable.
The lucky-drift (LD) model of Ridley [15,16] greatly simpliﬁes the transport
by using artiﬁcial trajectories based on the energy relaxation length which allows
an analytic expression to be derived for the ionization coeﬃcient. The complicated transport details are subsumed into a few material parameters which allows
experimental results to be readily ﬁtted and reveal a chemical trend. However,
it was demonstrated in [17] that the use of energy relaxation path lengths to
quantify phonon scattering in LD theory imposes a lower spatial limit of 0.1µm.
Furthermore, the model gives the incorrect spatial ionization probability which
might lead to errors when calculating the excess noise factor associated with the
avalanche process.
We used a simple Monte Carlo model (SMC) [18] for simulating thin APD’s.
It is an accurate, eﬃcient and self-contained model for the avalanche process
which can be used to predict both the multiplication and excess noise characteristics of all practical device geometries. Furthermore, this model allows experimental data to be ﬁtted and interpreted with few parameters in a similar way
to the LD model.
Since any Monte Carlo calculations are time consuming, which is especially
restrictive when many ionization events need to be simulated to give reliable

Design and Distributed Computer Simulation

517

statistics for the avalanche process, in this paper we present simple distribution
algorithm. It takes into account the heterogeneous of cluster and allows achieving signiﬁcant gain performance depending on contribution of any machine,
independent of their relative speed.
Good results are shown between the calculated and measured multiplication
and excess noise results from [3]. The simulation was tested on diﬀerent heterogeneous clusters consisting of considerably diﬀerent machines. Addition of
relative ”slower” machine leaded to achievement of gain, not deceleration. Our
model can be used for simulation of complicated models utilizing relatively cheap
clusters.

2

The Monte Carlo Model (MC)

We used a simple Monte Carlo model (SMC) [18] for simulating thin APD’s.
SMC uses single eﬀective parabolic valleys and accurately accounts for deadspace
eﬀects. An eﬀective parabolic valley is used for both electrons and holes which
gives an energy independent mean-free path when phonon scattering is assumed
to be solely by the deformation potential, which dominates at high electric ﬁelds.
To calculate the avalanche process in devices, the electric ﬁeld proﬁles are
generated in the depletion approximation assuming a built in voltage of 1.2V .
The values of the i-region thickness, w, the cladding doping, p+ and n+ , and the
unintentional p-type doping in the i-region, p− were extracted from [6].

3

Estimation of Multiplication and Excess Noise Factor

The excess noise factor F is deﬁned as the normalized second moment of the
multiplication random variable M , when a single photocarrier initiates the multiplication. Thus,
F = M2 / M 2
(3)
where M is the mean multiplication and M 2 is the mean square multiplication.
The calculation uses an iterative scheme. The photo-generated electrons are
ﬁrst simulated yielding secondary electron and holes distributions. The secondary electrons are simply added to the electron simulation, and the calculation
continues until all of the electrons are collected. The secondary hole distribution
is then simulated based on the spatial of each particle’s birth obtained from the
initial electron simulation. Secondary holes arising from hole-initiated ionization
eﬀects are added to the hole simulation, and again, the calculation continues
until all of the holes are collected. The electron simulation is then rerun with
the secondary electrons. The total number of ionization events, Nt is recorded
when all the carriers have left the multiplication region; the multiplication for
that trial is then given by M = Nt + 1 . By repeating the procedure for many
trials, M , and M 2 and F can be calculated. The number of trials is extended
until successive values of diﬀer by less than 0.0001. This usually requires at least
1000 trials for M = 2 and 10000 − 50000 trials for M larger than eight.

518

4

M. Yakutovich

The Parallel MC Algorithm

Monte Carlo simulations of carrier transport in semiconductors are based on
following the time evolution of an ensemble of particles through the material in
both real and momentum space. The motion of each particle in the ensemble
has to be simulated in turn, for the full duration of the simulation. It is assumed
that these particles are eﬀectively independent which makes the MC simulation
well suited to parallel implementations to reduce computation time. The ﬂow
chart of a typical MC device simulation is shown in Fig. 1.
The parallel MC algorithm is based on a master-slave model [20]. The ensemble of particles is divided into subensembles, each of which is dedicated to
a separate processor (slave). The slaves are solely responsible for simulating the
particles’ dynamics under the inﬂuence of the internal ﬁeld distribution. The
master processor updates the ﬁeld distribution consistently with the port conditions enforced by the external circuitry. The master also serves as user interface.
The MC algorithm will now be discussed with the aid of the ﬂow chart (Fig. 2):

Fig. 1. Flow chart for a typical Monte
Carlo device simulation algorithm

Fig. 2. Flow chart for a parallel MC
device simulation algorithm

1. The master deﬁnes the physical device simulation problem and inputs the
material and run parameters needed for the simulation. It also tabulates the
various scattering rates as a function of particle energy.

Design and Distributed Computer Simulation

519

2. The master spawns the slave executable code on N diﬀerent slaves and sends
the material parameters and tabulated scattering rates to each slave.
3. Each slave proceeds its own part until desired accuracy is attained.
To attain optimal eﬃciency, the computational load has to be shared among
the processors in relation to their respective processing power. For a network of
equally fast slave processors this implies that the number of particles in each
subensemble must be kept equal throughout the simulation.
The main goal of dynamic load sharing is to equalize time τi of calculation
on each slave machine, so the maximum theoretical performance gain will be
achieved. Test computation performs on each machine before each simulation.
Depending on test time τii , the data is divided inversely proportional to τii . So
we can expand proposed algorithm:
1. The master deﬁnes the physical device simulation problem and inputs the
material and run parameters needed for the simulation. It also tabulates the
various scattering rates as a function of particle energy.
2. The master spawns the slave test executable code on N diﬀerent slaves.
3. Each slave performs test code and sends execution time to master.
4. The master divides data between slaves inversely proportional to τii and
spawns the slave executable code on N diﬀerent slaves and sends the material
parameters and tabulated scattering rates to each slave.
5. Each slave proceeds its own part until desired accuracy is attained.

5

Results

The accuracy of the proposed parallel MC algorithm has been tested by comparing the results to those obtained by Plimmer [18]. The ﬁt to the range of
measured data for electrons and for holes is shown to be very good for Me in
Fig. 3 and for Mh in Fig. 4. In Fig. 5, the SMC-calculated excess noise factors are
compared with the measured values from [3] for the range of p+ –i–n+ structures
with for the case of electron injection. This plot shows the calculated values to be
in agreement with the measured results from [3] with the structure giving values
close to those which would be predicted using the noise theory of McIntyre [1].
There is greater experimental uncertainties in measuring noise characteristics
compared to the multiplication, but the MC predicts results close to experiment
from all the diodes down to 0.1µm as shown on the plot.
The eﬃciency of the parallel SMC-algorithm have been quantiﬁed as the
gain in computational speed achieved by employing multiple slaves relative to
a master with single slave conﬁguration and with diﬀerent conﬁgurations. The
modelling was executed on diﬀerent homogeneous and heterogeneous clusters.
The curves of the obtained speed-up as a function of the number of slaves are
given in Fig. 6. In case of homogeneous cluster speed-up is close to ideal as our
problem is perfectly suitable for parallelization.
Results of modelling in heterogeneous cluster are shown in Fig. 6 and Fig. 7.
Every newly subsequent added computer had relatively lesser computing power.

520

M. Yakutovich

The overall computing power of heterogeneous cluster was smaller then that
of homogeneous cluster, hence, in general the overall speed-up in heterogeneous
cluster reduced (Fig. 6). As it is shown in Fig. 7, our developed algorithm allowed
eﬃciently distribute data between computers in a cluster, so the average idling
time was greatly decreased. Addition of relative ”slower” machine leaded to
achievement of gain in any case. It is evident from the speed-up curves in Fig. 6
and Fig. 7 that the network communication plays a minor role in the eﬃciency
of the algorithm, implying that a considerable improvement in computational
speed is possible with the use of more powerful slave processors.

Fig. 3. Electron multiplication from MC
calculations (•) compared against measured values (—) from pin’s whose nominal i-region thicknesses are labelled on the
plot

Fig. 4. Hole multiplication from MC calculations (•) compared against measured
values (—) from pin’s whose nominal iregion thicknesses are labelled on the plot

Fig. 5. SMC calculated excess noise, F , for electron injection from pin’s with nominally
w = 0.5µm(•), 0.2µm( ), 0.1µm(∇) and 0.05µm(♦) along with the measured results
(—)

Design and Distributed Computer Simulation

6

521

Conclusion

An eﬃcient parallel implementation of the Monte Carlo particle simulation technique on a network of personal computers has been introduced. The parallel
implementation have been successfully applied to the MC simulation of multiplication noise in GaAs p+ –i–n+ avalanche photodiodes. These predict a decrease
in excess noise factor as the multiplication length decreases from 1.0 to 0.05µm
for both electron and hole injected multiplication. It was demonstrated that the
excess noise factor depends strongly on the ionization path length distribution
function.
Distributed computer simulation with dynamic load balancing greatly reduces computational time. Modelling was executed on diﬀerent homogeneous and
heterogeneous clusters. Addition of relative ”slower” machine in heterogeneous
cluster leaded to achievement of gain, not deceleration. Such algorithm can be
widely used in diﬀerent clusters.
Through ”computer experiments” like this outlined here, the eﬀect of various
geometries and material compositions on device performance can be assessed and
optimal designs achieved.

Fig. 6. The obtained speed-up curves for
the MC-parallel algorithm in homogeneous (•) and heterogeneous (♦) clusters
along with the ideal (—) speed-up curve

Fig. 7. Computational time for each processor working separately and in heterogeneous cluster

References
1. R. J. McIntyre, ”Multiplication noise in uniform avalanche diodes,” IEEE Trans.
Electron Devices, vol. ED-13, Jan. 1966.
2. R. J. McIntyre, ”The distribution of gains in uniformly multiplying photodiodes:
Theory,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. ED-19, pp.703-713, 1972.

522

M. Yakutovich

3. K. F. Li, D. S. Ong, J. P. R. David, G. J. Rees, R. C. Tozer, P. N. Robson, and
R. Grey, ”Avalanche multiplication noise characteristics in thin GaAs p+ –i–n+
diodes,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 45, pp. 2102-2107, Oct. 1998.
4. C. Hu, K. A. Anselm, B. G. Streetman, and J. C. Campbell, ”Noise characteristics
of thin multiplication region GaAs avalanche photodiodes,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol.
69, pp. 3734-3736, 1996.
5. K. F. Li, D. S. Ong, J. P. R. David, P. N. Robson, R. C. Tozer, G. J. Rees, and
R. Grey, ”Low excess noise characteristics in thin avalanche region GaAs diodes,”
Electron. Lett., vol. 34, pp. 125-126, 1998.
6. S. A. Plimmer, J. P. R. David, D. C. Herbert, T.-W. Lee, G. J. Rees, P. A. Houston,
R. Grey, P. N. Robson, A. W. Higgs, and D. R. Wight, ”Investigation of impact
ionization in thin GaAs diodes,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 43, pp. 10661072, July 1996.
7. Y. Okuto and C. R. Crowell, ”Energy-conservation considerations in the characterization of impact ionization in semiconductors,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 6, pp. 30763081, 1972.
8. Y. Okuto and C. R. Crowell, ”Ionization coeﬃcients in semiconductors: A nonlocal
property,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 10, pp. 4284-4296, 1974.
9. K. F. Brennan, ”Calculated electron and hole spatial ionization proﬁles in bulk
GaAs and superlattice avalanche photodiodes,” IEEE J. Quantum Electron., vol.
24, pp. 2001-2006, 1988.
10. A. Spinelli, A. Pacelli, and A. L. Lacaita, ”Dead space approximation for impact
ionization in silicon,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 69, no. 24, pp. 3707-3709, 1996.
11. J. Bude and K. Hess, ”Thresholds of impact ionization in semiconductors,” J. Appl.
Phys., vol. 72, pp. 3554-3561, 1992.
12. N. Sano, T. Aoki, and A. Yoshii, ”Soft and hard thresholds in Si and GaAs,” Appl.
Phys. Lett., vol. 55, pp. 1418-1420, 1989.
13. M. Stobbe, R. Redmer, and W. Schattke, ”Impact ionization rate in GaAs,” Phys.
Rev. B, vol. 49, pp. 4494-4497, 1994.
14. H. K. Jung, K. Taniguchi, and C. Hamaguchi, ”Impact ionization model for full
band Monte Carlo simulation in GaAs,” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 59, pp. 2473-2480,
1996.
15. B. K. Ridley, ”Lucky-drift mechanism for impact ionization in semiconductors,” J.
Phys. C: Solid State Phys., vol. 16, pp. 3373-3388, 1983.
16. B. K. Ridley, ”A model for impact ionization in wide-gap semiconductors,” J. Phys.
C: Solid State Phys., vol. 16, pp. 4733-4751, 1983.
17. S. A. Plimmer, J. P. R. David, and G. M. Dunn, ”Spatial limitations to the application of the Lucky-drift theory of impact ionization,” IEEE Trans. Electron
Devices, vol. 44, pp. 659-663, Apr. 1997.
18. S. A. Plimmer, J. P. R. David, D. S. Ong, K. F. Li, ”A Simple Model for Avalanche Multiplication Including Deadspace Eﬀects,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices,
vol. 46, April 1999.
19. L. V. Keldysh, ”Kinetic theory of impact ionization in semiconductors,” Sov. Phys.JETP, vol. 10, pp. 509-518, 1960.
20. Robert R. van Zyl, Willem J. Perold, Hans Grobler ”A Parallel Implementation of
the Monte Carlo Particle Simulation Technique on a Network of Personal Computers”

