The Notion of Community in United States
Computational Science Education Initiatives
Mary E. Searcy and Jill T. Richie
Appalachian State University, Department of Mathematical Sciences
Boone, NC 28608

Abstract. The computational science education community in the United States
can be perceived at a variety of levels: a community of stakeholders, educators,
colleagues, or learners. Each level is illustrated by examples and their roles are
discussed.

1 Introduction
In the last decade, addressing international problems such as communicating SARS
medical information [1] and researching microgravity combustion for international
space station fire prevention [2] has required computational methods. Rapid
technological growth has made it possible to meet larger challenges and resolve longunanswered questions. As a consequence, there has been an increased pressure on
United Stated academic institutions to prepare students for such a world [3]. As the
number of computational science education initiatives increases, the notion of
community – a social group sharing common characteristics or interests and perceived
or perceiving itself as distinct in some respect from the larger society within which it
exists [4], has become important to their development and implementation. This
article explores the United States computational science education community and
ways to strengthen it in the future.

2 A Community of Stakeholders
The United States Department of Energy’s (DOE) Office of Science [5] suggested the
following steps to help equip scientists for upcoming computational challenges:
establish partnerships with computer vendors, strengthen existing high-end computing
capability and networking, invest in advanced architecture, and collaborate with
federal agencies and the academic community to find better ways to use existing and
new capabilities. They advocate establishing connections among key computational
science stakeholders, those individuals or agencies, with direct interest, involvement
and/or investment in computational science endeavors. For example, the DOE’s
Scientific Discovery through Advanced Computing (SciDAC) funded projects
(http://www.osti.gov/scidac/index.html) and collaborations with the United States
national laboratories (http://www.scied.science.doe.gov/scied/sci_ed.htm) help
support innovative partnerships between academia and other stakeholders. Also, the
National Lambdarail (NLR) [6], which aims to provide a network infrastructure to

M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3037, pp. 726–729, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

The Notion of Community in United States

727

facilitate collaborative research, could possibly be one of the most significant
computational science collaborations impacting education in the future.
There are many efforts to strengthen high-end computing. The Terascale Cluster
project [7] at Virginia Tech has developed one of the fastest and most inexpensive
supercomputers using currently available off-the-shelf components and working with
industry partners. This effort has made complex projects accessible to local educators
and researchers. For those without connections to super-computing facilities and who
still want to give their students experiences with parallel processing, take an open lab
of Pentium computers and boot up a pre-configured distributed computing
environment with the Bootable Cluster CD (http://www.cs.uni.edu/~gray/bccd/). This
CD, motivated by collaboration between educators and LinuxCare, was created solely
“to facilitate instruction of parallel computing.” [8]

3 A Community of Educators
We now shift our focus to the community of educators. Two major 2003 initiatives
were the SC03 Supercomputing Conference Education Program (http://www.scconference.org/sc2003/education/edu_program.html) and the National Computational
Science Institute (NCSI) (http://www.computationalscience.org/), both evaluated by
the authors. Teams of educators from across the United States were chosen to spend
four days learning about computational science education opportunities and
technologies. The teams came from a variety of backgrounds. More than half were
male (56%); two-thirds were PhD's and 20% were K-12 teachers. Although most
participants had some experience with statistics, linear algebra, differential equations
and numerical analysis, only 25% said they had advanced knowledge of calculus.
They also had a variety of science knowledge in biology, chemistry, physics and
computer science; 10% to 15% rated themselves as advanced in one or more of these
fields. Approximately 75% said that they already incorporated modeling in their
teaching, though that activity was a less common teaching strategy than traditional
lecture (96%) or hands-on activities (97%).
Participants entered into the program with personal definitions of computational
science that were as varied as their backgrounds. Here are a few quotes taken from
participants’ pre-survey in response to the question, “What does computational
science mean to you?”
• The science of computation using sequential and parallel programming, for
solving engineering and science problems
• Numbers brought together to create meaning.
• Access to ideas, tools, data, and people.
• AI, representational theory, complex systems applications and theory,
automated feedback to learners, adaptive testing, responsive dissemination of
online resources, …
• It means using computers and other forms of technology to model or simulate
natural systems. The model may be numeric data and equations based on the
data or a visual representation using the data to generate graphics.
• problem solving
• At this point, nothing.

728

M.E. Searcy and J.T. Richie

Yasar and Landau [3] state that three elements have developed at the heart of defining
computational science: a collection of computational tools, a collection of
computational methods, and a problem-solving mindset that uses one discipline’s
information to solve another discipline’s problems. Some elements can be seen in the
definitions above; but there is a distinct lack of coherence among responses.
Community, at this level, helps educate educators by providing an arena for exposure
to new ideas and personal construct development.
The other current major program in the United States, NCSI, targets primarily
university and college faculty. They address the community notion by partnering with
universities, supercomputing facilities, non-profit foundations, and professional
organizations. NCSI holds weeklong computational science education workshops
where faculty are introduced to two major interpretations of computational science
education [9]: 1) (computational science) education which emphasizes the modeling
and visualization concepts, tools, and applications and how they should be used and
2) computational (science education) where the emphasis is on using visualization and
modeling concepts, tools and applications to help students understand science ideas.
In the summer of 2003, over 200 faculty were involved in workshops across the
United States. NCSI participants were largely male (64%) and white (62%); 82%
were PhD's; 13% were from community colleges; 82% were from a college or
university. About 95% reported that a primary reason for attending a NCSI workshop
was because they were interested in using modeling and visualization in instruction.
About 80% cited the desire to network with other instructors, and 73% said that they
believed attendance could help facilitate changes in their home departments.
Participants were encouraged to collaborate and required to produce an educational
product by the week’s end. After the workshops ended, participants’ short-term goals
included learning more about computational science and exploring new technologies,
demonstrating existing models in their courses, redesigning laboratory experiences,
setting up clusters, and designing new courses or new degree programs.

4 A Community of Colleagues
There is a critical level of community missing at many institutions, a community of
colleagues on a given campus who are interested in using computational science
activities in their classrooms. Support from other local faculty can be a powerful
resource for instructors. At a 2003 NCSI workshop, Tennessee community college
faculty from three different disciplines developed a genetics model to be used in
biology courses. Another institution, with six campuses outside of Atlanta, Georgia,
will begin an institution-wide computational science education initiative in 2004.
Their Center for Learning and Teaching (CLT) knows of “pockets” of faculty already
involved in such activities and would like to see the development of a support
network for the faculty that can be sustained over time.

5 Future Directions
This paper has shown there is substantial interest in computational science education;
yet, the community at most levels is still somewhat fragmented. There are two primary

The Notion of Community in United States

729

suggestions the authors offer for community development. Although the notion of
computational science education community can be perceived at different levels, the
community that truly motivates this discussion is the community of learners. As
computational science opens doors to a deeper, more dynamic, understanding of our
world for researchers and industry, computational science education is opening doors
to a deeper, more dynamic, understanding of course content and its applications to our
world for both faculty and students. The community of learners is essential to our
progress as educators and must remain the focus in this rapidly changing
environment. Along with keeping this critical focus, the authors also advocate an
annual computational science education conference. Conferences such as ICCS 2004
that have an education component are beneficial, particularly in bringing together
stakeholders. However, a focused conference might provide a catalyst for a more
cohesive notion of community in the future.

References
1. Gannis, M. (June 2003). SARS grid aids Taiwan. Access Online. Retrieved February 17,
2004 from http://access.ncsa.uiuc.edu/Stories/SARS/
2. NASA Center for Computational Science. (2002). NCCS highlights FY 2000: Enabling
NASA earth and space sciences. Retrieved February 17, 2004 from
http://sdcd.gsfc.nasa.gov/SCB/Highlights/FY2000/microgravity.10.html
3. Yasar, O. & Landau, R. (2003). Elements of computational science and engineering
education, SIAM Review, 45(4), 787-805.
4. Webster’s Encyclopedic Unabridged Dictionary of the English Language. (1989). New
York, New York: Portland House.
5. U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science. (2002). The challenge and promise of
scientific computing. Retrieved February 17, 2004 from
http://www.science.doe.gov/Sub/Occasional_Papers/Occasional_Papers.htm
6. The National Lambdarail, (2003). Retrieved February 17, 2004 from
http://www.nationallambdarail.org/
7. Terascale cluster press release – computing.vt.edu. (2003). Retrieved February 17, 2004
from http://computing.vt.edu/research_computing/terascale/pressrelease.html
8. Gray, P. (November, 2003), Implementing computational science in the [computer science]
classroom. Paper presented at the SC2003 Education Program, Phoenix, AZ.
9. Panoff, R. (July 2003). Modeling as an interactive learning environment: (Beyond
PowerPoint-lessness). Paper presented at a National Computational Science Institute
Workshop, Champaign, IL.

