An Interactive User Interface for Text Display
Hyungsuk Ji and Hyunseung Choo
School of Information and Communication Engineering,
Sungkyunkwan University, Korea
jihyungsuk@skku.edu,choo@ece.skku.ac.kr

Abstract. Studies on the eﬀect of text width on readability have encouraged the use of ﬁxed text-width web/electronic text design. The
drawback of this type of design is the loss of users’ interactivity with
regard to text modiﬁcation. In this paper, we investigate the web design
of the world’s top 100 websites and present an alternative interactive
user interface for text display.
Keywords: Readability, Web design, line length, text presentation.

1

Introduction

A great number of texts are read nowadays on computer screens. With the
increase in the amount of web-based texts, it is becoming increasingly important
to develop a convenient user interface that can enhance the eﬃciency and reduce
the fatigue when reading via the web [1]. Readability, among others, is one of the
most important factors that aﬀect eﬃciency and work fatigue, and it is closely
related to the text width or line length of the text.
The research on readability found that the largest acceptable text width for
printed materials is around 90mm, with some varying results. With regard to the
computer screen environment, the average text width preferred by the subjects
on the computer screen was found to be around 100mm [2,3]. An experiment
measuring the number of characters showed similar results of 55 characters per
line (cpl) [2] and 55-70 cpl [3]. Based on these studies, web designs with a speciﬁc
ﬁxed text width were recommended [3,4]. Inﬂuenced by these kinds of studies,
a myriad of web pages are now designed to meet conditions for maximum readability, and the majority of them have ﬁxed text width format.
While general consensus was found with regard to the best readability and
line length in the above experiments, there have always been some inconsistent
results. First, the similar readability was found irrespective of the line length
as far as the line length does not exceed a certain limit [2]. Second, the optimum line length that corresponds to optimum readability diﬀered depending on
researchers and experiments [2,3].
In this study, we propose an alternative user interface that restores the interactive text-width-selecting feature without going back to the ﬁrst generation
web document style.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part II, LNCS 4488, pp. 1226–1229, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

An Interactive User Interface for Text Display

2

1227

Web Design on Text Display

The following web design history is a classiﬁcation of the layout, or the controllability of the text width in web pages. These are based on the period where
each characteristic feature was used eﬀectively, and not at the point where the
feature was ﬁrst introduced.1
First Generation. The ﬁrst generation web design was characterized by its
simplistic layout. The text width was adjustable freely by dragging the borders
of windows with the mouse or by clicking the restore/maximize button.
Second Generation. With the adaptation of ‘table tags’, partial restrictions
were imposed on users’ adjustability of text width.
Third Generation. The frame was introduced: the menu and the main content
were separated. Adjusting the width of the menu and the main contents was
possible and users had the ability to hide menus by minimizing their width.
Fourth Generation. With the practical use of Cascading Style Sheets (CSS),
web pages became more ﬂexible from a designer’s point of view and more rigid
from a user’s point of view. Frames disappeared and it no longer became possible
for users to remove or hide menus.
In the ﬁrst generation, the adjustability of the text width provided web pages
with the most interactive and free text format as far as text width modiﬁcation was concerned. This feature was so typical that even today almost all
word processors call “dynamic text width layout” “web page layout”. However,
inﬂuenced by the studies on readability and line length and by other design requirements, most web pages today have ﬁxed text width and it is impossible for
users to adjust the text width.
To quantify these trends, we investigated the world’s top 100 websites as
chosen by Alexa. The results showed that only 11 web pages have a dynamic
text width format and about 90% of world’s top 100 websites use ﬁxed text width
web pages.2 Considering the still permitted personalizable options such as font
style, font size, color and global window size of web pages, it is quite surprising
that the most popular web designs do not allow the slightest ﬂexibility with
respect to the text width. This rigidity of web page design has resulted in losing
one of the most fundamental web pages’ features and reducing user’s active
interaction ability with the computer.

3

Proposed Interface

For 11 websites where dynamic text width modiﬁcation is allowed, resizing global
window’s (web browser’s outer window’s) width is required to get the desired
1

2

CSS was ﬁrst proposed in November 1995, which was virtually in the same period
as the previous two (Table was ﬁrst proposed in March 1995 and Frame September
1995).
The 11 websites are: *rkut.com *ikipedia.org *mazon *otolog.com *mdb.com *apidshare.de *andex.ru *c2.com *ourceforge.net *ama.ru *igg.com (The ﬁrst letter is
marked out for each item.).

1228

H. Ji and H. Choo

Fig. 1. The text width can be adjusted easily with a single mouse click

text width. This results in two diﬃculties. First, in narrowing global windows
width, users lose access to the far right menus/tabs, unless the menus/tabs are
detached from the web browser. Second, after narrowing text width, restoration
is necessary to view other web pages. Since web page reading involves frequent
changes from one website to another, this alternation is by no means convenient.
Further, some websites have no limit on line length, which obliges users to resize
their browser windows for better reading.
It is still important to allow users to personalize web text width. The results
of line-length related studies show that the optimal line length is not identical for
every user and considerable diﬀerences exist depending on the particular study
group [3,5]. Thus, providing users with interactive text-width modiﬁcation functionality is important in order to provide users with more personalized control
over the text format. In particular, in conducting speciﬁc textual study like analyzing multitext, such an interface would be of beneﬁt. Multitext analysis study
requires both normal reading and comparing two or more adjacent lines, and two
types of text-width are necessary for the fulﬁllment of the task (unlike normal
reading, it is preferable to have a greater line length for line-by-line comparison).
We propose a user interface that ensures users’ interactive control in adjusting
text format and provides a novel scrolling functionality for reading documents.

An Interactive User Interface for Text Display

1229

Special buttons were placed top right of the documents so that users can adjust
their contents’ width by a simple single click with the mouse (Fig. 1). The
button was designed without the use of mouse dragging since the latter requires
non-trivial concentration and attention. We propose (1) two diﬀerent text-width
formats independent of global windows size and (2) a dynamic format, whose
width is dependent on global window size.
The texts in Fig. 1 are parallel verses of the Bible, which were constructed
automatically using the program ‘multitext organizing model’ that we developed
in parallel with this study. In these multitext documents, the verses having the
same verse number are grouped together and the arrow buttons in Fig. 1 allow
users to bring the head of these groups on top of the window, ensuring the
constant positioning of the aligned elements.
Hornbæk and Frøkjær reported that users prefer a ﬁsheye interface, where
unimportant texts are reduced in size, or presented as unreadable, to a linear
interface, where no such distortions are implemented [6]. One drawback of such
a reduced size form is the amount of unimportant text cannot be known. Our
proposed scrolling method can be useful in such a case, since it is possible both to
keep full readable length of unimportant text, and to skip quickly over a portion
of text. An extra functionality was implemented that enables users to select or
remove certain portion of texts or left-side menu (the third and the fourth ﬁgure
in Fig. 1). These features were developed using JavaScript and CSS and can be
readily implemented in existing web documents.
Acknowledgments. This research was supported by the Ministry of Information and Communication, Korea under the ITRC, IITA-2006-(C1090-0603-0046).

References
1. Corry, M.D., Frick, T.W., Hansen, L.: User-centered design and usability testing
of a web site: An illustrative case study. Educational Technology Research and
Development 45(4) (1997) 65–76
2. Dyson, M.C., Haselgrove, M.: The inﬂuence of reading speed and line length on
the eﬀectiveness of reading from screen. International Journal of Human-Computer
Studies 54(4) (2001) 585–612
3. Ling, J., van Schaik, P.: The inﬂuence of font type and line length on visual search
and information retrieval in web pages. International Journal of Human-Computer
Studies 64(5) (2006) 395–404
4. Davidov, A.: Computer screens are not like paper: typography on the web. In
Sassoon, R., ed.: Computers and Typography. Volume 2. Intellect Books, Bristol,
UK. (2002) 21–40
5. Mills, C.B., Weldon, L.J.: Reading text from computer screens. ACM Comput.
Surv. 19(4) (1987) 329–357
6. Hornbæk, K., Frøkjær, E.: Reading patterns and usability in visualizations of electronic documents. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact. 10(2) (2003) 119–149

