Insurable Storage Services: Creating a
Marketplace for Long-Term Document Archival
Rahul Simha1 and K. Gopinath2
1

Department of Computer Science
The George Washington University, Washington, DC 20052, USA
2
Department of Computer Science and Automation
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India
simha@gwu.edu, gopi@csa.iisc.ernet.in

Abstract. Digital storage is a key element not only of computing systems, but is now considered an essential component of the infrastructure of any modern organization. This need has co-evolved with the
technology that has grown rapidly in recent years to provide low-cost
high-capacity storage. At the same time, the storage needs of users have
now become more sophisticated and diverse. Some users require very
long-term preservation; others need high security; and still others ask for
highly-reliable, distributed storage solutions. These needs pose a problem for solution providers in that no single solution seems to meet all
needs. Similarly, users must construct services out of disk systems on
their own. This paper proposes a way to streamline the marketplace
through insurable storage services, a combination of two ideas. The ﬁrst
is to deﬁne diﬀerent categories of storage service; the assumption here
is that a reﬁned categorization will better identify particular user needs.
The second, and more substantive idea, is to treat digital documents as
insurable property. The insurance of storage will provide economic incentives for both producers (storage service providers) and consumers
(individuals, organizations) to jointly create a marketplace that provides
a diversity of diﬀerentially-priced services. For example, insurers can help
assess the durability of storage solutions and provide consumers with a
quantitative valuation (“It’ll cost you $x per GB to ensure that your
documents last 100 years”). Similarly, storage service providers will have
incentives to maintain multiple geographically distributed copies, and to
continually move the copies onto emerging technologies (“You’ll need to
store more copies if you want a higher reliability rating”).

1

Introduction

Digital storage has grown from being a mere “part of a computer” to the complex array of interacting technologies, ﬁle systems, services and service providers
that deﬁnes the world of storage today. This world now has evolved into subspecialties such as materials, solid-state memories, disk-systems, RAID, storage
area networks and storage services, to name a few.
In this paper, we identify some possibilities for future storage services, and
most importantly, focus on a market mechanism by which these services could
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part III, LNCS 3993, pp. 679–686, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

680

R. Simha and K. Gopinath

arise and grow naturally. The lack of such a dynamic marketplace is one of
several key problems identiﬁed in the recent report on digital preservation [10].
In the words of that report, “Creating an economy for long-term preservation
entails providing incentives for organizations to invest in digital archives, even
though some of the beneﬁts of investments made today may not be realized for
decades.”
Our approach to addressing this problem starts with the observation that
most current storage-service paradigms posit two players in the service market:
the user and the Storage Service Provider (SSP). By introducing a third player,
insurers, and by treating digital documents as property, we argue that a natural
marketplace will emerge as the insured and the insurers drive the creation of
new, cost-eﬀective services. This way, investments can be funded today for the
beneﬁts realized later. The purpose of this paper is to provide an overview of
this idea, to identify factors aﬀecting insurance and to raise a few new technical
issues.

2
2.1

Background
System Components

As background, let us outline the various components and players in a storage
service system. Consider a typical desktop user who is busy creating, updating
and deleting ﬁles. This creates a stream of I/O between processor and disk. For
many users, the local disk is the ﬁnal resting place for documents instead of
being merely a local cache of a more stable repository. In today’s computing
paradigm, individual users either perform their own backups or are part of a
networked backup system. In either case, ﬁles are scheduled for backup on a
periodic basis. When the individual user is part of a larger organization, the
organization may contract with a SSP to perform such a backup, or even store
the primary copy on site.
In our paradigm, we identify the following players. First, there are users, either
as individuals or as part of an organization. Each user machine runs software
to feed ﬁles into a pipe intended for storage. That is, the operating system,
instead of writing to a local disk hands over the ﬁle to an application software
running on behalf of a service provider. This application will use the local disk
as a cache for eﬃciency. Second, SSP’s at the other end of this pipe provide a
variety of storage services, including storing the primary ﬁle and several copies.
Finally, some services will need third-party providers. These include: trusted
third-parties for some types of security operations (we will see one example later
in Section 4.1), third-party services for search, or a third-party curation service
aimed at long-term archival for maintaining a historical record.
2.2

User Needs

What do users want out of a storage provider? Let us ﬁrst consider individual
users in the home or small-business environment:

Insurable Storage Services

681

– Backup. Clearly, this most common need today will continue into the future.
In addition to simple backup, diﬀerent users may desire various levels of quality. For example, small business users might opt for multiple, geographically
diverse backup copies.
– Legacy. Users will want to pass on their digital property to rightful heirs
and ensure their access. Some of these heirs may be family members, others
might include a trust or a public organization. Today, this type of service is
virtually non-existent and certainly not systematically addressed.
– Legal services. As with any kind of property, in case of conﬂict over a legal
document, storage providers should make available a framework for conﬂict
resolution between all those party to the document. For example, a realestate property deed will need to have its integrity assured, and if needed,
to be checked against the same document stored by the local county oﬃce1 .
Thus, a SSP must provide the a means for access by other interested parties,
including a court of law.
In addition to these services, organizations have other requirements:
– Strong backup and availability. Organizations usually place greater value on
the accessibility and reliability of backups than do individuals. These additional factors are inﬂuenced by the physical durability of storage warehouses,
their geographical diversity, diversity across disk manufacturers, number of
such diverse copies, administrative convenience and speed of archival.
– Group coordination. Organizations also need to store documents in collections and from groups of individuals, often removing association with individuals. For this purpose, an important service is to provide organizations
with a framework for deﬁning groups and moving documents between groups.
Organizations also share documents between divisions and across other organizations.
– Ownership. The question of ownership is important to an organization. When
documents are associated with groups or roles, individuals in those groups or
roles assume temporary ownership. Thus, a framework for ownership must
provide for associations between individuals and groups, and between individuals and administrative roles with high privileges.
The needs of public organizations or of government agencies also include custodial actions. For example, U.S. law dictates that the executive branch must
make available its digital record to the National Archives. Even if the law does
not require it, other agencies might wish to make their documents available to
the public after a period of use.
2.3

Services

Each need identiﬁed above corresponds to a service that an SSP should provide.
In addition to these, we identify a few more:
1

Although cryptographic techniques can be used to verify integrity, these techniques
are subject to implementation errors. Furthermore, challenges must nonetheless be
addressed by third parties.

682

R. Simha and K. Gopinath

– Security. SSP’s should go beyond simple encryption to provide a comprehensive solution to various security needs. These include key management, key
transfers between groups, long-term key storage, re-keying, integrity checking, audit trails, conﬂict resolution and a framework for access privileges in
a multi-user environment.
– Escrow. SSP’s should provide services that aim for ﬁxed-term secure storage,
after which documents become public or are made available to other parties
according to a policy. Escrow services could also be used in various legal
transactions, such as on-line contract negotiations.
– Notification services. SSP’s should provide periodic notiﬁcation, just like a
bank statement, that contain storage transaction histories, reports on integrity checks, updates of technologies, numbers of copies, the geographic
sites where they are stored and usage statistics.
– Search. SSP’s should provide access points for search providers so that sophisticated search technologies may be used by organizations to search within
their document troves.
– Meta information. SSP’s should provide API’s for operating systems and applications so that they may store context information along with documents.
This context information should be augmented with usage statistics, locality
statistics (time, date) to form a comprehensive record of meta information
that will be useful for later searches.
Taken together, these features point to a future of value-added services in the
area of storage. Why hasn’t this future emerged already? Every change in the
marketplace needs a driver, a force that facilitates transactions and growth and
propels providers to competitively oﬀer creative new services. We argue that one
such possible market driver is insurance.

3
3.1

Insured Storage
How It Would Work

Users and organizations today are faced with a bewildering number of options
in constructing solutions for their storage needs. They must identify vendors
of storage systems and then build services on top of these storage systems.
Furthermore, they have no easy way to quantify the value of their investment.
Instead, we propose that users treat their digital documents as property,
whose storage is insurable. To illustrate, let us consider a user interested in
contracting out storage services from SSP’s. The user obtains an insurance rating for various service options across vendors, and together with the prices for
each, makes a decision. Thus, for example, Insurance Company A is willing to
insure service B oﬀered by SSP C at the rate of $10 per MB for 5 years. Faced
with choices such as these, users can discern what works best for them.
Similarly, SSP’s competing in this marketplace will make optimal use of technologies to acquire the best possible insurance rating and to oﬀer diﬀerentiated
services at diﬀerent prices. Thus, SSP C can oﬀer a long-term archival service

Insurable Storage Services

683

(50 years) but with slow access speeds at $10 per MB and a short-term (5 years),
highly eﬃcient service for $40 per MB. Each of these might be rated diﬀerently
by insurers. To get a high insurance rating, a SSP would have to convince insurers that, for example, they are using current technologies, exploiting geographic
and vendor diversity, and creating fresh copies at reasonable time intervals.
3.2

Beneﬁts of Insurance

The chief beneﬁt of using insurance is that it mediates between users and
providers in what could be a confusing array of options and beneﬁts. Users
are given a single number (or two) by a by which to assess services; the trustworthiness of this number is based on the reputation of insurers and the cost of
insurance. Similarly, SSP’s work towards better ratings by cycling copies onto
new technologies, increasing the number of copies, using diﬀerent hard-drive
vendors, diﬀerent geographic locations for the copies, physically securing these
locations from natural catastrophes and using proven engineering practices. All
of these can be ﬁtted into statistical models that quantify reliability, availability and eﬃciency. Insurers, with their legions of statisticians and considerable
experience with reliability models, are already suited to this type of analysis.
Furthermore, SSP’s will be driven to providing creative new services to meet the
needs of customers, as and when these get included in the overall rating.
We conjecture that an added beneﬁt for long-term archival would be some
closure to the “format wars.” As is well-known in the archival literature, there
is a tension between the proprietary formats (such as Microsoft Word) that
users prefer to use, and the open, human-readable formats (such as XML) that,
according to archivists, oﬀer the best hope of being readable in the future. Since
a proprietary format should logically receive a low 100-year rating, users will be
driven towards open formats if they are to guarantee long-term storage.
Note that other mechanisms exist that could mediate between consumers and
producers in the storage marketplace, as can be found in other marketplaces.
For example, a softer, non-binding form of mediation is to simply provide ratings, of the form provided by consumer protection groups. However, these are
not as powerful as mechanisms such as insurance that associate high cost for
inaccurately rating services.
3.3

Factors Aﬀecting Insurance

Many factors that one should use in rating the quality of a storage service have
been discussed in the literature. These include the obvious ones: number of
copies, geographic diversity of copies, vendor diversity, hardware reliability, copy
replacement policy, hardware replacement policy and physical security. To these
we add a few new ones. These are all based on the notion that a document that
can’t be deciphered or precisely located in the future, even if it is known to exist,
is useless.
– Formats. As mentioned earlier, proprietary formats, especially those subject
to frequent change, are probably not suited for long-term storage. Even if

684

R. Simha and K. Gopinath

these must be used, proper emulation [8, 11, 12] can mitigate some of the
disadvantages, and thus should be factored into a rating. Even among openformats, documents that use a mixture (such as a combination of HTML
and JPEG) might receive a lower rating than simple documents.
– Searchability. With a long-term view, documents should be retrievable not
just by specifying the owner but through a variety of means. A custodian of
government documents, for example, should be certain that the documents
will show up in a variety of search approaches.
– Monitoring quality. SSP’s that continuously monitor their document copies
for integrity should obviously receive a better rating. Monitoring should also
include hardware, network connections, software patches and security in its
purview.
– Networks. Aside from the assessment of individual sites where copies are
stored, the network used to connect these sites should also be subject to
evaluation. SSP’s that use multiple networks with redundant connections
should get a higher rating.

4

New Technical Issues

There are a host of technical issues associated with storage systems and storage
services. Here, we point out two technical issues related to long-term archival that
we believe are relatively new and not yet addressed in the technical literature.
4.1

Ownership Devolution

The ﬁrst issue is motivated by considering those situations in which ownership
of a document must be transferred. For example, an individual user might leave
her digital assets to heirs upon her demise. Similarly, the executive branch of
government must leave their documents to the public after their term expires.
The problem is non-trivial even when these documents are not encrypted during
use – there must be a way, for example, to ensure that the policy is properly
enforced. In the future, however, most documents will probably be encrypted
when stored using a service. In this case, how can one guarantee that the keys
will be made available? What happens if the keys are lost or if an individual
loses them?
To address these issues, SSP’s need a framework for handling ownership devolution. To solve problems such as key escrow, trusted third parties might be
needed in addition to SSP’s. For example, a trustee can perform encryption enroute to storing a document; this trustee can keep the key and be required to
reveal the key at some point in the future. A trust management framework might
therefore become an essential part of such services. Since access control is based
on identity, third party input is needed so that trust, delegation and public keys
can be negotiated.
Note that with public-key cryptography, it becomes possible to deal with
anonymous users as long as they have a public key: authentication and authorization are now possible with models such as SDSI/SPKI. In this case, an

Insurable Storage Services

685

issuer authorizes speciﬁc permissions to speciﬁc principals; these credentials can
be signed by the issuer to avoid tampering. For example, SDSI/SPKI provides
for credentials with delegation with the assumption that locally generated public keys do not collide with other locally generated public keys elsewhere. This
allows exploiting “local namespaces”: any local resource controlled by a principal can be given access permissions to others by signing this grant of permission
using the public key. Access control and cryptography can now be combined into
a larger framework with logic for authentication/authorization and access control. However, permission-based trust management cannot authorize principals
with a certain property easily. One solution to this problem is attribute-based
approach: it combines RBAC and trust management. Other approaches include
proof carrying authentication [1].
4.2

Universal Document ID

Currently, documents are identiﬁed by user account, directory structure and ﬁle
name. However, as storage services and providers grow, users will need to transfer
documents across providers and systems. Furthermore, there are many situations
where documents need to be identiﬁed with groups rather than individuals. This
raises the issue of proper identiﬁcation of documents for long-term use. Identiﬁers
are needed for indexing, for maintaining meta information and for tracking.
Thus, a service that provides unique universal document identiﬁers will be
useful. At the same time, these identiﬁers should maintain an individual’s privacy and not be traceable back to the individual. One solution is the use of
SHA2 hashes such as sha256, sha384 and sha512 algorithms. If SHA2 is strongly
collision-resistant (as is currently believed), then the hash can be used as a
global identiﬁer. Usability of such hashes can be managed with a secure mapping between names and hashes that is locally maintained. The latter service
could be constructed using a mechanism similar to DNS, the mechanism for internet domain names. If HMAC-SHA2 is used with the secret being between the
client and the storage provider service, both origination and integrity can also
be guaranteed.
One can imagine further reﬁnements. These IDs, if properly extended, can also
be used as ways of authorizing the use of documents to others (as in DRM). One
possibility is the use of “capabilities.” However, undesirable information ﬂows
are possible in such systems using capabilities in the presence of Trojans [5]. This
requires that some information about the intended recipient is incorporated in
the capability, and thus results in a modiﬁcation of the strict capability model
(see [2] for an example).

5

Summary

In this paper, we have described the beneﬁts of using insured storage as a mechanism for driving the marketplace for storage services. In addition, we have
identiﬁed a few new factors aﬀecting insurability and outlined a couple of new
technical issues relating to long-term storage.

686

R. Simha and K. Gopinath

The question that naturally arises is: will users take to insuring their documents? Our view is that, except for a few very important documents, users might
be unwilling to negotiate such minutiae on a per-document basis. However, we
speculate that users will be willing to insure services especially if oﬀered on an
annual basis or in terms of Gigabytes, similar to some internet services. Ultimately, the services will be oﬀered (because they are needed) and ultimately,
users will ﬁnd some, perhaps informal, way of assessing their value. Insurability, in addition to opening up a new possibilities for that industry, oﬀers a way
to rapidly streamline the marketplace for storage services. Already, insurance is
currently being oﬀered for costs related to compliance with open-source software
standards [6].
Finally, we recognize that associating a direct cost with storage might drive
users towards placing a value on documents today, resulting in the loss of some
documents that could be valuable to some future historian. This is an important
issue in general that is not considered in this paper.

References
1. A.W.Appel and E.W.Felten. Proof-carrying authentication. 6th ACM Conference
on Computer and Communications Security, November 1999.
2. Azagury et al A Two Layered Approach for Securing an object store network. 1st
International IEEE Security in Storage Workshop (SISW 2002).
3. D.Bearman. Reality and chimeras in the preservation of electronic records. DLIB
Magazine, Vol.5, No.4, 1999.
4. A.Crespo, H.Garcia-Molina. Cost-driven design for archival repositories. Proc. 1st
Joint Conference on Digital Libraries (JCDL). June, 2001.
5. S.Halevi, P.Karger and D.Naor. Enforcing Conﬁnement in Distributed Storage and
a cryptographic model for access control, IBM Tech Report, 2002.
6. M.LaMonica. Insurer launches $10 million open-source policy. CNET News, Oct
2005. http://news.zdnet.com/2100-3513 22-5924112.html
7. N.Li, B.Grosof and J.Feigenbaum. Delegation Logic: a logic-based approach to
distributed authorization, ACM Trans. on Info. and System Security, Feb 2003.
8. R.A.Lorie. Long-term archiving of digital information. IBM Research Report RJ10185, May 2000.
9. Technical Architecture, Ver. 0.2. National Digital Information Infrastructure and
Preservation Program (NDIPP) (www.digitalpreservation.gov).
10. It’s About Time: Research Challenges in Digital Archiving and Long-term Preservation. NDIPP (www.digitalpreservation.gov).
11. J.Rothenberg. Ensuring the longevity of digital documents. Scientific American,
Vol. 272(1), January 1995.
12. J.Rothenburg. An experiment in using emulation to preserve digital publications.
Technical Report, RAND-Europe, April 2000.

