Pulsating Flow and Platelet Aggregation
Xin-She Yang
Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge,
Trumpington Street, Cambridge CB2 1PZ, UK
xy227@eng.cam.ac.uk

Abstract. Platelet aggregation has been modelled as a nonlinear system of
viscous flow and pulsating flow based on the Fogelson’s continuum model.
By solving nonlinear governing equations and the coupling between flow and
platelet aggregates in the cylindrical coordinates using the finite element
method, we can see how the platelet aggregation forms under the pulsating
flow conditions. Numerical simulations show that the aggregates are stretched
by the flow in the dynamic equilibrium of the link forces and background
flow. In addition, significant elastic stress can be developed to maintain the
shape and integrity of the platelet aggregates.

1 Introduction
Platelet aggregations are important in physiological processes such as thrombus and
haemostasis. However, these processes are very complicated and many factors and
activities occur at the same. For example, physiological response in haemostasis to
blood vessel injury involves the cell-cell adhesive platelet aggregation and
coagulation. Platelets are tiny oval structure with diameter of 2-4 micrometers. They
are active in blood with a half-life of 8-12 days. Non-active platelets flow free in
blood vessels in a dormant state. Activating chemicals such as ADP initiated by injury
can induce platelet aggregation in the blood plasma. A platelet’s surface membrane
can be altered so that the platelet becomes sticky, and thus capable of adhering to
other activated platelets and the vessel walls. Although platelets only consist of about
0.3% in concentration and yet occur in enormous numbers about 250 millions per
millilitre [2,3,6]. Once triggered by the chemicals, the active platelets start to clot so
as to restrict the blood flow at the injury site. To prevent uncontrolled overspreading
of activated platelets, a chemical inhibitor, thrombin, is also involved.
There have been extensive studies on the biological and physiological effect of
platelet aggregations. Some mathematical models and computational models are very
instructive for the modelling of the detailed mechanism of the formation of platelet
aggregates [3-6]. Most of these studies use the Navier-Stokes equations with
simplified boundary conditions or the steady-state approximation. However, the real
blood vessel system has complex geometries due to branching and atherosclerotic
plague deposition inside the vessels. In addition, the flow velocity and pressure are
even more complicated by the pulsating process from the heart pumping process.
Thus, the more realistic modelling shall include the pulsating effect on the flow and
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3516, pp. 1048 – 1051, 2005.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

Pulsating Flow and Platelet Aggregation

1049

platelet aggregations. In this paper, we intend to extend the existing models to include
the pulsating flow and the platelet aggregations in the corresponding environment.

2 Fogelson’s Model
Fogelson first formulated a continuum model for platelet aggregation process [3]. The
full model consists of a system of coupled nonlinear partial differential equations. We
use the simplified version of Fogelson’s model with the following equations:
∇⋅u=0,

(1)
2
ρ(u +u⋅∇u)=-∇p+µ∇ u+f+β∇σ,
(2)
t
T
σ +u∇σ=σ∇u+(p∇u) ,
(3)
t
φ +u⋅∇φ=r,
(4)
t
where the first two equations are the Navier-Stokes equations for incompressible fluid
flow u=(U,V,W) and p pressure. The coefficient β is constant and f is the force
density. The last term is due to the cohesion of platelets. The third equation is for the
cohesion-stress tensor σ. The last equation is for the concentration φ of the active
platelets and the production rate r can be considered as a function of concentrations of
platelets and the activating chemicals. The governing equations are nonlinear and the
flow is coupled with the formation of platelet aggregates. Thus the full solution
necessitates efficient numerical methods. As the blood flow is slow and viscous, so
the first two equations can be simplified for the case of viscous flow and the zero
force f. We have
∇⋅u=0,

2
ρu =µ∇ u-∇p+β∇σ.
t

(5)

In most cases, the blood flow is one-dimensional tubular flow, it is convenient to
choose the local coordinates so that the z-axis is in the direction of the local blood
flow. In this case, we can assume the pulsating pressure (far field) in the form
p =∂p/∂z=Acos(ωt)+γ,
z

(6)

where A is a constant. In fact, we can assume any known function form for the
pressure gradient in terms of a Fourier expansion
N

p =g(t)=γ+
z

∑ [Ancos(ωnt)+Bncos(ωnt)].

(7)

n=1

3 Simulation and Results
Although the equations are coupled, they can be solved using the well-developed
finite element method together with the Newton-Raphson iteration procedure for the

1050

X.-S. Yang

nonlinearity. By solving the problem in the cylindrical coordinates, we can see how
the platelet aggregation forms and develops under the pulsating flow conditions.
3.1 Shear Stress Distribution and Variation
To simulate the tubular flow and the stress development, we first study the flow at the
bifurcation region where one large vessel is branched into two smaller vessels. For a
given pulse, one can calculate the wall shear stress and stress variation with time after
the peak R-wave of the given pulse. Figure 1 shows the shear stress distribution and
the mean wall shear stress variation. The major feature of the computed shear stress
variation is consistent with the experimental results. It is worth pointing out that there
exists a peak for wall shear stress for a given pulsating pressure gradient, and thus the
peak shear stress could directly affect the rupture if the stenosis or plague is presented
at the region concerned. The shear stress is higher at bifurcation regions and the
stress level can reach as high as 15 Pa for a blood vessel with a diameter of 1mm. As
the flow is pulsating, the shear stress and pressure vary with time. The mean shear
stress at wall varies significantly after the R-wave starts. It first increases quickly to a
peak at t=0.065 and then decreases exponentially with time.

Fig. 1. Shear stress distribution at the bifurcation region and wall stress variation with time

3.2 Platelet Aggregation
In the case of pulsating flow in a cylindrical vessel with a diameter of 1mm, a small
injury (point A) with a size of less than 0.1mm occurs and thus releases the ADP
chemical to activate the platelet aggregation, so platelets starts to deposit at the injury
site, and the size of the aggregation starts to increase. Figure 2 show the platelet
aggregation at the different times t=1,10,50 seconds after the injury. The flow is from
left to the right with the initial constant flow field. The boundary condition for the
pressure in the far field is the pulsating function given earlier in equation (7). For
simplicity, we have used the zero reaction rate (r=0), γ=0, β=1, and the normalized
concentration so that φ=0 for no platelets and φ=0.5 for solid platelet aggregates.
We can see clearly that the concentration of activated platelets is much higher at
the injury site than in the blood. The aggregation rate is proportional to the

Pulsating Flow and Platelet Aggregation

1051

A

Fig. 2. Formation of platelet aggregation at different times (t=1,5,50)

concentration of the activated platelets, and thus the size and shape of the platelet
aggregation can be represented in terms of the concentration as shown in the figure.
The aggregates are stretched by the flow in the dynamic equilibrium of the link forces
and background flow. As the platelets aggregate, the injured vessel will be blocked
severely after some time, and it may take 100 seconds to reach this stage.

4 Conclusions
We have simulated the platelet aggregation by using the Fogelson’s continuum model
with nonlinear governing equations and the coupling between flow and platelet
aggregates. By solving the problem in the cylindrical coordinates using the finite
element method, we can see how the platelet aggregation forms under the pulsating
flow conditions. Numerical simulations show that the aggregates are stretched by the
flow in the dynamic equilibrium of the link forces and background flow. In addition,
significant elastic stress can be developed to maintain the shape and integrity of the
platelet aggregates.

References
1. Chakravarty, S., Mandal P. K.: Mathematical modelling of blood flow through an
overlapping arterial stenosis. Math. Comput. Modelling, 19 (1994) 59-70.
2. David, T., Thomas, S., Walker, P. G.: Platelet deposition in stagnation poiint flow: an
analytical and computional simulation. Medical Engineering and Physics, 23 (2001) 229-312.
3. Fogelson, A.: Continuum models of platelet aggregation: formulation and mechanical
properties. SIAM J. Appl. Math., 52 (1992) 1089-1110.
4. Gurevich, K. G., Chekalina, N. D., Zakharenko, O. M.: Application of mathematical
modelling to analysis of nerves growth factor interaction with platelets. Bioorganic
Chemistry, 27(2000)57-61.
5. Guy, R. D., Fogelson, A. L.: Probabilistic modelling of platlet aggregation: effects of
activation time and receptor occupancy. J. Theor. Biol., 219(2002) 33-53.
6. Keener, J. and Sneyd, J.: Mathematical Physiology, Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg
New York (1998).
7. Zienkiewicz, O. C. and Taylor, R. L.: The Finite Element Method, Vol. I/II, McGraw-Hill,
4th Edition, (1991).

