Distance Geographic Learning Based on Collaborative
Virtual Environment
Wenhang Li, Jianhua Gong, Daojun Wang, Mingxiang Huang, and Jieping Zhou
State Key Laboratory of Remote Sensing Science,
Institute of Remote Sensing Applications, Chinese Academy Sciences, Beijing 100101, China
mylihang@163.com, jhgong@sina.com.cn,
{wangdaojun1980,hmx780202,janepencil}@163.com

Abstract. Although collaborative e-learning has been applied in many fields, it is
rarely reported in geographic education. This paper describes one prototype of
collaborative virtual geographic education environment (CVGEE). The prototype,
developed using Java and Java 3D, provides one immersive 3-dimensional
environment and many virtual teaching methods including virtual geographic
environment, virtual geographic process. Teachers and learners can discuss with
each other in a social way by combination virtualization and reality. Group
learning and normal teacher-learner relationship can then be realized in CVGEE.
An experiment was conducted to test the functions of the CVGEE prototype.
Keywords: collaborative virtual geographic education environment (CVGEE),
geography, e-learning, group learning, collaborative virtual environment (CVE).

1 Introduction
Education theories have been evolved from traditional teacher-centered theories to
learner-centered theories and group learning theories. Collaborative E-learning (CEL)
has been one of the most significant education trends recent years based on such
theories, as well as virtual reality and web technologies [1]. Educations based on CEL
are no longer confined to fixed place and learners, which makes public education and
individual education possible. CEL always provides a friendly, immersive,
3-dimensional virtual environment and several real-time intercommunication ways for
knowledge sharing and question discussion. Many CEL prototype systems have been
developed, for example, INVITE[1]， VES[2], VRLEARNER[3], and other systems.
Some researchers have applied CEL in various fields such as bio-education [4], medical
training [5], and geometric spatial training [6].
Although CEL has been applied in many subjects mentioned above, it is still rare for
application in geographic education. Contrast to other subjects, geographic education
needs more help from CEL, because (1) Geographic education emphasizes students’
experience. But in reality, it seems impossible for teacher to take students out to all
geographic environments due to funding, time, and other factors like safety. (2) The
content of geographic education is complicate. Geographic knowledge covers physics,
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part III, LNCS 4489, pp. 516–522, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Distance Geographic Learning Based on Collaborative Virtual Environment

517

chemistry, mathematics and other subjects. It’s a good idea for students studying
together to manage these complex knowledge. New tools are suggested to help
geographic education solve such problems. It is noteworthy that the innovative Google
Earth has been developed and evolved rapidly [7]. Google Earth can display virtual
terrain covered with remote sensing images for any place of the world. Some
geography teachers have applied it in teaching. But Google Earth is not designed
specifically for education, it is still necessary to explore CEL for geography.
Collaborative Virtual Geographic Education Environment (CVGEE) is such a
system to help explore new ideas for geographic education. This paper introduces the
prototype. Section 2 focuses on its development, including the architecture, server, and
client. Section 3 presents the prototype and an experiment on tornado. Features of
CVGEE, such as VGE and VGP simulation and their experience, social
intercommunication, virtual teacher-learner relationship, as well as virtual teaching
methods are discussed based on the experiment. Section 4 gives summary of current
work, as well as prospects for future work.

2 Development of CVGEE
2.1 The Architecture
One framework of CVGEE is proposed here (Fig.1). It is based on a three-layer
structure, including data layer, communication layer and representation layer. The
data layer contains all resources for geography teaching and collaborations. The
•Virtual geographic process •Group learning •Virtual relationship
•Social communication •Virtual geographic environment

Representation
layer

Collaborative Virtual Geography Education Environment

•Custom protocols
•Consistence keeping

Client

Client

Server
Client

Communication
layer

Client

Stream data

3D data

Simulated data

Other geo-data

Camera,
Microphone

3D avatar,
3D environment

MAS,
Particle system

Texts, Videos,
Images, Audios

Data layer

Fig. 1. The three-layer based architecture of CVGEE

518

W. Li et al.

communication layer is one C/S mode Collaborative Virtual Environment (CVE),
consisting of server and clients. Its purpose is to transfer data of the data layer, as well
as collaboration messages via server to realize social communications, distance
teaching, and group learning. The representations of data layer and communication
layer are participants’ social communication, geographic group learning, and
collaborative e-learning, that is, CVGEE.
2.2 Implementation of CVGEE
The server is responsible for data and message transfer among clients, to keep all
clients consistent. Five services, named “Message ServiceAgent”, “Chat ServiceAgent”,
“Video ServiceAgent”, “Audio ServiceAgent”, and “File ServiceAgent” are deployed on the
server. Each service is one multi-thread Java ServerSocket, responsible for one specific
kind of data transfer. The service behavior is as follows: when new request arrives, the
service will derive a new thread instance to transfer specific data. When data transfer
finished, the thread will destroy itself automatically. The behavior is something like
agent, so CVGEE calls these services “ServiceAgent”.
Client program is the visual interface for teachers and learners to take part in the
virtual education. It’s a 3-dimensional virtual environment developed using Java 3D.
The virtual scene is on a tree structure. The root node is a “SimpleUniverse” which has
many child branches, termed “BranchGroup”. These children branchGroups are
classified according to their functions into “avatar branchGroup”, “studyobject
branchGroup”, and “environment branchGroup”. Child branchGroup may have its
sub-child branchGroups. All virtual data are organized and virtual scene is then built up
by this way. The virtual scene is rendered by a Canvas3D instance, who responses to
the keyboard events, and menu events.
All actions of the clients are captured as commands and transferred to all others by
the server. When one command arrives, the client will carry out a corresponding action
to modify the virtual scene for consistency. Collaborations are then accomplished. All
are done based on custom protocols (Table 1).
Table 1. Example custom collaboration protocols

Action

Parameters

JOIN
MOVEAVATAR
SENDVIDEO
TALK

User Name
Avatar Figure
Avatar Location
User ID
User Name
New Avatar Location
User ID
Video Data
User ID
User Name
Message Content

3 Experiment of CVGEE
3.1 Brief Description on the Experiment
One CVGEE prototype has been developed. As an experiment, the prototype was
applied in Beijing Qianfeng middle school. The subject was on tornado, one dangerous

Distance Geographic Learning Based on Collaborative Virtual Environment

(a) teacher in experiment

(b) student in experiment

(c) snapshot of teacher’s viewpoint

②
⑥
⑨

519

(d) snapshot of one student’s viewpoint

③
⑦

④

①

Fig. 2. These pictures are demonstrations of the experiment. The numbers’ meanings are:
virtual classroom, remote sensing image, chat text, student’s avatar and captured video,
VRML sand-table, list of participants, playing geo-video, teacher’s avatar and her
captured video, dynamic tornado process model (particle system), and geo-slides.

⑤

⑧

⑩

geographic process. Teacher and students entered into the virtual classroom at different
places via Internet. The teacher taught in voice, slides, and videos. Figure 2 gives some
demonstrations of the experiment.
3.2 VGE and VGP Simulation and Experience
Hong Kong (Zhujiang delta) encountered with tornado was simulated during the
experiment. The “terrible” event “happened” on the desk. The ground was the
VRML-format Hong Kong terrain overlaid with the remote sensing image (Fig. 2 ).
Tornado was simulated with particle system (Fig. 2 ). The simulation demonstrated
the process that tornado came into being on the sea and moved towards the mainland.
There are two alternatives for students to experience VGE and VGP. One is to study
or view as outsiders (Fig. 3 a). Another is to shrink the avatar, together with the
viewpoint, into VGE or VGP to experience (Fig.3 b A). In the latter mode, participants
can walk along the virtual mountains, or float across the virtual sea. It’s similar to the
reality. The simply changes are participants to avatars, and realistic environments to
VGE and VGP.

⑨

⑤

520

W. Li et al.

A

B

A

(a) outsider mode

B

(b) experience mode

Fig. 3. VGE and VGP experience modes

3.3 Social Intercommunication and Group Learning
Education is one inter-communication activity between teachers and learners, which
needs sight, voice, gesture, and even emotional expression to achieve mutual
recognition. Referring to this mode, in the experiment, CVGEE proposed one
“virtual-and-reality-mixed” method (Fig. 4 a). In virtual environment, participants have
avatars. Their real figure, actions, as well as expression are captured real-time by digital
cameras to “transplant” upon their virtual avatars, and their voices are broadcast
through microphones. By this way, when two avatars meet in virtual classroom they
(participants) can see and hear each other. Social face to face inter-communication is
then simulated in CVGEE (Fig. 4 b).

Vide

Audio

Text

Avatar

Realistic figure, behavior,

Virtual

expression, voice, text

virtual behavior

(a) communication methods

figure,

(b) face-to-face discussion

Fig. 4. Participants’ realistic figures are “transplanted” on their avatars. When the avatars meet,
participants can see and talk with each other. It seems nearly face-to-face communication.

Based on the above communication methods, the experiment realized group
learning. They saw each other, talked with each other, or used texts to discuss on
geo-materials such as slides, pictures, videos, or models. They could exchange their
cognation and knowledge, or even their own geo-materials. CVGEE turned to be a
platform for group discussion.

Distance Geographic Learning Based on Collaborative Virtual Environment

521

3.4 Virtual Teacher-Learner Relationship and Virtual Teaching Methods
CVGEE respects learner-centered theories and group learning theories. But in the
experiment, we found that most of the students, especially younger students, still could
not teach themselves. So, CVGEE regards that the virtual education should not develop
all by learners themselves, but follow certain supervision. So, the function of teachers
should not be ignored in virtual education, and they were still the knowledge
disseminator, course designers and teaching organizers. However, one significant
change is teachers’ status: they are not central any more but learners’ helpers.
Education in CVGEE is students’ actively learning under guidance of teachers.
CVGEE also reserved successful traditional teaching methods in reality such as
slides, geo-videos and geo-images. Students could gain geographic knowledge from
various ways. Teaching methods in the experiment are list as table 2.
Table 2. Teaching methods in CVGEE

Classification

Features

Environment

3D environment、 3D avatar

Virtual simulations

VGE,VGP

Traditional methods

Slides, video, audio, images

Group learning
methods

Captured video, captured
audio, text chat

Purpose
Providing one real-like education environment
Achieving virtual experience of geographic
environment and geographic process
Inheriting the successful realistic education
methods
Simulating virtual face-to-face
inter-communication

4 Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we discussed the collaborative virtual geographic education environment
and its prototype. Contributions of this paper to geographic education can be
summarized as following: (1) CVGEE turns geographic education into the virtual one
based on a distributed collaborative virtual environment. Distance teaching, distance
learning and group learning can be carried out in CVGEE; (2) CVGEE helps solve the
puzzle of experience by introducing virtual geographic environments and virtual
geographic processes; (3) CVGEE appreciates socially face-to-face participants’
communication in virtual education activities; and (4) CVGEE indicates a normal
virtual teacher-learner relationship for virtual geographic education.
But further contributions can be achieved in future work, not only for geographic
education but also for education itself: (1) Educations have been carried out in virtual
space. Since present education theories are based on realistic education behaviors, then
one question should be asked: are they fit for the virtual ones? How about the
relationship between teachers and learners in the virtual world? They’re rarely seen in
literature. Maybe new theories should be proposed. (2) One more thing needs to be
pointed out that virtual educations including CVGEE are not substitute for the realistic
ones. They are supplements for each other. So it will be interestingly innovative to
integrate the virtual education with the realistic one. Nevertheless, it is a worthwhile
field of study CVGEE for geographic education.

522

W. Li et al.

Acknowledgements
This research is partially supported by the National High-tech R&D Program (863
Program) No. 2006AA12Z204 and the Knowledge Innovation Program of the Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Grant No. Kzcx2-yw-126-01.

References
1. Kuljis J.: A Distributed Virtual Collaborative Learning Environment. In Proceedings of the
IASTED International Conference, Applied Informatics, Innsbruck, Austria (2002) 464-469
2. Bouras C., Fotakis D., Kapoulas V.,Koubek A., Mayer H., Rehatscheck H.: Virtual European
School-VES. In Proceedings of the IEEE Multimedia Systems’99, Special Session on
European Projects, Florence, Italy (1999) 1055-1057
3. Kladias N., Pantazidis T., Avagianos M., Kalamas I., Kopidakis Y., Labbri M.: The
VRLEARNERS project: development of a Virtual Reality learning environment providing
access to digital museums. http://www.vrlearners.iis.gr/vrlearners/vrlearn.RTF
4. Okada M., Tarumi H., Yoshimura T.: Distributed virtual environment realizing collaborative
environment education. In Proceedings of the 2001 ACM symposium on Applied computing,
Las Vegas, USA (2001) 83-88
5. Bernhard J., Abdul A., Matthias W.: The Affective Virtual Patient: An E-Learning Tool for
Social Interaction Training within the Medical Field. http://isnm.de/~aahad/Downloads/
AVP_TESI.pdf
6. Liu D., Wang T. M.: A virtual reality training system fro robot assisted neurosurgery. In
Advances in Artificial Reality and Tele-Existence, ICAT 2006, Hangzhou, China (2006)
457-466
7. Declan B.: Virtual globes: The web-wide world. Nature, 439(16) (2006) 776-778

