Fuzzy Control System Using Nonlinear Friction Observer
For the Mobile Robot
Woo-Young Lee1, Il-Seon Lim2, Dae-Jung Huh3, Uk-Youl Huh4
1

Dept. of Electrical Engineering, Inha University, Incheon 402-751, Korea
woollung@hotmail.com
2
Dept. of Electrical Engineering, Inha University, Incheon 402-751, Korea
islim@kopo.ac.kr
3
Dept. of Electrical Engineering, Inha University, Incheon 402-751, Korea
g2011084@inhavision.inha.ac.kr
4
Dept. of Electrical Engineering, Inha University, Incheon 402-751, Korea
uyhuh@inha.ac.kr

Abstract. In this paper, a fuzzy control system with the nonlinear friction observer is
presented. The position accuracy is very important for the wheeled mobile robot
control but the accuracy is limited due to disturbance such as nonlinear friction. The
nonlinear friction is treated as disturbance. So the disturbance observer can estimate
it. The position accuracy of a robot is improved by adding a nonlinear friction
observer in the system. For the entire system control, fuzzy control is used.
Experimental result shows that the fuzzy controller with friction observer has better
performance.

1 Introduction
In the servo system, it is very important to deal with the uncertainty for the precision
control on the speed and the position. And the control theories are getting
complicated. Fuzzy logic control is based on human intelligence and expert’s
knowledge and has a good performance for the system that has nonlinear
characteristic. It is well known that fuzzy logic control is robust on the change of
system parameter and copes with the disturbance that has bad effect on the system
[1][2]. The mobile robot uses the sensor information and makes a path planning.
After that, it carries out path tracking. In the process, the path is consist of straight
way and curves. But by contour error and direction error, the robot is easy to be out
of its way. There errors are caused from some unknown disturbance. If we know
disturbance and predict that kind of error, it can be easier to control the robot
precisely. In mobile robot, nonlinear friction is the reason which make stick-slip
caused from stiction and Stribeck effect [3]. It is necessary to control the robot with
high performance and accuracy by the proper modeling and the friction
compensation. Nowadays accurate equation and friction modeling is focused on. And
there are a lot of solutions for this problem. Also there are a lot of problems like too
much computation amount for the uncertain friction modeling and the bandwidth for
feedback control loop.

2 Disturbance Observer
It is very important to deal with uncertainty for the system speed and position in the

mobile robot. Nonlinear friction causes stick-slip in the very low speed movement
and is the original nonlinear factor, which makes tracking error in the path tracking
control process and is caused by stiction (breakaway force) and Stribeck effect [4]. In
this paper we design the observer to estimate and compensate the friction torque in
the 2-wheel mobile robot movement. Using the observer, it is possible to prevent the
robot from breakaway and the navigation performance is improved.
2.1 Nonlinear Friction Torque Modeling
The friction with uncertain characteristic is changed by the speed and lubrication
condition. And the friction modeling is described in equation (1).
T f (ω ( t )) = T v (ω ( t )) + T c sgn( ω ( t )) + T e

(1)

Tv is coulomb friction torque. Normally the moving speed is proportional to the
friction torque and the positive slope characteristic of the relation between friction
torque and speed is shown in the region B of Figure 1. Beside, the friction torque is
getting bigger in the very low speed scope. As it moves faster, the friction torque is
getting smaller and this effect is called “Stribeck effect”. The region A of Figure 1
shows the negative slope characteristic of the relation between friction torque and
speed. Tc is nonlinear viscous friction caused by stiction (breakaway force), which
appears when the mobile robot starts. Te is static friction caused by Stribeck effect in
the low speed scope and this negative characteristic describes the exponential
decrement [5][6]. In Fig. 1, the friction torque modeling type is shown by the
characteristic curve between the friction torque and moving speed. In this curve, the
friction curve has the positive slope as the speed is changed. The friction direction is
designed to be changed symmetrically as the sign of the speed is changed.
T

f

( ω ( t )) = sgn( ω ) K ( α

1

ω + β

1

+ C 1e

− ( ω

/C

2

)C 3

)

(2)

Where, sgn( ω ) = 1 at ω (t ) > 0
sgn( ω ) = − 1 at ω (t ) < 0
In equation (2), the parameter α 1 is the torque coefficient of the coulomb friction at
the region B, β 1 is the viscous friction torque coefficient when the robot starts. C1,
C2 and C3 are the negative friction torque coefficients caused by Stribeck effect at the
region A. K is the gain coefficient for the entire friction. The friction torque function
included in system is a nonlinear function for the speed. Depending on the motor
direction, the function type is decided and the performance on the speed control is
effected on. Especially when the low speed and the high-speed navigation are
repeated or when the forward and backward navigation are repeated, the control
signal is disturbed and the navigation performance. The friction torque is also shown
as the disturbance that has bad effect on the system control. In this paper, we consider
the relation for the tracking performance and breakaway in the planned path when the

Fig. 1. Model of friction torque
friction torques of the two wheels become unbalanced by the stick and slip that are
caused by the inertia. When the robot turn left in the curve path after the straight
movement, the speed of the right wheel increases and the speed of the left wheel
decreases. In that case, the right wheel would keep the straight movement by inertia
and the friction torque works to the contrary. Thus stick that restrains the moving
speed for the command of the torque increment happens. In the contrary, slip that
would increase the speed for the decrease command happens.
2.2 Friction Torque Observer
The dynamic equation of the mechanical system is shown in equation (3).
T = J

dω
+τ
dt

(3)

f

After converting equation (3) into Laplace Transformation, we get the equation (4)

Jsω M = τ M − τ f

(4)

Where, J is the moment inertia of a system, τ M is the motor torque, s is the Laplace
operation. Assuming that the friction torque τ f consists of the viscous friction torque
and the coulombs friction in equation (4), equation (5) is obtained.

 Jsω M = τ M − ( Bω M + τ fc )
τ = sgn(ω )T
 fc
M
fc

sgn(
ω
)
=
1
(ω M > 0)
M

 sgn(ω M ) = 0 (ω M < 0)

(5)

Where, B is the friction coefficient ([Nm/(rad/s)]). From equation (5), let
dτ fc / dt = 0 and T̂ fc is estimated as following equation (6).

Tˆ fc =

τ M − ( sJ + B )ω M
1
J
sgn(ω M )
1+ s
sgn(ω M ) L

(6)

Where, L is used as the free coefficient of the observer. In the denominator, the
coefficient of s is the time constant as the first delay factor and we denote this as
Kτ .

Kτ =

J
sgn(ω M ) L

(7)

The sign of K τ depends on the change of sgn(ω M ) . For the observer to be stable, it
is necessary that the root of characteristic equation should be at the left half plane in
the S-plane and choose L to make the condition K τ >0. The feed forward
compensated torque is decided as following equation (8).

τˆ fc = sgn( ω M )Tˆ fc

(8)

The speed control block using the proposed friction torque observer is shown in Fig
2. Where, F(s) is defined in equation (9) and the motor torque τ M is calculated in
equation (10).

Fig 2 the proposed friction torque observer

F (s) =

1
sgn(ωM )

1

(9)

1
1+ s
sgn(ω M ) L

*

τ M = K p (ω M − ω M ) + τˆ fc

(10)

*

Where, Kp is the proportional speed gain and ω M is the speed command. The
proposed friction torque observer is a kind of the adaptive control and the free
coefficient of the observer L is changed as the sign of the moving speed is changed.

3 Fuzzy Control System Modeling
The performance of fuzzy controller is related to fuzzification, rule base, and I/O
linguistic parameters. Especially, premise and consequent linguistic values are very
important for the fuzzy controller design. These parameters are decided after many
trials and errors. It means that in fuzzy control system, the experience and an expert’s
knowledge are very important factor to design rule bases. In this paper we decided
rule bases like this after a lot of trials and error. First of all, the direction error eϑ and
contour error ec are defined as the premise parameter to track the path. And the
consequents parameters v̂d and v̂ s are defined in equation (11).

vˆd = vˆR − vˆL
vˆ + vˆ
vˆs = L R
2

(11)
(12)

Where, v̂ L and v̂ R are the left and right speed input values respectively. As the
fuzzification method, triangle method is used. To apply the designed controller, we
make the premise function and the consequent function and they are shown in Fig 3

Fig3. Premise variable eθ and ec

Fig 4. Consequent variable vd and v s
and Fig 4. For the direction angle and the moving speed, each rule base is made. That
is, even if the inputs are the direction error and the contour error, the outputs are the
direction angle and the moving speed with two 2× 1 structures. For the fuzzy
inference, Mamdani’s product implication is used, and as a t-norm and s-norm
operations, algebraic product and max are used respectively. We use a lookup table.
After the sensor information is checked with this lookup table the control output is
generated.

4 Simulation
In this paper, path tracking is simulated using Matlab program. We give the reference
and make the mobile robot follow the reference path. And the reference path is given
like Fig 5.

(a) The reference Trajectory

(b) The tangent slope of the trajectory

Fig5. The reference trajectory and the slope
4.1 Path Tracking without Observer

Fig. 6 The left result shows that the robot is out of the reference without
using the observer and the right graph is a magnified one.
If there is no difference between the right wheel inertia and the right wheel inertia, the
robot tracks the reference path but there is some difference the robot is out of the way.
4.2 Path Tracking with Observer

Fig. 7 The left result shows that the robot track the reference very well using
the observer and the right graph is a magnified one
In the above figure, the robot tracks both the straight path and the curve well.
Especially when the robot follows the curve, the observer estimates the friction
torque even though there is some difference between the left and the right wheel
inertia.

5 Conclusions
We have dealt with the servo controller to prevent from the breakaway and to
improve the path tracking performance using the friction torque observer. If stick or
slip occurs in the driving parts, the friction torques of wheels become unbalanced and
the torque command is disturbed. As a result, the path tracking performance is getting

worse and the path tracking failure happens. In this paper, the friction torque observer
is proposed to solve this problem. By consisting of this kind of a compensator, the
disturbance caused by the friction torque is compensated. That is, the main
disturbance is compensated and the input torque of the motor follows the command
value of the direction angle well. Also if the free parameter L, the first delay factor, is
chosen properly, the system could be robust for the rapid command value change. In
fuzzy system, proper premise and consequent center values are decided, the system
become stable and could have good performance.

Reference
[1] Sungchul Jee, "Fuzzy logic controls for CNC machine tools", A dissertation
submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Doctor of
Philosophy in the University of Michigan, pp. 101-111
[2] Kevin M. Passino, Stephen Yurkovich, "Fuzzy Control", Addison-Wesley, 1998.
[3] Makoto Iwasaki, "Disturbance-Observer-Based Nonlinear Friction Compensation
in Table Drive System." IEEE/ASME Trans. on Mechatronics. vol. 4, No.1,
March 1999.
[4] S. Futami, A. Furutani, and S. Yoshida, "Nanometer positioning and its microdynamics," Nanotechnol., vol. 1, p 31-37, 1990.
[5] C. C. de Wit, H. Olsson, K. J. Astorm, and P. Lischinsky. the new model for
control of systems with friction,` IEEE Trans. Automat. Contr., vol. 40, pp. 419425, Mar. 1995.
[6] M. Iwasaki and N. Matsui, "Observer-based nonlinear friction compensation in
servo drive system," in Proc., IEEE 4th Int. Workshop AMC. 1996, pp. 344-348.

