A 3D Virtual Lab for the Learning of Chemical
Experiments
IRENE LUQUE RUIZ, ENRIQUE LÓPEZ ESPINOSA, GONZALO CERRUELA GARCÍA AND
MIGUEL ÁNGEL GÓMEZ-NIETO

Department of Computing and Numerical Analysis,
University of Córdoba.
Campus Universitario de Rabanales, Edificio C2, Planta-3.
E-14071 Córdoba (SPAIN)
Phone: +34 957 212082 Fax: +34 957 218630
ma1lurui@uco.es :: mangel@uco.es

Keywords:
Distance education, interactive 3D multimedia system, virtual labs.

Abstract
A model for the development of virtual chemical experiments is proposed in this paper. The model is
named E(V)=M+m —Experiment (Virtual)=Materials + method— and is based on the definition of
chemical experiments through the use of a set of materials which are manipulated following a method or
protocol.
The proposed E(V)=M+m model has been implemented in a multimedia system, which is executed
through a web standard browser. The system developed allows the representation and subsequent building
of chemistry experiments in virtual 3D worlds to any degree of complexity.

This system integrates three main components: a complex object-relational database
storing any kind of information relationship with the experiments (e.g. chemical
substances, materials, apparatus, etc.), a VRML browser in charged to visualize the
experiments, and a Java interface which is in charged to communicate the database with
the 3D browser and the user.

1

1. Introduction
A great number of studies published showing the efforts investing by the chemical
community to adopt the new computer technologies in the teaching of this discipline [111]. The published papers present teaching material like tutorials mainly aimed at
secondary education [12-13], small-to-mid-sized software programs mainly directed to
areas such as: periodic table information, balancing reactions, detailed composition,
calculation of molecular masses, viewing molecular structures, interpretation of spectra,
etc. [13-21] and laboratory software designed to simulate teaching lab experiments [2224].
In this paper we proposed a model that permit avoid much of the existing
inconveniences of the current chemical virtual labs and an environment suitable for the
teaching of chemical experiments, as it offers the following features:
1.

The proposed model permits a simple representation of the domain of the
problem (the experiments). This model permits the inclusion of the teaching
component, since content may be ordered and sequentialized for adaptation
to both the student and the experiment.

2.

There not exists any limitation of the experiments that can be defined.
Experimental content can be reusable, allowing its partial or complete use in
the building of new experiments.

3.

Chemistry experiments can be performed at varying levels of complexity, in
line with different educational grades.

4.

The system may be executed in any platform. A standard web browser is
used as interface between the system and the user.

5.

The 3D representation of the experiments in a VRML world facilitates the
learning of its content by the user.

6.

The integration between a complex database, a Java interface and the 3D
world permit the full communication between the user and the systems
during the performance of the experiments.

The paper first describes the objectives of the study, and then in Section 2 provides a
description of the proposed model. The description includes specification of the
structure and content of experiments in an object oriented model, allowing both the
classification of knowledge in learning blocks and its sequencing in the teaching
process. Section 4 describes the operating prototype and its static operational
2

architecture, closing with a discussion of the project that mentions future projects and
enhancements currently under progress.

2. Representing Virtual Chemical Experiments
The model proposed in the development of chemical virtual experiments is based on the
supposition that a virtual experiment may be described by a method, which uses a set of
materials. Running a virtual experiment, performed in an interactive computer
environment using a system of dialogs, the user may experience a 3D presentation
simulating a chemistry experiment. Each experiment takes place in a virtual
environment containing all the materials with which the user might interact — the
virtual laboratory. Labs may be shared by multiple experiments and may also be built
using different technologies and software, so user interaction will depend on the
technology employed to build them.
Each virtual experiment has an objective and is thus accompanied by descriptive content
aimed at delivering knowledge for the user to learn. While the nature and extent of the
experimental content may be highly varied, presentation and user interaction is
independent of the experiment.
Each experiment has a unique associated method. A method is a precise description of
the tasks and resources used in the experiment.
Each method comprises structure and content. The structure of the method lists the
processes to be carried out during the experiment, while the content includes all
necessary information and the way in which this is manipulated therein.
The method’s structure is made up of a sequence of phases. Each phase involves a
global task or activity performed during the experiment, which may be broken down
into further elementary tasks called stages.
The level of abstraction for the method’s structure is independent of the method and
thus of the experiment, thus allowing any experiment to be described at various levels
of complexity.
This structural breakdown of an experiment, in which different knowledge blocks are
organized chronologically in a working network, is a key factor in user learning [5, 25].
Figure 1 shows a context diagram of the model E(V)=M+m. It may be seen that a
virtual experiment represents the knowledge of a laboratory experiment through a
method structured in phases, which in turn are divided into stages where the materials
3

are manipulated. These structural elements of experiments are extracted from a general
universe, enabling them to be reused in the same or indeed in a different experiment.
Let us now examine the structural elements of the model using a bottom-up approach,
according to complexity.

Universe of chemistry
lab practice

VIRTUAL EXPERIMENT
Universe of
methods

METHOD
PHASE-A

PHASE-J

PHASE-N

STAGE -JN

STAGE -JZ

Universe of
phases

PHASE-J
Universe of
stages

STAGE -J1

MATERIALS

Universe of
materials

Figure 1 Context diagram of the E(V)=M+m model

2.1. Stages
Stages are basic tasks in the structural description of an experiment. Depending on the
level of detail required for the description of an experiment, a task may vary from a
simple manipulation such as “Obtain a pipette” to one like “Obtain a pipette, fill it, and
empty the contents into an Erlenmeyer flask”.
Stages imply manual or automated processes carried out in the lab and involving some
laboratory material. They are distributed throughout the experiment, grouped in Phases.
Within a phase, stages comprise a sequence of tasks that may be described by one or
more directed graphs.

4

PHASE K
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7
Figure 2 Diagram showing permitted transitions for phase-k

Take a phase-k consisting of “Pour 10 ml HCl from the stock bottle into an Erlenmeyer
flask”. This phase may be defined by the following stages:
PKS1:

Obtain a 10 ml pipette from the rack

PKS2:

Open the bottle of concentrated HCl.

PKS3:

Pipette 10 ml HCl from the bottle.

PKS4:

Take the Erlenmeyer flask from the shelf and place on the bench.

PKS5:

Empty the pipette’s contents into the Erlenmeyer flask

PKS6:

Place the pipette in the sink.

PKS7:

Close the bottle of concentrated HCl.

Figure 2 contains a transition diagram [26] showing the different routes that could be
taken to perform phase-k (for a clearer description, the user is assumed to be reasonably
skilled). Again in Figure 2, stages are represented by labeled boxes: shaded boxes show
stages that could be the start of phase-k (S1, S2, S4), and the arrows indicate the
transitions allowed between stages. If when performing phase-k the user chose to begin
at stage S1, the next permissible stage would be S2 or S4. If the user opted to follow the
transition to S2, the next stage could be either S3 or S4.
If the transition to S3 were chosen, the next move would have to be to S4, since getting
to S5 would suppose a transition prior to S3, that is, an Erlenmeyer flask must be
present.
Alternatively, if the user had decided upon a transition to S4, the next move must be to
S3, since moving on to S5 would require a transition prior to stage S3, that is, the pipette
5

has to be filled, and moving to S7 would mean that not all the transitions to all the
stages of phase-k could be completed by any of the existing routes.
Thus, if phase-k is started at S1 it can be performed suitably or correctly by the system
using any of the following routes:

R1:

S1, S2, S3, S4, S5, S6, S7

R2:

S1, S2, S3, S4, S5, S7, S6

R3:

S1, S2, S3, S4, S7, S5, S6

R4

S1, S2, S4, S3, S5, S6, S7

R5:

S1, S2, S4, S3, S5, S7, S6

R6:

S1, S2, S4, S3, S7, S5, S6

R7:

S1, S4, S2, S3, S5, S6, S7

R8:

S1, S4, S2, S3, S5, S7, S6

R9:

S1, S4, S2, S3, S7, S5, S6

White arrows in Figure 2 show the permitted route that is considered, on defining
phase-k, as the most recommendable and which will be taken into account by the
system for the automatic execution of this phase without user intervention.
At each stage at least one Material is required for manipulation. The use of a material
on occasion implies the presence of other materials, as shown by PKS3 where a pipette
is used — thus implying the existence of the bottle of concentrated HCl. Manipulation
of material implies:
1. The presence of the material as well as those materials thereby affected.
2. A condition where the material manipulated and any other intervening
material are in such a state that the manipulation may be successfully
performed.
In the same foregoing example of PKS3 the bottle of HCl must be open to allow the
pipetting of 10 ml (a prior transition to PKS2 has taken place) and the pipette has
already been obtained (a prior transition to PKS1 has occurred).
Thus, Figure 2 shows all the possible transitions that represent manipulation processes
involving phase-k. However, from any given stage only some of these transitions will
be allowed for the performance of phase-k, depending on the transitions previously
carried out and therefore on the current state of the material.
The permitted routes for the user to perform a generic phase n will be those that:
1. Run through, with no repetition, all of the stages comprising phase-n.
2. For any given stage perform only those transitions that do not violate the
priorities existing between the stages of phase-n, as defined by the state of
the material.
6

2.2 Phases
Phases are global elements in the task network that detail a method and group together
stages, amounting to a general task. Regarding an experiment, a phase is an activity that
leads to an elementary step in the experiment and in which a recognizable, measurable
result is produced. Like stages, phases may be defined to varying degrees of abstraction
and thus represent experimental activity at different levels of complexity.

2.3 Methods
Methods describe the structure and chronological route of activities as occurring in the
course of an Experiment. A method is an abstract sequence of procedures representing
the tasks to be carried out, the material to be used and its manipulation in order to
successfully perform a chemistry experiment.
Since phases and stages may be described at various levels of abstraction, one
laboratory experiment can be described by different methods at various levels of
complexity.

2.4 Experiments
The term “experiments” is used to describe practical laboratory experiments whose
operational technique and underlying knowledge are to be passed on to the student
through a virtual environment.
In the E(V)=M+m model, an experiment is defined as the use of a method to manipulate
a set of Materials. Thus each experiment has an associated method that is described by
the phases and stages in which the materials are employed.
Furthermore, an experiment has an associated virtual world containing the materials to
be used and where the activities described in its associated method are carried out.

2.5 Materials
Materials represent the physical elements recognized in the virtual world or laboratory
associated with an experiment and which can be used therein.
The materials category embraces a great variety of laboratory items, differentiated by
their properties and associated functionalities.

7

Hence, the context of material includes such diverse items as chemicals (e.g. existing
products), furniture (e.g. lab benches), material (e.g. glassware) or instruments (e.g. pH
meters).

2.6. Modeling Virtual Experiments
We was performed the implementation of the proposed model using the objectoriented paradigm, and complies with the UML standard [27]. Using the object model, a
system can be described by a set of objects listing the properties and behavior of the
system and each of its component parts.
The class diagram in Figure 3 shows the main entities of the static model
representing the E(V)=M+m model.
forms_part_of 1..*

Formed_by
1

Component

Utilities

<<abstract>>
is_formed_by 1..*

<<dynamics>>

Material

Experiment

1..* {aggregation} 1..*

is_used_in 1..*

Method

1..* {aggregation} 1..*
Phase

formed_by

Stage
1

formed_by

1

uses 1..*
formed_by

1

<<abstract>>

uses 1..*

<<dynamics>>

is_used_by 1..*
1

forms_part_of
<<dynamics>>

Instrumental

is_used_by 1..*

served_from 1..*
uses

<<dynamics>>

Other
Material

Containers

reaction_with 1..*

Apparatus

Furniture

intervenes_in 1..*

Substance
<<abstract>>

1

<<abstract>>

Compound

formed_by *

Atom
obtained_from

1

<<abstract>>

<<dynamics>>

Figure 3 Class Diagram of the proposed model

A Component is considered to be any object existing in the system, and may in
turn be formed by other components. The Component class is an abstract generalization
class. By the term “abstract” we mean that objects belonging to the generalization class
must be refined to one of the specialization classes of which it is composed [27].
A series of components is constructed, stored in a library and then used by a
determined method, in a determined form and following a fixed timeline for the
performance of an experiment, which in itself may be another component. A few
examples of the objects included in this class would be: a decanting method, a
precipitation flask, an experiment for the titration of NaOH with HCl, filter paper, a
funnel, lab scales, etc.

8

Figure 4 An example of the interface of the system

3. Implementation of the model
An operational prototype of the proposed model has been built and is currently
undergoing tests. It has been developed using the Java programming language, which is
platform-independent and should run on any computer. The user interface has been
created using Java applets that can be instantiated on most of the currently available
browsers.
The Oracle 8i.X database manager handles information. The object-relational features
of Oracle 8i.X permits the correct implementation of the class model described in the
previous section. Moreover, this DBMS allows the storage of Java and VRML
procedures in the very nucleus of the database alongside SQL procedure, in addition to
storing media attributes like images and files in the definition of the table structure,
which facilitates and enhances the development and performance of procedures [28-30].
The virtual world (the labs) and its components (materials) were developed under
VRML 2.0, along with utilities to permit the graphical construction of these elements
and their generation in VRML format [31,32].
9

The Figure 4 shows an example of the interface of the system. The Java interface
coordinates the execution of the system, and it is in charged of the communication with
the user, showing all information about of the evolution of the user-system interaction,
which is carried out in a VRML virtual world.

Discussion
The proposal detailed in this paper is based on the use of virtual laboratories to provide
extra support in the teaching of chemistry laboratory experiments. The proposal is based
on E(V)=M+m model that permits the structuring of knowledge in chunks of
information describing basic stages in laboratory usage. The grouping of these stages in
phases  both stages and phases are held in a set of permitted sequences  allows
definition of the method or protocol for a lab experiment to be performed.
This structure, defined using a set of transitions that are allowed on the basis of the state
of the materials employed, offers the possibility of the user carrying out an experiment
in any permissible order of phases and stages and is thus not restricted to just one preset
sequence, as is the case with other existing systems; moreover, the system can “advise”
on the most suitable sequence and give feedback on the user’s errors, a feature that adds
greatly to its educational value.
The model has been implemented in an operational object-oriented prototype using the
latest software technology (Oracle 8i, Java and VRML), bestowing the system with the
set of properties required by authoring systems for the construction of intelligent tutorial
systems; amongst these features are the reuse of software, easy integration of other
components and a user-machine interface suited to the needs of assisted learning.
The authors are currently working to improve and expand several of the components of
the subsystems that should form part of an ITS [35-37]. Additionally, work is underway
on the definition of a suitable ontology for the construction of a dialog system between
the user (student) and the system, such that through the use of an explanatory system
running in parallel with the experiment, the student may both learn and be given
explanations of conceptual and procedural aspects of the task in hand. In the present
system this aspect is managed by static explanations held in .doc and .html files that are
delivered to the user either on request or automatically, as might happen when some
kind of exception arises.

10

References
(1)

Evans, T, Nation, D, Editors. Changing University Teaching: Reflections on Creating Educational
Technologies., Kogan Page, London, 2000.

(2)

Hallmark, J, Seidman, R., editors. Sci/Tech Librarianship: Education and Training. Haworth Press, New
York, 1998.

(3)

Moen, E.; Boersman, K., The Significance of Concept Mapping for Education and Curriculum
Development, Journal of Interactive Learning Research, 1997, 8(3), 487-502.

(4)

Tissue, B.M. The Costs of Incorporating Information Technology in Education.
http://www.chem.vy.edu/archive/chemconf97/paper04.html.

(5)

Cloete, E., Electronic Education System Model., Comput. Educ., 2001, 36(2) 151-170.

(6)

Lagowski, J.J. Chemical Education: Past, Present, and Future. J. Chem. Educ. 1998, 75(4), 425-436.

(7)

Seal, K.C., Przasnysk, Z.H., Using The World Wide Web for Teaching Improvement., J. Chem. Inf. Comp.
Sci., 2001, 36(1), 33-40.

(8)

Warr, W.A., Communication and Communities of Chemistry, J. Chem. Inf. Comp. Sci., 1998, 38, 966-975.

(9)

Borchardt, J.K., Improving the General Chemistry Laboratory, www-chenweb.com/alchem2000/news/nw000922-edu.html

(10)

Jurs, P.C., Computer Software Application in Chemistry. Second Edition, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New

(11)

Rzepa, H.S., Internet-Based Computational Chemistry Tools. In Enclyclopedia of Computational Chemistry.

York, 1996.

Wiley, London, 1998.
(12)

(a) marian.creighton.edu/~ksmith/tutorials.html, (b) www.emory.edu/ CHEMISTRY/pointgrp, (c)
www.chem.uwimona.edu.jm:1104/chemprob.html, (d) www.chemsoc.org.golbook

(13)

(a) chem.lapeer.org/Chem1Docs/Index.html, (b) www.geocities.com/Cape Canaveral/9687/index.html, (c)
www.lanzadera.com/qgeum, (d) www.scripps. edu/~nwhite/B/Download/, (e)
jchemed.chem.wisc.edu/JCEsoft/Issues/ Series_SP/SP8/abs-sp8.html, (f) chem-www.mps.ohiostate.edu/~lars/ moviemol.html

(14)

Barna, N, Dori, Y.J, Computerized Molecular Modeling as a Tool to Improve Chemistry Teaching, J. Chem.
Inf. Comp. Sci., 1998, 36(4), 629-634.

(15)

Ivancinc, O., ChemPlus for Windows, J. Chem. Inf. Comp. Sci., 1996, 36(4), 919-921.

(16)

Ivanov, A.S., Rumgantsev, A.B., Archakov, A.I., Education Program for Macromolecules Structure
Examination, J. Chem. Inf. Comp. Sci., 1996, 36(4), 660-663.

(17)

Parril, A.L., Periodi 2.0 fro Macintosh, J. Chem. Inf. Comp. Sci., 1997, 37(4), 820-820.

(18)

Yoshida, H., Mausura, H. MOLDA for Windows. A Molecular Modeling and Molecular Graphics Program
using a VRML Viewer on Personal Computers. Journal of Chemical Software, 1997, 3(4), 147-156
(cssj.chem.sci.hiroshima-u-ac.jp/molda/download.htm)

(19)

Arruarte, A.; Fernández-Castro, I.; Ferrero, B. The IRIS Shell: How to Build ITSs from Pedagogical and
Design Requisites, International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 1997, 8, 341-381.

(20)

Murray, T., Expanding the Knowledge Acquisition Bottleneck for Intelligent Tutoring Systems,
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 1997, 8(3), 222-234.

(21)

Nussbaum, N., Rosas, R., Peisano, I., Cardenas, F., Development Intelligent Tutoring Systems Using
Knowledge Structure. Computers and Education, 2001, 36(1), 15-32.

(22)

Borman, S., Lab Systems Embrace the Web, Chem. Eng. News. (27th, January, 1997, pp. 25-27).

(23)

(a) www.modelscience.com/products.html, (b) www.chemnews.com, (c) website/

11

lineone.next/~chemie/reviews.html, (d) www2.acdlabs.com/ilabs, (e) www. chemsw.com/10202.htm, (f)
www.compuchem.com/dldref/formdem.htm, (g)
www.ir.chem.cmu.edu/irProject/applets/virtuallab/applet_wPI.asp
(24)

Rzepa, H.S., Tonge, A.P., VchemLab: A Virtual Chemistry Laboratory. The Storage, Retrieval and Display
of Chemical Information Using Standard Internet Tools, J. Chem. Inf. Comp. Sci., 1998, 36(6), 1048-1053.

(25)

Luger, G.F., Stubblefield, W.A. Artificial Intelligence: Solutions and Strategies for Complex Problem

(26)

Jacobson, I., Booch, G., Rumbaugh, J., The Unified Software Development Process, Addison-Wesley

Solving. Addison-Wesley, Reading MA, 1992

Longman Inc, USA, 1999.
(27)

Rumbaugh, J., Jacobson, I., Booch, G., The Unified Modeling Language. Reference Manual, AddisonWesley Longman Inc, USA, 1999.

(28)

Cary Anderson, J., Loy Stone, Blake Manual de Oracle JDeveloper, McGraw-Hill/Oracle Press, Madrid,
1999.

(29)

Dorsey, P., Hudicka, J.R., Oracle8 Principios de Diseño de Base de Datos Usando UML , McGraw-Hill,
Madrid,1999.

(30)

Roehl, Bernie, Couch, Justin, Reed-Ballreich, Cindy et al. Late Night VRML 2.0 with Java, Ziff-Davis
Press, EmeryVille, California, USA, 1997.

(31)

Guerrero, J. VRML 2.0, El Lenguaje 3D de Internet, Abeto, Madrid, 1998.

(32)

Jamsa, K., Schmauder, P., Yee, N., VRML, Biblioteca del Programador, McGraw-Hill, Madrid, 1998.

(33)

Lea, R., Matsuda, K. Miyashita, K. Java for 3D and VRML Worlds, New Riders, Indianápolis, USA, 1996.

(34)

(a) java.sun.com/products/jama-media/3D, (b) www.rtzvirtual.es, (c) www.
VRML.org/Specification/VRML97, (d) www.wmaestro.com/web3d/docs/ portada.html

(35)

Luque Ruiz, I; Cruz Soto, J.L.; Gómez-Nieto, M.A. Error Detection, Recovery, and Repair in the Translation
of Inorganic Nomenclatures. 1. A Study of the Problem. J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci. 1996, 36(1), 7-15. 2. A
Proposed Strategy. J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci. 1996, 36(1), 16-24. 3. An Error Handler. J. Chem. Inf.
Comput. Sci. 1996, 36(3), 483-490.

(36)

Luque Ruiz, I.; Martínez Pedrajas, C.; Gómez-Nieto, M.A. Design and Development of Computer-Aided
Chemical Systems: Representing and Balance of Inorganic Chemical Reactions. J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci.
2000, 40(3), 744-752.

(37)

Luque Ruiz, I; Gómez-Nieto, M.A. Solving Incomplete Inorganic Chemical Systems through a Fuzzy
Knowledge Frame. J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci., 2001, 41(1), 83-99.

12

