Analytical Approach for Channel Assignments in
Cellular Networks
Vladimir V. Shakhov1 and Hyunseung Choo2
1

Institute of Computational Mathematics and Mathematical Geophysics,
Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences,
630090, Novosibirsk, Russia
shakhov@rav.sscc.ru
2
School of Information and Communication Engineering
Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 440-746, Korea
choo@ece.skku.ac.kr

Abstract. In the present paper channel assignments in cellular architectures are considered. This is quite important in cell and channel planning
since reusing channels in cells allows to manage resources and to serve
users eﬀectively in the system. The optimal solution is oﬀered here for
the case of co-channel interference. Previous solutions on co-channel interference are based on regular hexagonal models for service areas. A
novel technique is employed in this work that does not depend upon any
geometric form of cells. It is obtained that the optimal number of channels equals the density of a special graph. Earlier analytical results on
span minimization show lower bounds meanwhile we provide the upper
bound in this paper.

1

Introduction

A mobile computing has become an essential part of modern telecommunication.
As demands for wireless mobile communication grow under limited resources of
cellular systems, it is very important to use frequency channels as eﬃciently
as possible to maintain the necessary quality of services. Thus, frequency reuse
is the key concept of the cellular network design [1]. According to the concept
the same frequency channel can be simultaneously used in diﬀerent cells. The
geographical distance between cells should be suﬃciently large. Otherwise, interference may decrease the quality of service. So, the goal of Channel Assignment
Problem is an eﬀective utilization of frequency region under some interference
constraints.
There exist two types of interference constraints. 1) The co-channel constraint, where the same channel cannot be assigned to certain pairs of radio
cells simultaneously. An interference between diﬀerent channels is absent for any
This work was supported in part by grant No. 2000-2-30300-004-3 from the Basic
Research Program of Korea Science and Engineering Foundation. Dr. H.Choo is the
corresponding author.
P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2657, pp. 466–473, 2003.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

Analytical Approach for Channel Assignments in Cellular Networks

467

cells. Transmitters having a mutual distance no smaller than admissible distance
r may use the same frequencies, when r is a known constant. 2) The adjacent
channel constraint, where any couple of assigned channels must be separated by
a certain frequency band. This band depends on the physical distance between
cells which use the channels simultaneously. If the distance is suﬃciently large
then the band equals zero.
The interference constraints generate two kinds of Channel Assignment Problem. Let us consider the restriction 1). We have some quantity of potential channels. Each cell should get a set of available frequency channels under constraint
1). It is necessary to minimize a number of used channels in the cellular system.
We name it as minimization of the number of channels (MNC). The next kind
of Channel Assignment Problem is generated by restriction 2). Let us remark
that the constraint 2) generalizes the constraint 1). Here we have a bandwidth.
Frequency channels are extracted from the bandwidth and assigned to cells by
taking into account the constraint 2). It is required to minimize the bandwidth
which is used by the cellular system. In literature the technical term span is
applied [4]. The span of an assignment is the diﬀerence between the largest and
the smallest channels used [12]. Therefore, it needs to ﬁnd the minimum span
over all possible assignments. We name this as Span Minimization (SM).
For channel assignments a simpliﬁed model of cellular network is used. A service area of cellular network has been modeled by a net of regular homogeneous
hexagonal cells [4,5,7,8,10,12]. It is a good approximation for the use of omnidirectional antennas. Let us remark the hexagon is non-unique model of a cell.
A cell can be a triangle if antennas of cellular network have a sector direction
[2]. If an oﬃce network is designed, rectangular cells are used [3]. A geometry of
cells can be used by methods for frequency assignment.
Now we shall give the following deﬁnition. The cellular graph is a graph where
each cell of the cellular network is represented by a node and two nodes have
a common edge between them if the corresponding cells are adjacent to each
other [7]. Frequency assignment problems are reduced to a problem of cellular
graph coloring. For an arbitrary graph the problem is NP complete. However, the
optimal number of channels is found by using some properties of cellular graphs.
Without loss of generality it is assumed that a set of available frequencies for a
cell consists of a single element [4,8].
In previous works MNC under regular hexagonal cell system was investigated
and an optimal solution has been found. For this system the optimal number of
frequencies is given in [6]. In [4] MNC has been considered for Euclidean admissible distance r and a channel assignment algorithm has been oﬀered. The case
that r equals a number of cells was named r-distance problem and investigated
in [7,8]. However, results discussed are out-of-use for other cell systems. A cell
can be non-hexagonal, r can be diﬀerent for other part of service area and so on.
In this paper we present an alternative technique for computing the the optimal
number of channels, which can be more widely applicable.
Generally, SM is an NP-complete problem [5,13]. The optimal solution of the
problem is obtained only for particular cases [14]. In [15] a branch and bound

468

V.V. Shakhov and H. Choo

algorithm is used, but this approach does not guarantee against the complete
enumeration. For a large-scale system an approach for the optimal solution is
impractical. Thus a simpliﬁcation of the problem or an approximation technique
have been used, such as neural network based algorithms [16,17,18], simulations [19,20], and genetic algorithms [9,21,22,23]. Many authors have studied
lower bounds for SM. The most popular bounds are based on cliques [7,8] or
on minimum weight Hamiltonian paths [11,12]. The technique for mathematical
programming has been applied for lower bounds [12,5]. In this paper we oﬀer
unimprovable upper bound for SM.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, MNC is considered. We
prove the optimal number of channel is deﬁned by the density of special graph.
In Section 3, SM is investigated. An upper bound for frequencies assignment
under is oﬀered with some examples. Section 4 is a brief conclusion.

2

On Minimizing the Number of Channels

Let us consider a service area covered by omnidirectional base stations. Admissible distance r can be diﬀer for other part of service area. Let G(V, E) be a
cellular graph, when V is the vertex set and E is the edge set. By d(u, v) denote
distance from u to v, when u, v ∈ V . Now we shall give the following deﬁnitions.
Deﬁnition 1. A graph is called r-graph and is denoted by Gr if V (Gr ) =
V (G), E(Gr ) = {(u, v) : d(u, v) ≤ r in G}
Deﬁnition 2. A complete subgraph of Gr is a cluster if it is not contained
by other complete subgraphs.
It is clear MCN is reduced to the graph coloring problem for Gr . The optimal
number of channels for the regular hexagonal cell system equals a power of cluster
[6,4,7,8]. Here we do not use any assumption for geometric form of cells.
Lemma 1. Let the service area be completly covered by cells, i.e. there will be no
non-signalling (empty) zone. Then the corresponding cellular graph is chordal.
Proof. Without loss of generality we may consider a simple cycle with 4 nodes
in cellular graph. The service area of four corresponding base stations has no
empty zone. Let two non-adjacent vertices of the cycle have no edge between
them. The cell areas for those two base stations are non-overlapping sets. Let P
be the service area within the cycle excluding those two cell areas. Denote by
A and B service zones of other base stations into P . It is clear that P ∩ A = ∅
and P ∩ B = ∅. It follows from the lemma condition that P = A ∪ B. We have
P \ A = ∅. Hence, P \ A ⊂ B or P \ A = B, i.e. set B is the complement of
set A. So, if two vertices is non-adjacent then other vertices should be adjacent.
The proof is completed.
Let us remark E(Gr ) ⊃ E(G). Hence Gr is a chordal graph too. The following
theorem is needed for the sequel.
Theorem 1. Every chordal graph is perfect [24].

Analytical Approach for Channel Assignments in Cellular Networks

469

It is known that the chromatic number of the perfect graph is equal to the
graph density. So, we have
Theorem 2. The optimal number of channels equals the density of corresponding r-graph.

3

Upper Bound for Span Minimization

Here we use the same notation as in the section above. By fi denote a frequency
assigned to cell i. An admissible frequency assignment will be a set of positive
numbers {fi } such that
|fi − fj | ≥ ci,j ∀i, j ∈ V.
The lowest frequency equals 0. Hence, span F is the maximum frequency
assigned to the system. That is,
F = max fi , i ∈ V.
It is necessary to ﬁnd min F among all admissible assignments. A compatibility matrix is a symmetric matrix C = (ci,j ) with nonnegative integer entries ci,j
[5]. We say that C is the distance compatibility matrix if the following conditions
hold
∀i, j, u, v ∈ V : ci,j = cu,v if d(i, j) = d(u, v).
As in the literature, the distance compatibility matrix is assumed and let us have
values s0 , s1 , s2 , . . ., such that
ci,i = s0 ∀i ∈ V and ∀i, j ∈ V : c(i, j) = sk if d(i, j) = k, k ∈ {1 . . . n − 1}.
It is clear that s0 ≥ s1 ≥ s2 . . ..
As in [8,9] we consider the problem for a single mobile user in each cell. This
assignment can be used for more number of users. Suppose F1 is the assignment
for a single customer per cell, the frequency fi is assigned to cell i, and we
have K calls per cell. If s0 is suﬃciently large, then the assignment fi , fi +
s0 , . . . fi + (K − 1)so is used in cell i, else we use the assignment fi , fi + F1 +
s0 , . . . fi + F1 + (K − 1)so . Generally, it is not admissible for an optimal solution
nor lower bound. However, it is acceptable for upper estimation. Let us consider
the following example (See Figure 1). We have cellular network (A, B, C, D) and
one customer in each cell. Interference constraints are s0 = s1 = s. The optimal
span equals 2s and the distribution of frequencies is shown. We receive the same
results. However, if two customers are served in cell D, we receive span 4s using
our approach, meanwhile the optimal span equals 2s. Let us remark if we have K
customers in each cell (homogeneous traﬃc) then an optimal solution is reached
by the approach above.
Now we oﬀer the following technique for the frequency assignment of one
user per cell which produces the unimprovable upper bound of a span and an

470

V.V. Shakhov and H. Choo

Fig. 1. The example of frequency assignment

admissible frequency assignment. For some particular cases this assignment will
be an optimal.
1) Let G(V, E) be a cellular graph. We consider only interference constrain
s1 and decide the graph coloring problem for G. By χ denote the chromatic
number of G, i.e. colors 0, 1, . . . χ − 1 are used. If the node i received color k,
then fi = ks1 . In adjacent cells i, j we have |fi − fj | ≥ s1 . If s2 = 0 then SM is
decided and F = (χ − 1)s1 .
2) Let s2 = 0. Suppose the vertices i, j have the same color. If d(i, j) = 2,
then corresponding vertices cannot use the same channel. The set V is divided
in subsets Vi , i = 1, . . . , χ, where elements of Vi have the same color in G.
Now we decide the graph coloring problems for graphs Gi , i = 1, . . . χ, where
V (Gi ) = Vi and an edge (u, v) ∈ E(Gi ) if d(u, v) = 2 in G. Let the chromatic
number of G1 be χi . If the node i ∈ G1 received color k, then fi = ks2 . In
adjacent cells i, j of G1 we have |fi − fj | ≥ s2 but the condition for s1 should
be true too, i.e. | max fi − min fj | = s1 , i ∈ G1 , j ∈ G2 Hence, for nodes of
G1 we use frequencies 0, s2 , . . . , (χ1 − 1)s2 , for nodes of G2 we use frequencies
(χ1 − 1)s2 + s1 , χ1 s2 + s1 , . . . , (χ1 + χ2 − 2)s2 + s1 , and so on. If s3 = 0 then
SM is completed and S = (χ1 + χ2 + . . . + χχ − χ)s2 + (χ − 1)s1 . If s3 = 0, then
the process above is repeated, and so on, until sj = 0, j = 4, 5 . . ..
An example for s3 = 0 is on ﬁgure 2 (3-band buﬀering system). It is clear the
oﬀered method get upper bound for SM. Let us consider example from [8] (see
ﬁgure 3). Here s1 > s2 = 0, s3 = 0. The assigned frequency channels are into

Analytical Approach for Channel Assignments in Cellular Networks

471

Fig. 2. 3-band buﬀering system.

vertices. A couple (a,b) in node mean that corresponding cell receive channel
as1 + bs2 . Our method gives the same assignment. If s1 < 2s2 , then the shown
solution is optimal,hence, we received the unimprovable upper bound. Else, the
solution can be improved as it shown on the ﬁgure.

4

Conclusion

In most of real cellular networks, the homogeneous hexagonal model is unrealistic. We have obtained the optimal number of channels under co-channel interference for more practical cellular networks which are not necessary homogeneous
and hexagonal. It is proved that the optimal number of channels equals the
density of r-graph constructed from cellular graphs. For the span minimization
the upper bound is obtained. The division of compatibility matrix is used and
sequential solution of graph coloring problems are made. The distance between

472

V.V. Shakhov and H. Choo

Fig. 3. Example of solution

cells is deﬁned as a path in cellular graphs and we consider the distance compatibility matrix. Our approach is applicable to Euclidean distance and an arbitrary
compatibility matrix.

References
1. W. Lee, Mobile Cellular Telecommunications: analog and digital systems, Second
Edition, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1995.
2. Y. Akaiwa, Intoduction to Digital Mobile Communications, New York: John Wiley
& Sons, 1997.
3. S. Fedortsov, B. Tsybakov, “Channels distribution in cellular network,” Information Transmition Problems, vol. 32, pp. 91–99, 1996 (in Russian).
4. A. Gamst, “Homogeneouse Distribition of Frequencies in a Regular Hexaginal Cell
System,” IEEE Transactions on Veh. Technology, vol. VT-31, pp. 132–144, Aug.
1982.
5. A. Gamst, “Some Lower Bounds for a Class of Frequency Assignment Problems,”
IEEE Transactions on Veh. Technology, vol. VT-31, pp. 132–144, Aug. 1982.
6. V.H. MacDonald, “Advanced mobile phone service: The cellular concept,” Bell
Syst. Tech. J., v.58, pp. 15–41, 1979.
7. A. Sen, T. Roxoborough, and S. Medidi, “Upper and lower Bounds of a Class
of Channel Assignment Problems in Cellular Networks,” Proc. of IEEE INFOCOM’98, vol. 3, pp. 1284–1291, 1998.
8. A. Sen, T. Roxoborough, and S. Medidi, “On an Optimal Algorithm for Channel
Assignment in Celluar Networks,” Proc. of IEEE ICC’99, vol. 2, pp. 1147–1151,
1999.
9. C.Y. Ngo and V.O.K. Li, “Fixed channel assignment in cellular radio networks
using a modiﬁed genetic algorithm,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology,
v.47, No.1, pp. 163–172, 1998.
10. J.A. Khan, S.M. Sait, and S.A. Khan, “A fast constructive algorithm for ﬁxed
channel assignment problem,” The 2001 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems, v.5, pp. 65–68, 2001.

Analytical Approach for Channel Assignments in Cellular Networks

473

11. C.W. Sung and W.S. Wong, “Sequential Packing Algorithm for Channel Assignment Under Cochannel and Adjacent Channel Interference Constraint,” IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, v.46, No.3, pp. 676–686, 1997.
12. D.H. Smith, S. Hurley, and M. Allen, “A new lower bound for the channel assignment problem,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., v.49, No.4, pp. 1265–1272, 2000.
13. W.K. Hale, “Frequency assignment: Theory and application,” Proc. IEEE, v.68,
pp. 1497–1514.
14. J.C.M. Janssen and K. Kilakos, “An Optimal Solution to the ”Philadelphia” Channel Assignment Problem,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., v.48, No.3, pp. 1012–1014,
1999.
15. S.Z. Ali and L.F. Turner, “An eﬃcient methodology for optimal channel assignment
of large and complex mobile radio networks,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., VTC
2001 Fall. IEEE VTS 54th, v.1, pp. 389–393, 2001.
16. D. Kunz, “Channel assignment for cellular radio using neural network,” IEEE
Trans. Veh. Technol., v.40, No.1, pp. 188–193, 1991.
17. N. Funabiki and Y.Takefuji, “A neural network parallel algorithm for channel assignment problems in cellular radio network,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., v.41,
pp. 430–437, 1992.
18. N.A. El-Fishawy, M.M. Hadhood, S. Elnoubi, and W. El-Sersy, “A modiﬁed Hopﬁeld neural network algorithm for cellular radio channel assignment,” IEEE VTS
Fall VTC 2000. 52nd, v.3 , pp. 1128–1133, 2000.
19. M. Duque-Anton, D. Kunz, and B. Ruber, “Channel assignment for cellular radio
using simulation annealing,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., v.42, pp. 14–21, 1993.
20. R. Mathar and J. Mattfeldt, “Channel assignment in cellular radio networks,”
IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., v.42, pp. 647–656, 1993.
21. W.K. Lai and G.G. Coghill, “Channel assignment through evolutionary optimization,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., v.45, No.1, pp. 91–96, 1996.
22. K.A. Smith, “A genetic algorithm for the channel assignment problem,” IEEE
Global Telecommunications Conference, v.4, pp. 2013–2018, 1998.
23. G. Chakraborty and B. Chakraborty “A genetic algorithm approach to solve channel assignment problem in cellular radio networks,” Proc. of SMCia/99, pp. 34–39,
1999.
24. R. Diestel, Graph Theory, Second Edition. Springer-Verlag, New York, pp. 111–
112, 2000.

