Hybrid Search Algorithms for P2P Media Streaming
Distribution in Ad Hoc Networks*
Dong-hong Zuo, Xu Du**, and Zong-kai Yang
Dept. of Electronics and Information Engineering, Huazhong Univerisity of Science and
Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, 430074, China
{sixizuo,duxu,zkyang}@mail.hust.edu.cn

Abstract. Media streaming delivery in wireless ad hoc networks is challenging
due to the stringent resource restrictions, potential high loss rate and the decentralized architecture. To support long and high-quality streams, one viable approach is that a media stream is partitioned into segments, and then the segments are replicated in a network and served in a peer-to-peer fashion, however,
the searching strategy for segments is one key problem with the approach. This
paper proposes a hybrid ant-inspired search algorithm (HASA) for P2P media
streaming distribution in Ad Hoc networks. It takes the advantages of random
walkers and ant-inspired algorithms for search in unstructured P2P networks,
such as low transmitting latency and less redundant query messages. We quantify the performance of our scheme in terms of response time and network
query messages for media streaming distribution. Simulation results show that it
can effectively improve the Search Efficiency for P2P media streaming distribution in Ad Hoc networks.
Keywords: Ad Hoc networks, media streaming distribution, search algorithms,
peer to peer.

1 Introduction
Media streaming distribution in wireless ad hoc networks is attractive and is also
challenging due to stringent resource restrictions at the mobile hosts, dynamic network connectivity, and potentially high loss rate. To support media streaming applications with limited resources, one viable approach is: partitioning a media stream into
segments and managing them in a peer-to-peer fashion [1, 2]. Unfortunately, this
approach brings us challenges on searching for multiple segments and reassembling
them in such unstructured P2P networks.
Flooding based search algorithms [1, 2] are adopted due to the reliability and low
latency. However, they incur large volume of unnecessary traffic to networks. Statistics based searching algorithms [3, 4] are proposed to avoid the large volume of
redundant messages. But they introduce the partial coverage problem. In order to
effectively reduce the redundant traffic and alleviate the partial coverage problem,
*
**

Supported by Province Natural Science Foundation of Hu Bei under Grant No.2005ABA264.
Corresponding auther.

Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 873–876, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

874

D.-h. Zuo, X. Du, Z.-k. Yang

hybrid search algorithms [5] are proposed. But they are designed for the file sharing
system and don’t concern the correlation of continuous queries for media streaming
segments.
We propose a hybrid ant-inspired search algorithm (HASA) for P2P media streaming distribution in Ad Hoc networks, coping with the P2P network churn and concerning the correlation of the searched media segments. It takes the advantages of K
random walkers [4] and ant-inspired algorithms [6] for searching in unstructured
media streaming distribution P2P networks.

2 Description of the Hybrid Ant-Inspired Search Algorithm
HASA uses the ant colony theorem [7] to collect and maintain the statistics information. At each peer Pi, pheromone trails are maintained in a pheromone table of size
m×n, where m is the number of the media segments and n is the number of peer Pi’s
outgoing links to neighbor peers Pu where u∈{1, ..., n}.
2.1 Overview of HASA
Every peer in the network behaves as a media segments query originator peer, media
segments providing peer, and/or intermediate peer. When a peer wants to find some
media segment, a forwarding ant is generated. Originator peers and intermediate peers
forward the forwarding ants according the forwarding rule. When the query is hit at
one peer, a backward ant is generated, and is sent back following the reverse path of
its corresponding forward ant. When ants move in the P2P network, they collect the
paths’ information and update the pheromone tables of peers in their paths according
to the pheromone updating rule.
2.2 Forwarding Rule
Both intermediate and originator peers forward the ants in the same way. When a
forward ant is received or generated, this ant will be forwarded to K neighbor peers
except the incoming one. The next peer selection is done using the pheromone tables.
If the amount of pheromones of all neighbors for the segment that the forward ant is
searching for is τinit, then the forwarding ant will be forwarded to K randomly selected
neighbor peers. Otherwise, if more than K links’ pheromones for segment s are
refreshed, the forwarding ant will be forwarded to these K neighbors (K is far less
than the number of neighbor peers.) that the amount of pheromone is more than the
rest. If only L (L<K) links’ pheromones are updated, the forwarding ant will be
forwarded to these L neighbors, and M(M ≦ K-L) neighbors those have more
pheromone trails for segment s-1. If M+L<K, then other K-M-L neighbors will be
randomly selected from the rest to be forwarded to.
2.3 Pheromone Updating Rule
In HASA the pheromone table is updated when peers receive either forward ants or
backward ants. When a peer joins the media distribution network, we calculate the
elapsed time into equal intervals. At startup, all peers’ pheromone table entries are

Hybrid Search Algorithms for P2P Media Streaming Distribution

875

initialized with the same small value τinit. When receiving ants, peers update
pheromone table using function (1). At the beginning of the nth interval, peers update
pheromone table using function (2).
⎧ τ s,i,j (n )+ ∇ τ s,i,j (n ,a m ) th e in co m in g lin k
τ s ,i,j (n )= ⎨
τ s,i,j (n )
o th er lin k s
⎩

(1)

τs,i,j(n)= τs,i,j(n-1)ρs

(2)

Where τs,i,j(n) is the pheromone value for segment s corresponding to neighbor j at
node i after passing n intervals. ρs is the evaporation parameter of pheromone trails for
segment s. ∇τs,i,j(n,am) is the pheromone left by the mth ants for segment s
corresponding to neighbor j at node i in the nth interval. The amount of ∇τs,i,j(n,am) are
different at different peers which is left by the same ant. Example of such function is:
∇τs,i,j(n,am)=wpIpath,i+wh(C-hs,i), where C is a constant number, it should be larger than
the longest hop for searching any segment s in the network. hs,i is the hop that the ant
has traveled from its generating peer to peer i. Ipath,I is the path information from the
originator or providing peer to the intermediate peer i. wp is the path information
weight, and wh is the hop weight, they control the wp+ wh=1. The path information is
collected by ants.

3 Performance Evaluation
HASA is evaluated by simulating a peer-to-peer system with 1600 peers and by
comparing its performance against that of the well-known K random walkers
search[5] approaches. In this experiment, a long media stream is divided into 20
segments. Initially, all segments are stored in one peer in the network. Then streaming
accesses are triggered at random points in the network. To model the popularity of the
segments, a Zipf-like distribution is used. Each node has cache spaces for 3 segments.
In the experiment described here, the parameter values were chosen as follows: K=2,
ρs=0.2, wp=wh=0.5, TTL = 15. To provide for comparison fairness, the TTL and K of
K random walkers algorithm are set to 15 and 2 separately.

Fig. 1. The average segment transmitting
delay

Fig. 2. The average ratio of nodes visited to
number of query messages

876

D.-h. Zuo, X. Du, Z.-k. Yang

Fig.1 and Fig.2 show the performance comparison of the media transmitting
latency and messages efficiency for K random walkers and the hybrid ant-inspired
search algorithms.The simulation results show that the hybrid search algorithm is
better than the K random walkers algorithm. HASA algorithm forward queries
following the trails for latter generated searches, but K random walks still forwards
queries randomly, so HASA algorithm can find the queried segment more quickly,
and it can effectively avoid forwarding the queries to the useless peers.

4 Conclusion
HASA uses the K random walkers based search strategy for searching a segment at
the beginning, when receiving queries and responses, peers update their pheromone
tables immediately, then use the pheromone trails to forward k ants for searching
segments at each intermediate peers or originator peers. It collects the advantages of k
random walkers and ant-inspired search algorithms, it exploits the correlation of
streaming access. It can reduce most redundant messages, but still keeps the low
transmitting latency for media streaming distribution in wireless Ad Hoc networks.

References
1. Jin, S.: Replication of Partitioned Media Streams in Wireless Ad Hoc Networks. Proc. of
the 12th ACM Int. Conf. on Multimedia. ACM press, New York (2004) 396 - 399
2. Shahram, G., Bhaskar, K. and Song, S.: Placement of Continuous Media in Wireless Peerto-Peer Networks. IEEE Trans Multimedia, Vol. 6, No. 2. IEEE Computer Society, New
Jersey (2004) 335-342
3. Yang, B. and Garcia-Molina, H.: Improving search in peer-to-peer networks. Proc. of the
22nd Int. Conf. on Distributed Computing Systems. IEEE Computer Society, Washington
(2002) 5-14
4. Qin, L., Cao, P., Edith, C., Li, K. and Scott, S.: Search and Replication in Unstructured
Peer-to-Peer Networks. Proc. of the 16th Int. Conf. on Supercomputing. ACM Press, New
York (2002) 84-95
5. Gkantsidis, C., Mihail, M. and Saberi, A.: Hybrid search schemes for unstructured peer-topeer networks. Proc. of IEEE INFOCOM 2005. IEEE Computer Society, New York (2005)
1526-1537
6. Yang, K.H., Wu, C.J., Ho, J.M.: AntSearch: An ant search algorithm in unstructured peerto-peer networks. IEICE Trans Commun, Vol. E89-B, No. 9. Oxford University Press,
Bunkyo,Tokyo (2006) 2300-2308

