Finite Element Simulation of Stress Evolution in a
Frictional Contact System
1

1

2

H.L. Xing , P. Mora , and A. Makinouchi
1

QUAKES, The University of Queensland, St. Lucia, Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia
{xing,mora}@quakes.uq.edu.au
2
Integrated V-CAD Research Program
The Institute of Physical and Chemical Research, Japan

Abstract. A 3-dimensional finite element algorithm for modeling nonlinear
frictional contact behaviours between deformable bodies with the node-to-point
contact element strategy has been proposed and applied here to investigate
stress evolution processes of a nonlinear frictional contact system. The numerical results of a typical intra-plate fault bend model demonstrate the efficiency
and usefulness of this algorithm.

1

Introduction

The understanding, simulation and prediction of behaviors of frictional contact systems are very important in both theory and practical applications. Although the important progresses have been achieved in the computational mechanics, how to describe
the complex phenomena in a frictional contact system with reasonable accuracy still
remains a problem to be overcome. Up to now, it is difficult for most of the existing
finite element codes to get a stable solution even with the assumption that the interface parameters are constant during the frictional process. An arbitrarily shaped contact element strategy, named as node-to-point contact element strategy, was proposed
based on the static-explicit algorithm and applied to handle the frictional contact between deformable bodies with stick and finite frictional slip [1–4]. This paper will
focus on how to extend the algorithm to the simulation of stress evolution phenomena
in a frictional contact system.

2

Finite Element Formulation

The updated Lagrangian rate formulation is employed to describe the non-linear contact problem. The rate type equilibrium equation and the boundary at the current configuration are equivalently expressed by a principle of virtual velocity of the form

(

)

J
1
2
∫V σ ij − Dik σ kj + σ ik L jk − σ ik Dkj δLij dV = ∫S F Fiδvi dS + ∫S c1 f i δvi dS + ∫S c2 f i δvi dS (1)

P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2659, pp. 798–806, 2003.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

Finite Element Simulation of Stress Evolution in a Frictional Contact System

799

where V and S denote respectively the domains occupied by the total deformable body
B and its boundary at time t; SF is a part of the boundary of S on which the rate of
traction Fi is prescribed; v is the virtual velocity field which satisfies the condition v = 0 on the velocity boundary; σ ijJ is the Jaumann rate of Cauchy stress σ ij ; L
is the velocity gradient tensor, L = v/ x ; D is the symmetric part of L; f α is the
rate of contact stress on contact interface Scα of the body α and calculated as follows.
Friction is by nature a path-dependent dissipative phenomenon that requires the integration along the slip path. In this study, a standard Coulomb friction model is applied in an analogous way to the flow plasticity rule, which governs the slipping behaviour. The basic formulations are summarized below [1]-[3] (The tiled (~) above a
variable denotes a relative component between slave and master bodies, and l, m=1,2;
i , j , k = 1, 3 respectively in this paper).
Based on experimental observations, an increment decomposition is assumed

∆u~m = ∆u~me + ∆u~mp ,

(2)

where ∆u~me and ∆u~mp respectively represent the stick (reversible) and the slip (irreversible) part of ∆u~m , the relative displacement increment component along direction
m on the contact interface. The slip is governed by the yield condition

F=

fm f m − F ,

(3)

where fm (m=1,2) is the frictional stress component along the tangential direction m;
F , the critical frictional stress, F = µfn ; µ is the friction coefficient, it may depend
on the normal contact pressure fn , the equivalent slip velocity u~eq  = u~m u~m  and the


~
state variable ϕ , i.e. µ = µ ( f , u ,ϕ ) (e.g. [5]).
n

eq

If F<0, contact is in the sticking state and treated as a linear elasticity, i.e.

fm = Et u~me = Et ∑ ∆u~me ,

(4)

where Et is a constant in the tangential direction.
When F=0, the friction changes its character from the stick to the slip. The frictional stress can be described as
fm = η m F and η m = f me

where fme = Et ( u~m − u~mp ) , and u~mp
0

0

fle fl e

(5)

is the value of u~mp at the beginning of this step.

800

H.L. Xing, P. Mora, and A. Makinouchi

The linearized form of Eq. (5) can be rewritten as

df l =


 ∂µ
∂µ
du~eq +
dϕ 
~

∂ϕ

 ∂ueq
(6)

(δ lm − ηlη m )du~m + ηl µ  df n + ∂µ df n  + ηl f n 

F Et

∂f n



f me f me



In addition, the penalty parameter method is chosen to satisfy the normal impenetrability condition. Finally, the frictional contact stress acting on a slave node can be
described as (denote f 3 = fn )

fi = Gij u~j + fϕi ,

(7)

where G is the frictional contact matrix; fϕ i is from the contribution of the terms

related with ϕ .
A node-to-point contact element strategy was proposed to handle the frictional
contact problems between deformable bodies [1]-[4]. Assume a slave node s has contacted with point c on a surface element (master segment) E ′ , and the surface element
E ′ consists of γ nodes ( γ = 4 in this paper if without special notation), thus the term
related with contact in Eq. (1) can be described as (α = 1, (γ + 1) , β = 1, (γ + 1) )

([

f i (δu si − δuci ) = δu~sciβ K fik

]βα usckα + Rβ fϕi ) ,

(8)

where

[K fik ]βα = Rβ ei ⋅}Ghk Rα eh + (H jm eˆ j ((Cll Rα ,m − Cml Rα ,l )ek ⋅ ~x + Rα (Cll eˆm − Cml eˆl )⋅ ek ))}
(9)

( h = 1, 3 , l ≠ m and no sum on l ),

here Cml = Cml − gn n⋅ em ,l , Cml = em ⋅ el , ℘ = C11C22 − C12 C21 , x~ = x s − x c ,
Eijm = ei , m ⋅ e j

,

R = 1 − N1

− N2

H jm = fi Eijm ℘
... − Nγ

T

,

[

usc = us

u1

u2

... uγ

]

,

, N p ( p = 1, γ ) is the shape function value of the

point c on the surface element E ′ , ei and ei are respectively the base vectors of the
local natural and the local Cartesian coordinate systems on the master segment;
gn = n ⋅ (x s − xc ) , while x s and xc are the position coordinates of a slave node and its
corresponding contact point on a master surface, respectively.
The explicit time integration algorithm is applied with the R-minimum to limit the
step size for avoiding a drastic change in states within an incremental step [e.g. 4]. In
combination with the above equations, Eq. (1) can be rewritten as

(K + K f )∆ u = ∆ F + ∆ Ff ,

(10)

Finite Element Simulation of Stress Evolution in a Frictional Contact System

801

here K is the standard stiffness matrix corresponding to the total body B; ∆ F is the
external force increment subjected to body B on SF ; ∆ u is the nodal displacement
increment; K f and ∆ Ff are the stiffness matrices and the force increments of all the
node-to-point contact elements.

3

Numerical Investigation of Stress Evolution
3

A typical intra-plate fault bend model (300x300x50 mm ) is analyzed here, which
0
has a pre-cut fault that is artificially bent by an angle of 5.6 at the center E of the
fault. The details of the geometry, the boundary conditions are shown in Figure 1.
There exists no relative motion along the interface at the both ends (as depicted
using the thick black lines CD and FG in Fig. 1). This can be easily achieved using
the ‘stick’ algorithm in the code. While, for the other part of the fault interface (i.e.
segments DE and EF in Figure 1), the widely applied rate- and state-dependent
friction law [5] is used here with the following parameters:
µ = 0.60 + ( 0.010 − 0.025 )ln( V / 0.001) , dϕ dt = 0 . Thus, the total fault consists of
four fault segments: CD, DE, EF and FG in Fig. 1. Here all the materials have the
same properties: density ρ = 2.60 g cm 3 , Young’s modulus E=44.8 GPa and Poisson’s ratio γ = 0.12 . As for the loading conditions, two loading stages are applied
here: firstly, the pressure on the surfaces A and B are loaded up to 10 MPa, then
sustaining this pressure on surface A, while all the nodes on surface B are moved in
the x-direction at the velocity Vx=-0.001mm/sec.
The stress evolution of the total system during the loading processes is calculated
and some results at the different loading time are shown in Figs. 2 and 3. At the
beginning of the second loading stage (i.e. at the end of the first loading stage), the
stress distribution is rather smooth except that at the both ends as shown in Fig. 2,
and the same situation remains until the nodes start to change their stick states to
the slip (see Figs. 3: time=228.7s). However, with the increase of the prescribed
displacement, the stress on the segment DE begins to decrease and to redistribute
locally due to the local energy release induced by the state changes from the stick to
the slip on the segment DE. This also results in the stress increase for the nodes
around the segments CD and EF (see Fig. 3: Time=292.75s – 296.15s). Afterwards,
the stress increases much for most of the nodes except the local energy release zone
around the segment DE (see, e.g. Fig. 3: Time=302.98s). With the transition of the
stick-slip instability and the occurrence of energy release at the node on the fault
segment EF, the stress deceases and redistributes locally for the corresponding
nodes which have just entered the slip state, while the stress of neighboring node
that is in the stick state increases (see, e.g. Figs. 3: Time=311.08s – 369.78s). Finally, this also causes the obvious stress increase at both end zones (i.e. segments
CD and FG in Fig. 1) (as shown in Figs. 3: Time=329.93s – 369.78s).

802

H.L. Xing, P. Mora, and A. Makinouchi

Fig. 1. The mesh, the boundary conditions and prescribed nodal positions used for the fault
bend model in the x-y cross section. Here all the nodes at the surface marked by a triangular
) are free along the direction of two circles but fixed at the other direcwith two circles (
tion

Fig. 2. Mises equivalent stress σ distribution at the end of the first loading stage(here
σ = 3σ ij′ σ ij′ 2 , σ ij′ is the deviator stress tensor, unit: MPa)

Finite Element Simulation of Stress Evolution in a Frictional Contact System

Time (s):

Time (s):

228.7

293.44

803

292.75

296.15

Fig. 3. Mises equivalent stress σ variation during the second loading stage (here
σ = 3σ ij′ σ ij′ 2 , σ ij′ is the deviator stress tensor, unit: MPa)

804

H.L. Xing, P. Mora, and A. Makinouchi

Time (s):

Time (s):

302.98

311.08

313.41

329.93
Fig. 3. (continued)

Finite Element Simulation of Stress Evolution in a Frictional Contact System

Time (s):

Time (s):

335.19

335.42

346.08

369.78

Fig. 3. (continued)

805

806

4

H.L. Xing, P. Mora, and A. Makinouchi

Discussion and Conclusions

A 3-dimensional finite element code for modeling nonlinear frictional contact behaviours between deformable bodies with the node-to-point contact element strategy has
been developed and applied here to investigate stress evolution processes of a typical
intra-plate fault system. The above numerical results show that: (1) During the nucleation process of the stick-slip instability, the stress distribution is rather smooth
except that around both ends; (2) Once a stick node enters the slip, the stress decreases and redistributes locally at the corresponding slip zone, but increases in a
local narrow zone around its neighbour nodes being in the stick. Thus these stick
nodes are ‘pushed’ to the slip state by the neighbour nodes entering the slip. (3). Comparison with the calculation results for a flat fault [2], the fault bend has significant
influence on the nucleation, termination and restart of the stick-slip instability along
the intra-plate fault, and further on the corresponding stress variation of the total frictional contact system. (4). The proposed finite element algorithm can capture the key
phenomena of stress evolution in such a frictional contact system easily and will be
applied to the further complicated interacting fault system in the earthquake research.

References
1. Xing H.L. and Makinouchi A.: A node-to-point contact element strategy and its applications. RIKEN Review: High Performance Computing in RIKEN 2000; 30:35–39
2. Xing H.L. and Makinouchi A.: Finite element analysis of a sandwich friction experiment
model of rocks, PAGEOPH 2002; 159:1985–2009
3. Xing H.L. and Makinouchi A.: Finite element modeling of multiboby contact and its application to active faults, Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience 2002;
14:431–450
4. Xing H.L. and Makinouchi A.: Three dimensional finite element modeling of thermomechanical frictional contact between finite deformation bodies using R-minimum strategy,
Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 2002; 191:4193–4214.
5. Ruina A.L.: Slip instability and state variable friction laws, J. Geophys. Res. 1983; 88:
10359–10370

