Incorporating Local Ca2+ Dynamics into Single Cell
Ventricular Models
Anna Sher2, David Abramson1, Colin Enticott1, Slavisa Garic1, David Gavaghan2,
Denis Noble3, Penelope Noble3, and Tom Peachey1
1

Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University,
Clayton, 3800, Victoria, Australia
2
Comp. Biology Group, Oxford University Computing Laboratory,
Oxford OX1 3QD, UK
3
Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetic,
Oxford University
Oxford OX1 3PT, UK

Abstract. Understanding physiological mechanisms underlying the activity of the
heart is of great medical importance. Mathematical modeling and numerical
simulation have become a widely accepted method of unraveling the underlying
mechanism of the heart. Calcium (Ca2+) dynamics regulate the excitationcontraction coupling in heart muscle cells and hence are among the key players in
maintaining normal activity of the heart. Many existing ventricular single cell
models lack the biophysically detailed description of the Ca2+ dynamics. In this
paper we examine how we can improve existing ventricular cell models by
replacing their description of Ca2+ dynamics with the local Ca2+ control models.
When replacing the existing Ca2+ dynamics in a given cell model with a different
Ca2+ description, the parameters of the Ca2+ subsystem need to be re-fitted.
Moreover, the search through the plausible parameter space is computationally
very intensive. Thus, the Grid enabled Nimrod/O software tools are used for
optimizing the cell parameters. Nimrod/O provides a convenient, user-friendly
framework for this as exemplified by the incorporation of local Ca2+ dynamics
into the ventricular single cell Noble 1998 model.
Keywords: Cardiac Cells, Mathematical modeling, Parameter optimization,
Grid Computing.

1 Introduction
Researchers have been developing complex models of cardiac cells for many years, in
an attempt to explore the detailed physiology and operation of the heart. Ultimately,
the goal is to produce better treatment strategies and to develop novel drugs for
treating heart disease. This case study concerns the detailed modeling of particular ion
channels in heart muscle cells.
The key physiological function of the heart is to pump blood around the living
organism. This function is enabled by the spread of electrical excitation through the
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2008, Part I, LNCS 5101, pp. 66–75, 2008.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

Incorporating Local Ca2+ Dynamics into Single Cell Ventricular Models

67

cardiac tissue and contraction of the cardiac muscles. On the single-cell level (a
myocyte), the mechanisms of excitation-contraction coupling are closely regulated by
calcium ion (Ca2+) dynamics. Ca2+ entering the cell triggers the release of Ca2+ from
the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) which is the organelle that stores calcium. The
resulting rise of intracellular Ca2+ (Cai) activates the contraction of the cell. This
phenomenon is known as Ca2+-induced Ca2+ release (CICR). Local Ca2+ dynamics are
characterized by the interactions within localized microdomains (known as dyadic
spaces) between L-type Ca2+ channels (LCCs) located on the Transverse–tubules (T–
tubules), which are deep invaginations of the membrane into the cell, and closely
opposed Ca2+ release channels (known as ryanodine receptors, RyRs) located on the
sarcoplasmic reticulum (Fig. 1). The sarcoplasmic reticulum is an extensive and well
organized network, that repeatedly comes in contact with each T-tubule, so that the
number of dyadic spaces throughout the cell has been estimated to be of the order
50,000 – 300,000.

Sarcolemma
Ca-ATP

NCX

Cai
Dyadic
space
JLCC

SR
JRyR
CaSR

Cads
JD

Serca

Cai

T-tubule
Fig. 1. Local Ca2+ dynamics of Greenstein et al. 2006 [1] model. Arrows represent the direction
in which Ca2+ flows. Cai, Cads and CaSR denote intracellular, dyadic and SR Ca2+ respectively.
The diagram illustrates the local control theory: LCCs and RyRs contribute to local JLCC and
JRyR fluxes respectively within the dyadic space, JD represents the diffusion of Ca2+ out of the
dyad into the bulk myoplasm, SERCA re-uptakes Ca2+ back into the SR, Ca2+-ATPases and
NCXs pump Ca2+ out of the cell.

68

A. Sher et al.

ICa.L(ds) INa-stretch

Ina.b ICa INaCa Ip.N ICa. ICa-stretch

L-type Ca2+
channel

Diadic
space

a

Na+

Na+K+ Ca2+

Na+ Na+ Na+ Ca2+

b

Ca2+ Na+ Ca2+ Ca2+

IAn-stretch
Cl-

Sarcoplasmic Reticulum

Iup

Ca2+ NSR Itr
Ca2+

K+

K+ K+

K+

K+

JSR

Calsequestrin
K+

Irel

Ca2+

INs-stretch

Myoplasm

K+ K+ Na+

K+

K+

IK1 IKr IKs IKNa Ib(K) IK.ATP Ito IK.ACh INaK IK-stretch
Fig. 2. Schematic representation of the single cell Noble et al. 1998 [3] model (adapted from a
diagram at www.cellml.org model repository). Arrows represent the direction in which the
ions flow and the label of the corresponding ionic current is located above or bellow the arrow.
The model includes four Ca2+ compartments which are the intracellular, dyadic, network SR
(NSR) and junctional SR (JSR). This model is an example of the deterministic non-common
pool ventricular model that uses phenomenological description of Ca2+ in the dyadic space and
Ca2+ related currents. While such a model succeeds in producing graded SR Ca2+ release, it
lacks the mechanistic description of local SR Ca2+ release, i.e. the stochastic interaction
between LCCs and RyRs within the dyadic spaces.

The local Ca2+ release mechanisms are essential to reproduce the characteristic
properties of the excitation-contraction coupling such as high gain and graded Ca2+
release. However, most existing single cell models lack the description of the
biophysical nature of local Ca2+ dynamics. In this paper we present a methodology
of how local Ca2+ dynamics can be efficiently incorporated into a single cell model
of ventricular myocyte in order to produce a biophysically accurate cell model. The
two stages involved are (i) development of the Ca2+ subsystem and (ii) its
incorporation into a single cell model. The first stage is the generation of the local
control CICR models (also known as the coupled LCC-RyR models) such as, for
instance, the ones that have been developed by Hinch et al. [2] and Greenstein et al.
[1]. The second stage, which is the focus of this paper, involves the incorporation of
the coupled LCC-RyR models into a single cell model. Specifically, the steps are as
follows:

Incorporating Local Ca2+ Dynamics into Single Cell Ventricular Models

69

− The equations that describe Ca2+ dynamics in the original single cell model (e.g.
Noble 1998 model1 [4] (Fig. 2)) are substituted by equations of the biophysically
detailed Ca2+ subsystem (e.g. baseline 40-state coupled LCC-RyR Greenstein 2006
model [1] (Fig. 1)), provided that units are modified accordingly;
− The parameters of the newly obtained single cell model are refitted. This is done to
ensure that the newly obtained single cell model, which contains the replaced Ca2+
subsystem, is capable of reproducing the data of the original model. In particular,
the specific aim is to fit the dynamics of the Ca2+ of the newly developed wholecell model either to the dynamics of the Ca2+ of the original model (e.g. Noble
1998) and/or to the available experimental data (e.g. Cai transient, IV curves, tail
currents recorded from the voltage-clamp experiments, etc.). To achieve this, we
need to optimize the parameters of the Ca2+ subsystem, or, in other words, to solve
an inverse problem.
In this paper we demonstrate how the novel Grid computing tools allows the
incorporation of local Ca2+ dynamics into the existing cellular models at a low
computational cost. The optimization methods that are used require repeated
evaluation of the models, and thus the time required to compute the optimal model
parameters can be very long. The computational Grid can be exploited to speed the
execution by delivering a large number of processors. The Grid enabled Nimrod/O
tool that we use in this experiment incorporates a range of non-linear optimization
methods, and these can be used to optimize the cell parameters accordingly. Section 2
briefly introduces the Grid and the Nimrod tools. Section 3 discusses challenges and
results of incorporating local calcium dynamics on the example of the ventricular
single cell Noble 1998 model.

2 Grid Computing
The Grid provides a general platform for integrating computation, data and
instruments [8]. It serves as the infrastructure for implementing novel applications,
particular in science and engineering.
In particular, “computational” Grids have emerged as a viable platform for
delivering on-demand access to a range of very high performance machines. Whilst it
may not be possible to gain access to sufficient resources at any single site,
computational Grids can aggregate a number of otherwise separate resources into a
single large super-computer. Such a virtual machine, or testbed, is an ideal base for
simulating complex systems using computational models because the resources can
be assembled at a period of peak demand and then released for use when not required.
Such platforms have the potential to offer very cost effective solutions, leveraging
everything from spare cycles on high end machines through to large pools of
inexpensive desktops that are idle.
1

The Noble 1998 model is extensively used by various researchers and, thus, it is important to
assess the effect of replacing the existing phenomenological description of Ca2+ in the dyadic
space and Ca2+ related currents with the local, biophysically sound Ca2+ dynamics. Therefore,
the Noble 1998 model is chosen as the case study.

70

A. Sher et al.

In spite of the enormous progress in building operation Grids, and the significant
effort in developing middleware, assembling such a testbed on demand is difficult.
Most Grids are built from different components, and this resource heterogeneity is a
fact of life. Likewise, Grids are built across multiple administrative and security
domains, posing problems for aggregating them into a single virtual machine. Lack of
a single owning organization also means that resource scheduling becomes complex –
no single job scheduler can guarantee access to sufficient computational power,
making it difficult to deliver the guaranteed levels of service. Importantly, Grid
application users don’t want to know about the complexity of the underlying fabric,
and wish to concentrate on their domain science.
Difficulty in using the Grid is not a hypothetical concern. Currently, very few
scientists use the Grid routinely, and instead rely on local resources, which are under
their control. This means that the scale and nature of the work is limited. Until we can
make it easier to use, the Grid will never be adopted by more than the most hardy or
desperate users!
Over the years we have developed a strategy for delivering the high levels of
performance, and have built software tools that make it easy for scientists to leverage
the computational power of the Grid. Specifically, the Nimrod family of tools allows
a non-expert to specify large computational experiments using legacy software, and
execute these over a range of Grid resources. Nimrod is not a single tool: it
incorporates a component that distributes computations to the resources (Nimrod/G)
[5], [7]; a component that searches for “good” solutions using non-linear optimization
algorithms (Nimrod/O) [4], [6]; and a component that helps evaluate which parameter
settings are important using experimental design (Nimrod/E). Most aspects of Nimrod
have been written about extensively over the years, so we will only provide a cursory
overview in Section 2.1 of the paper.
2.1 The Nimrod Tool Family
Figure 3 shows the architecture of the Nimrod tool family and the interaction between
the major components. Typically, users interact through a Web browser using the
Nimrod portal. This single point of presence then directs traffic to one of three
different components – Nimrod/G which support parameter studies and distributes the
computations to the Grid, Nimrod/O which performs optimization and Nimrod/E
which uses experimental design techniques to scope parameter studies. Importantly,
each of these components acts either as a user level tool, or as middleware, depending
on the client use. For example, Nimrod/G can interact directly with users using a Web
enabled interface, or can provide services to other software (such as Nimrod/E,
Nimrod/O) via an API. Each of the applications discussed here leverages different
aspects of the tools. In many cases, they used Nimrod/G to perform a crude sweep of
the overall parameter space, and then launched Nimrod/O to refine the solutions.
Nimrod/E is a fairly new development, and whilst it has been used in the cardiac
modeling work, we do not have results at this stage.
An important aspect of the tool family is that they share a common specification
language – which is written in a text document called a “plan” file. This file contains
details of the parameters and how to invoke the application, and is typically quite
small. Over the years, we have expanded the plan file to allow more complex

Incorporating Local Ca2+ Dynamics into Single Cell Ventricular Models

71

workflows to be specified [9], however, in the simplest form a single application is
run many times. Nimrod/O plan files contain some additional information about
which heuristics to use This specifies the optimization algorithm, or algorithms, and
associated settings. For example, the file may specify simulated annealing and the
associated cooling regime. Starting points for iterative algorithms are also specified as
Nimrod/O can perform multiple concurrent searches. The Nimrod/E plan file contains
information about which parameter combinations are to be estimated, and which are
assumed negligible.

Fig. 3. The Nimrod tool chain

2.2 Nimrod Methodology
Each of the case studies discussed in the next section adopted the same overall
methodology – regardless of which Nimrod tool was used. The following steps
summarize this process:
1. Testbed construction. The use must decide which resources will be included in
the grid testbed, and configure Nimrod to use these. The Nimrod portal
provides a number of high level interfaces for making this fairly easy. Nimrod
assumes that users already have accounts (and the necessary authentication) on
each of the testbed resources.
2. Software preparation. Here the applications are compiled and tested on each of
the Grid resources. This can either be performed manually by logging into each

72

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

A. Sher et al.

of the different remote resources, or by using a tool like Distant [9] which
manages the process through a single user oriented client. Even when
configured manually, it is possible to prepare the application binary on one
machine, and use Nimrod to distribute it to similar resources before execution.
Determine which Nimrod tool to use. As discussed, Nimrod has a number of
different components. The user must select the most appropriate component,
depending on whether a complete, partial or guided search is required.
Describe how to execute the application, and which files are required for input
and output. These steps are described in the Nimrod plan file, using a simple
declarative language. Nimrod can be instructed to copy input files to each
resource, and return output files. Large output files can be left on remote
resources for later analysis. Nimrod also managed parameter substitution via
command line options or special control files.
Determine the parameters and their ranges. This will vary depending on the
application requirements, These are then described in the Nimrod plan file
using the ‘parameter’ keyword. Most parameters are independent, however, it is
also possible to specify sequences of parameters that create complex workflows
[9]. In this paper we use Nimrod/O to compute optimal parameter settings.
Execute the experiment. This is usually performed through the Nimrod portal,
but it is also possible to use the Nimrod command line tools. Long running
experiments can be left unattended, and monitored using the Nimrod
monitoring tools.
Analyze the results, possibly returning to step 5 to refine the parameter ranges.

3 Incorporating Local Ca2+ Dynamics
The models of the local Ca2+ dynamics is a system of ODEs of approximately 30-70
variables with up to 100 parameters. These ODEs do not exhibit stiffness, thus, time
integrators such as the forward Euler integrator or a Runge-Kutta 4th order method are
appropriate to simulate these Markov models. The results presented below are
simulated in Matlab 6.5 using an inbuilt `ode45' solver - a one-step solver based on an
explicit Runge-Kutta of 4th and 5th order, that is appropriate for non-stiff problems and
has medium accuracy.
Each simulation on a personal laptop (e.g. Toshiba 512 MB RAM, 2 GHz, 60 GB
Hard Drive, Windows XP) takes under five minutes, thus the computational resources
required to perform one simulation are minimal. However, to optimize the set of
parameters in the newly developed Ca2+ subsystem, the software tools which perform
optimization algorithms within the framework of the distributive computing are
essential. In particular, Nimrod/O provides a computationally effective manner of
tuning the parameters and examining their effects within the newly developed models.
Interestingly, in the case of running the simulations discussed above, the limiting
factor is the number of Matlab licenses available rather than the number of
processors. This is an issue that requires consideration by both the community and
independent software vendors if the true power of the Grid is to be realized for this
class of software. Nimrod/O offers a variety of optimization methods, such as
“subdivision search” and downhill type search methods, etc. The simulation results

Incorporating Local Ca2+ Dynamics into Single Cell Ventricular Models

73

presented below are obtained using the downhill simplex method of Nelder and Mead.
The optimal set of parameters, calculated using the simplex method, is obtained by
fitting the action potential (AP), Cai transient and ICaL current, with the objective
function calculated using the least-square approximations.
The direct incorporation of the canine 40-state Greenstein 2006 coupled LCC-RyR
model 1 into Noble 1998 guinea pig model (Fig. 2) results in a distorted electrical
behaviour of the cell such as a significant second peak in Cai transient and a
pronounced plateau phase in an action potential (compare dashed and dotted curves in
Fig. 4). An optimized set of parameters obtained using Nimrod/O significantly
improves the dynamical behaviour of the modified Noble 1998 model (solid curve).

Fig. 4. Cardiac model output: The guinea pig Noble 1998 [4] ventricular model modified to
include local Ca2+ dynamics. Dashed curve represents the Noble 1998 model. Dotted curve
shows the modified Noble 1998 model that incorporates the 40-state coupled LCC-RyR
Greenstein et al. 2006 model. Solid curve denotes Noble 1998 model modified to include
Greenstein et al. 2006 Ca2+ dynamics with an optimized set of parameters2.
2

The optimal set of parameters (corresponding to the solid curve) is as follows: an increase in
the maximum rate of the SERCA pump (1.4-fold), an increase in the conductance of RyR
(3.5-fold) and LCC (1.5-fold) channels, modified constants of the 10-state LCC Markov
model (the transition rate to the Ca2+-dependent inactivation (CDI) state by 1.33-fold; the
transition rate out of the CDI-state constant by 0.34-fold; the transition rate out of the closed
state by 2.2-fold; the transition state out of the open state by 0.59-fold) and of the 4-state RyR
Markov model (the transition rate into the open state from CDI-state 2 by 4.58-fold; the
transition rate out of open state into CDI-state 2 by 0.79-fold; the transition rate into the open
state from CDI-state 4 by 2.4-fold; the transition rate out of the closed state by 2.1-fold).

74

A. Sher et al.

Importantly, the new set of parameters, which falls within the physiologically
acceptable ranges, results in an elimination of the second peak in Cai transient (middle
panel in Fig. 4). Further, the results demonstrate that Nimrod/O provides a
convenient, user-friendly framework for tuning the parameters in the cardiac cell
models in an efficient computional manner by taking advantage of parallel batches of
evaluations. This study provides a valuable platform for future incorporation of the
biophysically detailed Ca2+ subsystems into whole-cell models of various species.
It is important to note that the use of Nimrod/O highlighted the issues of the
parameter sensitivity and over-parameterizations of cardiac ionic models (data not
shown). Specifically, the challenges involved in analyzing and characterizing the
significance of a given set of parameters in ionic models include (1) potentially fewerthan-necessary constraints being imposed when calculating the objective function, (2)
the cardiac ionic models being complex nonlinear systems which have many local
minima as opposed to global minima, etc. Parameter estimation in cardiac systems is
an ongoing area of research. Thus, while Nimrod/O is a valuable tool in parameter
optimization with low computational cost, further studies need to be performed in
order to improve the method of finding the optimal set of parameters in a given
ventricular single cell model.

4 Conclusions
In this paper we have outlined the steps necessary for updating the ventricular
myocytes models with the local Ca2+ dynamics. Nimrod/O was used as the tool to
incorporate the coupled LCC-RyR models in the place of the existing Ca2+ dynamics.
To conclude, the incorporation of the local Ca2+ dynamics into the Noble 1998 model
shows that Nimrod/O is a convenient, user-friendly framework for tuning the
parameters in the cardiac cell models in an efficient computational manner by taking
advantage of parallel batches of evaluations. Thus, Nimrod/O, provides a valuable,
low-computational tool for the incorporation of the biophysically detailed Ca2+
subsystems into whole-cell models of various species.
Acknowledgements. The cardiac modeling project was supported by EPSRC EScience Pilot Project in Integrative Biology GR/S72023/01, UK. The Nimrod project
has been funded by the Australian Research Council, the Cooperative Research
Centre for Enterprise Distributed Systems, the Department of Communications,
Information Technology and the Arts under a GrangetNet grant, and the Australian
Partnership for Advanced Computing.

References
1. Greenstein, J.L., Hinch, R., Winslow, R.L.: Mechanisms of excitation-contraction
coupling in an integrative model of the cardiac ventricular myocyte. Biophys. J. 90, 77–91
(2006)
2. Hinch, R., Greenstein, J.L., Tanskanen, A.J., Xu, L., Winslow, R.L.: A simplified local
control model of calcium-induced calcium release in cardiac ventricular myocytes.
Biophys. J. 87, 3723–3736 (2004)

Incorporating Local Ca2+ Dynamics into Single Cell Ventricular Models

75

3. Noble, D., Varghese, A., Kohl, P., Noble, P.: Improved guinea-pig ventricular cell model
incorporating a diadic space, IKr and Iks, and length- and tension-dependent processes, Can.
J. Cardiol. 14(1), 123–134 (1998)
4. Abramson, D., Lewis, A., Peachey, T., Fletcher, C.: An Automatic Design Optimization
Tool and its Application to Computational Fluid Dynamics. In: SuperComputing 2001,
Denver (November 2001)
5. Abramson, D., Sosic, R., Giddy, J., Hall, B.: Nimrod: A Tool for Performing Parametrised
Simulations using Distributed Workstations. In: The 4th IEEE Symposium on High
Performance Distributed Computing, Virginia (August 1995)
6. Abramson, D., Lewis, A., Peachy, T.: Nimrod/O: A Tool for Automatic Design
Optimization. In: The 4th International Conference on Algorithms & Architectures for
Parallel Processing (ICA3PP 2000), Hong Kong, December 11-13 (2000)
7. Abramson, D., Giddy, J., Kotler, L.: High Performance Parametric Modeling with
Nimrod/G: Killer Application for the Global Grid? In: International Parallel and
Distributed Processing Symposium (IPDPS), Cancun, Mexico, May 2000, pp. 520–528
(2000)
8. Foster, I., Kesselman, C. (eds.): The Grid: Blueprint for a New Computing Infrastructure,
2nd edn. Morgan Kaufmann, USA (2003)
9. Ayyub, S., Abramson, D., Enticott, C., Garic, S., Tan, J.: Executing Large Parameter
Sweep Applications on a Multi-VO Testbed. In: 7th IEEE International Symposium on
Cluster Computing and the Grid, CCGrid, Brazil, pp. 73–80 (2007)
10. Goscinski, W., Abramson, D.: Legacy Application Deployment over Heterogeneous Grids
using Distributed Ant. In: IEEE Conference on e-Science and Grid Computing, Melbourne
(December 2005)

