Model Integrating Fleet Design and Ship Routing
Problems for Coal Shipping
Qingcheng Zeng and Zhongzhen Yang
Transport and Logistics College, Dalian Maritime University, 116026,Dalian, China
Qingcheng Zeng, Zhongzhen Yang, zqcheng2000@tom.com

Abstract. In this paper, an integrated optimization model is developed to
improve the efficiency of coal shipping. The objective is (1) to determine the
types of ships and the number of each type, (2) to optimize the ship routing,
therefore, to minimize the total coal shipping cost. Meanwhile, an algorithm
based on two-phase tabu search is designed to solve the model. Numerical tests
show that the proposed method can decrease the unit shipping cost and the
average ship delay, and improve the reliability of the coal shipping system.
Keywords: coal shipping, fleet design, ship routing, tabu search.

1 Introduction
Coal is one of the most important energy resources used in China. With the rapid
economic development, the demand for coal is rapidly increasing in recent years. Due
to the uneven distribution of coal sources, a large quantity of coal must be transported
from west and north to east and south in China by railway and shipping. Therefore,
optimization of shipping is the fundamental and key element to ensure the efficiency
and reliability of coal transportation system. And significant improvement of fleet
operation can be achieved by proper ship routing and scheduling.
In this paper, we will consider optimization of coal shipping from a set of
outbound ports to demand ports. The problem involves determining the type of ships,
the number of each type, and the optimal ship routing. Kim [1] developed a prototype
optimization-based decision support system for the ship owner’s scheduling problem
in bulk trade. Fagerholt [2] developed a model to decide the optimal fleet size for
liner shipping problem. Christiansen [3] studied a combined inventory management
problem and a routing problem with time windows for ammonia transportation. Liua
[4] studied the coal shipping and blending problems for an electric utility company.
Fagerholt [5] considered a real ship scheduling problem as a multi-ship pickup and
delivery problem with soft time windows. Persson [6] proposed an optimization
model and a solution method to determine how to route a fleet of ships and the
planning of which products to transport in these ships.
To ensure the integrated optimization, the ship routing and fleet design problems
should be considered simultaneously. But most of the existing literatures studied the
two problems respectively. In this paper, a model integrating fleet design and ship
routing is developed. To solve the model, two-phase tabu search (TS) algorithm is
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part III, LNCS 4489, pp. 1000–1003, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Model Integrating Fleet Design and Ship Routing Problems for Coal Shipping

1001

designed. And a real shipping planning problem is given as an example to illustrate
the validity of the model and algorithm.

2 The Fleet Design and Ship Routing Problem
The background of this paper is a real problem that involves developing a new ocean
shipping system for SEC (Shenhua Energy Company, the largest coal supply
company in China). In the system, the coal produced by SEC is transported by
railway to the outbound ports: Huanghua, Tianjin, and Qinhuangdao first, then by
shipping to demand ports. Because of the natural constraints, the maximal ship
capacity allowed by Huanghua port is 50,000 ton. Besides, Huanghua port is owned
by SEC, to ensure the full utilization of the port, it is given priority in the ship routing.
Therefore, if a ship’s capacity exceeds 50,000 ton, it must be loaded at Huanghua port
first, then reloaded at Tianjin or Qinhuandao, and discharged at demand ports lastly.
Meanwhile, the type of ships used determines whether to reload or not and thus
influences the ship routing. Therefore, optimization of coal shipping problem can be
divided into two phases: the first phase is to determine the ship type; the second phase
is to optimize the routing based on the ship type, and determine the reloading strategy.
Let PT be the total set of ports and K , indexed by k , be set of available ship types

O ∈ PT , D ∈ PT denote the set of outbound and demand
ports respectively, and s denote Huanghua port; Qd is coal traffic destined for

to be routed and scheduled.
k

port d ; cijd denotes the total unit shipping cost per ton from outbound port i to
k

demand port d through reloading port j using ship type k ; CAP is the capacity of
ship type k , and CAPi is the maximal ship that port i .
k

If coal demand of port d is transported by ship type k , yd

= 1 , and 0, otherwise.

x = 1 if ship of type k runs from port i to port d through reloading port j , and
k
ijd

0, otherwise.

k
xiid
= 1 denotes that ships of type k run from port i to port d directly.

Thus, the integrated model can be formulated as follows:

Min
s.t.

∑c

k
ijd d
i , j∈O , d ∈D , k∈K

∑y

k
d

Q y dk .

(1)

= 1 ∀d ∈ D .

(2)

k ∈K

∑x

k
ijd

= 1 ∀d ∈ D, ∀i ∈ O, ∀k ∈ K .

j∈O

(3)

k
xsjd
= 1 ∀j ∈ O, ∀d ∈ D .

(4)

k
xisd
= 0 ∀i ∈ O, ∀d ∈ D .

(5)

1002

Q. Zeng and Z. Yang
k
xsjd
(CAP k − CAPs ) ≥ 0 ∀k ∈ K , ∀d ∈ D, ∀j ∈ O .

(6)

ydk (CAPd − CAP k ) ≥ 0 ∀k ∈ K , ∀d ∈ D .

(7)

x , y = 1, or 0 ∀k ∈ K , ∀d ∈ D, ∀i, j ∈ O .

(8)

k
ijd

k
d

The objective function (1) is to minimize the total coal transportation cost.
Constraints (2) ensure that every demand port is served by only one type of ship.
Constraints (3) ensure that each ship is reloaded no more than once. Constraints (4)
guarantee that all the ships must be loaded at Huanghua port first. Constraints (5) and

> CAPs .
Constraints (7) ensure that the capacity of the ship served to demand port d does not

(6) determine that reloading only happens on the condition that CAP

k

exceed the maximal loaded ship the port allows. (8) is variable constraints.

3 Solution Procedures
To reflect the inter-relation between the fleet design and ship routing, a tabu search
(TS) algorithm is designed to solve the model. Fig.1 shows the general process of this
algorithm: The two-phase approach integrates two levels of decision making. In the
first phase of the algorithm, one TS is performed to determine a good ship type
design. For each ship type design obtained during the first phase, the other TS is ran
to obtain the reloading scheme, then calculate objective function, namely, the total
shipping cost, so as to influence the TS in the first phase. The feedback and
reciprocity between the two phases form the optimization scheme.

Initialize the ship type for each demand port

Perform the swap move Yes
on reloading port

The second
phase TS
Swap move<M

No
Obtain the ship routing, calculate
the objective function

Perform the swap move
on ship type

Yes

No
Swap move<M

No
Obtain the optimal ship type,
and the optimal ship routing

Fig. 1. Two-phase TS algorithm for coal shipping model

The first
phase TS

Model Integrating Fleet Design and Ship Routing Problems for Coal Shipping

1003

4 Numerical Tests
Numerical tests are used to illustrate the validity of the model and its algorithm. The
maximal passing capacity of the three outbound ports is 100,000 ton; therefore, all the
ship types we select are less than 100,000 ton. Results are shown as Table1. From
Table1, we can compare the proposed method with the current status of SEC. We can
find that the unit shipping cost decreases 21.01%, and the average ship capacity
increases 37.39%. This indicates that the coal shipping cost can decrease by using
larger ships. At the same time, the number of voyages decreases 34.4% due to the
increase of the ship capacity. And also, the Average Delay in Huanghua Port
decreases 26.87%, this is because the decrease of the ships berthing in Huanghua port.
Table 1. Comparison of the results by our method with the current status
Heading level
Unit cost (RMB/ton)
Average ship capacity (ton)
The number of voyages
Average delay in Huanghua(hour)

Our model(1)
124
40,450
1,740
49

Current status(2)
157
29,441
2,650
67

((1)-(2))/(2)
-0.2101
0.3739
-0.3434
-0.2687

5 Conclusions
In this paper, a model integrating fleet design and ship routing for coal shipping is
developed. Numerical results indicate that the proposed method can decrease the unit
shipping cost, reduce the ship delay in port, and improve the efficiency and reliability
of the coal shipping system. For SEC, it can improve the coal shipping efficiency by
large-scaled ships. However, this is restricted by the port passing capacity, especially
the demand ports in south China. Therefore, for coal shipping system of China, the
efficiency can be improved by reasonably planning the ports layout, and increasing
the passing capacity of the demand ports.

References
1. Kim Si-Hwa, Lee Kyung-Keun: An optimization-based decision support system for ship
scheuling. Computers & Industrial Engineering 33 (1997) 689–692.
2. Fagerholt Kjetil: Optimal fleet design in a ship routing problem. International Transactions
in Operational Research. (1999) 453-464.
3. Christiansen Marielle: Decomposition of a combined inventory and time constrained ship
routing problem. Transportation science 33, (1999) 3-16.
4. Liua Chiun-Ming, Sherali Hanif D. A coal shipping and blending problem for an electric
utility company. Omega 28 (2000) 433-444.
5. Fagerholt Kjetil: Ship scheduling with soft time windows: An optimization based approach.
European Journal of Operational Research 131(2001)559-571.
6. Persson Jan A: Shipment planning at oil refineries using column generation and valid
inequalities. European Journal of Operational Research 163 (2005) 631-652.

