Dynamic Error of Heat Measurement in Transient
Fang Lide, Li Jinhai, Cao Suosheng, Zhu Yan, and Kong Xiangjie
The Institute of Quality and Technology Supervising, Hebei University, Baoding, China,
071051
Leed_amy@yahoo.com.cn

Abstract. According to EN1434 (European Standard) and OIML
R-75(International Organization of Legal Metrology), there are two methods in
heat measurement, and they are all steady-state methods of test, using them in
transient, obvious error will be produced, so some accurately measuring
functions should be seeking. In a previous published paper of the author, a
transient function relationship of heat quantity and time is deduced, and the
validity of this function is proved through experimentation, also it is simplified
reasonably, so it can be used in variable flow rate heating system. In this study, a
comparison with steady-state method and dynamic method is presented, the
errors exist in the steady state method are analyzed. A conclusion is improved
that the steady-state methods used in variable flow heating system will result in
appreciable errors, the errors only exist in transient, when system reach steady
state, the errors disappear, moreover, the transient time is long in heating system,
it is at least 30 minutes, so it is necessary to take some measures to correct them,
however, study showed that the error can be ignored when the flow rate step
change is less than 5kg/h.
Keywords: Dynamic heat meter, variable flow heating system, step change, flux.

1 Introduction
The accuracy of measurement model is a continuous goal in measurement instrument
designing, moreover, in last decades saving the energy has become an important issue,
due to environmental protection and economical reasons. In every year a significant
part of the energy is utilized for heating. So the primary concern of heating services
today is to accurately measure and charge the heat consumption.
According to EN1434 (European Standard) and OIML R-75(International
Organization of Legal Metrology), there are two methods in heat measurement, and
they are all steady-state methods of test, Theory give the two methods as
τ2

Q = ∫ GΔhdτ
τ1

v2

Q = ∫ k ΔθdV
v1

Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part II, LNCS 4488, pp. 1067–1074, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

(1)
(2)

1068

L. Fang et al.

where: Q is the quantity of heat given up; G is the mass flow rate of the heat-conveying
liquid passing through the heat meter; Δh is the difference between the specific
enthalpies of the heat-conveying liquid at the flow and return temperatures of the
heat-exchange circuit; t is time; V is the volume of liquid passed; k called the heat
coefficient, is a function of the properties of the heat-conveying liquid at the relevant
temperatures and pressure; Δθ is the temperature difference between the flow and
return of the heat exchange circuit[1,2].
Usually, equation (1) called enthalpy difference method and equation (2) called K
coefficient method; they are widely used in all kinds of heat meters [3-8].
Howeve r, when the flow rate of system have a step change, heat dissipating capacity
is a function of flow rate, temperature and time, and, if the transient time interval
between two steady states is long enough, huge error would be produced by using
steady equation (1) or (2).
During the author study on a new heating measurement and control system, a
function relationship of heat quantity and time is deduced, and the validity of the
function is proved through experimentation, and it is simplified reasonably [9], so it can
be used in variable flow heating system, this article presented a comparison of state
heat measurement method and dynamic heat measurement method.

2 Principle of Dynamic Heat Meter
When system flux generated step change, the author put forward a “level-move”
presumption of temperature distribution curve in radiator during transient. On the basis
of the presumption, the function of heat quantity and time is deduced, and validity of
the function is proved through experimentation, the relativity error of the function was
within 3%. The dynamic heat measurement function in transient after flux changing to
large can be seen as Equation (3), and the opposite function can be expressed as
equation (4)[9,10,11,12].

Q0−1 = cG0 (t g − t n )(1 − e −b0 FC ) −
( t g − t n ).( K 0 + ( K 1 − K 0 )

τ
)
τ s1

b0

(t g − t n ).( K 0 + ( K 1 − K 0 )
b1

τ
)
τ s1

(e

− b 0 ( FC −

( e − b1 FC − e

τ
. a 0 −1 )
τ s1

− b1

τ
FC
τ s1

−e

− b0 (

τ
τ
FC −
. a 0 −1 )
τ s1
τ s1

).......( 0 ≤ τ ≤ τ s1 )

Q1−0 = cG0 (t g − t n )(1 − e −b0 FC ) +
( t g − t n ).( K 1 − ( K 1 − K 0 )
b0

τ
)
τ s1

)+

( e − b 0 FC − e

− b0

τ
FC
τ s1

)

（3）

Dynamic Error of Heat Measurement in Transient

( t g − t n ).( K 1 − ( K 1 − K 0 )
−

b1

τ
)
τ s1

(e

− b1 ( FC +

τ
. a1 − 0 )
τ s1

−e

− b1 (

τ
τ
FC +
. a1 − 0 )
τ s1
τ s1

)

（4）

.......(0 ≤ τ ≤ τ s 0 )
Where

1069

a 0−1 , the max right parallel moving distance; a1−0 , the max left parallel

，

b0 , b1 coefficient ( m −1 ); c —mass specific heat of
water. FC —total area of radiator m2 . G0 — flux before step change. G1 — flux after
step change. K —heat transfer coefficient of radiator(W/m2. ). Q0−1 —dynamic heat
quantity of radiator in flux largen transient W . Q1− 0 —dynamic heat quantity of
radiator in flux diminution transient W . t n —average room temperature.

moving distance;

. tg

（ ）

℃

（ ）
（ ）
（℃）
—feed water temperature of radiator（℃）. τ —evacuation time of the medium in
s1

the flow rate G1 . τ s 0 —evacuation time of the medium in the flow rate G0 .

These two equations can be applicable not only for dynamic course, but also for
steady course. Let τ 0 in steady course.

≡

3 Dynamic Heat Measurement Error of Heat Meter in Transient
Compared equation (3),(4) with equation (1)(or(2)) in different conditions, heat
measurement error in transient can be acquired. The follow analyzing is based on the
assumption that heat dissipating capacity of pipeline is too little to be considered, water
supply temperature t g is invariable.
3.1 Errors in Same Initial Flow Rate with Different Step Change
The results presented in Fig.1,2. The curves showed that Eq. (1) used in transient can
produce very huge errors. When system flow rate vary large from G0 to G1 ,
maximum error exist in the beginning of the transient, for this moment, the feed water
temperature become rising, but the backwater temperature remain unchanged, so the
temperature difference rising, on the same time, system flow rate vary large, all this
factors caused calculating value of heat dissipating capacity with Eq. (1) larger than
Eq. (3). With the time gone, the error become small with the backwater temperature
rising.
At τ = τ S 1 , the mass of system finish updating, backwater temperature reach its real
level, the error disappeared. When system flow rate vary small from

G1 to G0 ,

maximum error exist in the beginning of the transient too, and it is negative value, for
this moment the feed water temperature is invariable, and the backwater temperature

1070

L. Fang et al.

Fig. 1. Comparison of average of relative error in step change 5 and 10

Fig. 2. Average of relative error in the same initial flow rate with different step change

also remain unchanged at the beginning, so the temperature difference is invariable, on
the same time, system flow rate vary small, all this factors caused calculating value of
heat dissipating capacity with Eq. (1) less than Eq.(4). With the time gone, the errors
become small with the backwater temperature descending.
At τ = τ S 0 , the mass of system finish updating, backwater temperature reach its real
level, the error disappeared. Moreover, different step change has different average
of relative error, the larger step change, and the more average of relative error. Fig.1
only showed two step changes (5 and 10), more test data and comparison presented in
Fig.2.

Dynamic Error of Heat Measurement in Transient

3.2 Errors in Same Step Change with Different Initial Flow Rate

1071

G0

The result showed in Fig.3 to Fig6.

Fig. 3. Average of relative error in different initial flow rate and different step change (flow rate
vary to large)

Fig. 4. Average of relative error in different initial flow rate and different step change (flow rate
vary to small)

It is clear from all the results that average of relative errors increase with increasing
step change. At the same step change, absolute average of relative errors is descending
with the initial flow rate G 0 changing to large no matter in the transient of system flow

1072

L. Fang et al.

rate changing to large or small. Fig.3,4 showed average of relative errors have the same
trend in different step change; Average of relative error tends to unity at same step
change ratio, so all data almost exhibits one line in Fig.5. In flow rate large to small
transient, all data exhibits most curvature, particularly at low initial flow rate, see Fig.6.
These pictures would provide some valuable reference for heat measurement function
correlations. Two ways may be concerned in correcting the errors, one is to use
dynamic equations in transient, the other is to use steady equation multiply a coefficient
which is the function of step change ratio.

Fig. 5. Average of relative error in different step change ratio and different initial flow rate (flow
rate vary to large)

Fig. 6. Average of relative error in different step change ratio and different initial flow rate (flow
rate vary to small)

Dynamic Error of Heat Measurement in Transient

1073

4 Conclusion
From discussing above, The obvious error will be produced if heat dissipating capacity
of heat system is calculate by using steady-state equation (1) after step change of flow
rate.
In a fixed original flow rate, As the flow rate step change is small the relative error
corresponding this condition is small too, and otherwise, it is large. In a fixed step
change, average relative errors decreasing with the initial flow rate increasing. These
kinds of errors only exist in the transient, and a part of it can be counteracted because
the sign of the relative error is reverse during the two process of flow rate increasing
and decreasing. According to calculation data shown in the paper, the error can be
ignored when the flow rate step change is less than 5 kg/h, else it must be corrected.
The errors mentioned above only exist in transient, when system reach steady state,
the errors disappear, however, the transient time is long in heating system, it is at least
30 minutes, so it is necessary to take some measures to correct them.
To correcting the errors, some program should be added in system’s software, so that
the heat meter can have some functions like step change discrimination, timing. In
brief, heat meter should have the function to judge the quantity of the flow rate step
change, so that using different formula in different working state. In brief, two ways
may be concerned in correcting the errors, one is to use dynamic equations in transient,
the other is to use steady equation multiply a coefficient which is the function of step
change.

References
[1] Europeanstandard, EN1434:1997has the status of a DIN standard, Heatmeters,(1997)
[2] OIML-R75 International Recommendation, Heatmeters,(2002)
[3] SHOJI KUSUI and TETSUO NAGAI: An Electronic Integrating Heat Meter, IEEE
TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT. VOL 39 NO S.
OCTOBER,pp785-789,1990
[4] Géza Móczár,Tibor Csubák and Péter Várady: Distributed Intelligent Hierarchical System
for Heat Metering and Controlling, IEEE Instrumentation and Measurement Technology
Conference,Budapest,Hungary,pp2123-2128,May 21-23,2001.
[5] Géza Móczár, Tibor Csubák, and Péter Várady: Student Member, IEEE, Distributed
Measurement System for Heat Metering and Control, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 51, NO. 4, pp691-694, AUGUST
2002.
[6] Jin Hai-long; Pan Yong: Development and research of a new style intelligent heat meter,
Chinese Journal of Sensors and Actuators vol.18, no.2 : 350-352, 2005
[7] Hao LN, Chen H, Pei HD: Development on a new household heat meter, ISTM/2005: 6TH
INTERNATIONAL SYMPOSIUM ON TEST AND MEASUREMENT, VOLS 1-9,
CONFERENCE PROCEEDINGS : 3090-3092, 2005
[8] Ye Xian-ming; Zhang Xiao-dong: Design on intelligent heat meter, Instrument Techniques
and Sensor no.1: 10-12, 2005
[9] Fang Lide: Study on dynamic character of a new heating measurement and control system,
Master’s degree dissertation of Hebei University of Technology, pp18-36, 2005.3

1074

L. Fang et al.

[10] Fang Lide, Li Xiaoting, Li Jinhai, etc: Analyze Dynamic Errors of heat meter after step
change of Flow rate, Electrical Measurement & Instrumentation (J), pp20-24, .2005.9
[11] Toma, G: Practical Test Functions Generated by Computer Algorithms, Lecture Notes
Computer Science 3482 (2005), 576—585
[12] Toma, C: An Extension of the Notion of Observability at Filtering and Sampling Devices,
Proceedings of the International Symposium on Signals, Circuits and Systems Iasi SCS
2001, Romania, 233--236

