High-Order Finite Element Methods for Parallel
Atmospheric Modeling
Amik St.-Cyr and Stephen J. Thomas
National Center for Atmospheric Research,
1850 Table Mesa Drive, Boulder, 80305 CO, USA
{amik, thomas}@ucar.edu

Abstract. High-order ﬁnite element methods for the atmospheric shallow water equations are reviewed. The accuracy and eﬃciency of nodal
continuous and discontinuous Galerkin spectral elements are evaluated
using the standard test problems proposed by Williamson et al (1992).
The relative merits of strong-stability preserving (SSP) explicit RungeKutta and multistep time discretizations are discussed. Distributed memory MPI implementations are compared on the basis of the total computation time required, sustained performance and parallel scalability.
Because a discontinuous Galerkin method permits the overlap of computation and communication, higher sustained execution rates are possible
at large processor counts.

1

Introduction

High-order ﬁnite element methods are well-suited to atmospheric modeling due
to their desirable numerical properties and inherent parallelism. A spectral element atmospheric model received an honorable mention in the 2001 Gordon Bell
award competition, Loft et al (2001). Discontinuous Galerkin approximations are
an extension of low order ﬁnite-volume techniques for compressible ﬂows with
shocks (Cockburn et al 2000). Either nodal or modal basis functions can be
employed in high-order ﬁnite elements and the methods are spectrally accurate
for smooth solutions. To avoid excessive memory requirements, global assembly
of ﬁnite element matrices is avoided in the continuous Galerkin method by applying a direct-stiﬀness summation, Deville et al (2002). Computations within
an element are based on tensor-product summations, taking the form of dense
matrix-matrix multiplications. These are naturally cache-blocked and can be unrolled to expose instruction level parallelism to processors containing multiple
ﬂoating point units.
The shallow water equations are a prototype for atmospheric general circulation models. The parallel performance of a 3D model can be estimated by
solving identical 2D shallow water problems on multiple layers. To evaluate the
eﬃciency of various time integrators, schemes of equivalent order will be compared on the basis of the total wall-clock time required to solve a given initial
value problem (i.e. time to solution). The amount of computation required by
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3514, pp. 256–262, 2005.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

High-Order Finite Element Methods for Parallel Atmospheric Modeling

257

a method depends on the Courant number or equivalently the time step size.
Moreover, the parallel performance depends on the number of right-hand side
evaluations per time step and the associated parallel communication. In the case
of the discontinuous Galerkin method, communication of conserved variables can
be overlapped with the weak divergence and source term computations. The continuous Galerkin spectral element model developed by Loft et al (2002) will serve
as the parallel performance baseline for our simulations.

2

Shallow Water Equations

The shallow water equations contain the essential wave propagation mechanisms
found in atmospheric general circulation models. These are the fast-moving gravity waves and nonlinear Rossby waves. The latter are important for correctly
capturing nonlinear atmospheric dynamics. The ﬂux form shallow-water equations in curvilinear coordinates are described in Sadourny (1972).
√
∂
∂u1
+
E = G u2 (f + ζ),
1
∂t
∂x
√
∂
∂u2
+
E = − G u1 (f + ζ),
2
∂t
∂x
∂ √
∂ √
∂ √
1
( G Φ) +
( G u Φ) +
( G u2 Φ) = 0,
∂t
∂x1
∂x2
where
E =Φ+

1
(u1 u1 + u2 u2 ),
2

1
ζ=√
G

∂u2
∂u1
−
1
∂x
∂x2

h is the height above sea level. ui and uj are the contravariant and covariant
velocities. Φ = gh the geopotential height. f is the Coriolis parameter. The
metric tensor is Gij and G = det(Gij ).

3

Space Discretization

The computational domain Ω is partitioned into ﬁnite elements Ωk . An approximate solution uh belongs to the ﬁnite dimensional space Vh (Ω). uh is expanded
in terms of a tensor-product of the Lagrange basis functions deﬁned at the
Gauss-Lobatto-Legendre points
N

N

ukh =

uij hi (x)hj (y)
i=0 j=0

A weak Galerkin variational problem is obtained by integrating the equations
with respect to a test function ϕh ∈ Vh . In the continuous Galerkin spectral element method, integrals are directly evaluated using Gauss-Lobatto quadrature
and continuity is enforced at the element boundaries.

258

A. St.-Cyr and S.J. Thomas

To illustrate the discontinuous Galerkin approach, consider a scalar hyperbolic equation in ﬂux form,
ut + ∇ · F = S.
By applying the Gauss divergence theorem, the weak form becomes
d
dt

ϕh uh dΩ =
Ωk

F · ∇ϕh dΩ −

ϕh S dΩ +
Ωk

Ωk

ϕh F · n
ˆ ds
∂Ωk

The jump discontinuity at an element boundary requires the solution of a Riemann problem where the ﬂux function F · n
ˆ is approximated by a Lax-Friedrichs
numerical ﬂux. The resulting semi-discrete equation is given by
duh
= L(uh ).
dt

4

Time Discretization

Strong-stability preserving (SSP) time discretization methods were developed for
semi-discrete method of lines approximation of hyperbolic PDE’s in conservative
form, Gottlieb et al (2001). Strong stability is a monotonicity property for the
internal stages and the numerical solution. A general m-stage SSP Runge-Kutta
method is given by
u(0) = un
i−1

u

(i)

αik u(k) + ∆tβik L(u(k) ),

=

k=0
(m)

un+1 = u

i = 1, . . . , m,

(1)

.

To compute u(i) for each stage requires up to m evaluations of the right-hand
side L(u(k) ). Thus, higher-order SSP Runge-Kutta methods can be expensive, in
terms of the number of ﬂoating point operations, memory to store intermediate
stages and parallel communication overhead per time step. Linear multistep
methods (LMM) substitute time levels for stages.
Higueras (2004) discovered second order SSP Runge-Kutta methods with
three stages and having Courant number C = 2. Therefore, the most eﬃcient
second order explicit integrator for the discontinuous Galerkin approximation
would appear to be the three stage SSP Runge-Kutta scheme with an eﬃciency
factor of C/3 = 2/3. Indeed, our numerical experiments conﬁrmed this to be the
case. In fact it was found in practice that this scheme integrates twice as fast
as the two stage method. Moreover, the maximum time step for the three stage
SSP RK2-3 matches that of the second order leap frog integrator employed in
the continuous Galerkin spectral element model of Loft et al (2001).

High-Order Finite Element Methods for Parallel Atmospheric Modeling

259

Fig. 1. Shallow water test case 5: Flow impinging on a mountain. 150 spectral elements,
8 × 8 Gauss-Legendre Lobatto points per element Geopotential height ﬁeld h at ﬁfteen
days produced by discontinuous Galerkin method

5

Numerical Experiments

Our numerical experiments are based on the shallow water test suite of Williamson
et al (1992). Test case 5 is a zonal ﬂow impinging on an isolated mountain. The
center of the mountain is located at (3π/2, π/6) with height hs = 2000 (1 − r/R)
meters, where R = π/9 and r2 = min[R2 , (λ − 3π/2)2 + (θ − π/6)2 ]. The initial
wind and height ﬁelds take the same form as test case 2 with α0 = 0, gh0 = 5960
m2 /s2 and u0 = 20 m/s. A total of 150 spectral elements containing 8 × 8 GaussLobatto-Legendre points are employed. The explicit time step was ∆t = 90 sec.
A spatial ﬁlter was not applied during this integration. Figure 1 contains a plot of
the geopotential height ﬁeld after 15 days of integration using the discontinuous
Galerkin approximation. These results compare favorably with the continuous
spectral element model.

6

Parallel Performance Results

Both the continuous and discontinuous Galerkin spectral element models are
implemented within a uniﬁed software framework. A hybrid MPI/OpenMP programming model is supported where the entire time step is threaded according
to an SPMD shared-memory approach. MPI message passing calls are serialized in hybrid mode. The cubed-sphere computational domain is partitioned
across the compute nodes of a distributed-memory machine using either Metis

260

A. St.-Cyr and S.J. Thomas

or space-ﬁlling curves (Dennis 2003). The latter algorithm is applied in the case
where the number of elements along a cube face edge is divisible by 2n 3m . Unlike continuous Galerkin spectral elements, almost all the computations within a
discontinuous Galerkin ﬁnite element do not require any information from neighboring elements. Both the weak divergence and source terms can be computed
independently on each element and then the local contribution of the boundary
integrals can be added later. By employing non-blocking MPI communication,
these computations can be performed while the exchange of conserved variables
between elements proceeds. Single processor optimizations are based on data
structures designed for extensive re-use and stride-1 memory access to minimize
cache misses. Finite elements are represented as Fortran 90 derived types which
are allocated statically on each processor at run-time. Spherical and cartesian
coordinates along with the metric tensor are deﬁned in the element type. Extensive loop unrolling is applied to expose instruction level parallelism to the
processor. An eﬀective technique for fast computation of the maximum eigenvalue α of the ﬂux Jacobian is to invoke vector intrinsics and the use of square
roots is minimized.
An experiment was designed to test if overlapping communication and computation in a pure MPI code has any measurable eﬀect on an IBM p690 cluster
with a Colony switch. The machine consists of 32-way SMP nodes containing
1.3 Ghz Power4 processors capable of four ﬂops per clock cycle. A node can be
conﬁgured as either a single 32-way or four 8-way logical partitions. Both the

DG SSP-RK2-3
DG SSP-LMM2-3
SE LF
Ideal slope
Ideal slope

10000

log(T)

1000

100

10
1

10

100
log(P)

Fig. 2. Shallow water test case 5: Flow impinging on a mountain. 384 spectral elements,
10 × 10 Gauss-Legendre Lobatto points per element. 40 vertical levels. Integration time
in seconds for IBM p690 8-way partitions

High-Order Finite Element Methods for Parallel Atmospheric Modeling

261

continuous and discontinuous Galerkin models were compared using test case
5, but integrated for only ﬁve days. For this test,the problem is replicated on
40 independent vertical levels. The discontinuous Galerkin code was integrated
using the three step linear multistep method (LMM2-3) with ∆t = 15 sec and
three stage SSP Runge-Kutta (RK2-3) scheme with ∆t = 60 sec. The continuous Galerkin model uses a second order leap frog integrator and ∆t = 60 sec.
K = 384 elements were employed with 10 × 10 Gauss-Lobatto-Legendre points.
The LMM2-3 and RK2-3 single processor execution rates are 667 MFlops and
528 MFlops, respectively. The leap frog code sustains 724 MFlops. The wait
time is deﬁned as the average time for the MPI non-blocking communication
to complete, summed over all time steps and all processors. We ﬁnd that the
wait time for 8-way is less than for 32-way partitions. Figure 2 is a plot of the
integration times using 8-way partitions.

7

Conclusions

The three stage RK2-3 integrator discovered by Higueras (2004) was the most
eﬃcient SSP method examined. The discontinuous Galerkin method converges
exponentially for smooth solutions and standard error metrics compare favorably
with a continuous Galerkin spectral element model. Overlapping communication with computation was suggested by Baggag et al (1999). However, we only
communicate uh and compute ﬂuxes F(uh ) locally. Both non-overlapping and
overlapping implementations were compared. The latter was found to be clearly
beneﬁcial on SMP clusters such as the IBM p690 and leads to improved scalability in the strong sense for a ﬁxed problem size. The per performance within
a 32-way node is higher but 8-way nodes scale better. Our experience with a
nodal Galerkin method indicates that a ﬁlter is required for long integrations to
stabilize the scheme, thereby extending the results of Nair et al (2004).
Acknowledgements. NCAR is supported by the National Science Foundation.
This work was partially supported by an NSF collaborations in mathematics
and the geosciences grant (0222282) and the DOE climate change prediction
program (CCPP).

References
1. Baggag, A., H. Atkins, D. Keyes, 1999: Parallel implementation of the discontinuous Galerkin method. ICASE Report 99-35, NASA/CR-1999-209546.
2. Cockburn, B., G. E. Karniadakis, and C. W. Shu, 2000: Discontinuous Galerkin
Methods. Springer-Verlag, New York, 470 pp.
3. Dennis, J. M., 2003: Partitioning with space-ﬁlling curves on the cubed-sphere.
Proceedings of Workshop on Massively Parallel Processing at IPDPS’03. Nice,
France, April 2003.

262

A. St.-Cyr and S.J. Thomas

4. Deville, M. O., P. F. Fischer, and E. H. Mund, 2002: High-Order Methods for
Incompressible Fluid Flow. Cambridge University Press, 499 pp.
5. Fischer, P. F., and J. S. Mullen, 2001: Filter-Based stabilization of spectral element
methods. Comptes Rendus de l’Acad´
emie des sciences Paris, t. 332, S´erie I Analyse num´erique, 265–270.
6. Giraldo, F. X., J. S. Hesthaven, and T. Warburton, 2003: Nodal high-order discontinuous Galerkin methods for spherical shallow water equations. J. Comput.
Phys., 181, 499-525.
7. Gottlieb, S., C. W. Shu, and E. Tadmor, 2001: Strong stability preserving highorder time discretization methods. SIAM Review, 43, 89–112.
8. Higueras, I., 2004: On strong stability preserving time discretization methods. J.
Sci. Comput., 21, 193-223.
9. Loft, R. L., S. J. Thomas, and J. M. Dennis, 2001: Terascale spectral element
dynamical core for atmospheric general circulation models. Proceedings of Supercomputing 01, IEEE/ACM.
10. Nair, R. D., S. J. Thomas, and R. D. Loft, 2004: A discontinuous Galerkin global
shallow water model. Mon. Wea. Rev., to appear.
11. Sadourny, R., 1972: Conservative ﬁnite-diﬀerence approximations of the primitive
equations on quasi-uniform spherical grids. Mon. Wea. Rev., 100, 136–144.
12. Thomas, S. J., and R. D. Loft, 2002: Semi-implicit spectral element atmospheric
model. J. Sci. Comp., 17, 339–350.
13. Williamson, D. L., J. B. Drake, J. J. Hack, R. Jakob, P. N. Swarztrauber, 1992: A
standard test set for numerical approximations to the shallow water equations in
spherical geometry J. Comp. Phys., 102, 211–224.

