A Model of the Role of Cholesterol in the Development
of Alzheimer’s Disease
Gizelle Kupac Vianna1 , Artur E. Reis1 , Lu´ıs Alfredo V. de Carvalho1 ,
and Roseli S. Wedemann2
1

COPPE - Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro,
Prog. Eng. de Sistemas e Computac¸a˜ o, P.O. Box 68511, 21945-970, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil
gkupac@gmail.com, artur reis@yahoo.com.br, LuisAlfredo@ufrj.br
2
Instituto de Matem´atica e Estat´ıstica, Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro
R. S˜ao Francisco Xavier, 524, 20550-013, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil
roseli@ime.uerj.br

Abstract. We present a mathematical-computational model of the development
of Alzheimer’s disease, based on the assumption that cholesterol plays a key role
in the formation of neuropathological lesions that characterize the disease: the
senile amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles. The final model, conceived as
a system of equations, was simulated by a computer program.

1 Introduction
We propose a mathematical-computational model, that represents the physiological alterations resulting from Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) [9]. It is difficult to achieve a good
understanding of this pathology, since it is generated by a combination of many complex
and highly connected processes. The model thus aims at facilitating the comprehension
of AD, which is associated with an adaptative biological complex system. We know of
no other similar attempt to achieve such a model, in the specialized literature.
AD affects almost 7% of the population over 65 years old and up to 40% of people
over 80 years of age, and it is estimated that it is responsible for almost 70% of all
senile dementias. AD consists of a degenerative process, characterized by the occurrence of a series of abnormalities in the brain, selectively affecting neurons of specific
regions, such as the cortex and the hippocampus. Microscopic exams reveal a great
amount of two physical alterations that characterize AD and distinguish it from other
diseases: extracellular senile amyloid plaques (SAP ’s) and intracellular neurofibrillary
tangles (N T ’s). SAP ’s consist of deposits of amyloid β-peptide (Aβ) surrounded by
distrofic axons and inflammation. N T ’s contain paired helical filaments, composed of
hyperphosphorylated forms of Tau protein [2]. Such alterations hinder the functioning
of sinapses and the feasibility of neurons, leading to neuronal loss.
Age is the most relevant risk factor for AD, as many physical alterations take place in
the brain as an individual grows older. The theory of oxidative stress conceives aging as
a result of the accumulation of damages to the tissues caused by free radicals [8]. Some
epidemiologic studies suggest an influence displayed by high plasmatic cholesterol levels in the development of AD [5]. The disease also shows some genetic components.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part I, LNCS 3991, pp. 842–845, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

A Model of the Role of Cholesterol in the Development of Alzheimer’s Disease

843

2 A Computational Model and Simulations
There is uncertainty regarding the relationship between levels of cholesterol in the
plasma and in the central nervous system (CNS), in patients with AD. This is due to
the fact that plasma cholesterol and brain cholesterol are separated by the blood-brain
barrier (BBB), that controls the exchange of substances between fluids of the brain and
blood. However, there is evidence that the level of cholesterol in the frontal cortex
demonstrates a significant increase when plasma cholesterol increases [1].
In [9], we have presented a mathematical model which was simulated by a computer program for the main mechanisms in AD that are influenced by the presence
of cholesterol in the CNS, as proposed in the literature. The model consists of a set
of linear equations and linear differential equations that model the concentration of
substances involved in the metabolism of cholesterol, the formation of senile amyloid
plaques and in the formation of neurofibrilary tangles, all of which cause neuronal
loss [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. We consider that the level of neuronal loss will characterize
AD, since it relates to the cerebral atrophy that occurs in the disease.
We used Euler’s method to solve the model equations. One integration step, representing time, corresponds to 8 hours and the simulation of 100 years requires approximately 100,000 steps. A basal cholesterol diet corresponds to a daily consumption of
300mg and a high cholesterol diet to a daily consumption of 600mg. In Fig. 1, we
show the production levels of SAP ’s and N T ’s from a simulation of daily ingestion of
600mg of cholesterol.

Fig. 1. [SAP ] (PNS) and [N T ] (ENs), for 600mg of cholesterol and Aβ aggregation

Murray [4] hypothesized that, if the process of aggregation of Aβ could be suspended, the disease would not evolve. We tested the system’s behavior when the aggregation process of Aβ is inhibited. The results in Fig. 2 are coherent with the hypothesis
and we observe that, when the aggregation process of Aβ is inhibited, suppression of
the inflammatory process occurs and the formation of SAP ’s is inhibited. We notice
a slight decrease in the formation rate of N T ’s. As SAP ’s were no longer formed,

844

G.K. Vianna et al.

Fig. 2. [SAP ] and [N T ], for 600mg of cholesterol and inhibition of Aβ aggregation

there will be no disturbance in the functioning of the BBB by these structures and the
increase of efflux of cholesterol is avoided. Changes in the distribution of cholesterol
in the neuronal membrane will occur much more slowly and the production of Aβ is
reduced.
There are some positive feedbacks in the system that may aggravate AD. For example, Aβ and SAP ’s initiate an inflammatory process in the brain, which aggravates the
AD development process. We inhibited the occurrence of inflammation and observed a
keen reduction in the development of neuropathological alterations, with daily ingestion
of 600mg, as seen by comparing Figures 1 and 3.
In Niemann-Pick’s disease, N T ’s identical to those of AD were found, but no SAP ’s.
Since individuals with this disease usually die much younger than AD patients, we
conclude that N T ’s occur earlier than SAP ’s. Our simulations confirm this phenomenon
as shown in Fig. 1, since the formation of N T ’s happens almost 25 years before SAP ’s.

Fig. 3. Neuropathological alterations for 600mg cholesterol, without inflammation

A Model of the Role of Cholesterol in the Development of Alzheimer’s Disease

845

3 Conclusions
Results from the literature and from our simulations suggest that, despite the brain’s
resistance to dietary lipid composition, chronic consumption of cholesterol may alter
the functioning of certain cerebral proteins and even the structure of neurons. This happens because cholesterol alters the composition and certain properties of the neuronal
membrane. One consequence of these alterations is the increase of Aβ production and
aggregation, simultaneous with a reduction of its degradation rate. These factors contribute to the increase of toxic Aβ formation, leading to formation of SAP ’s which
cause the generation of free radicals, amplifying oxidative stress OS. OS then oxidates
the synaptic plasmatic membranes, creating a positive feedback over Aβ production.
Finally, OS and insoluble Aβ trigger Tau protein phosphorylation and the neuronal
structure is destabilized, generating N T ’s. Inflammation also plays an important role
in the development of AD and its inhibition resulted in a sharp deceleration of the neurodegenerative process.
Acknowledgements. This research was developed with grants from the brazilian National Research Council (CNPq), the Rio de Janeiro State Research Foundation
(FAPERJ) and the brazilian agency which funds graduate studies (CAPES).

References
1. Howland, D. et al.: Modulation of Secreted β-Amyloid Precursor Protein and Amyloid βPeptide in Brain by Cholesterol. The J. of Biological Chemistry, 273 No. 26. (1998) 16576–
16582
2. Illenberger, S. et al.: The Endogenous and Cell Cycle-Dependent Phosphorylation of Tau Protein in Living Cells: Implications for Alzheimer’s Disease, Molecular Biology of the Cell, 9
(1998) 1495–1512
3. Ji, S.R., Wu, Y., Sui, S.F.: Cholesterol is an Important Factor Affecting the Membrane Insertion
of β-Amyloid Peptide (Aβ-40), which May Potentially Inhibit the Fibril Formation. The J. of
Biological Chem., 277 No. 8. (Feb 22, 2001) 6273–6279
4. Murray, R.K.: The Biochemical Basis of Some Neuropsychiatry Disorders. In: Murray, R.K.,
Granner, D.K., Mayers P.A. et al. (eds.): Harpers Biochemistry, Int. Edition, (23 ed.). PrenticeHall (1993) 750-752.
5. Pappolla, M.A., Smith, M.A., et al.: Cholesterol, Oxidative Stress, and Alzheimer’s Disease:
Expanding the Horizons of Pathogenesis. In: Smith, M.A., Perry, G. (eds.): Serial Review:
Causes and Consequences of Oxidative Stress in Alzheimer’s Disease. Free Radical Biology
and Medicine, Vol. 33, no. 2., Elsevier (2002) 173–181
6. Rissman, R.A., Poon, W.W., Jones, M.B. et al.: Caspase-cleavage of Tau is an early event
in Alzheimer’s disease tangle pathology. The J. of Clinical Investigation, 114 No. 1, (2004)
121–130
7. Selkoe, D.J.: Toward a Comprehensive Theory for Alzheimer’s Disease. Hypothesis:
Alzheimer’s Disease is Caused by the Cerebral Accumulation and Cytotoxicity of Amyloid
β-Protein. Annals of the New York Academy of Science, 924 (2000) 17–25
8. Wood, W.G. et al.: Brain Membrane Cholesterol Domains, Aging and Amyloid Beta-Peptides.
Neurobiology of Aging, No. 23 (2002) p.685–694
9. Vianna, G.K.: Um Modelo Neurocomputacional do Papel do Colesterol no Desenvolvimento
da Doenc¸a de Alzheimer. Ph.D. Dissertation, Prog. Eng. de Sistemas e Computac¸a˜ o, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, (2005) (in Portuguese).

