Dynamic Data Driven Applications Systems –
DDDAS 2009
Craig C. Douglas
University of Wyoming, Laramie, WY 82071, USA
Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520-8285, USA

Abstract. This workshop covers several aspects of the Dynamic Data
Driven Applications Systems (DDDAS) concept, which is an established
approach deﬁning a symbiotic relation between an application and sensor based measurement systems. Applications can accept and respond
dynamically to new data injected into the executing application. In addition, applications can dynamically control the measurement processes.
The synergistic feedback control-loop between an application simulation
and its measurements opens new capabilities in simulations, e.g., the
creation of applications with new and enhanced analysis and prediction
capabilities, greater accuracy, longer simulations between restarts, and
enable a new methodology for more eﬃcient and eﬀective measurements.
DDDAS transforms the way science and engineering are done with a
major impact in the way many functions in our society are conducted,
e.g., manufacturing, commerce, transportation, hazard prediction and
management, and medicine. The workshop will present such new opportunities as well as the challenges and approaches in technology needed
to enable DDDAS capabilities in applications, relevant algorithms, and
software systems. The workshop will showcase ongoing research in these
aspects with examples from several important application areas.

1

The Scope of the Workshop

More and more applications are migrating to a data-driven paradigm including
hazard management, terrorist event handling, contaminant tracking, chemical
process plants, petroleum reﬁneries, well bores, and nuclear power plants. In
each case sensors produce large quantities of telemetry that are fed into simulations that model key quantities of interest. As data are processed, computational
models are adjusted to best agree with known measurements. If properly done,
this increases the predictive capability of the simulation system. This allows
what-if scenarios to be modeled, disasters to be predicted and avoided with human initiated or automatic responses, and the operation of the plants to be
optimized. As this area of computational science grows, a broad spectrum of application areas will reap beneﬁts. Examples include enhanced oil recovery, optimized placement of desalination plants and other water intakes, optimized food
production, monitoring the integrity of engineered structures and thus avoiding failures, and real time traﬃc advice for drivers. These are but a few of
countless examples.
G. Allen et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2009, Part II, LNCS 5545, pp. 445–446, 2009.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

446

C.C. Douglas

As is the case in other data intensive arenas, visualization plays a key role in
DDDAS. Visualization is used at all stages: setting up data and initial and/or
boundary conditions, seeing and analyzing results, and steering computations.
Data-driven computational science is ripe for multidisciplinary research to
build applications, algorithms, measurement processes, and software components
from which tools can be developed to solve diverse problems of regional and international interest. The advances that will result, including enhanced repositories
of software components and applications, will be of great value to industry and
governments, and will set the stage for further valuable research and development. A comprehensive list of ongoing state of the art projects is kept up to date
on http://www.dddas.org in the projects area.
Several research thrusts in which advances should signiﬁcantly enhance the
ability of data-driven computational science to bring its tremendous beneﬁts to
a wide array of applications. These research thrusts, which are described below
in more detail, are:
– Eﬀective assimilation of streams of data into ongoing simulations.
– Interpretation, analysis, and adaptation to assist the analyst and to ensure
the most accurate simulation.
– Cyberinfrastructure to support data-driven simulations.
These three areas interact with two other research ﬁelds symbiotically: (1) forward multiscale modeling and simulation, and (2) deterministic and statistical
methods in inverse problems.
Research areas (1) and (2) combined with (3) DDDAS must work within the
context of uncertainty and will beneﬁt from the development of statistically
sound, uniﬁed treatments of uncertainties. For example, in forward multiscale
modeling and simulation, input data are uncertain and these uncertainties should
be propagated to uncertainties in output quantities of interest. In an inverse
problem, proper treatment of measurement uncertainties and errors must be
integrated with treatment of uncertainties associated with bforwardb models.
be treated systematically. In a data-driven application, all of these uncertainties
are present and must.
Data management in a DDDASis typically supported by tools for data acquisition, data access, and data dissemination. Data acquisition tools retrieve
the real time or near real time data, processing and storing them. Data access
tools provide common data manipulation support, e.g., querying, storing, and
searching, to upper level models. Data dissemination tools read data from the
data store, format them based on requests from data consumers, and deliver
formatted data to data consumers.
Software re-use, supporting separation of concerns, and real time quality support for applications will increase reliability, reduce development time, and teach
students how to be much more productive.
DDDAS and similar methodologies are the paradigm of the truly data rich
information age upon us.

