A Hybrid Mining Model Based on Neural Network
and Kernel Smoothing Technique
Defu Zhang, Qingshan Jiang, and Xin Li
Department of Computer Science, Xiamen University, 361005, China
dfzhang@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract. Neural networks as data mining tools are becoming increasingly
popular in business. In this paper, a hybrid mining model based on neural
network and kernel smoothing technique is developed. The kernel smoothing
technique is used to preprocess data and help decision-making. Neural network is
employed to predict the long trends of stock price. In addition, some trading rules
involving trading decision-making are considered. The China Shanghai
Composite Index is as case study. The return achieved by the hybrid mining
model is four times as large as that achieved by the buy and hold strategy, so the
proposed model is promising and certainly warrants further research.

1 Introduction
In this era of information blast, people meet huge amount of information everyday and
are drowning in information. Information will provide huge profits for people if
information can be utilized and processed, otherwise, it will become the burden of
people. The goal of data mining is to bring the practice of information processing closer
to providing the real answer and decision-making for the different investors and
organizations. However, traditional data mining tools have been very difficult to meet
the need of people. People have to find new computational models to get useful
information from huge amount of data.
Neural networks (NNs) are a class of generalized nonlinear nonparametric models
inspired by studies of the human brain. They are robust and have good learning and
generalization capabilities [1], and are appropriate for clustering and prediction
problems. For a more detailed description of NNs, the interested readers are referred to
the papers in [2-4]. Due to NNs can mine valuable information from a mass of history
information, so they have become one of the most efficient and useful mining tools [1,
5-8]. Especially, some researches [8-10] have shown that NNs performed better than
conventional statistic approaches in financial forecasting. Despite NNs as data mining
tool have many advantages, however, they still have some drawbacks, for example,
overfitting and poor explanation capability and so on, which significantly affect the
performance of NNs. In order to enhance the forecasting capability of NNs, many
researchers have improved NNs by combining other techniques [11]. In this paper, the
kernel smoothing technique, which is use to filter ‘noise’ and help decision-making, is
combined with NNs to develop a mining model. The actual results show that this model
is efficient, and some interesting results are obtained.
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3516, pp. 801 – 805, 2005.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

802

D. Zhang, Q. Jiang, and X. Li

2 The Hybrid Mining Model
Many researches [12] have shown that the closing price and the trading volume are the
most important factors that affects stock market, so the two data are selected to predict
the future trends of stock market. Due to the original financial data are very complex,
and generally contain noise. In order to make model more effective, these data are
usually preprocessed before training. In this paper, a kernel smoothing technique [12] is
used to filter noise. In detail, for a time series Y : y1 ,", y n , a smoothed time series

Yˆ : yˆ1 ,", yˆ n is calculated as following:

∑ K (i − t ) y
=
∑ K (i − t )
n

yˆ i

t =1
n

t =1

h

h

t

x2

− 2
1
, i = 1,2,", n, K h ( x) =
e 2h .
h 2π

In addition, due to the activation function is a sigmoid function that squashes input
data to [0,1], so the two data are scaled in [0.1,0.9] respectively.
The network architecture is shown in Fig.1.
Input layer Hidden layer

Output layer

Fig. 1. A network architecture used by this paper

In order to make mode more effective, the following mean squared error is used.

MSE =

1 N ~
2
∑ α (xi + n − xi + n ) ,
2 i =1

(1)

if ( ~
xi + n − xi + n −1 )( xi + n − xi + n −1) > 0
⎧ β
, β ∈ (0,1) , N is the total
where α = ⎨
2
β
else
−
⎩
xi + n is the computed output, xi + n is the target
number of training pattern pairs, and ~
output. (1) denotes that the incorrect predicted directions are penalized more heavily
than the correct predicted directions.

A Hybrid Mining Model Based on Neural Network and Kernel Smoothing Technique

803

In order to avoid the poor explanation capability of NNs and give valuable
suggestions for our investment decision-making, some trading rules are considered.
The trading rules 1 is as follows:
Buy,
The trading signs=

Sell,

RBP > RBT ,
if RSP < RST ,
if

Do nothing, otherwise.
xn +i ) − xn
max ( ~
min ( ~
xn + i ) − xn
≤
i
≤
≤
1
30
1
where RBP =
, RSP = i ≤30
, RSP and RBP are different
xn
xn
constants and denote the return of predict selling and buying respectively.
All the seasoned investors know the stock trend is very important to make money,
and the past trend will affect the future trend. Therefore, we obtain the trading rules 2
by combining the past trends and the trading rule 1. Namely, the trading signs are sell if
RSP < RST and the trend in the past two days is down. The trend can be obtained by
the kernel smoothing techniques in the process of data preprocessing. We compare the
return of the trading rule 1 with the return of the trading rule 2 (see Fig.2), the
computational results have shown that the trading rule 2 is more effective. The mining
model can tell us when to buy or sell the stock according to these rules.

3 Computational Results and Conclusions
The hybrid mining model was implemented in C++ for Dos on a PC. The performance
of this model was evaluated by trading the China Shanghai Composite Index from May
1996 to 15 Dec. 2003. The training patterns and test patterns are the data of 300 and 200
trading days respectively. Other parameters are designed as follows:
n = 20, m = 5, RBT = 0.06, RST = 0.041, β = 0.4 . The initial weights and
thresholds are in [-0.5, 0.5]. All the training patterns are selected randomly to train
network about 3000 times, then all the testing patterns are tested. The process is
repeated until the stop criteria are met.
The comparisons of returns between the mining model and the buy and hold strategy
can be seen in Fig.2. All returns were calculated after taking the actual transaction costs
for each transaction into consideration, namely the transaction costs for buying and
selling is 1% respectively. For Fig.2, the return of the mining model with the trading
rule 1 and 2 is 3.12 and 4.33 respectively, and the return of the buy and hold strategy is
1.31. The return of the trading rule 2 is about four times as large as that of the buy and
hold strategy. So the mining model is superior to the buy and hold strategy. In addition,
from Fig.2, it can know that the presented mining model performs better in bear market
than in bull market, it denotes that the mining model has better capability of controlling
risk. What is more, we find an interesting result, namely, the performance by training
neural network every 150 days is better than that by training neural network every day.
It directly improves the computational speed of the hybrid model.
The results of trading about seven years to Shanghai Composite Index have shown
that the mining model was encouraging. This mining model can have actual application

804

D. Zhang, Q. Jiang, and X. Li

Fig. 2. Comparisons of returns between mining model and buy and hold strategy

and is very efficient for combinational investment. The future work is to strive for
making the model more adaptive to the application and applying this model to other
market and individual stocks.

References
1. Sushmita Mitra, Sankar K. Pal, and Pabitra Mitra: Data Mining in Soft Computing
Framework: A Survey. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks (2002) 13(1): 3–14
2. Hertz, J. Krogh, A., and Palmer R.G.: Introduction to the theory of neurocomputing.
Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA (1991)
3. Widrow, B.; Rumelhart, D.E.; and Lehr, M.A.: Neural networks: applications in industry,
business and science. Communications of the ACM (1994) 37(3): 93–105
4. Kate A.Smith, Jatinder N.D. Gupta: neural networks in business: techniques and
applications for the operations researcher. Computers & Operations Research (2000)
27:1023-1044
5. A. J. Chapman: Stock market trading systems through neural networks: Developing a
model. International Journal of Applied Expert Systems (1994) 2(2): 88-100
6. Hoptroff R.: The principles and practice of time series forecasting and business modelling
using neural nets. Neural Computing & Applications (1993) 1: 59–66
7. Zhang G, Patuwo B, Hu M: Forecasting with artificial neural networks: the state of the art.
International Journal of Forecasting (1998) 14: 35–62
8. Refenes,A.N., A.Zapranis, and G. Francis: Stock performance modeling using neural
network: A comparative study with regression models. Neural Network (1994) 5: 961-970
9. Y.S.Abu-Mostafa, A.F. Atiya, M. Magdon-Ismail, and H. White: Neural networks in
financial engineering. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks (2001) 12(4): 653-656

A Hybrid Mining Model Based on Neural Network and Kernel Smoothing Technique

805

10. Saad E, Prokhorov E, Wunsch D.: Comparative study of stock trend prediction using time
delay, Recurrent and probabilistic neural networks. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks,
(1998) 9:1456–70
11. Paul G. Harrald and Mark Kamstra: Evolving Artificial Neural Networks to Combine
Financial Forecasts. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 1997 1(1): 40-52
12. 12.Andrew W. Lo, Harry Mamaysky, Jiang Wang: Foundations of technical Analysis:
Computational algorithms, statistical inference, and empirical implementation.
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7613, National Bureau of Economic Research (2000)

