Family of Energy Conserving
Glossy Reﬂection Models
Michal Radziszewski and Witold Alda
AGH University of Science and Technology,
al. Mickiewicza 30, 30-059 Krakow, Poland
mradzisz@student.agh.edu.pl, alda@agh.edu.pl

Abstract. We present an improved reﬂection model optimized for
global illumination. The model produces visually plausible images, is
symmetric and has improved energy preserving capabilities compared to
previous approaches which satisﬁes these requirements. Having an eﬃcient sampling routine, the model is ready to use in Monte Carlo rendering. Presented model is phenomenological, i.e. it has intuitive glossiness
parameter that aﬀects its appearance. Moreover it can be used as a set
of basis functions designed to ﬁt material reﬂection to measured data.
Keywords: Reﬂection Functions, BRDF, Global Illumination, Ray
Tracing.

1

Introduction

Modeling reﬂection properties of surfaces is very important for rendering. Traditionally, in global illumination fraction of light which is reﬂected from a surface is
described by a BRDF (Bidirectional Reﬂection Distribution Function) abstraction. This function is deﬁned over all scene surface points, as well as two light
directions – incident and outgoing. As the name suggests, to conform the laws
of physics, all BRDFs must be symmetric, i.e. swapping incident and outgoing
directions must not change BRDF value. Moreover, the function must be energy
preserving – it cannot reﬂect more light than it receives.
To achieve best results of rendering with global illumination, energy preservation of BRDF should satisfy more strict requirements. It is desirable that basic
BRDF model reﬂects exactly all the light that arrives on a surface. The actual
value of reﬂection is then modeled by a texture. If BRDF is unable to reﬂect
all incident light, even white texture appears to absorb some part of it. In local
illumination algorithms this can be corrected a bit by making reﬂection value
more than unit, but in global illumination such trick can have fatal consequences
due to multiple light scattering. Our model is strictly energy preserving, while
it still maintains other desirable properties.
This paper concentrates on phenomenological glossy BRDFs only. It does not
account for wave model of light scattering, neither it touches the concept of
BSSRDF. The latter is deﬁned on two directions and two surface points instead
of one, which is used to simulate subsurface scattering, during which light is
reﬂected from surface at a point slightly diﬀerent than is illuminated.
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2008, Part II, LNCS 5102, pp. 46–55, 2008.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

Family of Energy Conserving Glossy Reﬂection Models

47

Paper organization. In the subsequent section there is a brief description of
former research related to the BRDF concept. Next, requirements, which should
be satisﬁed by a plausible reﬂection model are presented. Then there is explained
the derivation of our reﬂection function, followed by comparison of our results
with previous ones. Finally, we present a summary, which describes what was
achieved during our research and what is left for future development.

2

Related Work

The ﬁrst well known attempt to create glossy reﬂection is Phong model [1].
This model is, however, neither symmetric nor energy conserving. An improved
version of it was created by Neumann et al. [2,3]. Lafortune et al. [4] used
combination of generalized Phong reﬂection functions to adjust scattering model
to measured data.
There are popular reﬂection models based on microfacets. Blinn [5] and Cook
et al. [6] assumed that scattering from each individual microfacet is specular,
while Oren and Nayar [7] used diﬀuse reﬂection instead.
A lot of work was dedicated to anisotropic scattering models. The ﬁrst well
known approach is Kajiya’s one [8], which uses physical model of surface reﬂection. Ward [9] presented a new technique of modeling anisotropic reﬂection,
together with method to measure real-world material reﬂectances. The Walter’s
technical report [10] describes how to eﬃciently implement Ward’s model in
Monte Carlo renderer. Ashikhmin and Shirley [11] showed how to modify Phong
reﬂection model to support anisotropy.
Some approaches are based on physical laws. He et al. [12] developed a model
that supports well many diﬀerent types of surface reﬂections. Stam [13] used
wave optics to accurately model diﬀraction of light. Westin et al. [14] used a
diﬀerent approach to obtain this goal. They employed Monte Carlo simulation
of scattering of light from surface microgeometry to obtain coeﬃcients to be
ﬁtted into their BRDF representation.
On the other hand, Schlick’s model [15], is purely phenomenological. It accounts for diﬀuse and glossy reﬂection, in isotropic and anisotropic versions
through a small set of intuitive parameters. Pellacini et al. [16] used a physically
based model of reﬂection and modiﬁed its parameters in a way which makes
them perceptually meaningful.
A novel approach of Edwards et al. [17] is designed to preserve all energy while
scattering, however at the cost of non-symmetric scattering function. Diﬀerent
approach was taken by Neumann et al. [18]. They modiﬁed Phong model to
increase its reﬂectivity at grazing angles as much as possible while still satisfying
energy conservation and symmetry as well.
Some general knowledge on light reﬂection models can be found in Lawrence’s
thesis [19]. More information on this topic is in Siggraph Course [20] and in
Westin’s et al. technical report [21]. Westin et al. [22] also provided a detailed
comparison of diﬀeren BRDF models. Stark et al. [23] shown that many BRDFs
can be expressed in more convenient, less than 4D space (two directional vectors).

48

M. Radziszewski and W. Alda

Shirley et al. [24] described some general issues which are encountered when
reﬂection models are created.

3

Properties of Reﬂection Functions

In order to create visually plausible images, all reﬂection functions should satisfy
some well deﬁned basic requirements.
Energy conservation. In global illumination it is not enough to ensure that
no surface scatters more light that it receives. It is desirable to have a function which scatters exactly all light. We are aware of only Edwards’s et al.
work [17], which satisﬁes this requirement, but at the high price of lack of
symmetry. Neumann et al. [18] improved reﬂectivity of Phong model, but
the energy preservation still is not ideal.
Symmetry. The symmetry of BRDF is very important when bidirectional
methods (which trace rays from viewer and from light as well) are used.
When a BRDF is not symmetrical, apropriate corrections similar to described in [25] must be made, in order to get proper rendering results.
Everywhere positive. If a reﬂection function happens to be equal to zero on
part of its domain, the respective surface may potentially render to black,
no matter how strong the illumination is. Having a ’blackbody’ on the scene
is a severe artifact, which is typically mitigated by a complex BRDF with an
additional additive diﬀuse component. However, this option produces dull
matte color and is not visually plausible.
Everywhere smooth. Human eye happens to be particularly sensitive on
detecting discontinuities of ﬁrst derivative of illumination, especially on
smooth, curved surfaces. This artifact occurs in any BRDF which uses functions such as min or max. Particularly, many microfacet based models use
so-called geometric attenuation factor with min function, and look unpleasant at low glossiness values.
Limit #1 – diﬀuse. It is very helpful in modeling if glossy BRDF can be made
’just a bit’ more glossy than a matte surface. That is, good quality reﬂection
model should be arbitrarily close to matte reﬂection when glossines is near
to zero. Surprisingly, few of BRDF models satisfy this useful and easy to
achieve property.
Limit #2 – specular. Similarly, it is convenient if glossy BRDF becomes near
to ideal specular reﬂection when glossines approaches inﬁnity. Unfortunately,
this property is partially much more diﬃcult to achieve than Limit #1. First,
all glossy BRDFs are able to scatter light in near ideal reﬂection direction,
which is correct. Second, energy preservation typically is not satisﬁed.
Ease of sampling. Having a probability distribution proportional (or almost
proportional) to BRDF value, which can be integrated and then inverted
analytically, allows eﬃcient BRDF sampling in Monte Carlo rendering. This
feature is roughly satisﬁed in majority of popular BRDF models.
Our work is an attempt to create a BRDF which satisﬁes all these conditions
together.

Family of Energy Conserving Glossy Reﬂection Models

4

49

Derivation of Reﬂection Function

In this section a detailed derivation of the new reﬂection model is presented.
Since this model is purely phenomenological, all mathematical functions chosen
to use in it are selected just because of desirable properites they have. This
particular choice has no physical basis, and of course, is not unique. Through
the rest of this section the notation presented in Table 1 is used. By convention,

Table 1. Notation used in BRDF derivation
Symbol
fr
R
ωi
ωo
ωr
N
u, v
θi
θr
φi
φr
Ω

Meaning
Reﬂection function (BRDF)
Reﬂectivity of BRDF
Direction of incident light
Direction of outgoing light
Ideal reﬂection direction of outgoing light
Surface normal
Arbitrary orthogonal tangent directions
Angle between ωi and N
Angle between ωr and N
Angle between ωi and u
Angle between ωr and u
Hemisphere above surface, BRDF domain

all direction vectors are in Ω, i.e. cosine of angle between any of them and N is
non-negative. Moreover, these vectors are of unit length.
4.1

Symmetry and Energy Conservation

Symmetry requires that incident and outgoing direction can be swapped without
modiﬁcation of BRDF value:
∀ωi , ωo ∈ Ω

fr (ωi , ωo ) = fr (ωo , ωi ).

(1)

Energy conservation requires that reﬂectivity of the BRDF must not be greater
than one, and is desirable to be equal to one:
fr (ωi , ωo ) cos(θi )dωi ≤ 1.

R(ωo ) =

(2)

Ω

The reﬂectivity can be expressed in a diﬀerent domain. The following expression
is used through the rest of this section:
2π

R(θo , φo ) =

π
2

fr (θi , φi , θo , φo ) cos(θi ) sin(θi )dθi dφi .
0 0

(3)

50

M. Radziszewski and W. Alda

It is very useful if reﬂection function fr can be separated into a product:
fr (θi , φi , θo , φo ) = fθ (θi , θo )fφ (θi , φi , θo , φo ),

(4)

where fθ is latitudal reﬂection and fφ is longitudal reﬂection. If fφ integrates
to unit regardless of θi and θo this separation signiﬁcantly simpliﬁes reﬂectivity
evaluation, which now can be re-expressed as:
⎞
π ⎛
2π
2

⎝

R(θo , φo ) =
0

fφ (θi , φi , θo , φo )dφi ⎠ fθ (θi , θo ) cos(θi ) sin(θi )dθi ,

(5)

0

and energy conservation as:
π
2

2π

fφ (θi , φi , θo , φo )dφi ≤ 1

fθ (θi , θo ) cos(θi ) sin(θi )dθi ≤ 1. (6)

and

0

0

Due to this feature, latitudal and longitudal reﬂection functions can be treated
separately.
4.2

Latitudal Reﬂection Function

The domain of latitudal function is very inconvenient due to the sine and cosine
factors in the integrand:
π
2

Rθ (θo ) =

fθ (θi , θo ) cos(θi ) sin(θi )dθi .

(7)

0

However, substituting x = cos2 (θi ), y = cos2 (θo ) and dx = −2 sin(θi ) cos(θi )dθi
leads to much simpler expression for reﬂectivity:
1

Ry (y) = 0.5

fθ (x, y)dx.

(8)

0

Despite being much simpler, this space is still not well suited for developing
reﬂection function, mainly because of necessity of symbolic integration. Using
the ﬁnal transformation it may be obtained:
y x

Fθ (x, y) =

fθ (s, t)dsdt

and

fθ (x, y) =

∂ 2 Fθ (x, y)
.
∂x∂y

(9)

0 0

Designing a function Fθ is much easier than fθ . The requirements that Fθ must
satisfy are the following:
∀x,y
∀x
∀x1 ≤x2

Fθ (x, y) = Fθ (y, x)

(10)

Fθ (x, 1) = x

(11)

Fθ (x1 , y) ≤ Fθ (x2 , y)

(12)

Family of Energy Conserving Glossy Reﬂection Models

51

The requirement (11) can be released a bit. If it is not satisﬁed, it is enough if
Fθ (1, 1) = 1 and Fθ (0, 1) = 0 are satisﬁed instead. In the latter case, applying:
x = F −1 (x, 1)

and y = F −1 (1, y)

(13)

guarantees that Fθ (x , y ) satisﬁes original requirements (10-12).
A matte BRDF in this space is expressed as Fθ = xy. We have found that the
following (unnormalized) function is a plausible initial choice for latitudal glossy
reﬂection:
(14)
fθ (x, y) = sech2 n(x − y) .
Transforming this equation into Fθ space leads to:
Fθ (x, y) =

ln cosh(nx) + ln cosh(ny) − ln cosh n(x − y)
.
2 ln cosh n

(15)

This function satisﬁes only the released requirements, so it is necessary to substitute:
1 − e−2 ln(cosh n)x
1
x = artanh
(16)
n
tanh n
for x, and analogical expression for y. After substitution and transformation to
the fθ space it may be obtained:
fθ (x, y) =

m tanh2 n · e−m(x+y)
tanh2 n − (1 − e−mx ) (1 − e−my )

2,

(17)

where m = 2 ln cosh n. Finally, it should be substituted x = cos2 (θi ) and y =
cos2 (θr ). Considering how complex the ﬁnal expression is, it is clear why it is
diﬃcult to guess the form of plausible reﬂection function, and how useful these
auxiliary spaces are.
4.3

Longitudal Reﬂection Function

The longitudal reﬂection function should be a function of cos(φi − φr ). It has to
integrate to unit over [−π, π], so it is reasonable to choose a function that can
be integrated analytically:
fφ (φi , φr ) = Cn

1

6,

[n(1 − cos(φi − φr )) + 1]

and Cn =

(2n + 1)5.5
,
2πP5 (n)

(18)

where P5 (n) = 7.875n5 + 21.875n4 + 25n3 + 15n2 + 5n + 1. When n = 0, the
function becomes constant. When n increases, the function is largest when φi =
φr . In the limit, when n approaches inﬁnity, the function converges to δ(φi − φr ).
There is still one issue – whenever either ωi or ωr is almost parallel to N , φi
or φr is poorly deﬁned. In fact, in these cases, the function should progressively
become constant. The simple substitution n = n sin θi sin θr works ﬁne.

52

4.4

M. Radziszewski and W. Alda

Reﬂection Model

Combining latitudal and longitudal scattering functions leads to the ﬁnal BRDF:
fr (θi , φi , θo , φo ) =

(2nφ sin θi sin θr + 1)5.5
6

2πP5 (nφ ) (nφ sin θi sin θr (1 − cos(φi − φr )) + 1)
mθ tanh2 nθ · e−mθ (cos

2

·

tanh2 nθ − 1 − e−mθ cos2 θi

·

θi +cos2 θr )

1 − e−mθ cos2 θr

2.

(19)

The parameters nθ and nφ do not have to satisfy nθ = nφ = n. Using various
functions of the form nθ = f1 (n) and nφ = f2 (n) leads to a variety of diﬀerent
glossy scattering models. The reﬂection angles (θr and φr ) may be computed
from outgoing angles θo and φo in a few ways, e.g. with ideal reﬂection, ideal
refraction or backward scattering, leading to variety of useful BRDFs.
The reﬂection model is strictly energy preserving, so cosine weighted BRDF
forms probability density functions (pdf ) to sample θi and φi from. Obviously,
both pdf s are integrable analytically, which is very helpful.

5

Results

The following results are generated using a white sphere and a complex dragon
model illuminated by a point light source.√ The proportions of latitudal and
longitudal gloss are nθ = n and nφ = 0.75n n sin θi sin θr . Fig. 1 examines how
selected scattering models cope with little glossiness. Phong-based models expose

Fig. 1. Comparison of diﬀerent glossy BRDFs with gloss ’just a bit’ more than matte.
From left: diﬀuse reference, reciprocal Phong, max-Phong, microfacet.

Fig. 2. Latitudal scattering only. From left: glossiness ’just a bit’ more than matte,
medium glossiness, large glossines, similarity between θi and θr .

Family of Energy Conserving Glossy Reﬂection Models

53

Fig. 3. Longitudal scattering only with varying glossiness

Fig. 4. Product of latitudal and longitudal scattering with increasing glossiness

Fig. 5. Scattering with perpendicular (left) and grazing (right) illumination

Fig. 6. Complex dragon model rendered with glossiness n = 2 (left) and n = 4 (right)

54

M. Radziszewski and W. Alda

a zero reﬂectivity in certain directions, while max-Phong and microfacet models
have shading discontinuities. Neither of these models is fully energy conserving.
Fig. 2 shows latitudal component of our reﬂection model. The scattering is increased at grazing angles to achieve energy conservation. Similarly, Fig. 3 presents
longitudal scattering only. In Figs. 4, 5 and 6 our BRDF model, deﬁned as a product of latitudal and longitudal scattering is presented. The Fig. 4 shows how the
BRDF behaves when glossiness is increased, while the Fig. 5 changes illumination angle using the same glossines. The BRDF exhibits some anisotropy at nonperpendicular illumination, not signiﬁcant in complex models (Fig. 6).

6

Conclusions

We have presented a novel approach to create BRDFs, for which we have designed an energy preserving and symmetrical reﬂection function. Energy conservation allows improved rendering results. For example, when a model rendered
with our function is placed into an environment with uniform illumination, it
vanishes. On the other hand, majority of other models lose some energy, especially at grazing angles. For example, Phong reﬂection tend to absorb much
light, producing dark borders around objects, impossible to control. Microfacet
model, which conserves energy far better than Phong model, still is not perfect.
In general, properties of our reﬂection model are diﬀerent from typically used
Phong or microfacet models. It conserves energy and for low glossiness values
our model produces neither visual defects like illumination discontinuities, caused
by microfacet model, nor black patches, caused by Phong model. Moreover, it
smoothly becomes matte, when glossiness approaches zero.
On the other hand, our model produces anisotropy when grazing illumination
is encountered, i.e. when viewer direction is rotated around ideal reﬂection direction, reﬂection value changes in a way diﬃcult to predict. Phong model does
not produce such anisotropy at all, and in microfacet model it is less distracting.
Nevertheless, when geometry of illuminated ﬁgure is complex, the anisotropy is
no more visible, and at grazing angles microfacet model loses numerical stability,
especially when ωi ≈ −ωr .
Moreover, simple implementation of latitudal reﬂection formula causes numerical instabilities when high glossiness is used, i.e. when n
25. Currently,
our reﬂection model is best suited for complex geometrical shapes and not extremely high glossiness. In these conditions it produces better results than simple
formulae of Phong or microfacet models. Minimizing the impact of anisotropy
and numerical instability at high glossiness requires further research in this area.
AGH Grant no. 11.11.120.777 is acknowledged.

References
1. Phong, B.T.: Illumination for computer generated pictures. Communications of the
ACM 18(6), 311–317 (1975)
2. Neumann, L., Neumann, A., Szirmay-Kalos, L.: Compact metallic reﬂectance models. Computer Graphics Forum 18(3), 161–172 (1999)

Family of Energy Conserving Glossy Reﬂection Models

55

3. Neumann, L., Neumann, A., Szirmay-Kalos, L.: Reﬂectance models with fast importance sampling. Computer Graphics Forum 18(4), 249–265 (1999)
4. Lafortune, E.P., Foo, S.C., Torrance, K.E., Greenberg, D.P.: Non-linear approximation of reﬂectance functions. In: SIGGRAPH 1997 Proceedings, pp. 117–126
(1997)
5. Blinn, J.F.: Models of light reﬂection for computer synthesized pictures. In: SIGGRAPH 1977 Proceedings, pp. 192–198. ACM, New York (1977)
6. Cook, R.L., Torrance, K.E.: A reﬂectance model for computer graphics. ACM
Transactions on Graphics 1(1), 7–24 (1982)
7. Oren, M., Nayar, S.K.: Generalization of lambert’s reﬂectance model. In: SIGGRAPH 1994 Proceedings, pp. 239–246. ACM, New York (1994)
8. Kajiya, J.T.: Anisotropic reﬂection models. In: SIGGRAPH 1985 Proceedings, pp.
15–21. ACM, New York (1985)
9. Ward, G.J.: Measuring and modeling anisotropic reﬂection. In: SIGGRAPH 1992
Proceedings, pp. 265–272. ACM, New York (1992)
10. Walter, B.: Notes on the ward brdf. Technical Report PCG-05-06, Cornell University (April 2005)
11. Ashikhmin, M., Shirley, P.: An anisotropic phong brdf model. Journal of Graphics
Tools 5(2), 25–32 (2000)
12. He, X.D., Torrance, K.E., Sillion, F.X., Greenberg, D.P.: A comprehensive physical
model for light reﬂection. In: SIGGRAPH 1991 Proceedings, pp. 175–186 (1991)
13. Stam, J.: Diﬀraction shaders. In: SIGGRAPH 1999 Proceedings, pp. 101–110. ACM
Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co, New York (1999)
14. Westin, S.H., Arvo, J.R., Torrance, K.E.: Predicting reﬂectance functions from
complex surfaces. In: SIGGRAPH 1992 Proceedings, pp. 255–264 (1992)
15. Schlick, C.: A customizable reﬂectance model for everyday rendering. In: Fourth
Eurographics Workshop on Rendering. Number Series EG 93 RW, pp. 73–84 (1993)
16. Pellacini, F., Ferwerda, J.A., Greenberg, D.P.: Toward a psychophysically-based
light reﬂection model for image synthesis. In: SIGGRAPH 2000 Proceedings, pp.
55–64. ACM Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co, New York (2000)
17. Edwards, D., Boulos, S., Johnson, J., Shirley, P., Ashikhmin, M., Stark, M.,
Wyman, C.: The halfway vector disk for brdf modeling. ACM Transactions on
Graphics 25(1), 1–18 (2006)
18. Neumann, L., Neumann, A., Szirmay-Kalos, L.: Reﬂectance models by pumping
up the albedo function. Machine Graphics and Vision (1999)
19. Lawrence, J.: Acquisition and Representation of Material Appearance for Editing
and Rendering. PhD thesis, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA (2006)
20. Ashikhmin, M., Shirley, P., Marschner, S., Stam, J.: State of the art in modeling
and measuring of surface reﬂection. In: SIGGRAPH 2001 Course #10 (2001)
21. Westin, S.H., Li, H., Torrance, K.E.: A ﬁeld guide to brdf models. Technical Report
PCG-04-01, Cornell University (January 2004)
22. Westin, S.H., Li, H., Torrance, K.E.: A comparison of four brdf models. Technical
Report PCG-04-02, Cornell University (April 2004)
23. Stark, M.M., Arvo, J., Smits, B.: Barycentric parameterizations for isotropic brdfs.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 11(2), 126–138 (2005)
24. Shirley, P., Smits, B., Hu, H., Lafortune, E.: A practitioners’ assessment of light
reﬂection models. In: Paciﬁc Graphics 1997 Proceedings, pp. 40–50 (1997)
25. Veach, E.: Non-symmetric scattering in light transport algorithms. In: Proceedings
of the Eurographics Workshop on Rendering Techniques 1996, pp. 81–90 (1996)

