A Novel DC Nodal Pricing Method Based on Linear
Programming in Competitive Electricity Market
Bo Yang1,3, Yun-ping Chen1, Zun-lian Zhao2, and Qi-ye Han3
1

School of Electrical Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China
yangbo@ccpg.com.cn
2
State Grid Corporation of China, Beijing 100031, China
zl-zhao@sgcc.com.cn
3
Central China Grid Company Limited, Wuhan 430077, China
hanqy@ccpg.com.cn

Abstract. AC based nodal pricing method makes market rule less transparent
and affects market decisions on risk and opportunity in short-run and long-run
periods. Therefore, AC based nodal pricing formulation is simplified into DC
based nodal pricing formulation, which maximizes total social welfare with the
condition of satisfying Kirchhoff’s laws and other operational constraints in
modified DC optimal power flow model. Then, a simple but practical linear
programming based nodal pricing method, which can be applied to solve
market clearing mode with piecewise constant supply and demand curves, is
proposed. The proposed method is tested on IEEE 30 bus system. Test results
show that it can avoid premature and divergent phenomenon, which always
occurs in the solution of AC based nodal pricing formulation, and has potential
application in competitive electricity market.
Keywords: nodal price, linear programming, constrained optimization, optimal
power flow, electricity market.

1 Introduction
Nowadays, electricity industry is undergoing deregulation and reconstruction. Spot
pricing [1], real-time pricing for active and reactive power [2], and reserve pricing [3]
have been proposed to determine price of energy and ancillary services in competitive
electricity market. These pricing methods above are mainly based on nodal pricing
principle which is supported by marginal cost theory. Mathematically, nodal pricing
formulation is a large-scale, nonlinear, multi-variable, and constrained optimization
problem. Its objective function is to maximize social welfare on condition that supply
and demand curves are given and operational constraints are satisfied. But it has
following disadvantages: (1) optimal dispatch schedule including active power and
reactive power makes market rule less transparent and hence affects market decisions
on risk and opportunity in short-run and long-run periods; (2)optimal price-quantity
pairs in supply and demand sides at each node may not be obtained because
optimization algorithm is trapped into local optimum or even diverges; (3) two totally
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part III, LNCS 4489, pp. 1012–1015, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

A Novel DC Nodal Pricing Method Based on Linear Programming

1013

different dispatch schedules may have the same or similar social welfare value, which
violates initial intension of market designer and confuses market participants.
Therefore, a novel linear programming based DC nodal pricing method is proposed in
the paper.

2 Nodal Pricing Formulation
Nodal pricing problem can be formulated as follows:
N

S id

i =1

0

Max B = ∑ [ ∫ p (S )dS −
d
i

S is

∫ p i (S )dS ]
s

(1)

0

subject to:
Pi s − Pi d −

∑ Vi

j∈N

Qis − Qid −

∑ Vi V j

j∈N

(

)

V j Yij cos θ ij + δ j − δ i = 0

(

)

Yij sin θ ij + δ j − δ i = 0

(2)

(3)

Pi ,smin ≤ Pi s ≤ Pi ,smax , Qis, min ≤ Qis ≤ Qis, max

(4)

Pi ,dmin ≤ Pi d ≤ Pi ,dmax , Qid,min ≤ Qid ≤ Qid,max

(5)

Pij , min ≤ Pij ≤ Pij , max , Vi ,min ≤ Vi ≤ Vi ,max

(6)

where S, P and Q are apparent power, active power, and reactive power, Yij ∠θ ij and
Vi ∠δ i are the ijth element of bus admittance matrix and voltage at bus

( )

( )

i , p id S id and p is S is are demand curve and supply curve at bus i , respectively.

Superscripts d and s denote demand and supply, suffixes max and min denote upper
and low limits, respectively. N is a bus set. Pij is active power flow over i → j .

3 LP-Based Method for DC Nodal Pricing
3.1 Modifications to Nodal Pricing Formulation

Given that branch resistances and charging capacitances are negligible, bus voltage
magnitudes are close to 1 p.u., and voltage angle differences are small, AC based
nodal pricing formulation can be modified into DC based nodal pricing formulation
which is given as follows:

1014

B. Yang et al.

N

Pis

Pid

i =1

0

0

Min B = ∑ [ ∫ p is (P )dP −

d
∫ p i (P )dP]

(7)

subject to:
N

∑ ( Pi s − Pi d ) = 0 , Pi ,smin
i =1

≤ Pi s ≤ Pi ,smax , Pi ,dmin ≤ Pi d ≤ Pi ,dmax , Pij , min ≤ Pij ≤ Pij , max

(8)

3.2 Nodal Price of Active Power

The Kuhn-Tucker conditions for the DC nodal pricing formulation can be solved to
obtain nodal price of active power at each bus. λ , λis max , λis min , λdimax , λidmin , λij max and

λij min are Lagrangian multipliers of corresponding constraints.

( )

p is Pi s − λ + λ is max − λis min +

( )

∑ λij max

i , j∈ N

− p id Pi d + λ + λ idmax − λ idmin +

∑ λij max

i , j∈ N

∂Pij
∂Pi

−

s

∂Pij
∂Pi

d

∑ λij min

i , j∈ N

−

∑ λij min

i , j∈ N

∂Pij
∂Pi s
∂Pij
∂Pi d

=0

=0

(9)

(10)

∑ (Pi s − Pi d ) = 0

(11)

λ is max (Pi smax − Pi s ) = 0 , λ is min (Pi s − Pi smin ) = 0

(12)

λ idmax (Pi dmax − Pi d ) = 0 , λ idmin (Pi d − Pi dmin ) = 0

(13)

λ ij max (Pij max − Pij ) = 0 , λ ij min (Pij − Pij min ) = 0

(14)

N

i =1

3.3 Solution Method

In many existing electricity markets, market rules set strict restrictions on the form of
demand and supply curves. For example, demand and supply curves are required to be
constant or piecewise constant functions. Since all constraints are linear in our
proposed DC nodal pricing formulation, linear programming can be used to solve
nodal price of active power at each bus if the restrictions above are imposed on
demand and supply curves. It can avoid premature and divergent phenomenon, which
always occurs in the solution of AC based nodal pricing formulation, and give certain
price signal for market participants in competitive electricity market.

A Novel DC Nodal Pricing Method Based on Linear Programming

1015

4 Simulation Results
To demonstrate the feasibility of the proposed method, we test it on IEEE 30 bus
system [4]. In the experiment, demand price elasticity is zero and supply curve is
piecewise constant function. Two cases are studied. In case 1, power flow limit over
each transmission line is not attained; in case 2, power flow limits over transmission
line 1 → 2 and 1 → 3 are decreased from 130 MW to 16MW. After computation by
the proposed method, nodal price at each bus is 44.000$/MW in case 1, but is
different in case 2. Nodal prices of case 2 are given in Fig. 1. Apparently, because of
power flow limits over transmission line 1 → 2 and 1 → 3 , nodal price dramatically
decreases at bus 1, greatly increases at bus 2, slightly changes at bus 13,22,23 and 27.
Besides, we can draw a conclusion that power flow transmission limit has greater
influence on nodal price at neighboring bus than at remote bus.

Fig. 1. Nodal price at each bus in case 2

5 Conclusions
A novel DC nodal pricing method based on linear programming is proposed in the
paper. It can provide useful price signal for demand and supply sides. Because of its
simplicity and practicability, it can be applied to day-ahead and balance markets.

References
1. F. C. Schweppe, M. C. Caramanis, R. D. Tabors and R. E. Bohn: Spot Pricing of Electricity.
Kluwer Academic Publishers (1988)
2. M. L. Baughman and S. N. Siddiqi: Real-time Pricing of Reactive Power: Theory and Case
Study Results. IEEE Trans on Power Systems. 1(6)(1991)23-29
3. E. H. Allen and M. D. Ilic: Reserve Markets for Power Systems Reliability. IEEE Trans on
Power Systems. 1(15)(2000)228-233
4. R. W. Ferrero, S. M. Shahidehpour, V. C. Ramesh: Transaction analysis in deregulated
power systems using game theory. IEEE Trans on Power Systems. 3(12)( 1997) 1340-1347

