Data Driven Design Optimization Methodology
Development and Application
H. Zhao, D. Knight, E. Taskinoglu, and V. Jovanovic
Dept of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
Rutgers - The State University of New Jersey
New Brunswick, NJ 08903
knight@soemail.rutgers.edu

Abstract. The Data Driven Design Optimization Methodology
(DDDOM) is a Dynamic Data Driven Application System (DDDAS)
developed for engineering design optimization. The DDDOM synergizes
experiment and simulation in a concurrent integrated software system
to achieve better designs in a shorter time. The data obtained from
experiment and simulation dynamically guide and redirect the design
optimization process in real or near-real time, and therefore realize the
full potential of the Dynamic Data Driven Applications Systems concept.
This paper describes the DDDOM software system developed using the
Perl and Perl/Tk programming languages. The paper also presents the
ﬁrst results of the application of the DDDOM to the multi-objective design optimization of a submerged subsonic inlet at zero angle of attack
and sideslip.

1

Introduction

A Dynamic Data Driven Application System (DDDAS) is an application which
can interact with experiment and/or simulation in real-time, building a bridge
between them and guiding them dynamically [1]. DDDAS is an important area
of current research in Information Technology (IT) with a wide range of engineering and scientiﬁc applications [2,3,4]. Engineering design optimization can
beneﬁt signiﬁcantly from the DDDAS concept whereby the concurrent integration of remote real-time input from high performance computing resources (e.g.,
NSF Teragrid [5]) and experiments will achieve the best designs. D. Knight,
G. Elliott, Y. Jaluria, N. Langrana and K. Rasheed proposed the Data Driven
Design Optimization Methodology (DDDOM) [6] for Multi-criteria Design Optimization (MDO) [7] as a Dynamic Data Driven Application System. DDDOM
therefore diﬀers from the conventional, sequential engineering design approach.
DDDOM utilizes advanced experimental technology (e.g., Rapid Prototyping)
and computational technology (e.g., parallel processing, grid computing [5]). The
DDDOM software system under development is shown in Fig. 1. It is comprised
of six elements: User Interface, Controller, Optimizer, Experiment, Surrogate
Model (SM) and Simulation. Further details are presented in Knight et al [8].
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3038, pp. 748–755, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

Data Driven Design Optimization Methodology

749

External

Simulation

Experiment

(e.g., NSF TeraGrid)

x

✻

f, σ

❄
User Interface

✛

✲

x

❄
DDDOM
Controller

✻

control

x, f , σ

❄
Optimizer
(e.g., GA)

✻

f, σ

x

✞
x, f , σ ✝
✲
✞
✝

control

archive

x, f , σ

☎
✆
☎
✆

❄
❄
✲ Surrogate Model

✛

(e.g., RBF ANN)

x, f , σ
Fig. 1. Data Driven Design Optimization Methodology (DDDOM)

2

The DDDOM Controller

The DDDOM Controller is the central element in the DDDOM and controls
the overall operations of the DDDOM cycle. Its basic function is to initiate and
monitor the design optimization, and to direct the simulations and experiments
needed to build and update the surrogate models. The functions are illustrated
in Fig. 1 and are described below.
Control of Optimizer: The Controller initiates the optimization and monitors
the progress of the optimization. The Controller monitors each design, denoted
by its vector of design variables x, generated by the optimizer and the resultant
vector of objective functions f and uncertainty σ generated by the Surrogate
Model (SM). The Controller determines when new data is needed for training
the SM and initiates new simulations and identiﬁes new experiments needed.
Control of Surrogate Model: The Controller manages the state of the SM
between training and modelling. It decides when the SM must be retrained using
data stored on the archive.
Control of Simulation: The Controller determines the design x to be simulated and stores the resultant objective function f and uncertainty σ on the
archive.
Control of Experiments: The Controller determines the design x to be examined by experiment and requests the experiment to be performed. In certain
cases, the experiment may be conducted automatically.

750

H. Zhao et al.

Fig. 2. Main panel for DDDOM controller

The DDDOM Controller must deal with executable codes, link diﬀerent ﬁles
and directories, and connect to databases. The User Interface is the access to
the DDDOM Controller. The User Interface must be closely combined with the
DDDOM Controller. It must be user-friendly, block-structured and well documented. The Controller is written in Perl and Perl/Tk [9,10,11]. The main panel
of the DDDOM User Interface is shown in Fig. 2.

3
3.1

Multi-objective Design Optimization
Problem Statement

The DDDOM software system is applied to the multi-objective design optimization of a submerged inlet. A generic submerged inlet is shown in Fig. 3. Basically,
it is a ﬂuid ﬂow duct through which air is delivered to a turbojet, turbofan or
ramjet. The main objective for an inlet designer is to provide a high quality air
ﬂow,i.e., the optimum levels of total pressure and ﬂow uniformity which are vital
for engine operability and stability. Because of the curved shape, inertial forces
create a swirl in the inlet leading to ﬂow non-uniformity. The speciﬁc design
objectives are to minimize the Distortion Coeﬃcient (DC) and Swirl Coeﬃcient

Data Driven Design Optimization Methodology

751

Fig. 3. Generic inlet

(SC) at the engine face (for deﬁnition, see [12]). Since the DC and SC are competing design objectives, the optimization problem is multi-objective and the
solution is the Pareto Set of optimal designs.
This problem was selected to demonstrate the capability of the DDDOM to
achieve an optimal set of designs (the Pareto Set) through concurrent integration
of experiment and simulation while synergizing the respective advantages of each.
For example, the computational cost of each simulation is independent of the
inlet geometry, angle of attack or sideslip, and requires hundreds of total cpu
hours. Since the simulation code is parallelized, the typical turnaround time for
a simulation is six hours on the cluster at the Rutgers School of Engineering.
The time to set up the experiment (including fabrication of the inlet model) is
typically one day. However, changes in the inlet angle of attack or sideslip can
be accomplished in a matter of minutes in the experiment. Thus, experiment
and simulation can be synergized to achieve a more eﬀective and eﬃcient design
optimization whereby the simulation is used to explore changes in the inlet
geometry, and the experiment is used to explore changes in the inlet angle of
attack and sideslip.
We present the results of the ﬁrst stage of the multi-objective design optimization of a submerged inlet using experiment and simulation. In this stage,
we conduct a design optimization of the inlet at zero angle of attack and sideslip
using simulation alone, and then compare the predicted results for DC with the
experiment. This establishes a baseline for calibration of the simulation against
the experimental results which is an important element in the DDDOM. In the
second stage (currently in progress), we will synergize the experiment and simulation in a concurrent manner to obtain the Pareto Set of designs for the case
of non-zero angle of attack and sideslip.
Trade studies have shown [12,13] that the inclusion of a ﬁn inside the inlet
provides a signiﬁcant improvement in ﬂow quality (Fig. 4). The design variables are therefore taken to be the length, width and angle of attack of the ﬁn
(Fig. 4(a)).

752

H. Zhao et al.

(a) Side view

(b) View looking upstream

Fig. 4. Design variables for a ﬁn type of deformation

3.2

Design Optimization

The design optimization incorporates ﬁve software components linked together in
an automated loop built using Perl/Tk. The components are the Optimizer (CFSQP), Geometry Modeller (Pro/Engineer [14]), Mesh Generator (GridPro [15]),
Flow Solver (GASPex [16]) and Auxiliary Program (to compute DC and SC).
The Optimizer selects a speciﬁc geometry for the inlet. The geometry is passed
to the Geometry Modeler (Pro/Engineer) which constructs a Computer Aided
Design model of the inlet including the surface alteration in the form of a ﬁn. The
inlet surface deﬁnition is provided to the Mesh Generator (GridPro) which creates the grid in the ﬂow domain. The grid is provided to the ﬂow solver (GASPex)
which solves the Reynolds-averaged compressible time dependent Navier Stokes
equations in three dimensions. The computed ﬂowﬁeld is provided to the Auxiliary Program which calculates the objective functions DC and SC. The objective
functions are provided to the Optimizer which then selects a new design. The
loop continues, until the set of optimal designs (Pareto Set) is obtained. The
entire process is controlled using Perl/Tk and the software components are executed on distributed systems based upon the licensing arrangements.
The set of designs examined in the optimization and the Pareto Set are
shown in Fig. 5. The Pareto Set is disjoint and is characterized by two discrete
sets of designs denoted A and B (circled). The designs in set A and set B show
fundamentally diﬀerent ﬂow behavior. Set A designs are characterized by high
swirl coeﬃcient SC and low distortion coeﬃcient DC, while Set B designs have
low swirl coeﬃcient SC and a higher distortion coeﬃcient DC. Both sets of
designs have improved values of both DC and SC compared to the baseline inlet
without the ﬁns [12].
3.3

Experiment

The experimental portion [12] of the inlet optimization problem is conducted
in the subsonic wind tunnel located in the Low Speed Wind Tunnel Labora-

Data Driven Design Optimization Methodology

753

Fig. 5. Set of designs including Pareto Set (circled)

tory at Rutgers University (Fig. 6). A stainless steel model has been fabricated
and installed into the test section of the subsonic wind tunnel. The model was
designed with a removable submerged inlet (Fig. 7), which is fabricated using
the Stratasys FDM Model 3000 rapid prototyping system at Rutgers University.
Solid modeling of the submerged inlet is performed in ProEngineer using coordinates obtained from the computations. A STereo-Lithography (STL) ﬁle, which
is a 3D faceted geometric model, is created in ProEngineer.
A comparison of the simulation results for one of the designs in Set B with the
experimental measurements was performed. Compared with the baseline inlet,
the distortion coeﬃcient is improved (i.e., reduced) in both the computation
and the experiment. Speciﬁcally, the DC is reduced from 0.48 (baseline inlet)
to 0.08 (optimum inlet) in the simulation and from 0.27 (baseline inlet) to 0.22
(optimum inlet) in the experiment. However, there is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence
between the computed and experimental DC values for both the baseline and
optimal inlets which is attributable to the limitations of the accuracy of the
simulation (speciﬁcally, the turbulence model used in the simulations). This is a
common occurrence in such complex ﬂow conﬁgurations, and will be addressed
in future work (see below).

4

Future Work

The second stage of our research on optimal design of subsonic submerged inlets
will focus on incorporating the experiment into the design optimization using

754

H. Zhao et al.

Fig. 6. Experimental facility

Fig. 7. Rapid prototyping model

the DDDOM software system. Two speciﬁc issues will be addressed. First, the
experimental results will be used to extend the parametric range of the design optimization to non-zero angles of attack and sideslip. Evaluation of the
distortion coeﬃcient at nonzero angles of attack and sideslip is more readily
(and quickly) achieved by experiment than by simulation. Thus, the experiment
(rather than the simulation) will dynamically drive the optimization at nonzero
angles of attack and sideslip. This demonstrates the enhancement oﬀered by the
Data Driven Design Applications System (DDDAS) concept. Second, we will
incorporate the eﬀects of uncertainty in the simulation (as deﬁned by the results
presented herein) into the DDDOM.

5

Conclusions

Engineering design is an example of a Dynamic Data Driven Application System
wherein data from experiment and simulation can be synergized to dynamically
drive the optimization process to achieve better designs in a shorter time. A
Data Driven Design Optimization Methodology (DDDOM) is described which
incorporates experiment and simulation in a real-time, synergistic manner. The
DDDOM software system is developed using Perl and Perl/Tk. The DDDOM
is applied to the multi-objective design optimization for a submerged inlet. The
ﬁrst stage results are presented. The Pareto Set of optimal designs at zero angle
of attack and yaw are obtained, and the results compared with experiment. The
uncertainty in the simulation (due to the limitations of the turbulence model)
is identiﬁed. The second stage of research will extend the parametric space to
nonzero angles of attack and yaw using the experimental data (rather than the
simulation results) to drive the optimization.
Acknowledgments. The research is sponsored by the US National Science
Foundation under grant CTS-0121058. The program managers are Drs. Frederica
Darema, C. F. Chen and Michael Plesniak.

Data Driven Design Optimization Methodology

755

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

7.
8.

9.
10.
11.
12.

13.
14.
15.
16.

http://www.cise.nsf.gov/eia/dddas
https://www.fastlane.nsf.gov/servlet/showaward?award=0121177.
https://www.fastlane.nsf.gov/servlet/showaward?award=0121667.
https://www.fastlane.nsf.gov/servlet/showaward?award=0121263.
http://www.ncsa.uiuc.edu/About/TeraGrid
Knight D., Elliott G., Jaluria Y., Langrana N., and Rasheed K. Automated Optimal Design Using Concurrent Integrated Experiment and Simulation. AIAA Paper
No. 2002-5636, AIAA/ISSMO Symposium on Multidisciplinary Analysis and Optimization, Atlanta, GA (2002).
Deb, K. Multi-Objective Optimization using Evolutionary Algorithms. John Wiley
& Sons, New York (2001).
Knight D., Zhao H., Icoz T., and Jaluria Y. Data Driven Design Optimization
Methodology. F. Darema (ed.) Dynamic Data Driven Applications Systems. Kluwer
Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands (2004), to appear.
Wall L., Christiansen T., and Orwant J. Programming Perl. O’Reilly and Associates, Sebastopol, CA (2000).
Christiansen T., and Torkington N. Perl Cookbook. O’Reilly and Associates, Sebastopol, CA (1998).
Lidie S., and Walsh N. Mastering Perl/Tk. O’Reilly and Associates, Sebastopol,
CA (2002).
E.S. Taskinoglu, V. Jovanovic, D. Knight. AIAA 2004-25 Multi-objective Design
Optimization and Experimental Measurements for a Submerged Inlet. 42nd AIAA
Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, Nevada (2004).
E. Taskinoglu, D. Knight. Design Optimization for Subsonic Submerged Inlets.
AIAA Paper 2003-1247, Jan, 2003.
Parametric Technology Corporation. Pro/Engineer User’s Guide. (1996).
Program Development Corporation. GridPro/az3000 User’s Guide and Reference
Manual. White Plain, New York (1998).
Aerosoft Inc. General Aerodynamic Simulation Program User Manual. (1996).

