A 2D Numerical Model for Simulating the
Physics of Fault Systems
Peter Mora1,2 and Dion Weatherley1
1

Queensland University Advanced Centre for Earthquake Studies (QUAKES)
The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia
2
The Australian Computational Earth Systems Simulator
Major National Research Facility (ACcESS MNRF)
The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia

Abstract. Simulations provide a powerful means to help gain the understanding of crustal fault system physics required to progress towards the
goal of earthquake forecasting. Cellular Automata are eﬃcient enough
to probe system dynamics but their simpliﬁcations render interpretations
questionable. In contrast, sophisticated elasto-dynamic models yield more
convincing results but are too computationally demanding to explore
phase space. To help bridge this gap, we develop a simple 2D elastodynamic model of parallel fault systems. The model is discretised onto
a triangular lattice and faults are speciﬁed as split nodes along horizontal rows in the lattice. A simple numerical approach is presented for
calculating the forces at medium and split nodes such that general nonlinear frictional constitutive relations can be modeled along faults. Single
and multi-fault simulation examples are presented using a nonlinear frictional relation that is slip and slip-rate dependent in order to illustrate
the model.

1

Introduction

Numerical shear experiments of granular regions have exhibited accelerating energy release in the lead-up to large events[3] and a growth in correlation lengths
in the stress ﬁeld[4]. While these results suggest a Critical Point-like mechanism
in elasto-dynamic systems and the possibility of earthquake forecasting, they do
not prove that such a mechanism occurs in the crust. Cellular Automaton (CA)
models exhibit accelerating energy release prior to large events or unpredictable
behaviour in which large events may occur at any time, depending on tuning
parameters such as the dissipation factor and stress transfer ratio[6]. The mean
stress plots of the granular simulations are most similar to the CA mean stress
plots near the boundary of the predictable and unpredictable regimes suggesting that elasto-dynamic systems may be close to the borderline between the
predictable and unpredictable. To progress in resolving the question of whether
more realistic fault system models exhibit predictable behaviour and to determine whether they also have an unpredictable and predictable regime depending
on tuning parameters as seen in CA simulations, we develop a 2D elasto-dynamic
model of parallel interacting faults.
P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2659, pp. 817−826, 2003.
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

818

P. Mora and D. Weatherley

Preliminary work using the model[5] to simulate the dynamics of multiple
parallel interacting faults have been performed and indicate, through calculations
of the so called “inverse metric” (see [1]), that the system is non-ergodic. This
has major implications to the analysis of crustal fault systems within a statistical
physics framework. This work has also shown that such fault models exhibit so
called ”glassy” behaviour which implies that mean ﬁeld theoretical analysis such
as [1] require revision to introduce a memory kernel.
The elasto-dynamic parallel interacting fault model developed here may help
provide a crucial link between CA maps of phase space and the behaviour of more
realistic elasto-dynamic interacting fault system models, and thus, a means to
improve understanding of the dynamics and predictability of real fault systems.

2

Numerical Model

The numerical model consists of a 2D triangular lattice of masses each of which
is connected to its six nearest neighbours by a linear spring. This discretisation
yields isotropic
elasticity with compressional and shear wave speeds related by
√
Vs = Vp / 3[2] which is a typical value for rocks. This simple discretisation allows
elasto-dynamics to be simulated relatively eﬃciently, albeit with the restriction
of only one Poisson’s ratio. Furthermore, horizontal faults can be easily speciﬁed
in the model by splitting masses in half along a horizontal row, and simulating
the frictional interaction of split masses with one another. Henceforth, we will
refer to the masses as nodes of the discrete lattice. In the following, α = 0, . . . , 5
is used to index the six lattice directions.

3

Calculation of Forces

The force on masses at medium nodes and at fault (split) nodes is calculated as
Fi =

Fei + Fνi + FTi
Ffi + Fνi + FTi

,
,

i∈M
i ∈ F + or i ∈ F −

,

(1)

where subscript i is used to denote mass (node) number i, FTi is a term representing “thermal noise” in the system, Fei is the elastic force due to springs
connected to node i, and Ffi is the sum of the elastic and frictional forces acting
on the split nodes along faults.
3.1

Elastic Forces

The elastic forces are calculated by summing the elastic forces due to connected
springs
 5
 α=0 k(dβ − d0 )eβ , i ∈ M




e
Fi =
(2)
, i ∈ F+ ,
(Fei )+




 e −
(Fi )
, i ∈ F−

A 2D Numerical Model for Simulating the Physics of Fault Systems

819

where β = mod(α, 6) is the lattice direction number, k is the spring constant, dβ
is the distance to the mass linked in direction β, d0 is the equilibrium separation
or lattice spacing, M denotes the set of medium nodes, F + denotes the set of
upper fault surface split nodes, and F − denotes the set of lower fault surface
split nodes. In the above equation, (Fei )+ is the force on the upper split nodes
due to linked nodes above the fault, and (Fei )− is the force of lower split nodes
due to linked nodes below the fault, namely
3

(Fei )+ =

i ∈ F+

k β (dβ − d0 )eβ
α=0

(Fei )− =

6

i ∈ F−

,

(3)

α = 1, 2, 4 or 5
α = 0, 3

,

(4)

k β (dβ − d0 )eβ
α=3

where
kα =

kα = k
k α = k/2

,
,

speciﬁes spring constants connected to split nodes (i.e. spring constants in the
medium are k whereas the horizontal springs along the fault are split in two
so k α = k/2 for α = 0, 3). As such, the total elastic force of split node pairs
moving as a single mass m in unison (i.e. when split nodes are in static frictional
contact) is the sum of the elastic forces on the split node pair Fei = (Fei )+ +(Fei )−
and yields the same expression for force as for the medium nodes speciﬁed by
Equation (2).
3.2

Viscous Forces

In order to damp energy in the closed elastic system, an artiﬁcial viscosity is
introduced that attenuates elastic waves as exp(−γt) where γ is the frequency
independent attenuation coeﬃcient which is related to the viscosity coeﬃcient
by γ = ν/2m (e.g. see [2]). The viscous force is given by
Fνi = −ν(vi − v0 ) ,

(5)

where ν is the viscosity coeﬃcient, vi is the velocity of node i, and v0 is a
speciﬁed reference velocity (e.g. in constant strain rate shear experiments, we
set v0 to the velocity of a homogeneous elastic system undergoing shear). To
have an attenuation coeﬃcient γ that is uniform in space, the viscosity ν must
be set to ν = 2mγ. Hence, for a homogeneous medium, the viscosity coeﬃcients
at split nodes are half as large as at medium nodes.
3.3

Thermal Noise

Recent research[1, 4–6] suggests that fault system models may be understood
using concepts developed in statistical physics and that their dynamics may have

820

P. Mora and D. Weatherley

similarities to classical Critical-Point systems. A key parameter in such systems
is the temperature. As such, we introduce a thermal noise term to provide a
means to study the statistical physics of the system. This is achieved by adding
a random forcing term at each time step
FTi =

Ni
Ni /2

,
,

i∈M
i ∈ F + or i ∈ F −

,

(6)

where the magnitude of Ni relates to the eﬀective temperature of the system.
The factor of a half for the second case is because the noise – which is assumed to
have uniform statistics in space – is shared equally by each of the split nodes on
faults. This term models random time dependent ﬂuctuations in stress within the
earth due to seismic background noise (distant earthquakes, earth tides, human
noise, wind and ocean noise, etc).
3.4

Vertical Component of Elastic Forces on Split Nodes

The term Ff in Equation (1) represents the force on the split nodes due to
medium elasticity and the friction. When split nodes are in contact, half of the
vertical elastic force due to linked springs is applied to the split node itself and
half is applied to the touching split node
Fyf =

(Fye )+ + (Fye )− /2 .

(7)

Hence, considering the mass of split nodes is m/2, split nodes in contact accelerate in unison with vertical acceleration (Fye )+ + (Fye ) /m (i.e. the same
vertical acceleration as a medium node at the split node location linked to
the six neighboring nodes). When split nodes move out of contact (i.e. when
(Fye )+ −(Fye )− > 0, there is no interaction between the split nodes so the vertical
force on each split node is the elastic force due to its linked springs. Summarising
the above, the vertical elastic force on split nodes is given by

(Fye )+ − (Fye )− ≤ 0
 (Fye )+ + (Fye )− /2 ,
f
Fy =
.
(8)
 e
Fy
,
(Fye )+ − (Fye )− > 0
3.5

Horizontal Component of Frictional and Elastic Forces on Split
Nodes

The horizontal force on a split node is the sum of the horizontal elastic force due
to linked springs and a frictional force f
Fxf = Fxe + f

,

(9)

where Fxe is the horizontal elastic force on the split node being considered given
by Equation (3). In the case of a fault in static frictional contact, the friction is
such that split nodes accelerate horizontally in unison so
f = [(Fxe ) − Fxe ] /2 ,

(10)

A 2D Numerical Model for Simulating the Physics of Fault Systems

821

where the is used to denote the other split node (ie. if we are calculating f for the
upper split node, then the signiﬁes the lower split node and vice versa). Hence,
for the case of static frictional contact, the split nodes both accelerate with a
horizontal acceleration [(Fxe )+ + (Fxe )− ] /m which is equal to the acceleration
that would be calculated for a medium node of mass m that replaces the split
node pair (c.f. case for vertical forces). When the elastic force is suﬃciently great
to overcome static friction, the split nodes will begin to slip. Therefore, we can
write
(11)
|f | = min(| [(Fxe ) − Fxe ] /2|, |τ |) ,
where τ is a function that prescribes the frictional constitutive relation with
τ + = −τ − (i.e. the friction is equal in magnitude and opposite in direction on
the upper and lower fault surfaces). Hence, the friction can be written as

 [(Fxe ) − Fxe ] /2 , | [(Fxe ) − Fxe ] /2| < |τ |
f =
(12)

τ
, otherwise
The sign of τ is such that it opposes slip between the nodes. As such, we can
write

 [(Fxe ) − Fxe ] /|(Fxe ) − Fxe | , S(t − ∆t) = stick
sgn(τ ) =
,
(13)

(Vx − Vx ) /|Vx − Vx |
, S(t − ∆t) = slip
where S(t−∆t) speciﬁes the state of the split node at the previous time step t−∆t
and may be either stick or slip. The ﬁrst case ensures the friction will oppose the
new slip velocity of a split node pair that is beginning to slip whereas the second
case opposes the slip velocity of an already slipping split node pair. Hence, in
the upper case, the state changes from S(t − ∆t) = stick to S(t) = slip whereas
in the lower case, the state remains unchanged (i.e. S(t) = S(t − ∆t) = slip).
The magnitude of the friction is given by
|τ | = µ[(Fye )− − (Fye )+ ]/2 ,

(14)

(i.e. Coulomb friction) where the friction coeﬃcient µ may be a function of
dynamic variables such as slip or slip-rate. In the following examples, we will use
a friction that is slip and slip-rate dependent as follows

, s < Dc
 µd + (µs − µd )(1 − s(t)/Dc )p1
µ(t) =
,
(15)

µd + (µs − µd )(1 − s(t
˙ − ∆t/2)/Vc )p2 , s ≥ Dc
where µs and µd are respectively the static and dynamic friction coeﬃcients,
p1 and p2 are exponents that control the functional form of friction with slip
and slip-rate, s is the amount of slip during a rupture event, s˙ is the slip-rate,
Dc is the “critical slip weakening distance” over which friction weakens to the
dynamic value, and Vc is the slip-rate when slip reaches Dc . The slip-rate is

822

P. Mora and D. Weatherley

calculated using centred ﬁnite diﬀerences from the positions of the nodes at the
current and past time steps which is the reason why s˙ is at time (t − ∆t/2). This
frictional relation is slip weakening until the slip equals Dc and then remains
at the dynamic value until the slip-rate drops below the value it attained when
slip ﬁrst exceeded Dc . As the slip-rate drops further, the fault re-strengthens
as a function of velocity and reaches the static friction once the slip-rate drops
to zero. The second term allows the fault to heal after passage of a rupture
front and yields slip-pulse behaviour of simulated earthquake ruptures consistent
with observations, rather than less realistic crack-like ruptures which result from
simple slip weakening relationships. Exponent p1 controls the sharpness of the
leading edge of the pulse and p2 controls the sharpness of the trailing edge of
the pulse. In the following examples, we will set p1 = 2 and p2 = 1 which yields
a relatively symmetrical slip pulse.

4

Time Integration Scheme

A second order ﬁnite diﬀerence scheme is used to extrapolate the positions in
time as follows
(ui ) (t + ∆t) = 2(ui ) (t) − (ui ) (t − ∆t) + ∆t2 (ai ) (t) ,

(16)

where (ui ) is the -th component of the displacement at the i-th node and the
acceleration ai is calculated from the force given by Equation (1) as
ai = Fi /mi

,

(17)

where mi is the mass of the i-th node (e.g. for a homogeneous medium, m would
be constant except for split nodes which would have mi = m/2). Once the new
displacements are calculated, we can evaluate the new slip-rate at time (t+∆t/2).
When the slip-rate changes sign, i.e. when sgn(s(t
˙ − ∆t/2)) = −sgn(s(t
˙ + ∆t/2),
it is assumed that slip is stopping and the change in sign is caused by numerical
overshoot due to the ﬁniteness of the time step ∆t. In this case, we set S(t+∆t/2)
to stick.

5

Numerical Examples

In all examples, we set ∆t = 0.4, d0 = ∆x = 1, k = 1 and m = 1 and use lattice
dimensions of Nx = 100 and Ny = 101. These parameters yield a P-wave speed
of Vp ≈ 1 (see [2]). In the single fault examples, a horizontal fault was centered
in the model at y = y50 where yn = n∆y denotes the y-ordinates of the n-th row
of lattice nodes and row indices have the range n = 0, . . . Ny − 1. In all cases,
the vertical strain was ﬁxed at εyy = 0.02 and viscosity was set to ν = 0.04.
Boundary conditions are circular in x and rigid in y, and the thermal noise Ni
is set to 0.

A 2D Numerical Model for Simulating the Physics of Fault Systems

5.1

823

Waves Traveling through a Locked Fault

A point source was excited below the fault with the aim of verifying that split
nodes in static frictional contact behave identically as medium nodes. The snapshot shown in Figure 1 shows circular compressional and shear waves propagating
through the locked fault. There are no artiﬁcial reﬂections, thus verifying the
implementation for static frictional contact.
Fig. 1. Snapshot showing the vertical
component of velocity at time t = 25
due to a point source below the fault located at x = (50, 34). The y-ordinate of
the horizontal fault is indicated by tic
marks on the frame. The source was excited by adding a Gaussian perturbation
Ke−κ(t−t0 ) to the horizontal component
of displacement. Source parameters were
K = 0.0001, κ = 0.05 and t0 = 25. The
colour scale saturates when |vy | exceeds
0.3 times its maximum value.

5.2

Rupture of a Homogeneous Fault

A numerical shear experiment was conducted by driving the upper and lower
rows of nodes, which represent rigid driving plates, in opposite directions at a
constant rate of 0.0005 (i.e. approx 0.0005 times the P-wave speed). The fault
static friction was initialised to µs = 0.8 everywhere except at the middle node
located at x = 50∆x, which was set was set to µs = 0.75. This provides a
weak point or seed for the rupture to nucleate. The dynamic friction was set
to µd = 0.7 everywhere and the critical slip weakening distance was set to
Dc = 0.02. Initially, there was no slip along the fault followed by quasi-static
slip at the central weak point when the system became suﬃciently stressed. As
the stress builds up, a small region of slip grows quasi-statically around the weak
node until a dynamic rupture is initiated which then propagates outwards at the
compressional wave speed (Figures 2 and 3).
5.3

Rupture of a Heterogeneous Fault

A second shear experiment was conducted with the same parameters as the
previous example except that both the static and dynamic friction were assigned
values from a power law distribution, speciﬁcally µ(xn ) = ﬀt −1 {kn−p Nn } where
exponent p = 0.3, Nn is white noise, and xn and kn respectively denote the
discrete locations and wavenumbers. The range of ﬂuctuations for the static
friction was µs ∈ [0.7, 0.8] and the range for the dynamic friction was [0.55, 0.65].
After several slip events, the stress becomes highly heterogeneous along the fault
(Figure 4) and once this happens, ruptures typically propagate at approximately

824

P. Mora and D. Weatherley

Fig. 2. Snapshot of the horizontal component of velocity showing a rupture
propagating bi-directionally along the
fault at the compressional wave speed.
The y-ordinate of the horizontal fault is
indicated by tic marks on the frame. The
colour scale saturates when |vx | exceeds
0.1 times its maximum value thus allowing small amplitudes to be visualised.

Fig. 3. Slip velocity on the fault deﬁned
as the horizontal velocity of upper split
nodes subtracted from the horizontal velocity of lower split nodes.

the shear or Rayleigh wave speed (Figures 4 & 5). Because of the heterogeneity,
it is typical that the rupture front will propagate in one direction only and leave
a complex wave train following the rupture front as shown in Figure 4 (right).
5.4

Multi-fault Simulation

As the motivation to develop the numerical model is to study the physics of interacting fault systems, we present a shear experiment with a number of parallel
faults to illustrate this capability. The same parameters were used as in the single
heterogeneous fault case except that 11 faults were initialised at y = 25 + 5j∆y
where j = 0, . . . 11 denotes the fault number. In this example, a lower shear rate
was used than in previous examples. Namely, the speeds of the upper and lower
rows were set to 0.0002 instead of 0.0005. Figure 6 shows the shear stress as a
function of time. The saw-tooth shapes are characteristic of stick-slip behaviour,
with each drop being caused by a dynamic rupture event on a fault.
Figure 7 shows snapshots of the shear stress σxy and horizontal component of
velocity in the model at the 136050-th time step when a dynamic rupture event
is occurring. The stress ﬁeld in the fault region is complex and heterogeneous
although coherent high stress bands can be seen running diagonally across the
model. These are analogous to grain bridges which support stress in granular
models. The numerical model allows the evolution of these complex stress patterns to be studied. One goal of such studies would be to determine whether
there is a consistent growth in correlation lengths in the lead-up to large events
in accord with the Critical Point Hypothesis for earthquakes and as seen in granular numerical models[4]. The horizontal component of velocity shows a rupture

A 2D Numerical Model for Simulating the Physics of Fault Systems

825

Slip velocity

Fig. 4. Snapshots of σyy (left) and horizontal component of velocity vx (right) showing
a rupture propagating to the left at around the Rayleigh wave speed. The colour scale
of vx saturates when |vx | exceeds 0.015 times its maximum value.
0.015

Fig. 5. Slip velocity on the fault at the
same time as the snapshot shown in Figure 4.

0.01
0.005
0
0

20

40

x

60

80

100

Shear stress

propagating to the right along the 4-th fault from the bottom. In some cases, a
rupture on one fault will trigger rupture on another fault. In most cases, ruptures propagate at around the Rayleigh wave speed although ruptures frequently
accelerate to the P-wave speed, probably as a consequence of the high driving
rate. Both unidirectional and bidirectional ruptures were observed.
74
72
70
68
0

50000

1e+05

Time steps
Fig. 6. Shear stress in the multi-fault model measured on the upper & lower edges of
the lattice. The plot shows characteristic saw-tooth shapes associated with stick-slip
behaviour. The initial shear stress was non-zero to minimise the ﬁrst loading time.

6

Conclusions

A simple and relatively eﬃcient numerical model is presented that provides a
means to simulate the physics of parallel fault systems, and hence, a means to

826

P. Mora and D. Weatherley

Fig. 7. Snapshots of shear stress (left) and the horizontal component of velocity (right).
The colour scale of vx saturates when |vx | exceeds 0.05 times its maximum value. The
y-ordinates of the 11 horizontal faults are indicated by tic marks on the frame.

study whether elasto-dynamic crustal fault models may exhibit a dynamics that
enables earthquakes to be forecast.
Acknowledgement.
This work has been supported by The University of Queensland, the Australian
Research Council, and the Australian Computational Earth Systems Simulator
Major National Research Facility.

References
1. Klein W., and Anghel M., Ferguson C.D., Rundle J.B., and Martins, J.S.S´
a (2000)
Statistical analysis of a model for earthquake faults with long-range stress transfer,
in: Geocomplexity and the Physics of Earthquakes (Geophysical Monograph series;
no. 120), eds. Rundle, J.B. and Turcotte, D.L., and Klein, W., pp 43-71 (American
Geophys. Union, Washington, DC).
2. Mora, P., and Place, D. (1994) Simulation of the frictional stick-slip instability, Pure
Appl. Geophys., 143, 61-87.
3. Mora, P., Place, D., Abe, S. and Jaum´e, S. (2000) Lattice solid simulation of the
physics of earthquakes: the model, results and directions, in: GeoComplexity and the
Physics of Earthquakes (Geophysical Monograph series; no. 120), eds. Rundle, J.B.,
Turcotte, D.L. & Klein, W., pp 105-125 (American Geophys. Union, Washington,
DC).
4. Mora, P., and Place, D. (2002) Stress correlation function evolution in lattice solid
elasto-dynamic models of shear and fracture zones, and earthquake prediction, Pure
Appl. Geophys, 159, 2413-2427.
5. Mora, P., Weatherley, D., and Klein, W. (2003) Simulation of parallel interacting faults and earthquake predictability, Proc. European Geophysical Society Annual
Meeting.
6. Weatherley, D. and Mora, P. (2003) Accelerating precursory activity within a class
of earthquake analog automata, Pure Appl. Geophysics, accepted.

