Self-Organizing Compact Modeling Methodology for
High-Speed Passive Electrical Interconnection Structures
Tom Dhaene
University of Antwerp, Middelheimlaan 1, 2020 Antwerpen, Belgium
tom.dhaene@ua.ac.be
Agilent Technologies, EEsof Comms EDA, Lammerstraat 20, 9000 Gent, Belgium
tom_dhaene@agilent.com

Abstract. New modeling technology is developed that allows engineers to
define the frequency range, layout parameters, material properties and desired
accuracy for automatic generation of simulation models of general passive
electrical structures. It combines electromagnetic (EM) accuracy of
parameterized passive models with the simulation speed of analytical models.
The adaptive algorithm doesn’t require any a priori knowledge of the dynamics
of the system to select an appropriate sample distribution and an appropriate
model complexity. With this technology, designers no longer must put up with
legacy modeling techniques or invest resources in examining new ones.

1 Introduction
Component and circuit models are a cornerstone of EDA (Electronic Design
Automation) technology. With wireless and wireline designs constantly increasing in
complexity and operating at higher frequencies, design engineers push the limits of
their EDA tool’s passive analytical models. Often, these passive models are used
outside their operational range, causing the EDA tool to return inaccurate simulation
results. The inconsistencies of legacy modeling techniques from the 1970s and 1980s
hinder the accuracy of these models when applied to different processes and
frequencies. Exceeding a model’s frequency limit causes errors due to the model’s
failure to account for higher-order propagation modes. Limitations of the equivalent
circuit model, such as frequency independent inductive or capacitive elements, also
lead to simulation errors. Since most EDA tools do not proactively report such errors,
they propagate through the design flow and may not be discovered until a prototype
fails to perform as expected. To avoid errors and inconsistencies, full-wave EM
simulation is required to fully characterize the structure and produce an accurate Sparameter model of the discontinuity that is then used by the circuit simulator.
Developing new models is not a trivial task! To model a single parameter over a
range of values, several sample points are required. Since the model can be a function
of many layout parameters (line width, length, metal thickness, dielectric constant,
substrate thickness, loss tangent, etc.) there is an exponential growth in the number of
samples as the number of layout parameters increases. Also, developing a new model
usually requires a highly skilled person working for an extended period — several
weeks or even months—to build, test and produce the desired analytical model. If the
P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2658, pp. 741–747, 2003.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

742

T. Dhaene

requirement is for a complete library of models, the total effort is multiplied by the
number of models sought. This task needs to be weighed against measurement-based
or EM-based modeling on a case-by-case basis.
Some common approaches to modeling issues have limiting factors [1]-[2].
Methods using pre-calculations of equivalent circuits, using a variety of look-up
tables, fitting equations and interpolation techniques can have a limited number of
samples and have insufficient interpolation methods. One clear example where the
dependability of these techniques comes into question is with high-Q resonant circuits
such as those used in narrow band filters. Using discrete data grids and interpolation
techniques with such circuits might cause the generated model to suffer from either
“oversampling” or “undersampling.” With oversampling, too many data samples are
collected and model generation is inefficient; on the other hand, with undersampling,
too few data samples are collected and the model is not completely defined.
As an alternative to building classic analytical models, engineers can utilize a fullwave EM modeling tool to fully characterize a given passive component. This method
permits accurate characterization of the actual passive structure to be used, accounting
for higher-order mode propagation, dispersion and other parasitic effects. However,
the calculation time required for full-wave EM simulation of a given component
makes real-time circuit tuning impossible.
A new efficient adaptive sampling and modeling technique addresses this model
accuracy dilemma. The ‘Multidimensional Adaptive Parameter Sampling’ algorithm
(MAPS) selects a limited set of data samples in consecutive iterations, and
interpolates all S-parameter data using rational and multinomial fitting models. This
algorithm allows important details to be modeled by automatically sampling the
response of the structure more densely where the S-parameters are changing more
rapidly. The goal is minimizing the total number of samples needed, while
maximizing the information provided by each new sample. The modeling technique
combines the speed and flexibility of analytical models, and accuracy and generality
of full-wave EM simulation in one compact parameterized passive model [3]-[4].

2 Adaptive Modeling and Sampling Technique
The MAPS technique builds a global fitting model of the chosen parameters, handling
frequency and geometrical dependencies separately. Multidimensional polynomial (or
multinomial) fitting techniques are used to model the geometrical dependencies, while
rational fitting techniques [5]-[6] are used to handle frequency dependencies. The
modeling process does not require any a priori knowledge of the circuit under study.
Different adaptive algorithms are combined to efficiently generate a parameterized
fitting model that meets the predefined accuracy. This includes the adaptive selection
of an optimal number of data samples along the frequency axis and in the geometrical
parameter space, and adaptive selection of the optimal order of the multinomial-fitting
model.
The number of data points is selected to avoid oversampling and undersampling.
The process of selecting data points and building models in an adaptive way is called

Self-Organizing Compact Modeling Methodology

743

reflective exploration [7]. Reflective exploration is useful when the process that
provides the data is very costly, which is the case for full-wave EM simulators.
Reflective exploration requires reflective functions that are used to select new data
points. For example, the difference between two fitting models can be used as a
reflective function. Also, some physical rules, such as a passivity-check, can be used
as a reflective function. The modeling process starts with an initial set of data points.
New data points are selected near the maximum of the reflective function until the
desired accuracy is reached.
The model complexity is automatically adapted to avoid overmodeling (overshoot
or ringing) and undermodeling, and the model covers the whole parameter and
frequency space and can easily be used for optimization purposes.

•

•
•

•

The MAPS modeling technique follows four steps to adaptively build a model.
Step One: The frequency response of the circuit is calculated at a number of
discrete sample points (using the Agilent Momentum full-wave EM simulator
[8]). The Adaptive Frequency Sampling (AFS) algorithm [6] selects a set of
frequencies and builds a rational model for the S-parameters over the desired
frequency range (Figure 1).
Step Two: A multinomial is fitted to the S-parameter data at multiple discrete
frequencies (Figure 2).
Step Three: This model is written as a weighted sum of orthonormal
multinomials. The multinomials only depend on the layout parameters. The
weighting coefficients preceding the orthonormal multinomials in the sum are
only frequency dependent (Figure 3).
Step Four: Using the AFS models built in step one, the coefficients can be
calculated over the whole frequency range (Figure 4). These coefficients,
together with the orthonormal multinomials, are stored in a database for use
during extraction afterwards.

data

p
freq

Fig. 1. Step One: AFS rational models over the desired frequency range, derived from fullwave EM simulation.

744

T. Dhaene

data

p
freq
Fig. 2. Step Two: Multinomial models are created at discrete frequencies.

mag

n

C1

C2

C0
freq
Fig. 3. Step Three: Creation of the coefficients of orthogonal multinomials at discrete
frequencies.

mag

n

C1
C0

C2
freq

Fig. 4. Step Four: Calculation of coefficients of orthogonal multinomials over the entire
frequency range.

3 Example
The automated modeling technique was used to generate analytical circuit models for
all sub-parts (transmission line, open end, slot coupler, step in width, corner-fed

Self-Organizing Compact Modeling Methodology

745

patch) of a slot-coupled microstrip-fed patch antenna structure (figure 5). This
modeling step is a one-time, up-front time investment. A double sided duroid
substrate was used (thickness = 31 mil & 15 mil, εr = 2.33, tg δ = 0.0012).
First, parameterized circuit models were built for all substructures of the circuit.
For example, the corner-fed patch (figure 6) circuit model was built over the
following parameter range (table 1):
Table 1. Parameter ranges of corner-fed patch

variable

L_patch

min
320
mil
5 mil

max
400
mil
30 mil

5 GHz

15
GHz

W_feed
f

Fig. 5. Slot-coupled microstrip-fed patch antenna structure

Wpatch
Wfeed
Lpatch
H = 31 mil

εr = 2.33

tg δ = 0.0012

Fig. 6. Layout of corner-fed patch

The automated modeling tool (ADS Model Composer) selected 25 data points (=
discrete layouts) in an adaptive way, and grouped all S-parameter data all in one
global, compact, analytical model. ADS Momentum was used as planar EM simulator
[8]. The desired accuracy level was set to -55 dB. In figure 7, the reflection
coefficient S11 of the corner-fed patch is shown as a function of frequency and width.
Then, the parameterized circuit models were used to simulate the overall antenna
structure (figure 5). Figure 8 shows S11 simulated with Momentum, and with the new
analytical circuit models for all sub-components (divide and conquer approach). Both
results correspond very well. However, the simulations based on the circuit models

746

T. Dhaene

easily allow optimization and tuning, and took only a fraction of the time of the
full-wave simulation (2 seconds compared to 96 minutes on a 450 MHz Pentium II
computer).

Fig. 7. Reflection coefficient S11 of corner-fed patch (W_feed = 8 mil)

Fig. 8. Reflection coefficient S11 of slot-coupled microstrip-fed patch antenna

4 Conclusions
An advanced modeling technique was presented for building parameterized models
for general passive microwave and RF structures. The models are based on full-wave
EM simulations, and have a user-defined accuracy. Once generated, the analytical

Self-Organizing Compact Modeling Methodology

747

models can be grouped in a library, and incorporated in an EDA tool where they can
be used for simulation, design and optimization purposes. A patch antenna example
was given to illustrate the technique. The results based on the parameterized models
correspond very well with the global full-wave simulations. However, the time
required for a simulation using the compact analytical circuit models was only a
fraction of the time required for a global full-wave simulation.

References
1. Chaki S., Aono S., Andoh N., Sasaki Y., Tanino N., Ishihara O.: Experimental Study on
Spiral Inductors, Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Microwave Theory and
Techniques, (1995) 753–756.
2. Liang J-F., Zaki K. A.: CAD of Microwave Junctions by Polynomial Curve Fitting,
Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Microwave Theory and Techniques, (1993) 451–
454.
3. De Geest J., Dhaene T., Fache N., De Zutter D.: Adaptive CAD-Model Building Algorithm
for General Planar Microwave Structures, IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and
Techniques, vol. 47, no. 9, (1999) 1801–1809.
4. Dhaene T., De Geest J., De Zutter D.: EM-based Multidimensional Parameterized Modeling
of General Passive Planar Components, Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Microwave
Theory and Techniques, Vol. 3, (2001) 1745–1748.
5. Dhaene, T., Ureel, J., Fache, N., De Zutter, D.: Adaptive Frequency Sampling Algorithm for
Fast and Accurate S-parameter Modeling of General Planar Structures, Proceedings of the
IEEE Symposium on Microwave Theory and Techniques, (1995) 1427–1430.
6. Dhaene, T.: Automated Fitting and Rational Modeling Algorithm for EM-Based SParameter, Proceedings of the Applied Parallel Computing Conference, LNCS 2367,
(2002), pp. 99–105.
7. U. Beyer and F. Smieja, Data Exploration with Reflective Adaptive Models, Computational
Statistics and Data Analysis, vol. 22, (1996) 193–211.
8. Momentum software, Agilent EEsof Comms EDA, Agilent Technologies, Santa Rosa, CA.

