Embedded Fuzzy Control System: Application to an
Electromechanical System
1,2

1

1

R.E. Haber , J.R. Alique , A. Alique , and J.E. Jiménez

1

1

Instituto de Automática Industrial (CSIC)
Nº-III km. 22800, La Poveda. 28500. Madrid. SPAIN.
rhaber@iai.csic.es
2

Escuela Técnica Superior
Ciudad Universitaria de Cantoblanco
Ctra. de Colmenar Viejo, km. 15. 28049 - SPAIN
Rodolfo.Haber@ii.uam.es

Abstract. Nowadays with open computerized numerical controls internal
control signals can be gathered and mathematically processed by means of
integrated applications. Working with a commercial open computerized
numerical control, a fuzzy control system has been designed, implemented and
embedded that can provide an additional optimization function for cutting
speed. The results show that, at least in rough milling operations, internal
signals can double as an intelligent, sensorless control system. The integration
process, design steps and results of applying an embedded fuzzy control system
are shown through the example of real machining operations.

1 Introduction
One of the main activities the manufacturing industry has to deal with is machining, a
process that includes operations that range from rough milling to finishing. There is a
number of angles from which to view the optimization of the machining process,
angles where minimum production cost, maximum productivity and maximum profit
are significant factors [1].
There are also various different ways of implementing machining process
optimization. The implementation on which we will focus here attains optimal goals
via automatic control of the machining process. The spectrum of “conventional”
methods (so named to distinguish them from intelligent methods) available for
designing control systems is enormous. In the incessant pursuit of better performance,
newer approaches have been also tested such as model reference adaptive control
(MRAC) [2], which incorporates an on-line estimation scheme to tune controller
parameters for time-varying process dynamics. Another recently applied method is
robust control based on the Quantitative Feedback Theory (QFT) [3]. The results of
these tests, however, have not lived up to expectations, because all these approaches
have the indispensable design requisite of an accurate (traditional) process model,
P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2658, pp. 812–821, 2003.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

Embedded Fuzzy Control System: Application to an Electromechanical System

813

e.g., differential equations, transfer functions and state equations. Unfortunately,
accurate models of this sort cannot yet be attained for the machining process.
The complexity and uncertainty of processes like the machining process are what
make what is known as intelligent systems technology a feasible option to classical
control strategies. Indeed, Artificial Intelligence techniques have received
considerable interest from scientific community and have been applied to machining
[4]-[5]. Two interesting approaches are the neural network and expert rule based on
adaptive control constraints (ACC) [6] and the evolutionary algorithms based on
adaptive control optimization (ACO) approach [7].
However, the main disadvantage related with the above-mentioned approaches is
that neural network and evolutionary algorithm based computation requires time, and
therefore it limits the performance of the intelligent control system. Nowadays, open
computerized numerical control is powerful to build up an intelligent system.
However, there are constraints for real-time signal processing and to implement
complex control algorithms.
On the other hand, the majority of the work in machining optimization is devoted
to the issue of adaptive techniques. Adaptive controllers are highly expensive
considering the time requirements because they estimate parameters on-line and
adjust the controller gains accordingly. Likewise, these systems must be carefully
tuned and exhibit complex, and sometimes undesirable behavior.
In order to improve machining efficiency, the current study focuses on the design
and implementation of an intelligent controller in an open computerized numerical
control system. From all available techniques, Fuzzy Logic (FL) is selected because it
has proven useful in control and industrial engineering as a highly practical
optimizing tool. To the best of our knowledge, the main advantage of the present
approach includes: (i) embedded fuzzy controller in an open computerized numerical
control to deal with a real life industrial process, (ii) a simple computational
procedure to fulfill the time requirements, and (iii) without restrictions concerning
sensor cost (sensorless application), wiring and synchronization. The results with
fuzzy control strategy through actual industrial tests show a higher machining
efficiency.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we present a brief study of the
machining process, explaining why it is considered a complex process and setting up
the milling process as a case study. In Section 3 we design the fuzzy controller to
optimize the milling process. Next, in Section 4 we describe how the fuzzy controller
can be embedded in open computerized numerical control, and we discuss the key
design and programming stages. In Section 5 we share the experimental results and
explore some comparative studies. Finally we give some concluding remarks.

2 The Machining Process
This section introduces the milling process, which is characterised by both nonlinear
characteristics and varying process parameters. The task of controlling this complex
plant is performed with the help of a fuzzy controller that will be introduced in
Section 3. A panoramic view of a typical machining center is given in Figure 1.

814

R.E. Haber et al.

Fig. 1. Overall view of a typical machining center

The machining process, also known as the metal removal process, is widely used in
manufacturing. One of the most complex of the four operations is the milling process.
One important study of cutting-process monitoring and control by means of current
measurement shows the feasibility of motor-current measurement for adaptive control
[8]. The direct relationship between the current consumed and the cutting force is fair
enough for a real industrial implementation of the control system to be made on the
basis of a main spindle’s drive current [9].
Nowadays the development of open control systems in the NCK offers more
facilities for using digital drive signals without the need to install more sensors.
Indeed, cutting processes show significant effects on drive signals such as actual drive
current and drive torque. Digital drive signals have many limitations for process
monitoring alone, because of the ratio between process-related components of the
signal and non-process-related disturbances. However, main-spindle drive current can
be used to optimize cutting speed. Signal behavior is complex because of specific
design considerations such as star-triangle switching in drive configuration.
Nevertheless, correcting the current offsets during the signal-processing stage (before
entering the fuzzy algorithm) solves the problem.
In terms of control system design, the most important aspects are the variables,
parameters and typical measures of performance that we use to characterize the
system. After a preliminary study we selected: the spatial position of the cutting tool,
considering the Cartesian coordinate axes (x, y, z) [mm], spindle speed (s) [rpm],
relative feed speed between tool and worktable (f, feedrate) [mm/min], cutting power
invested in removing metal chips from the workpiece ( Pc )[kW], current consumed in
the main spindle during the removal of metal chips (IS) [A], radial depth of cut (a,
cutting depth) [mm] and cutting-tool diameter (d) [mm].
In order to evaluate system performance, we need to select certain suitable
performance indices. The milling process basically consists of two operations, rough
milling and finishing. The differences in these operations’ objectives are what will
decide which performance index is useful in each operation. The quality and
geometric profile of the cutting surface is paramount in finishing operations, whereas
the quantity of metal removed from the workpiece is the main issue in rough milling
operations. This work dealt essentially with rough milling, so the main index was the
metal-removal rate (MRR).

Embedded Fuzzy Control System: Application to an Electromechanical System

815

3 Fuzzy Logic Controller for Machining Processes
The fuzzy controller follows rather classic lines. The controller’s actual core performs
on-line actions to control the feedrate. The three basic tasks known as fuzzification,
decision-making and defuzzification were implemented on-line. The main design
steps for this controller and their corresponding implementation were as follows:
1) Defining input and output variables, fuzzy partitioning and building the
membership functions.
The input variables included in the error vector e are the current-consumed error
( ∆I S in ampere) and the change in current-consumed error ( ∆2 I S in ampere). The
manipulated (action) variable we selected is the feed-rate increment ( ∆f in
percentage of the initial value programmed into the computerized numerical control),
whereas the spindle speed is considered constant and preset by the operator.

[

e T = KE ⋅ ∆I S

]

KCE ⋅ ∆2 I S ; u = [GC ⋅ ∆f ] .

(1)

where KE , KCE and GC are scaling factors for inputs (error and change in error)
and output (change in feed rate), respectively.
The fuzzy partition of universes of discourse and the creation of the rule base were
drawn from the criteria of skilled operators, although we did have to apply a “cut and
trial” procedure as well. Figure 2 shows the fuzzy partition thus obtained.

a)

b)

Fig. 2. a) Fuzzy partitions and membership functions for (a) ∆I S , ∆ 2 I S and (b) ∆f

2) Constructing the Rule Base and Generating Crisp Output.
We will consider a set of rules consisting of linguistic statements that link each
antecedent with its respective consequent, having, for instance, the following syntax:
IF ∆I S is positive AND ∆2 I S is positive THEN ∆f is Positive Big
The controller output is inferred by means of the compositional rule. The SupProduct compositional operator was selected for the compositional rule of inference.
m× n
µ (∆I S , ∆2 I S , ∆f ) = S1 T2 µ ∆I (∆I S ), µ∆2 I (∆2 I S ), µ ∆f i (∆f )  .
Si
Si

i =1  

(2)

816

R.E. Haber et al.

where T2 represents the algebraic product operation and S1 represents the union
operation (max), m × n = 9 rules. The crisp controller output, which is used to change
the machine-table feedrate, is obtained by defuzzification employing the center of
area (COA) method [10] defined as

∑ µ (∆f ) ⋅ ∆f
=
∑ µ (∆f )
i

R

∆f *

i

R

(3)

i

.

i

i

where ∆f * is the crisp value of ∆fi for a given crisp input ( ∆I Si , ∆2 I Si ) .
The crisp control action (generated at each sampling instant) defines the final
actions that will be applied to the set points. The strategy used to
compute f determines what type of fuzzy regulator is to be used. In this case it can be
a PI- FLC
f * ( k ) = f ( k − 1) + ∆ f ( k ) .

(4)

f * ( k ) = f 0 + ∆f ( k ) .

(5)

or a PD- FLC

Feedrate values ( f ) were generated on-line by the controller and fed in with the
set point for the spindle current ( I Sr ) and measured value ( I S ) provided by the
computerized numerical control from the internal spindle-drive signal, as is explained
in section 4.
The static input-output mapping can be represented by the nonlinear control
surface
shown
in
Figure
3,
considering
that
∆I S ∈ [−1.5, 1.5] ,
∆2 I S ∈ [− 1.5, 1.5] and ∆f ∈ [−10, 10] .
These nonlinearities are essential in order to achieve good performance. Recently it
has been proved that when trapezoidal membership functions are used, the resulting
system is the sum of a global nonlinear controller (static part) and a local nonlinear PI
controller (dynamically changing with regard to the input space) [11]. Therefore, it is
expected that this kind of membership functions can be relevant for dealing with
nonlinear process behavior.

4 Open Computerized Numerical Control
The demand for open control systems is on the rise as the result of the current need
for enhanced control functionality in industry. To date, only a small group of
machine-tool manufacturers has accepted adaptive controllers. One main reason for
their reluctance is the need for an accurate model for calculating controller

Embedded Fuzzy Control System: Application to an Electromechanical System

817

parameters. Additionally, adaptive controllers cannot be applied reliably to various
combinations of machining processes, materials and tools without major changes
being required in the control algorithm and its parameters. Some European
computerized numerical control manufacturers do not include any adaptive functions
in their products [12], while others offer an “AC control” whose performance is very
restricted [13]. The adaptive module is rarely used in a flexible machining
environment containing many types and combinations of materials and tools.

Fig. 3. Fuzzy control surface

At present two levels of opening are available from machine-tool and
computerized numerical control manufacturers. The degree varies, however,
depending on part involved. There are two categories, depending on how important it
is from the control-system viewpoint: opening of Man/Machine Communication
(MMC) and opening of the Numerical Control Kernel (NCK). The first category is
the one responsible for interaction with the user (e.g., office applications can be
developed using the DDE Dynamic Data Exchange protocol). Use of a bus (e.g.,
Multi-Point Interface bus) enables communication with low-level data. The more
important level of opening from the control-system viewpoint, can be found in the
NCK, where real-time critical tasks (e.g., axes control) are scheduled and performed.
4.1 Embedding the Fuzzy Controller
This section explains how the fuzzy controller designed in Section 3 is embedded in
the open CNC. Nowadays the integration of any control system in the CNC is a
complex task that requires the use of various software utilities, technologies and
development tools. Three classical technologies can be used: a software-developing
tool (C++, Visual Basic), an open- and real-time computerized numerical control and
communications technology.
The general outline of the control system is depicted in Figure 6. First the fuzzy
controller was programmed in C/C++ and compiled, and as a result a dynamic link
library (DLL) was generated. Other tools were used as well. A Sun Workstation, the
UNIX operating system and C++ were used to program the NCK. A PC, the
WINDOWS 9X operating system and Visual Basic were used for programming the
MMC. Inter-module communications between the MMC and the NCK was

818

R.E. Haber et al.

established through DDE. Finally, and for the sake of simplicity, the user interface
was programmed in Visual Basic.

Fig. 4. Diagram of the control system.

The application was developed on the basis of a Sinumerik 840D CNC. The
process of integrating the software application into the NCK involved a series of
steps. The development was run at a workstation, including edition, compiling and
code linking. After that, the file was transferred to the PC, where OEM software ran
debugging routines. Finally, the code was copied on a PCMCIA card and inserted into
the computerized numerical control [13].
An experimental control internal data-acquisition system was developed and used
to record the control internal spindle-drive signal. The system enables a selected drive
signal to be recorded and provides stored data on the hard drive of the SINUMERIK
840D user interface PC (MMC). Internal data-acquisition software was developed to
obtain control information. The maximum sampling frequency could not be any
longer than 500 Hz, defined by the servosystems’ control cycle. Therefore the
acquisition-signal software works at the same time for which servosystems are
configured in the computerized numerical control (i.e., 2 ms.). The software consists
of a data-acquisition module in the NCK that records the selected data into an internal
buffer and an MMC background task that receives the completed measurement and
stores it in the hard drive of the user-interface PC. Data transfer is performed by
splitting the recorded data into a number of fragments, due to limitations in the
Sinumerik 840D’s file systems. The signals to be recorded (in our case the current
consumed at the spindle) are configured using specially added machine data.
Recording can be started and stopped either manually through an MMC application or
under the numerical control program.

5 Industrial Tests. Evaluation
Tests were carried out in the SL400 SORALUCE machining center, which was
equipped with a SIEMENS open- Sinumerik 840D. The SL400 model SORAMILL
milling machine. It possesses high-precision slideways that allow all three axes to

Embedded Fuzzy Control System: Application to an Electromechanical System

819

reach a speed of up to 15 m/min. The machine has high-rigidity, high-precision
features, and the workpiece has no influence whatsoever on the moving part.
The cutting tool was a Sandvik D38 R218.19 - 2538.35 - 37.070HA (020/943) face
mill 25 mm in diameter with four inserts of the SEKN 12 04 AZ (SEK 43A, GC-A
p25) type. The workpiece material used for testing was F114 quality steel. The
maximum depth of cut was 20 mm, the nominal spindle speed was s 0 =850 rpm, and
the nominal feedrate, f 0 =300mm/min. The actual dimensions of the profile were
334x486 (mm). The profile is depicted in Figure 5b.

a)

b)

Fig. 5. a) Tool used for industrial tests, b) workpiece for industrial tests

We used control internal spindle-drive signal. The processing-signal analysis was
done on-line. The signal processing was centered in the correction of current offsets.
The current offsets were corrected on the basis of the model that relates spindle speed
vs. current. This model was created using linear regression. Moreover, further
filtering was performed using the mean value of the signal in the sampling period.
The set point was estimated according to constraint given by the power available at
the spindle motor, material and the tool characteristics. In order to compare the
performance of the PI and PD- FLC, a reference value of 18A was set during the
experiments. In the second study, the set point used was 22A in order to make an
appropriate comparison with a commercial product. The results of applying two fuzzy
controllers (PI and PD- FLC) to mechanize an irregular profile (see Fig. 5b) are
depicted in Figure 6a. The negative effect of integral components is reflected in the
transient response.
An illustrative example was inserted to uphold the validity of the theoretical
approaches examined in this paper. The second study compared an embedded PDFLC, the OPTIMIL [14] and the CNC working alone. The results are shown in Figure
6b. The reduction in machining time was very similar for the OPTIMIL and the
embedded PD-FLC (10%), yet the overshoot was bigger for the embedded PD-FLC
(23.7%). From the technological viewpoint, this overshoot is allowable for rough
milling operations. It is important to note that in some approaches the goal of the
controller design is to limit the percent overshoot to 20% [3].
Regarding OPTIMIL, when used as external equipment, requires synchronization
steps and a tedious calibration procedure including a learning phase. On the other
hand, the embedded PD-FLC does not require any calibration procedure or external
sensors, and the application can be supplied with a computerized numerical control
(CNC) alone, and no other external equipment.

820

R.E. Haber et al.

Drive current signal of the main spindle (A)
30

….. OPTIMIL
___ PD-FLC
------ CNC alone

25

20

15

10

5

0

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

Time (sec.)

Fig. 6. Time responses of the control systems

Conclusion
The results of transferring technology to a machine-tool manufacturer through
cooperation with a technological center show the effectiveness of a fuzzy control
system for dealing with the nonlinear behavior of the machining process. The
embedded fuzzy controller is able to work using only internal CNC signals.
Moreover, it can run in parallel with other applications without any synchronization
problems. However, future work is necessary to refine the fuzzy controller’s
performance and so to improve the transient response.
All this work, from hypothesis to implementation and experimentation, including
design and analysis, is done following the classical patterns. Our focus at all times lay
on the practical implementation, so that the results we have presented in this work are
for a real life industrial plant. The results show that internal CNC signals can double
as an intelligent, sensorless control system. Actual industrial tests show a higher
machining efficiency: in-process time is reduced by 10% and total estimated savings
provided by installing the system are about 78%.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.

Koren Y.: Control of machine tools. Journal of Manufacturing Science and Engineering
119 (1997) 749–755
Lauderbaugh L.K., Ulsoy A. G.: Model reference adaptive force control in milling. ASME
Journal Engineering of Industry 111 (1989) 13–21
Rober S.J., Shin Y.C., Nwokah O.D.I.: A digital robust controller for cutting force control
in the end milling process. Journal of Dynamic Systems, Measurement and Control 119
(1997) 146–152
Haber R.E., Peres C.R., Alique A., Ros S., Alique J.R.: Towards intelligent machining:
hierarchical fuzzy control for end milling process. IEEE Transactions on Control Systems
Technology 6 (2) (1998) 188–199

Embedded Fuzzy Control System: Application to an Electromechanical System
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.

821

Lin L.-C, Lee G.-Y.: Hierarchical fuzzy control for C-axis of CNC turning centers using
genetic algorithms. Journal of Intelligent and Robotic Systems: Theory and Applications
25(3) (1999) 255–275
Liu Y., Zhuo L., Wang C.: Intelligent adaptive control in milling process. International
Journal of Computer Integrated Manufacturing 12(5) (1999) 453–460
Liu Y., Wang C.: Neural networks based adaptive control and optimization in milling
process. International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology 15 (1999) 791–795
Altintas Y.: Prediction of cutting forces and tool breakage in milling from feed drive
current measurements. ASME Journal of Engineering of Industry 11 (1992) 386–392
Kim T., Kim P.: Adaptive cutting force control for a machining centre by using indirect
cutting force measurements. International Journal of Machine Tool Manufacturing 36(8)
(1996) 925–937
Yager R., Filev D.: Essentials of Fuzzy Modeling and Control, (New York, John
Wiley&Sons) pp. 313–354 (1994)
Ying, H.: Analytical structure of a typical fuzzy controllers employing trapezoidal input
fuzzy sets and nonlinear control rules. Information Science 116 (1999) 177–203
Fagor Automation: Needs of New Numerical Controls (in Spanish). Producción Mecánica
3 (1999) 74–83
Siemens AG: Sinumerik 840D, OEM-package NCK, software release 4, user's manual,
Erlangen 1999.
Nosrat A.: Adaptive controls lead to peak efficiency, American Machinist (1997) 78-80

