Resource Reservation and Allocation Based on
Direction Prediction for Handoﬀ in Mobile
Multimedia Networks
Jongchan Lee1 , Hongjin Kim2 , and Kuinam J. Kim3
1

2

Radio Access Research Team ETRI, Korea
chan2000@etri.re.kr
Dept. of Computer Information KyungWon College, Korea
3
Dept. of Information Security Konggi Univ., Korea

Abstract. Future mobile communication systems can support not only
voice but also multimedia applications such as data, image and video. It
requires greater resources than voice-oriented mobile system. If handoﬀ
events are occurred during the transmission of multimedia, the eﬃcient
resource allocation and handoﬀ procedures are necessary to maintain
the same QoS of transmitted multimedia traﬃc because the QoS may
be defected by some delay and information loss. This paper proposes a
resource reservation and allocation scheme to accommodate multimedia
traﬃc based on the direction estimation in mobile multimedia networks.
This scheme estimates the position of mobiles based on a two step estimation comprised of sector estimation, zone estimation. With the position
information, the moving direction is determined.

1

Introduction

The explosive growth of Internet access in parallel with the technological advances in mobile communications has motivated mobile computing and multimedia applications in wireless mobile networks. A Key characteristic of multimedia services is that they require diﬀerent Quality of Service (QoS) guarantees.
Due to the limitations of the radio spectrum, the wireless systems use microcellular architectures in order to provide a higher capacity. Because of small
coverage area of micro-cells, network resources availability varies frequently as
users move from one access point to another [1]. In order to deterministically
guarantee QoS support for a mobile unit, the network must have prior exact
knowledge of the mobile’s mobility. Majority of the existing schemes to support mobility make a reservation for resources in adjacent cells. However these
techniques cause a waste of resources since it is regardless of the direction of
mobiles. Also, existing methods for predicting and reserving resources for future
handoﬀ calls do not seem to be suitable for mobile multimedia networks. The
amount of resources required to successfully perform handoﬀ may vary arbitrarily over a wide range in a mobile multimedia network. For example, data and
video applications may adapt to diﬀerent service quality levels and consequently
P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2660, pp. 555–565, 2003.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

556

J. Lee, H. Kim, and K.J. Kim

may accept diﬀerent levels of resources in order to ensure a successful handoﬀ
[2][3][4]. In this paper, we consider a mobile network supporting diverse trafﬁc characteristics of voice, data, and video applications. Since the connections
can now diﬀer in the amount of resources required to meet their QoS needs, the
question is how should a base station dynamically adapt the amount of resources
reserved for dealing with handoﬀ requests. In this paper, the handoﬀ requests
for real-time connections are handled based on the direction prediction and the
resource reservation scheme. The resources in the estimated adjacent cells should
be reserved to guarantee the continuity of the real-time connections. If handoﬀ
requests are occurred during the transmission of multimedia traﬃc, the eﬃcient
resource allocation and handoﬀ procedures are necessary to maintain the same
QoS of transmitted multimedia traﬃc because the QoS may be defected by some
delay and information loss. This paper proposes a handoﬀ scheme to transmit
multimedia traﬃc based on the resource reservation using direction estimation.

2

Direction Prediction Method

Figure 1 shows how our scheme divides a cell into many zones based on the
signal strength, and then estimates the optimal zone stepwise where the mobile
is located. This process is based on a two step location estimations which determines the mobile position by gradually reducing the area of the mobile position
[5][6]. This scheme is implemented as an estimator into the base station. The
estimator is started with a timer, and then the estimation is performed sequentially in two steps. The estimator ﬁrst estimates the location sector in the sector
estimation step, then estimates the location zone in the zone estimation step,
and then ﬁnally estimates mobile’s direction.

2.1

Sector Estimation

The sector estimation, the ﬁrst step of the location estimation, is done in the
following procedure.

A. All the neighboring base stations transmit pilot signals periodically.
B. The demodulator of the mobile measures PSSs of neighboring base stations.
C. The mobile sends PSMM (Pilot Strength Measurement Message) to the base
station.
D. The estimator in the base station compares the received strengths of the
pilot channels with each other and chooses the sector neighboring to the
base station of the greatest signal strength as the sector at which the mobile
locates.
E. The sector number is registered to the object information.

Resource Reservation and Allocation Based on Direction Prediction

557

0
3

Sector 1

Zone-3
Sector 6

Sector 2
Zone-2

Zone-1

2
3

d13

d11

d15

2
3

d12
d14

d18

d17

Sector 5

Sector 3

d16

Sector 4
3

Fig. 1. Sector, zone and a mobile’s moving direction

2.2

Zone Estimation

Each cell is divided into n zones with each zone classiﬁed by PSS. The following
LOS algorithm summarizes the zone estimation procedure for LOS model.
1. Select each threshold considering PSS.
2. In order to map the signal strength onto the direction information, determine
the distance function for each threshold with Equation(1).
PA (d) = k1 − k2 (d) + u(t)
PB (d) = k1 − k2 (D − d) + υ(t)

(1)

In Equation (1) D indicates the distance between two base stations,
and d the distance between the base station A and the mobile. k1 is
proportional to the transmission power of the station and k has the oﬀset
value depending the radio propagation environment. Two random signals
u(t), υ(t) which indicate the power distributions of signals received at the
distance d respectively from the station A and from the station B have
i.i.d (identical independent distribution) with Gaussian distribution of
N (µ(d), σ) . The average value of the received signal at the speciﬁc location,
µ(d), is determined by the path-loss component proportional to the distance
and σ is assumed to be same. The changes in the LOS are depicted by k2 .
3. Classify zones using the distance function.
4. Assign the zone number and the PSS threshold to all divided zones.

558

J. Lee, H. Kim, and K.J. Kim

Using the sector of blocks selected in the sector estimation, the zone estimation,
the second step of the location estimation, estimates the zone of blocks at one
of which the mobile locates. It is done in the following procedure.
A. The base station transmits the pilot signal periodically.
B. The demodulator of the mobile measures the signal strength of the pilot
channel of the base station in which it is.
C. The mobile sends PSMM to the base station.
D. The estimator estimates the zone using the LOS algorithm.
E. The estimated zone number is registered to a zone object.
2.3

Direction Estimation

The estimator estimates a sector in the sector estimation step and a zone in the
zone estimation step respectively, and then ﬁnally computes mobile’s direction
using the vector information between the estimated location and the previous
one. In order to indicate the location of each zone within a cell, we use the
vector data which is obtained by converting the rectangular coordinate of the
zone to the polar coordinate with the origin of the base station [5]. Each vector
has the information on a distance and an angle. The polar coordinate indicates
the location by the distance from the origin to the mobile and the angle from
the positive horizontal axis toward counter-clockwise. In our study we need the
direction information to identify the sector relative to the base station and the
relative position of a zone so we use the polar coordinates converted from the
rectangular coordinates.
A mobile’s direction is classiﬁed based on the movement into the upper
zone (d11, d12 and d13), lower one (d16, d17 and d18) and the same one (d14
and d15), as shown in Figure 1. The moving radius of a mobile toward the
upper from the lower zone becomes wider, while the moving radius of a mobile
toward the lower zone becomes narrower. That is, the direction prediction for a
mobile toward his BS is diﬃcult more than mobiles toward his cell boundary.
Therefore, for a mobile toward the upper zone it is eﬃcient to increase the
number of cells within his moving radius that is expected to be handed oﬀ,
and to decrease the number of cells in case of a mobile toward the lower zone.
Figure 2 shows the direction estimation algorithm based on the above conditions.
2.3.1

Resource Reservation for Low-Speed Mobiles

The moving radius and the moving pattern of a mobile has diﬀerent characteristics according to the speed of the mobile. That is, a low-speed mobile (a
pedestrian) has a smaller moving radius and a more complex moving pattern,
while a high-speed mobile (a motor vehicle) has a larger radius and a simpler
pattern. Using those characteristics, reservation variables such as the current
position and the moving direction of a mobile are deﬁned, and the neighboring
cells that need to reserve resources are decided. In the case of low-speed mobiles,

Resource Reservation and Allocation Based on Direction Prediction

559

Start

Operate a inner timer

i=1
Direction predictor estimates the i th zone
Within a cell where a mobile is located
th

Direction predictor estimates the i + 1 zone
Within a cell where a mobile is located
Direction predictor estimates the zone
Within a cell where a mobile is located
no

Same zone?

yes

Moving state

Stopping state

Select a condition
Corresponding to the mobile

Estimate the moving direction of the mobile

Fig. 2. Direction estimation algorithm

the result of the direction estimation can vary signiﬁcantly due to two factors.
First, the current position is considered. This is because the moving radius of
low-speed mobiles is narrow, therefore, whether the handoﬀ is done or not can
be estimated according to his current position. Second, the moving direction is
considered. The reason of using this factor is that the handoﬀ attempt of the
mobiles moving toward the inside of cell is decreased, while the handoﬀ attempt
of the mobiles moving toward the outside of cell is increased. The location zone
is estimated in the sector and the zone estimation, and then based on the location of the estimated zone and the predicted direction, cells in the neighborhood
are ranked according to the likelihood that the mobile will move into these cells.
Cells needed to reserve the resource is decided by the sector estimation, and the
resource reservation for the cells is done using the current position estimated by
the zone estimation. Mobiles moving toward the upper zone need not reserve the
resource. The resources for mobiles moving toward the lower zone are reserved
only in case their estimated position is zone-3. Resource reservation conditions
based on the reservation variable for a low-speed mobile is as follows.
– Condition 1: if the current position is zone-1, the reservation is not made
regardless of its moving direction.

560

J. Lee, H. Kim, and K.J. Kim

– Condition 2: if the current position is zone-2 and its movement is done from
zone-1, the reservation is not made.
– Condition 3: if the current position is zone-2 and its movement is done from
zone-3, the reservation is made to the maximum two cells.
– Condition 4: if the current position is zone-3 and its movement is done from
zone-2, the reservation is made to the maximum one cell.

2.3.2 Resource Reservation for High-Speed Mobiles
The reservation variable for fast-speed mobiles is the moving direction. If the
mobiles move fast, the feasibility of performing a handoﬀ is expected to be higher;
therefore the reservation is needed regardless of their current position within cell.
Since the mobility of the fast-speed mobiles has a varying randomness, a cluster
of cells that is reﬂective of the user mobility is needed to reserve the resources.
Resource reservation conditions based on the reservation variable for a highspeed mobile is as follows.
– Condition 1: If the mobile moves from zone-1 to zone-2 within the same
sector, the resources are reserved for three cells that is reﬂective of the moving
direction.
– Condition 2: If the mobile moves from zone-2 to zone-3 within the same
sector, the resources are reserved for one cell that is reﬂective of the moving
direction.
– Condition 3: If the mobile moves from zone-3 to zone-2 within the same
sector, the resources are reserved for ﬁve cells that is reﬂective of the moving
direction.
– Condition 4: If the mobile moves from zone-1 to zone-2 within the same
sector, the resources are reserved for three cells that is reﬂective of the moving
direction.
– Condition 5: If the mobile moves from zone-1 to zone-2 within the other
sector, the resources are reserved for three cells that is reﬂective of the moving
direction.
– Condition 6: If the mobile moves from zone-2 to zone-3 within the other
sector, the resources are reserved for one cell that is reﬂective of the moving
direction.
– Condition 7: If the mobile moves from zone-3 to zone-2 within the other
sector, the resources are reserved for ﬁve cells that is reﬂective of the moving
direction.
– Condition 8: If the mobile moves from zone-2 to zone-1 within the other
sector, the resources are reserved for ﬁve cells that is reﬂective of the moving
direction

Resource Reservation and Allocation Based on Direction Prediction

3
3.1

561

Direction Prediction Based Resource Reservation and
Allocation
Resource Reservation and Allocation Structure

A real-time mobile performs resource reservation for hand-oﬀ, and a set of the
reserved resources can be occupied temporally by non-real-time mobiles within
the target cell. On the order hand, a non-real-time mobile doesn’t perform resource reservation for handoﬀ, and its resource allocation request is buﬀered in
the waiting queue of the target BS during handoﬀ duration time and is given
the priority based on the service demand time. If the reserved set is returned
because the corresponding real-time mobile is handed oﬀ, the priority of the
request becomes the lowest lank. This strategy is explained in Figure 3.

START

Handoff connection

New connection
Connection Types

Real -time

yes

Non -real -time

Application types

Real -time

no

yes

Reserved Resource ?

Allocate
The reserved resource
Available Resource ?

Block
the connection

no
yes

Allocate The resource

Available Resource ?

Drop
the connection

yes
Allocate The resource

yes

Non -real -time

no

Available Resource ?

Allocate
The resource
yes

Application types

no

Reserved Resource ?
no

Available Resource ?

Allocate The resource

no

Allocate
The reserved resource

Buffer the request
in a non -real -time queue

Block
the connection

Fig. 3. Admission control for multimedia connections

3.2

Resource Reservation Procedure

The base station reserves only the resources corresponding to the minimum
transmission rate to the mobile. Based on the location and the direction of
the mobile within a cell, the resource reservation is performed with the following order: unnecessary state, not necessary state, necessary state, and positively
necessary state. If the reservation variable for the mobile is changed, the reservation is canceled and the resources have to be released with the reverse order and
returned to the fool of available resource. The set of the reserved resources have
its priorities depending on whether it can be allocated to new connections or not:
a real-time handoﬀ connection (priority 1), a non-real-time handoﬀ connection
(priority 2) and a non-real-time new connection (priority 3).

562

J. Lee, H. Kim, and K.J. Kim

– U nnecessary State
The resource reservation needs not be performed.
This state corresponds to the resource reservation condition 1 and 2 for
low-speed mobiles.
– N ot N ecessary State
A set of the reserved resources corresponds to priority 3.
If any resources are available in each of the estimated cells, the resources
are then reserved for each of the mobiles. A set of the reserved resources can
be occupied by the new connections if enough resources are not available
for a new connection in each of the estimated cells.
If there are any resources available to support the reservation in the
estimated cell, and a moving connection competes with a new connection
for the resources, the resources are occupied with the following order: a
real-time handoﬀ connection, a real-time new connection, a non-real-time
handoﬀ connection, and a non-real-time new connection.
If no resources are available, the reservation is not done.
This state corresponds to the resource reservation condition 3, 7 and 8 for
fast-speed mobiles.
– N ecessary State
A set of the reserved resources corresponds to priority 1.
If there is no enough resource available to accommodate a new connection,
a set of the reserved resources for real-time handoﬀ connections can be
occupied by non-real-time new connections.
If there are resources available to support the reservation in the estimated
cell, and a moving connection competes with a new connection for the
resources, the order of occupying the resources is the same as Not Necessary
State.
If no resources are available for the reservation in the estimate cell, the
shared part resources are allocated and reserved for a real-time connection.
This state corresponds to the resource reservation condition 4 for low-speed
mobiles.
This state corresponds to the resource reservation condition 1, 4, 5 and 8
for fast-speed mobiles.
– P ositively N ecessary State
The reserved resources correspond to priority 1.
New connections cannot occupy the reserved resources.
In case of a moving connection competes with a new connection for resources
in the estimated cell, the resources are occupied with the following order: a
real-time handoﬀ connection, a non-real-handoﬀ connection, a real-time new
connection and a non-real-time new connection.
If no resources are available for the reservation in the estimate cell, the shared
part resources can be allocated and reserved for both real-time connections
and non- real-time connections.

Resource Reservation and Allocation Based on Direction Prediction

563

This state corresponds to the resource reservation condition 4 for low-speed
mobiles.
This state corresponds to the resource reservation condition 2 and 6 for
fast-speed mobiles.

4

Simulation Model and Result

The proposed scheme is compared with two diﬀerent methods to evaluate the
performance.
Method 1: there is resource reservation. The resources are reserved exclusively
for handoﬀ connections in each cell. The remaining resources can be equally
shared among handoﬀ and new connections. This method is called Fixed Res.
Method 2: the resources are reserved dynamically based on the current connections in the neighboring cells. This method is called Dynamic Res.

Fig. 4. Comparison of resource
utilization

Fig. 5. Comparison of transmission
delay

The simulation model composed of a single cell, which will keep contact with
its six neighboring cells. Each cell contains a base station, which is responsible for the connection setup and tear-down of new applications and to serve
handoﬀ applications. We consider the following simulation parameters regarding
the received signal strength. The mean signal attenuation by the path-loss is
proportional to 3.5 times the propagation distance, and the shadowing has a
log-normal distribution with a standard deviation of σ = 6dB. A value of the
received signal strength less than -16 dB is regarded as an error, which is therefore excluded from the calculation. Figure 4 shows the results for an average
percentage of resource utilization as a function of connections arrival with priority to handoﬀ connections over new connections. The resource utilization for

564

J. Lee, H. Kim, and K.J. Kim
0.1
Direction-based
Dynamic-based
Fixed-based

Aggregated Data Loss Rate

0.09
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0
1

6

11

16

21

26

Number of connections

Fig. 6 Comparison of aggregated data loss rate

the Direction-based is increased up to 25 arrival, than that for Fixed and Dynamic. This improvement may be caused since the Direction-based allocates the
reserved resources not only real-time handoﬀ connections but also non-real-time
new connections. In Figure 5, the comparison of transmission delay of the three
schemes is plotted against the number of connections. From the ﬁgure, we can see
the performance of the direction-based is up to 2.5 times better than that of the
conventional schemes. This is because non-real-time connections can adaptively
occupy the reserved resources for real-time connections, and we can prevent the
performance degradation due to queueing of non-real-time connections.
Figure 6 shows the aggregated data loss rate. It is observed that as the number of connections increase, direction-based provides a noticeable improvement
over the conventional schemes for real-time connections, while slightly degrading
the performance for the non-real-time connections.

5

Conclusion

This main paper is to address the problem of guaranteeing an acceptable level of
QoS requirements for mobile users as they move from one location to another.
This is achieved through reservation variables such as the current location and
the moving direction that is presented with a set of attributes that describes the
user mobility. In this scheme, mobiles are classiﬁed according to their reservation
variables. Based on reservation variables a scheme that provides predictive QoS
guarantees in mobile multimedia networks is proposed. The proposed scheme
shows a great improvement of the resource utilization, the delay and the data
loss. It is because our resource reservation scheme is more adaptive than existing resource reservation schemes. In our scheme, resources are classiﬁed as ones
having priority to the new calls and ones having priority to the handoﬀ calls
based on reservation variable. We improve the dropping rate for the handoﬀ
connections by dynamically adjusting the amount of the reserved resources according to the amount of occupied resources. The determination of the optimal
direction should be studied consecutively. Also further researches are required
on their implementation and applications to the handoﬀ and resource allocation
strategies.

Resource Reservation and Allocation Based on Direction Prediction

565

References
1. P. Agrawal, D. K. Anvekar, and B. Narendran, “Channel management policies for
handovers in cellular networks,” Bell Labs Tech. J., vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 97–10, 1996.
2. M. Naghshineh and M. Schwartz, “Distributed call admission control in mobile/wireless networks,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 14, pp. 711–717, May
1996.
3. O. T. W. Yu and V. C. M. Leung, “Adaptive resource allocation for prioritized call
admission over an ATM-based wireless PCN,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol.
15, pp. 1208–1225, Sept. 1997.
4. C. H. Yoon and C. K. Un, “Performance of personal portable radio telephone systems with and without guard channels,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 11,
pp. 911–917, Aug. 1993.
5. J. C. Lee and Y. S. Mun, “Mobile Location Estimation Scheme,” SK telecommunications Review, Vol. 9, No. 6, pp. 968–983, Dec. 1999.
6. J. C. Lee, B. H. Ryu and J. H. Ahn, “Estimating Position of Mobiles by MultiCriteria Decision Making,” ETRI J., vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 323–327, Aug. 2002.

