Properties of the Genetic Code under
Directional, Asymmetric Mutational Pressure
Malgorzata Dudkiewicz1 , Pawel Mackiewicz1 , Aleksandra Nowicka1 ,
Maria Kowalczuk1 , Dorota Mackiewicz1 , Natalia Polak1 , Kamila Smolarczyk1 ,
Miroslaw R. Dudek2 , and Stanislaw Cebrat1
1

Department of Genetics, Institute of Microbiology, University of Wroclaw,
ul. Przybyszewskiego 63/77, PL-54148 Wroclaw, Poland
{malgosia, pamac, nowicka, kowal, dorota, polak, smolar,
cebrat}@microb.uni.wroc.pl
http://smORFland.microb.uni.wroc.pl
2
Institute of Physics, University of Zielona G´
ora, ul. A. Szafrana 4a,
PL-65516 Zielona G´
ora, Poland
mdudek@proton.if.uz.zgora.pl

Abstract. We have used the Monte Carlo method for simulating the
evolution of protein coding sequences from the Borrelia burgdorferi genome under the directional mutational pressure, described by the nucleotide
substitution matrix experimentally found for this genome. Since the mutational pressure is asymmetric – diﬀerent for each of the two DNA
strands, and the coding sequences are also asymmetric, the mutagenic
eﬀect depends on the topology of the coding sequence on the chromosome. While the direct eﬀect of the directional mutational pressure on
the codon usage is predictable, the eﬀect on the amino-acid composition
depends on the degeneracy of the genetic code, initial composition of the
protein sequence and codon usage. Assuming additional degeneracy of
information connected with the structure of amino-acids, we have found
that the best strategy for the evolution of some genes in the B. burgdorferi genome is to change the mutational pressure by inversions, which
corresponds to changing the substitution matrix to the mirror one. It
mimics the behavior of a stock market player who can gain by investing
only in two stock sets even if during that time both sets have lost.

Introduction
The DNA molecule is composed of two anti-parallel sequences (strands) of four
diﬀerent nucleotides: Adenine (A), Thymine (T ), Guanine (G) and Cytosine (C).
The complementarity rule predicts that A in one strand corresponds to T in the
other one and G corresponds to C [1]. As a consequence, the number of A in the
whole DNA molecule equals the number of T and the number of G equals the
number of C [2]. These rules, called parity rules 1 (P R1) are deterministic. One
could predict that for a random DNA molecule the same rules, but for each of
To whom all correspondence should be sent.
P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2657, pp. 343–350, 2003.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

344

M. Dudkiewicz et al.

the two DNA strands, should be in force. These parity rules for single strands
are stochastic rather than deterministic and are called parity rules 2 – P R2 [3],
[4]. In the natural DNA sequences there are many mechanisms which introduce
deviations from P R2 and sequences with such deviations are called asymmetric.
The most important mechanisms introducing asymmetry into the DNA molecule
are the replication-associated directional mutational pressure (see for review: [5],
[6], [7] and selection for a proper amino-acid composition of proteins coded by
genes [8], [9]. Due to the degeneracy of the genetic code, the same amino-acid
can be coded by many (up to six) diﬀerent codons – tri-nucleotide sequences. It
means that DNA sequences with diﬀerent nucleotide composition can code for
the same protein. Thus, a coding nucleotide sequence under directional mutational pressure could adapt to this pressure by using preferred or more stable
codons without any change in the amino-acid composition. The interesting question is how the degeneracy of the genetic code ameliorates the viability of coding
sequences and, assuming a declared tolerance for amino-acid composition – what
could be the best strategy for genes. Genes are pieces of DNA composed of two
complementary strands, one strand is called coding (or sense) sequence and it is
usually richer in purines (A and G) while the other – anti-sense strand is relatively rich in pyrimidines (T and C) [10], [11], [12], [13]. Since the composition
of the two DNA strands is diﬀerent [14], [15], [16], [17], [18], it is important if the
sense strand of a gene lies on the leading DNA strand replicating continuously
or on the lagging DNA strand replicating discontinuously through intermediate Okazaki fragments. Knowing the real mutational pressure exerted on each
DNA strand of the B. burgdorferi genome described by the matrix of nucleotide
substitutions as well as sequences and positions of all genes in the B. burgdorferi genome, we have used Monte Carlo simulations for the estimation the of
susceptibility of coding sequences to the mutational pressure.

1

Material and Methods

All simulations were performed with DNA sequences of the B. burgdorferi genome downloaded from www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov. The replication associated directional mutational pressure for the B. burgdorferi genome has been described in
the so called substitution matrices by [19], [20], [21]. Note that the substitution
matrix describing the mutational pressure for one strand i.e. the leading DNA
strand has a mirror matrix describing the mutational pressure for the complementary – the lagging DNA strand. In this paper we have performed our studies
with 292 genes lying on the leading strand of the B. burgdorferi genome of the
total length of 309024 nucleotides. If the genes from the leading strand are under
the mutational pressure characteristic for them it means that the sense strands
of these genes are under the mutational pressure for the leading DNA strand.
If such a gene is inverted, it means that its anti-sense strand is under the mutational pressure characteristic for the leading strand. In one Monte Carlo Step
(MCS) each nucleotide of the sequence is drawn with a probability pmut = 0.001
and then substituted by another nucleotide with the probability described by

Properties of the Genetic Code

345

the corresponding parameter in the substitution matrix. Then, all nucleotide
substitutions, codon substitutions and corresponding amino-acid substitutions
introduced during simulation into the coded proteins are counted. When the viability of coding sequences is studied, two genomic sequences (composed of 292
genes), originally identical, are consecutively mutated. Moreover, the selection
parameter – tolerance (T ) for the amino-acid composition of individual sequences
was introduced. It describes the maximum allowed deviation in the amino-acid
composition of a protein coded by a given gene after mutations in comparison
to its original sequence (occurring in the genome). It is expressed by the sum
of absolute values of diﬀerences between fractions of codons or amino acids as
follows:
20

|fi (0) − fi (t)|,

(1)

i=1

where: fi (0) is a fraction of a given amino-acid in the original sequence (before mutations) and fi (t) is a fraction of a given amino acid in the sequence
after mutations in t MCS. Arbitrarily, we have assumed as a value of tolerance for amino-acid composition the average distance between 442 pairs of orthologs belonging to two related genomes: B. burgdorferi and Treponema pallidum. These orthologs were extracted from COGs databse downloaded from
ftp://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pub/COG in September 2001. COGs contain protein sequences which are supposed to have evolved from one ancestral protein
[22]. Orthologs are sequences from diﬀerent species which have evolved by vertical descent and are usually responsible for the same function in diﬀerent organisms. If the number of substituted elements in a given gene overpasses the
declared tolerance T = 0.3, the coded sequence is “killed” and replaced by the
corresponding one from the second genomic sequence.

2

Results and Discussion

Directional mutational pressures found for many prokaryotic as well as eukaryotic genomes generate DNA sequences in equilibrium whose fractions of
nucleotides are highly correlated with the turnover rate of nucleotides [19]. It
means that if any DNA sequence stays under a stable directional mutational
pressure for long enough time, its nucleotide composition reﬂects the mutational
pressure described in a relation:
Fa ∼ Pmut ta + const,

(2)

where: Fa – fraction of a nucleotide in the DNA strand, ta – half time of survival
of a given nucleotide. The DNA sequence which is not in equilibrium with the
mutational pressure and which is richer in nucleotides with higher turnover rate
than the sequence in equilibrium (the case of coding sequences in many genomes)
would tend to reach the equilibrium if there are no selection forces. Furthermore,
during this process the total mutability of the sequence decreases. It is trivial,
since nucleotides with higher substitution probability are replaced by nucleotides

346

M. Dudkiewicz et al.
120
codons
amino acids

number of substituted codons/amino acids

100

80

60

40

20

0

0

2000

4000
6000
time (in MCS)

8000

10000

Fig. 1. Time dependence of the number of substituted codons and amino acids under
a stable mutatational pressure without selection.

with lower substitution probability. This eﬀect directly translates into the substitution rates of codons – each nucleotide substitution simultaneously leads to
the change of codon. But, due to the degeneracy of the genetic code, there are
many codons which code for the same amino-acid. Thus, not every substitution
of nucleotide in the codon changes the sense of this codon – not every mutation is a miss-sense mutation. The eﬀect of the evolution of the composition
of DNA sequences towards equilibrium and the eﬀect of the degeneracy of the
genetic code is seen in Fig.1. Comparing diﬀerent genomes it is very easy to ﬁnd
genes which code for proteins fulﬁlling the same functions in diﬀerent organisms.
Furthermore, these genes very often share the same amino-acid residues at the
corresponding positions which seems to prove that they have a common ancestor
sequence. Such genes are called orthologs. In fact, the degree of homology between two orthologs could be low (much lower than 0.5). This means that there
is another level of degeneracy in the coding genetic information. Not only different codons can code for the same amino-acid, but it is possible to not disturb
the protein function by placing diﬀerent amino-acids at the same position in the
protein sequences. We will call this eﬀect “tolerance” in the next simulations. We
have assumed the tolerance 0.3, meaning that the maximum overall composition

Properties of the Genetic Code

347

50000

changing mutational pressure
stable mutational pressure

accumulated number of killed genes

40000

30000

20000

10000

0

0

2000

4000
6000
time (in MCS)

8000

10000

Fig. 2. The accumulated number of killed genes (since the start of simulation) in the
case of the same mutational pressure in each Monte Carlo step t, and in the case when
the mutational pressure is switching periodically in time.

of a protein can be changed due to the accumulated mutations in the coding
sequence by this factor, as described in the Method section. This tolerance corresponds to the average diﬀerence between orthologs belonging to two related
genomes: B. burgdorferi and Treponema pallidum. If during the simulation of mutagenesis the fraction of replaced amino-acids in the coded sequence exceeds the
tolerance the gene is replaced by its copy from the parallely simulated genome.
Note that this copy could have also many mutations accumulated during the
previous MCSs of simulations. The dynamics of elimination of genes and their
replacement is shown in Fig.2. The solid bold line represents the accumulated
number of replaced sequences of genes located originally in the genome on the
leading DNA strand. At the beginning of the simulation there is no killing eﬀect
because we have assumed that all genes stay at their maximally stable composition. As the simulation proceeds, genes accumulate mutations and eventually
surpass the declared tolerance. Then they are replaced by corresponding copies.
Since the replacement copies already have some accumulated substitutions, the
probability of their elimination in the next MCSs is much higher than the initial
probability, that is why the elimination rate increases with time reaching the
constant value after a few hundred of MCSs. In fact, one Monte Carlo Step in
our simulation corresponds to about 100000 generations in Nature (the muta-

348

M. Dudkiewicz et al.
60

number of killed genes

40

20

0

0

200

400

600

time (in MCS)

Fig. 3. The number of genes killed by selection in the course of evolution during which
mutation pressure switches every 200 MCSs from one speciﬁc for the leading DNA
strand to the one speciﬁc for the lagging DNA strand and vice versa.

tion rate in Nature is of the order of 1 per genome per generation). During so
many generations recombination processes can translocate or invert the coding
sequences inside the genome. Inversion of a gene implies the change of the directional mutational pressure into the mirror one. That is why we checked what
would be the eﬀect of switching the mutational pressure from the one characteristic for the leading strand into the mutational pressure characteristic for the
lagging DNA strands, which mimics the inversion of a gene. In Fig.2 we have
shown the dynamics of gene elimination under the changing mutational pressure
(light line). After every 100 MC steps we exchanged the substitution matrix for
the mirror one. It is evident that the “killing” rate decrease after inversion. The
rate of nucleotide substitution is growing at these conditions (Fig. 3). There is a
paradox – to escape the elimination by mutations, the best strategy for a gene
is to increase the mutation rate but under the mirror asymmetric substitution
matrix, what is possible just by inversion. In Fig. 4 we have shown how the elimination rate depends on the substitution accumulation when inversion is allowed
and when it is forbidden.

Properties of the Genetic Code

349

Fig. 4. Accumulated number of genes killed by selection and the accumulated number
of mutated amino acids (two upper lines). Solid lines without, and dashed lines with
switching mutation matrices.

3

Conclusions

Mutation process is not a random process, it is rather highly correlated. If a
coding sequence stay for a long time under the stable directional, asymmetric
mutational pressure its composition adopt to this pressure but only in the limits
set by selection forces. By inverting the asymmetric pressure it is possible to
lower the probability of trespassing these limits set by selection. Our preliminary
studies show averaged data for the set of genes from B. burgdorferi genome but
it could be expected from the experimental data concerning the probability of
inversion of genes and highly diﬀerentiated divergence rate that this eﬀect could
depend on the function and codon composition of genes. Further studies will
probably show how important role in the process is played by the genetic code
– its extremely sophisticated way of degeneracy. Is it the best?
Acknowledgements.
1016/S/IMi/02.

The work was supported by the grant number

References
1. Watson, J.D. & Crick, F.C.H.: A structure for deoxyribose nucleic acid. Nature
327 (1953) 169–170
2. Chargaﬀ, E.: Chemical speciﬁcity of nucleic acids and mechanism of their enzymatic degradation. Experientia 6 (1950) 201–240

350

M. Dudkiewicz et al.

3. Sueoka, N.: Intrastrand parity rules of DNA bases composition and usage biases
of synonymous codons. J. Mol. Evol. 40 (1995) 318–325, 42, 323
4. Lobry, J.R.: Properties of a general model of DNA evolution under no-strand-bias
conditions. J. Mol. Evol. 40 (1995) 326–330, 41, 680
5. Mrazek J., Karlin S.: Strand compositional asymmetry in bacterial and large viral
genomes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95. (1998) 3720–3725
6. Frank A.C., Lobry J.R.: Asymmetric substitution patterns: a review of possible
underlying mutational or selective mechanisms. Gene 238 (1999) 65–77
7. Kowalczuk, M., Mackiewicz, P., Mackiewicz, D., Nowicka, A., Dudkiewicz, A.,
Dudek, M.R., and Cebrat, S.: DNA asymmetry and the replicational mutational
pressure. J. Appl. Genet. 42 (2001) 553–577
8. Karlin S., Blaisdell, B.E., Bucher, P.: Quantile distributions of amino acid usage
in protein classes. Protein Eng. 5 (1992) 729–738
9. Karlin, S., Mrazek, J.: What drives codon choices in human genome? J. Mol. Biol.
262 (1996) 459–472
10. Shepherd J.C.: Method to determine the reading frame of a protein from the
purine/pyrimidine genome sequence and its possible evolutionary justiﬁcation.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 78. (1981) 1596–1600
11. Karlin S., Burge C.: Dinucleotide relative abundance extremes: a genomic signature. Trends Genet.11 (1995) 283–290
12. Francino, M.P., Chao, L., Riley, M.A., Ochman, H.: Asymmetries generated by
transcription-coupled repair in enterobacterial genes. Science 272 (1996) 107–109
13. Cebrat, S., Dudek, M.R., Mackiewicz, P.: Sequence asymmetry as a parameter
indicating coding sequences in Saccharomyces cerevisiae genome. Theory Bioscienc.
117 (1998) 78–89
14. Lobry, J. R.: Asymmetric substitution patterns in the two DNA strands of bacteria.
Mol. Biol. Evol. 13 (1996) 660–665
15. Blattner, F. R., Plunkett III, G., Bloch C.A., et al. (17 co-authors): The complete
genome sequence of Escherichia coli K-12. Science 277 (1997) 1453–1462
16. Freeman, J. M., Plasterer, T.N., Smith, T.F., and Mohr, S.C.: Patterns of genome
organization in bacteria. Science 279 (1998) 1827
17. Grigoriev, A.: Analyzing genomes with cumulative skew diagrams. Nucleic Acids
Res. 26 (1998) 2286–2290
18. Mackiewicz, P., Gierlik, A., Kowalczuk, M., Dudek, M.R., and Cebrat, S.: How
does replication-associated mutational pressure inﬂuence amino acid composition
of proteins? Genome Res. 9 (1999) 409–416
19. Kowalczuk, M., Mackiewicz, P., Mackiewicz, D., Nowicka, A., Dudkiewicz, M.,
Dudek, M.R., and Cebrat, S.: High correlation between the turnover of nucleotides
under mutational pressure and the DNA composition. BMC Evol. Biol. 1 (2001)
(1):13
20. Kowalczuk, M., Mackiewicz, P., Mackiewicz, D., Nowicka, A., Dudkiewicz, M.,
Dudek, M.R., Cebrat, S.: Multiple base substitution corrections in DNA sequence
evolution. Int. J. Modern Phys. C 12(7) (2001) 1043–1053
21. Mackiewicz, P., Kowalczuk, M., Mackiewicz, D., Nowicka, A., Dudkiewicz, M.,
Laszkiewicz, A., Dudek, M.R., Cebrat, S.: Replication associated mutational pressure generating long-range correlation in DNA. Physica A 314 (2002) 646–654
22. Tatusov, R. L., Natale, D.A., Garkavtsev, I.V., Tatusova, T.A., Shankavaram, U.T.,
Rao, B.S., Kiryutin, B., Galperin, M.Y., Fedorova, N.D., and Koonin, E.V.: The
COG database: new developments in phylogenetic classiﬁcation of proteins from
complete genomes. Nucleic Acids Res. 29 (2001) 22–28

