The ARM-Approach Based Local Modelling of
the Gravitational Field
Sultan Valeev and Konstantin Samokhvalov
Ulyanovsk State Technical University, 32 Sev Venets Str., 432027 Ulyanovsk, Russia
{sgv,sam}@ulstu.ru

Abstract. Gravimetrical Measurements revealing particularities of the
gravitational ﬁeld, play an important role in a research after oil thanks
to their capacity to reduce the cost of reconnaissance work. Graphic
generalization of the ﬁeld is given by gravimetrical maps of the ﬁeld
anomalies, drawn out with the corresponding software on the basis of
one or other version of interpolation formula. Mathematical models of
the trend forming regional reference-surface, can extend the capabilities
of graphic generalization of measurements. With these models and corresponding contour maps, the local particularities of the gravitational ﬁeld
reveal themselves more clearly.
The use of models in the manner of truncated decompositions in Fourier
series on spherical surfaces is oﬀered for practical geophysical tasks. An
algorithm of adaptive statistical modelling which allows optimum mathematical models to be built is considered.
In the last section we describe the developed software that allows us to
build the statistical potential ﬁeld models. The corresponding ﬁeld maps
of residual anomalies are described.

1

Introduction

Gravimetrical contour maps (isoanomaly contour maps) which are drawn according to the results of measurements and various reductions are used for geological
object identiﬁcations which accompany oilﬁelds and gas ﬁelds, or just hydrocarbon collectors. This information is used with (or without) some seismic and
other types of measurements depending on a number of circumstances.
At present time, gravitational anomalies and, naturally, corresponding isolines on contour maps have mistakes because of incomplete account of global,
regional and, in some cases, local components forming the gravitational ﬁeld of
a region. Besides, normal ﬁeld of the Earth is ﬁxed with suﬃciently great mistakes, and mathematical presentation of the ﬁeld of anomalies in points in which
measurements are taken, can contain great casual mistakes because of the model
inadequacy.
In practice of geodesic works, local mathematical models are not always used;
more often one immediately goes from measurements on points to contouring of
anomalies with the help of interpolations in graphic software packages. The usefulness of the local ”background” models, averaging the inﬂuence of the rock
P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2658, pp. 471–480, 2003.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

472

S. Valeev and K. Samokhvalov

on ”normal” Earth on the area under consideration is obvious. Forming some
reference-surface they enable separate local disturbance from geological structures to reveal itself on average background.
So-called surface polynomials (usual two-dimensional algebraic polynomials)
are often used to make a description of gravitational ﬁeld of anomalies in the
region. Their factors are deﬁned by a standard method of least squares (MoLS),
and dimensions of the model are hard ﬁxed.
It is expected that the approach proposed in this paper will increase the
accuracy of potential ﬂoor description by the mathematical model and, consequently, the accuracy of identiﬁcation (in contrast with methods used in practice
in Russia and other counties) from 10% to several times as large.
Using ARM-approach, based on adaptive regression modelling [1] the following is planned: 1) determination of global and regional components of the geopotential by a great multifunction array of measurements (overland and satellite
data); 2) revision of normal ﬁeld of the Earth; 3) building of regional and local mathematical models in the manner of optimum decompositions by Fourier
series based on the overland gravimetrical measurements.

2
2.1

Mathematical Models of Potential Fields
Global Models of Gravitational Field

Global models of potential ﬁelds (gravitational, magnetic and others) are necessary for solution of geophysical and other problems both for the whole Earth, its
great regions, and for the building of local models. In the last case global models
can be used as reference-models (relationship models).
Decompositions on spherical functions are more often used for the presentation of global models. Harmonic coeﬃcients of those functions are deﬁned by
MoLS with lumpy distribution of data [2], [3]. Initial data for processing are the
results of the Earth Satellite observing; average anomalies in free air in trapezoids are usually 10 x 10 ; average one-degree altimetrical heights of the geoid
relative to ocean surface.
Decompositions of anomalies of gravity ∆g are researched for the description
of the global gravitational ﬁeld in spherical drawing in the manner of:
∆g (z) =

GM
r2

∞

(n−1 )
n=2

an
rn

n

∆C¯nm cos mλ + ∆S¯nm sin mλ P¯nm (cos θ) (1)
m=0

where GM = G (M0 + Matm )- is geocentric gravitational constant, taking into
account the Earth atmosphere, a- big half-axis of the Earth ellipsoid; r,θ=900 ϕ, λ - are spherical coordinates of the point - accordingly geocentric distance,
arctic distance (ϕ - geocentric width), geographical longitude;∆C¯nm , ∆S¯nm - are
diﬀerences of factors of normalizing spherical functions of real and normal ﬁelds;
P¯nm (cos θ) - are normalized joined Legendre functions of n degree and m order.
Taking into account that model (1) has excluded the planet component, corresponding to normal Earth, it is possible to suppose that they include local and

The ARM-Approach Based Local Modelling

473

regional components, generated respectively by anomalies of the gravitational
ﬁeld in upper mantle and in the Earths crust. This circumstance ensures a possibility to use with a certain accuracy a mathematical model (1) to determine
the identiﬁcation of geological structures which generate anomalies.
Under standard approach the model (1) is considered to be determined for
accepted order of decomposition m, if MoLS - evaluations of amendments to
harmonica amplitudes are calculated on the surplus number of measurements of
anomalies. Whereupon, we can draw a map of gravitational ﬁeld (gravimetrical
contour map), using expression (1) in the mode of forecast.
On the basis of the theory and computing experiments with great data arrays, we had proved that standard decompositions on spherical functions with
MoLS-evaluations of amplitudes of harmonics do not fully correspond to real
measurements, on which they are built [1]. The main reason of this fact is
the redundancy of mathematical model, containing multiple (up to 60% and
more) noise harmonicas. There occurs the reduction of accuracy from 10% up
to one order at the study of such models for the forecast (buildings isolines isoanomalies or isolines in relief description), that causes corresponding displacing of isoanomalies and the loss of accuracy in the identiﬁcation of geological
structures.
We oﬀered to use a statistical approach in the manner of adaptive regression modelling [1] for deciding a problem of adequacy of global models and
accordingly gravimetrical contour maps of anomalies of power of gravity. This
approach allows to raise the accuracy of identiﬁcation of structures up to several
times already at the stage of elimination of noises. Experiments on its using
under comparatively small orders of decomposition are described in [1].

2.2

Local Models of Gravitational Field

Flat functional approximations in the manner of polynomials of low degrees are
usually used for local models, but in global model decompositions on spherical functions are researched, using degree n at 360 order. However, spherical
functions also can be used for regional and local models as trend functions. It
is possible to use noted functional models for the forecast of regular values of
anomalies.
The area of the local models application is suﬃciently wide. They can assign regional or local, relation surfaces, formed by long geological structures,
aside from the description of systematic behavior of a potential ﬁeld. In the
last case residue, for instance(∆ gi − ∆ gˆi ) = ei between observed and computed
(forecasted) values of anomalies, can be interpreted as a manifestation of disturbances, generated by changing density of geological objects.
Accuracy of the end result, naturally, depends on the keeping of suggestions,
mortgaged in the mathematical device of data processing for getting optimum
models, MoLS in particular.

474

S. Valeev and K. Samokhvalov

It is possible to oﬀer the model
N

n

∆g (λ, θ) =

(Cnm cos mλ + Snm sin mλ) Pnm (cos θ),

(2)

n=0 m=0

as the local model, describing potential ﬁeld on a segment of spherical surface.
The formula (1) can be oﬀered for the anomaly description.
2.3

Problems of Local Potential Fields Modelling and Ways of
Their Solution

Researchers face the problems of non-observance of conditions of MoLS with all
resulting consequences, when they’re using approximate descriptions and MoLS.
MoLS - evaluations are not the best single-line evaluations in practice.
In this paper the following problems are concerned:
1. Algorithm Development of statistical modelling of local potential ﬁelds on
the basis of adaptive regression modelling (an ARM - approach);
2. The development of ARM - approach software with the use of the decompositions in Fourier series;
3. The research of ARM - approach eﬃciency on the example of real data
array.

3
3.1

Methodology and Algorithms of Statistical (Regression)
Modelling
Mathematical Model of Data Processing, to Forecast Potential
Field Features

Clearly determined model of observed (measured) phenomena (objects, processes), in mathematical terms is deﬁned as mathematical model of data processing. For instance, the relationship of anomaly of gravity power and measured
coordinates of an object in some area can be described as the model
M Y = η (X, β)

(3)

where Y - is dependent variable (anomalies of gravity power); X = (x 0 , x 1 , ...,
x p−1 )- is matrix of independent variables (measured coordinates, their product
or other combinations), which can change in certain areas of space R0 ; β =
T
(β0 β1 ...βp−1 ) - is the vector of unknown parameters deﬁned according to the
results of experiments; M - is an operator of math mean.
The analysis of standard strategy used in the geophysics for parametric model
identiﬁcation (3), has shown that for essential increasing of accuracy of presentation, it is necessary to solve a number of problems, connected with the use of
MoLS.
Standard methodology can be subjected to criticism as methodology, from
the point of mathematical statistics and the theory of function reconstruction.

The ARM-Approach Based Local Modelling

475

It does not promote getting the whole possible statistical information about the
model and its members, and does not help to get the identical structures and
parameters according to the results of checking the hypotheses. These statements
are considered in detail below.
1. Choice of measures of accuracy for the evaluation of a model quality, its
ﬁtness for the whole forecast is limited. Only one measure from the kit of internal
measures exists in mathematical statistics - it is a remaining dispersion or its
variety. Mixed measure of accuracy used in a number of works in the manner of
forecast mistakes expects the observance of the assumption about the absence of
systematic mistake in the model that is not always executed. At the same time
external measures are not paid attention to, ways of their using are imperfect,
and many approaches used are limited.
2. Mathematical model after postulating is considered to be hard given, regardless of its origins: no matter if it is a result of a project or it is approximated.
In the last case the members of the model are not analyzed on value in the process of solution, i.e. the procedure of structured identiﬁcations is not executed.
3. In papers on modelling in geophysics interest is not shown to the circumstance that evaluations of parameters of the statistical model (3) are the best,
i.e. consisted, not-shifted, eﬃcient in the class of single-line not-shifted evaluations only in conditions of observance of a number of suggestions, considered in
the following section.
3.2

Methodology of the ARM – Approach

Regression Analysis (RA). Model of RA. Data processing Model (1)-(3) can
be presented in the manner of [1]
Y = Xβ + ε .

(4)

Usual mathematical presentation of direct and indirect observance resulted
in the form (4) when passive experiment in geophysics is used.
RA stipulates the performing of three stages: - model postulating,
- valuation of its parameters,
- solution of the problem of searching its optimum structure.
RA-MoLS suggestions. For correct using of RA it is necessary to observe a
number of suggestions. One part of suggestions, given below, is generated by
the statistical theory of valuation, in which condition for the sample of data
and method of valuation (MoLS) are installed, the other part - is a theory
of statistical criteria. Besides, we oﬀer a suggestion (5.1) which concerns the
structure identiﬁcation method taking into consideration the dimensions of the
problem.
In the respect of data samples {y i , x ii } it is supposed to be suﬃciently
representative, i.e.
(1.1) - a size of observing is suﬃcient,
(1.2) - casual selection of observing is ensured,
(1.3) - the set of observing is uniform,

476

S. Valeev and K. Samokhvalov

(1.4) - there are no rough misses of inwardly set.
Some suggestions about valued vector parameter β are formulated:
(2.1) - the model (4) is linear on vector β,
(2.2) - no restrictions are imposed on the vector β,
(2.3) - vector β contains the additive constant β 0 ,
(2.4) - vector elements are calculated with a negligibly small computer inaccuracy.
Let us note suggestions about matrix X.
(3.1) - regressors x0 ,x1 ,...xp−1 (matrix X columns) are linear-independent
vectors of matrix X or of matrix: rank X = p,
(3.2) - elements of matrix X are not random quantities.
The main suggestions concerning elements e i of mistake vector e are:
(4.1) - they are additive casual mistakes,
(4.2) - they are distributed by normal law,
(4.3) - they do not contain systematic displacement,
(4.4) - they have constant dispersion,
(4.5) - they are not correlated and in the suggestion (4.2) are statistically
independent.
In conclusion we will point out additional suggestions about vector Y :
(5.1) - the method of searching for optimum model or the identiﬁcation of
optimum kit of regressors {xi : j = 1, p1, p1 < p} for vector y is exact,
(5.2) - MoLS can be used for each of regressions separately to solve a multiresponsible problem, containing two or more output parameters yk (k < 2).
Linear normal RA ensures the best (consisted, not-shifted, eﬃcient) evaluations only if all RA conditions are observed. In practice, suggestions (1.1) - (5.2)
are broken, so RA evaluations are not optimum. The degree of not-optimality is
considered in detail in book [1].
The main stages of RA. There are three main RA stages:
(1) model postulating, (2) valuation of its MoLS parameters, (3) analysis and
searching for optimum structure of the model. All these stages are considered in
detail in [1].
Adaptive regression modelling. Consequences of the RA-MoLS suggestions
breaking. Breaking of conditions of RA - MoLS application results in removable,
insolvent and ineﬃcient MoLS (for details see book [1]), and evaluations of both
the parameters of the model processing βj j = 0, p − 1 , and the values of Yˆ
when using models in the mode of forecast.
Revealing of breaches. To reveal breaking of conditions of RA - MoLS use
both corresponding statistics and various graphic procedures can be used [1].
Methodology of the ARM approach. As it was already noted, traditional
methodology of the solution of problems concerning data processing is characterized by two moments: 1) the structure of model processing is considered to
be given; 2) valuation of model parameters is performed by MoLS. A standard
approach for given geophysical problem does not correspond to terms of accuracy. The more so because the simplicity of its use does not compensate forecast

The ARM-Approach Based Local Modelling

477

losses in characteristics of best linear evaluations from dozens of percent to one
order. It is possible to say, that a MoLS computing scheme application (without
statistical analysis of the degree of breaking its usage conditions and corresponding adaptation) on the one hand makes the accuracy of the results higher and
allows to consider statistically negligible factors. On the other hand (in conditions of some MoLS suggestions breaking) - it results in not-the-best evaluations
of parameters and the model’s prognoses characteristics become worse.
Certainly, the use of regression analysis is a signiﬁcant step forward in contrast with MoLS application: 1) model analysis of a some number of criteria (R-,
F - criteria) is made; 2) statistical value not only of a model as a whole, but each
separate member of the model is analyzed. The last fact allows to develop to
some extent the best model structure, using one or another method of structure
identiﬁcation.
Unfortunately, RA does not completely solve the problem of ﬁnding the best
linear evaluations βˆj and Yˆ .
Additional stages for standard MoLS methodology (in system ARM - approach developed in [1]) are: 1) evaluation of model adequacy to observation
and search for its optimum structure; 2) checking the observance of MoLS suggestions; 3) consequent adaptation of a processing scheme to breaking of MoLS
conditions by using a kit of computing procedures (change of postulating models,
methods of parametric valuation, structure identiﬁcation and others. [1]); 4) application of a kit of measures (criterion of models quality, including multi-criteria
concept).
3.3

The Algorithm of Building the Local Optimum Model of Field
of Anomalies of Gravity Power

At present time, there are at least two rival scenarios of a solution of the geophysical problems of data processing, represented in the manner of models (1) (4).
Let forecasting model be postulated in the manner of model (4).
One of the perspective scenarios of processing can be described in brief as
follows:
1. Single-criteria search in the global criterion of optimum mathematical
structure is realized on the base of initial description (4). Such search can be
full, if computing possibilities allow, or incomplete. In the last case the method
of incomplete change with the restriction can be one of pseudo-bul optimization
methods. Casual or systematic mistakes, deﬁned according to the objects being
checked, which were not used in processing model building, or values of general
F-criterion can serve as global (main) criterion of model quality.
2. The Second and further stages of the structured-parametric identiﬁcation
of optimum model are based on checking of all conditions of RA-MoLS application and consequent adaptation according to the degree of breach importance. In
practice the ”chains” of adaptation algorithms can be diﬀerent, and it results in
particular requirements to ”intellectuality” automated data processing systems.

478

S. Valeev and K. Samokhvalov

The Second rival scenario of data processing does not expect the use of
global criterion in realization the last, one based on checkpoints is used at the
end stage only. The base of this approach is a check of suggestion observance for
initial models (4) and its consequent improvement by adaptation to the most
serious breaking while the degree of characteristics distortion of best evaluations
is decreasing.
3.4

Contouring Algorithm of the Anomalies Field

It is possible to use a method, based on the way from [3] to build isolines in the
manner of isoanomalies on the equation (2). Adaptation of this way makes the
following algorithm.
Let’s calculate two-dimensional curves, deﬁned by optimum mathematical
description under initial model (2)
N

n

(Cnm cos mλ + Snm sin mλ) Pnm (cos θ) =0.5k

(5)

n=0 m=0

for instance, under k=-4,-3,-2,-1,0,1,2,3,4,5,6, we will get isoanomalies, along
which deﬂections of values δg from 0 will be -2, -1.5,-1 and etc to +3.
We rewrite equation (5) in the manner of
f (λ, θ, k) = 0 .

(6)

Let k be ﬁxed, and free spot be chosen as initial (λ0 , θ0 ) . Then most likely
that f (λ0 , θ0 , k) = 0. To ﬁnd the spot (λ1 , θ1 ) , for which
|f (λ1 , θ1 , k) | ≤ |f (λ0 , θ0 , k) |

(7)

let us enter increments δλ and δθ and require the equation to be satisﬁed
f (λ0 + δλ, θ0 + δθ, k) = 0 .

(8)

In the ﬁrst approximation we get
∂f
∂λ

λ=λ0

δλ −

∂f
∂θ

θ=θ0

δθ = −f (λ0 , θ0 , k) .

(9)

Then, solving (9) with equation
∂f
∂λ

∂f
∂θ

δλ −

we deﬁne
δλ = −

∂f
∂λ

f
∂f
∂λ

δθ = 0

2

+

∂f
∂θ

2

(10)

(11)

The ARM-Approach Based Local Modelling

δθ = −

∂f
∂θ

f
∂f
∂θ

2

+

∂f
∂λ

2

.

479

(12)

If these values are added to λ0 and θ0 , the condition (7) will be satisﬁed. Values
λ1 and θ1 which satisfy an equation (6) will be reached under following approximations. When we ﬁnd one point on the curve (let it be (λ, θ)) we give it an
increment along tangent, i.e. the increment must satisfy the condition
∂f
∂λ

δλ +

∂f
∂θ

δθ = 0 .

(13)

To move forward the inner product of increments (δλ, δθ) of two consequent
points on the curve must be positive. Otherwise, we need to change the signs of
both components. Equation (13) gives only the direction, so to move we need to
choose a value of the step at each moment.

4
4.1

Software
The First Version of ASSI

The ﬁrst version of developed automatic system [4] is a specialized system, realizing the strategy of the statistical (regression) modelling [1] for solution of a
number of problems of mathematical relief description and gravitational ﬁelds
of planets. The main purpose of the system is to obtain models of processes or
phenomena with their further application for output features (responses) and
realization of some functions of management in interactive (display) and packet
modes of work. The need for this automatic system is due to great diﬃculties
when performing similar work, requiring both multi-variant calculations, and
using diﬀerent methods of parameters valuation and structural identiﬁcations,
as well as remainders analysis under chosen scenario of checking the observance
of MoLS suggestions.
Module system realizing methods of regression analysis is considered to be
base mathematical support. The given modules ensure the solution of normal
and surplus (redeﬁned) algebraic equation systems. Both original and modiﬁed
programs of a well-known package of scientiﬁc programs in Fortran are used in
this automatic system.
4.2

Modiﬁed Version of ASSI

The program package ASSI 1.0 [4] does not use computing facilities very much,
the speed of calculations is not high enough because of the use of 16-bit code, so
the process of modelling requires a lot of time. Possibilities of the package are
limited by modelling when using the spherical functions of order N<40.
New realization diﬀers from initial one by using optimized 32-bit code, and by
adding new procedures and modules and new multi-window interface. Methods

480

S. Valeev and K. Samokhvalov

of mathematical modelling, unceasing and discrete optimization, numeric methods, the theory of probability methods are used in the program. Object-oriented
programming methods were used when creating an algorithmic code, which resulted in less complicated package structure, new functions for realization of
various methods of calculation have appeared.
In this realization of ASSI 2.0 for the operating system Windows 9x/2000/XP
an eﬃcient solution of the problem of relief models adequacy and gravitational
ﬁelds of planets at the level of measurements accuracy and size of the information
used is ensured. Most program code had been developed in Borland C++ Builder
5.0. Also Borland Delphi was used. ASSI 2.0 consists of interface, controlling
part and calculation modules. Also a program for making contour maps and a
program of sections building are included in the package.

5

Conclusion

The developed mathematical methods and software are used for getting local and
regional trend models, as well as drawing maps of iso-anomalies and variations
of the anomalies of gravity power for one of the regions at the Volga-river. The
results prove the eﬃciency of the given technique.
The problems to be solved next are:
- adjustment of type models (2) within the framework of ARM-approach
(reduction of the eﬀect of interdependence of parameters of Fourier series, adaptation of MoLS use to other breaking of conditions);
- development of other type models, both on spherical and square coordinates (models with generally accepted normalizing harmonic factors in particular) which will provide more exact account in local models of global and regional
components;
- expansion of type (2) models application (magnetic and other potential
ﬁelds);
- practical identiﬁcation of deposits (territorial expansions of investigated
ranges, practical check of accuracy of geological structures localization, consideration of a problem of the depth of their presence bedding);
- improvement of software.

References
1. Valeev, S.G.: Regression Modelling in Observations Treatment. Science, Moscow
(1991) [or Valeev, S.G.: Regression Modelling in Data Processing. FEN, Kazan
(2001)]
2. Torge, W.: Gravimetru. Walter de Gruyter, Berlin New York (1989)
3. Gudas, To.: Decomposition of Relief of the Moon on Spherical Functions / Figure
of the Moon and Problems of Moon Topography. Science, Moscow (1968)
4. Valeev, S.G., Dyakov, V.I.: Automatic System for Modelling of the Megarelief and
Gravitation Fields of Planets. Izvestiya VUZov. Series: Geodesy and Aerophotography 4-5 (1998) 45–49

