Numerical Simulation of Cloud Dynamics and
Microphysics
Elena N. Stankova and Mikhail A. Zatevakhin
Institute for High Performance Computing and Information Systems, Fontanka, 6,
191186, St. Petersburg, Russia
{misha,lena}@fn.csa.ru

Abstract. It is well known that convective clouds play an essential role in the
evolution of the aerosol particles in the atmosphere by providing spatial
redistribution and transformation of aerosol due to in cloud chemical reactions,
dynamical and microphysical processes. The influence of the clouds upon the
aerosol properties increase greatly in extreme conditions, such as volcano
eruptions, explosions, large fires, when enormous number of aerosol particles of
different size and chemical compound are injected in the atmosphere. In this
paper the overview of the main results, obtained by the authors in the field of
numerical modeling of the convective clouds, developing in natural and
extreme conditions and the investigation of their role in the evolution of the
atmospheric aerosol is presented.

1 Introduction
Computational fluid dynamics and meteorology in particular are among the major
consumers of high performance computer technology. Effective numerical modeling
of convective flows developing in natural and extreme conditions allows to calculate
online transport and transformation of the atmospheric particles and effluents in real
time thus making possible to use the model for the operational forecast of the local
pollution propagation. A detailed analysis of the processes of such kind requires
development of the effective algorithms of its numerical realization including highperformance algorithms for modern supercomputer calculations. The effective
numerical algorithms will allow to incorporate the model into in the operational
regional or global climate models for online forecasting of the pollutant propagation
in the certain area and possible prevention of undesirable effects of catastrophic
phenomenon frequently accompanied by the convective cloud development.
A role of clouds in evolution of atmospheric pollutant is quite significant. Cloud
dynamics strongly modifies the distribution of pollutant through advection and more
local eddy motions over the edges of the cloud. Cloud microphysics participates in
pollutant evolution by means of condensation/evaporation and collection processes
transferring them to the drops during precipitation formation and reinjecting back into
the air by evaporation of droplets and raindrops. On the one hand, the processes in the
clouds result in cleaning the atmosphere by wet removal of the pollution. On the other
hand they are responsible for so called acid rains, damaging the material surfaces of
aquatic and forest ecosystems. In addition, clouds participate actively in trace
P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2658, pp. 171–178, 2003.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

172

E.N. Stankova and M.A. Zatevakhin

chemical redistribution, affect the global radiation budget and thus influence global
background atmosphere.
Though clouds of all types contribute significantly to atmospheric processes, the case
of so called deep convection, when the upper boundary of the cloud can reach the
tropopause level, is the most interesting one from the view point of pollutant
delivering to the upper levels of troposphere. Besides, deep convection plays an
exclusively important role as pollutant converter and transport mean in various
extreme situations when enormous amount of chemically active aerosol particles are
being injected into the atmosphere.
Convective clouds are very complex natural objects, with a wide spectrum of
interacting processes of different time/space scales (convective transport,
microphysical interactions, chemical reactions, etc.). A brief review of the resent
cloud models where the most complete set of the in-cloud processes are considered
[1]-[6] shows, that in each model only a few features of cloud processes interaction
are being considered rigorously while the rest ones are treated approximately, with the
use of strong simplifying assumptions and crude parameterizations. Thus, an urgent
need does exist in a numerical model capable of representing properly all the essential
interactions between dynamical, microphysical, chemical and aerosol processes. This
model implementation will apparently demand supercomputer facilities and the
effective numerical algorithms including special techniques for supercomputer
applications.
This paper is dedicated to the description of the numerical algorithms used for
simulation dynamical, turbulent, microphysical and chemical processes in convective
clouds developing in natural and extreme conditions. Algorithms were realized in the
frame of one and two-dimensional numerical models. The first one is intended for
natural clouds investigation, the second – primarily for investigation of the clouds
developing in extreme conditions. The second model was also used for describing the
polluted cloud formation that occurs during buoyant thermal rising.

2 Algorithms Used in the One–Dimensional Model
A time-dependent, one-dimensional model is used for an isolated warm cumulus
cloud life cycle simulation. In this model the cloud is assumed to have a cylindrical
form with constant radius R in an environment at rest. All equations expressed in
cylindrical coordinates and all cloud variables are represented with mean values
averaged over the horizontal cross section of the cloud [7]. The system of equations
combines the equations of vertical motion, the equation of continuity, the first law of
the thermodynamics, and the equations of water vapor and liquid hydrometeors
transport. The dynamic interaction between the cloud and its environment is modeled
by two entrainment terms: turbulent entrainment representing lateral mixing at the
side boundaries of the cloud and dynamic entrainment, representing the systematic
inflow or outflow of air required to satisfy mass continuity. Time splitting method is
used for numerical solution of the equations. The formation and growth of drops by
nucleation, condensation and stochastic collection are modeled in detail with the help
of stochastic collection equation. For calculation of the terms describing processes of
condensation/evaporation the Lagrangian scheme was chosen [8], which guarantee

Numerical Simulation of Cloud Dynamics and Microphysics

173

the conservation of cloud drops number. For the calculation of coalescence process
the modification of the well-known Kovetz and Olund method [9] is used, which
allows to obtain good solution of stochastic collection equation at the relatively low
number of drop size intervals and provides precise fulfillment of the mass
conservation law.
In such kind of problems the major part of computation time is consumed during the
solution of stochastic coalescence equation especially when the real collection kernel
is calculated directly in calculation process. To reduce the run time the collection
kernel of such equation, being once calculated must be stored in computer memory.
2
This demands the array of the size n m, where n is the number of droplet size classes
and m is the number of space grid points. It is evidently needs great amount of
computer memory, but allows reducing run time essentially.
To investigate the role of convection in aerosol pollutant redistribution a very effective
numerical algorithms are needed which could be incorporated into the dynamical
block of the model without a significant growth of the computational expenses.
Development and implementation of such algorithms will allow assessing more
accurately the effect of the aerosol particles size distribution on the pollutant
concentrations.
For the problem solution the model was modified in nucleation block description.
Nucleus vertical transport and reinjecting back into the air by evaporation of cloud
drops were taken into account. The particle was assumed to be activated when
achieving critical supersaturation for given size. The results of numerical
investigation of the cloud effect upon aerosol pollution redistribution in the
atmosphere revealed strong feedback between cloud and aerosol parameters. Vertical
distribution of the aerosol particles in different outer atmospheric conditions with
unstable temperature distribution (case 1) and the other (case 2) with the small layer
of the temperature inversion on the 50 min of cloud development is represented in
Fig.1.

Fig. 1. Vertical profiles of aerosol particles obtained on the 50min of cloud development, where
1- initial aerosol distribution, 2 - hydrophobic particles (case 1), 3 - cloud condensation nucleus
(case 1), 4 - hydrophobic particles (case 2), 5 - cloud condensation nucleus (case 2).

174

E.N. Stankova and M.A. Zatevakhin

For the analyses of the calculation results a special viewer was elaborated, which
allowed looking through the output data which structure was not prescribed in
advance. This was obtained by special output procedure, which created data base with
all necessary information about the structure of the output data fields and its content.
The viewer utilizes this data to form the user’s menu system and provide all features
necessary for visualization.
Calculations with the model gave the results, which were in good agreement with
observations of the dynamical and microphysical properties of warm cumulus cloud
(Fig.2). The development of the droplet spectrum during cloud evolution up to the
precipitation formation was particularly well simulated.

Fig. 2. Numerical and experimental data comparison. (drop size distribution) Dark columns numerical data, light columns - numerical data.

One-dimensional model was used for investigation of the effect of the convective
cloud droplets on the chemical composition of the troposphere. For this purpose
effective and computationally chip numerical scheme of chemical species
redistribution along the droplet spectrum due to the processes of condensation and
evaporation was elaborated [8]. In general, numerical simulation of cloud droplet –
chemical species interaction is very complicated problem, demanding solution of the
kinetic equation for multicomponent composition distribution function [10]. Proposed
approach is based upon the following simple assumptions: if the droplet spectrum is
divided into several size classes, fraction of the chemical species redistributed due to
the microphysical processes is proportional to the ratio of the droplet mass flux
between classes to the total droplet mass class contains. Nevertheless it allows
obtaining satisfactory results using relatively small computer resources.
Calculation showed that the main effect of the convective cloud on the chemical
composition of the air is the depletion of the well-dissolved species concentrations
and their removal by precipitation. The transformation of aqueous species in different
size droplets due to their coagulation is very important for the cloud and precipitation

Numerical Simulation of Cloud Dynamics and Microphysics

175

chemistry. The vertical transport in the convective cloud may affect essentially the
vertical distribution of chemical species of the troposphere, especially if there is a
surface pollution source.
Test calculations showed that the method application for simulation intensive
collection at high aerosol particle concentrations required essential reduction of the
time step for obtaining positive solution. For overcoming this constraint the following
modification of the initial scheme was proposed. A solution is obtaining in two stages
as the time step is splitting. On the first stage the following equation is solved (see
[9]):

M nj +1 / 2 − M nj

= − S −j ,

∆t

(1)

where Mj – aerosol particle mass in the interval mj-1/2, mj+1/2, mj, j=0,1,…,N –
coordinates of the grid points in the mass space.

S −j =

N −1

∑S

−
jl

(2)

l =1

S −jl = K (m j , ml )

M nj+1/ 2 M ln

(3)

ml

K(mj,ml) – is collection kernel.
Solution of the equation (1) is as follows:

M

n +1 / 2
j

=

M nj
N −1

1 + ∆t ∑ K (m j , ml ) M ln / ml

(4)

l =1

The further calculations are conducted according to the formulas:

M nj+1 − M nj
∆t

S +j =

= S +j − S −j

N −1 N −1

∑ ∑S

(5)

+
jkl

(6)

+
S gjl
= α gjl S −jl

(7)

k =1 l =1

176

E.N. Stankova and M.A. Zatevakhin

α gjl

 mg +1 − m j − ml
at mg < m j + ml ≤ mg +1
 m −m
g +1
g

 m + ml − mg −1
= j
at mg −1 < m j + ml ≤ mg
 mg − mg −1
0
in the other cases




(8)

It is easy to show that

(

)

M nj +1 = M nj + ∆t S +j − S −j = M nj − ∆tS −j + ∆tS +j = M nj +1 / 2 + ∆tS +j ,

(9)

Test calculations showed that at relatively small time step the solution obtained by
explicit and implicit schemes practically coincided. At large time step implicit scheme
produces a certain error. Nevertheless it provides positive solution at any time step (as
it is clear from [8]) and guarantees mass conservation similar to the original scheme.

3 Algorithms Used in the Two–Dimensional Model
The numerical study of the convective flows developing in extreme conditions was
based upon the system of equations of the turbulent convection, described in detail in
[11] and [12]. In case of deep convection, especially associated with the extreme
conditions, the problem is strengthen by the presence of crucial variations of the
system thermodynamic parameters. At such conditions the conventional Boussinesq
approximation becomes unjustified and one has to use the full compressible Navier Stokes equations. However at low Mach numbers typical for clouds convection, these
equations becomes acoustically "stiff" and their solution presents an extremely
complicated computational problem [13]. Besides, one of the most difficult physical
issues associated with the cloud dynamics modeling is an appropriate treatment of
turbulent transport. A turbulence model used for this purpose should be capable of
providing an adequate description of the strong stream-line curvature, flow rotation,
and buoyancy effects being crucial in deep clouds convection.
Two-dimensional model is the model based upon the solution of equations, describing
the axisymmetric turbulent flow of compressible two-phase two-component medium
considering condensation of water vapour and precipitation formation. The model is
appropriate for the description of the flows with arbitrary vertical scales and
temperature variations. The description of the processes of turbulent mixing is
provided with the help of k-ε model modified by taking into account the influence of
the streamline curvature and buoyancy forces. It was shown in [11], that for the
correct description of the stratified flows one of the constants in the k-ε turbulence
model should have different values in the stable and unstable conditions. The
alternative directions scheme is used for the numerical solution of the system of
equations. The suppression of the nonphysical oscillations is provided by means of
the specially elaborated monotonization procedures [14] Calculation of the processes
of turbulent energy generation and dissipation is separated in the additional step of the

Numerical Simulation of Cloud Dynamics and Microphysics

177

splitting procedure, where fully explicit scheme is used. As the dimensions of the
disturbed region of calculation vary greatly, the simulations were performed in the
domain with movable external boundaries where movable grid with fixed number of
points was inserted. The model is intended for the investigations of the flows
developing at the presence of high-energy sources on the ground surface or in the air.
As a matter of fact this problem is converged to the simulation of the buoyant thermal
rising in the stratified medium.
The numerical simulation provided with this model allowed to obtain the description
of all stages of the thermal evolution, including the stage of its transformation to the
buoyant vortex ring, which is characterized by the fully coincidence of the regions of
maximum temperature and maximum vorticity. Such structure is preserved till the end
of the thermal rising when its speed begins to decrease due to the generation of the
secondary vortex system in the stable stratified atmosphere.
For taking into account the phase transitions of the water vapor the main model
equations are written for the general case of two-phase two-component flow
movement. In this case the processes of cloud droplets evaporation-condensation were
described in the equilibrium approach, for the description of precipitation formation
the Kessler parameterization scheme was used. Moist convection numerical
experiments results showed, that while thermal ascending the condensed water once
appeared in the updraft region near the axis of symmetry propagates then to the whole
cloud volume. The further cloud evolution depends essentially upon the
environmental conditions. When the relative humidity of the air is more than 50% in
the lower 5km atmospheric layer release of the latent heat of condensation resulted in
the development of the convective flow similar to that in the natural convective
clouds. In the regions of high water content the formation of the precipitation particles
capable to reach the ground takes place.
This model appended with the equations describing the aerosol-droplet interaction
[15] was used for the investigations of the vertical transport of the aerosol particle
injected in the atmosphere as a result of the powerful explosion. The results of
numerical experiments showed that the process of so called «nucleation coalescence»
[16] is responsible for the rate of the capture of the large aerosol particles by the cloud
drops. Regions with low concentration of dry aerosol particles locate near cloud lower
boundary and under the vortex core, where the ambient air is involved into the cloud.

4 Conclusions
Several numerical algorithms intended for simulation of dynamical, microphysical
and chemical processes in convective clouds are presented. The algorithms provide
development and operation of adequate cloud models and effective codes of their
numerical realization. Special technique elaborated for supercomputer applications
allows conducting a wide set of numerical experiments with reasonable/affordable
computation resources. Wide set of numerical experiments was conducted aimed to
investigate the processes of pollutant source formation transport and transformation.

178

E.N. Stankova and M.A. Zatevakhin

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.

Trembley A. and Leighton H.: A three-dimensional cloud chemistry model. J. Clim. Appl.
Meteorol. 25 (1986) 652–671
Roelofs G.J.: Drop size dependent sulphate distribution in a growing cloud. J.Atm.Chem.
14 (1992) 109–118
Wang C. and Chang J.S.: A three-dimensional numerical model of cloud dynamics,
microphysics, and chemistry, 1. Concepts and Formulation. J. Geophys. Res. 98 (1993)
14827–14844
Gregoire P.J. et al.: Impact of cloud dynamics on tropospheric chemistry: advances in
modeling the interactions between microphysical and chemical processes.
J.Atmosph.Chem. 18 (1994) 247–266
Audiffren N. et al.: Effects of a polidiaperse cloud on tropospheric chemistry.
J.Geophys.Res. 101 (1996) 25949–25966
Guiciullo C.S. and Pandis S.N.: Effect of composition variations in cloud droplet
populations on aqueous-phase chemistry. J.Geophys.Res. 102 (1997) 9375–9385
Shiino, J.: A numerical study of precipitation development in cumulus clouds.
Pap.Met.Geophys. 29 (4) (1978) 157–194
Karol I. L., Zatevakhin M. A., Ozhigina N. A., Ozolin Y. E., Ramaroson R., Rozanov
E.V., Stankova E.N.: A model of dynamical, microphysical and photochemical processes
in a convective cloud. (In Russian) Izvestia FAO 36 (6) (2000) 1–16
Stankova E.N., Zatevakhin M.A.: The modified Kovetz and Olund method for the
th
numerical solution of stochastic coalescence equation. Proceedings 12 International
Conference on Clouds and Precipitation. Zurich (1996) 921–923
Gelbard F., Seinfeld J.H.: Simulation of Multicomponent Aerosol Dynamics. Journal of
Colloidal and Interface Science 78 (9) (1980)
Dovgalyuk Yu.A., Zatevakhin M.A., Stankova E.N.: Numerical simulation of buoyant
thermal using k-e model. J.Appl. Met. 33 (1994) 1118–1126.
Zatevakhin M.A.: Turbulent Thermal in a Humid Atmosphere High Temperature. 39 (4)
(2001) 532–539
Kuznetsov A., Niculin D., Strelets M., Zatevakhin M.: 3D Simulation of the Interaction
between Large Thermally Buoyant Clouds in the Earth Atmosphere. In Proceedings of the
Second European Computational Fluid Dynamics Conference Stuttgart (1994) 1010–1017
Zatevakhin M.A., Stankova E.N.: Monotonization of finite-difference schemes of
numerical solution of hydrodynamics equations. Tr.Gl.Geofiz.Obs. 534 (1991) 73–86. (in
Russian)
Stankova E.N., Zatevakhin M.A.: Investigation of aerosol-droplet interaction in the mature
th
convective clouds using the two-dimensional model. Proceedings 14 Int. Conf.
Nucleation and Atm.Aeros. Helsinki (1996) 901–903.
Bradley, M.M.: Numerical simulation of nucleation scavenging within smoke plume
above large fires. Proceedings Int. Conf. Energy Transform. Lausanne .(1987)

