Learning Surgical Interventions by Navigating in
Virtual Reality Case Spaces
Piet Kommers, Steffan Rödel, Jan-Maarten Luursema, Bob Geelkerken, and Eelco Kunst
University of Twente, Faculty of Behavioral Sciences
Medical Spectrum Hospital
Kunst en v Leerdam
Enschede, The Netherlands

Abstract. Virtual Reality is becoming a serious candidate for a learning
environment for complex skills like vascular interventions. The diagnostics,
dimensioning and insertion of the endograft stent has been modeled as a
decision making process and now faces its implementation in a VR learning
space.

1 Introduction
The DIME project (Distributed Interactive Medical Exploratorium for 3D Medical
Images) aims at conceptualizing, implementing and researching the effectiveness of a
VR-based pre-surgical planning and teaching environment. The DIME explorations
aim at a pre-surgical planning and teaching applications, which will most likely result
in better post-surgical results, lower health care costs and increased efficiency in the
training of fellow-surgeons. The project is a collaboration of a ‘computer science’
group from the University of Amsterdam (UvA)1, a ‘medically oriented computer
science’ group from the Leiden University Medical Center (LUMC)2, a ‘cognition’
group from the University of Twente (UT) and medical specialists from LUMC) and
The Medical Spectrum Twente.

2 Surgical Training in Virtual Reality
The surplus of surgical training skills as well as being oriented in medical disciplines
like anatomy, histology, physiology etc is evident. The optimization of its
professional training elements needs to most complete repertoire of learning
technology like the media spectrum and the full repertoire of new learning paradigms.
1 Prof Dr. P. Sloot (UvA) and Dr. E. Zudilova

2 Prof Dr. JHC Reiber (RUL) and Dr. J. Schaap

P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2659, pp. 1015−1024, 2003.
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

1016 P. Kommers et al.

The aim of this paper is to show the compatibility between the most advanced
visualization methods currently feasible for the average desktop work stations [2].
The overall conception is that the clinical training will gradually be extended with VR
learning systems, in order to make the supervised real operations more effective and
safe.
2.1 Relevance of Virtual Reality
1.

Surgical techniques have become increasingly complex, thus making the
learning curve to master these techniques steeper and longer.
2. More complex intervention techniques are rapidly developed and introduced in
the daily practice.
3. The conventional surgical teaching method is a close daily working relation
between the experienced teacher (trainer) and the unskilled pupil (trainee).
4. In traditional teaching the steep learning curve takes place during the interaction
with real patients.
5. The modern patient does not accept any mutilation attributed neither to the
disease nor to the intervention.
6. It is clear that a perfect preoperative visualization and planning, and rehearsals
of these interventions are essential.
7. This means that while there is an increased demand for surgical training,
experienced surgeons have increasingly less time and opportunity to cope with
this demand. A dedicated medical VE is badly needed to lift this burden from
their shoulders.
8. Of importance is also the possibility to allow trainees to explore critical
situations and to let them experiment with an underlying model of the
phenomena and processes in the human body, without the stress of having to
deal with an actual patient.
9. Virtual surgical tools should be available for life-long medical education and
assessment of the surgical consultant.
10. Based upon the disappointing experiences with “Intelligent Tutoring Systems”
in the ‘80ies we do not want to undertake the paradigm of “training dummy
mannequins” as it lacks the notions of “continuous learning” and the “surgeon as
active problem solver”.

2.2 The Urgency for Laparoscopic Interventions
Nowadays the laparoscopic cholecystectomy is the preferred technique in many
hospitals. However, the majority of the surgeons performing laparoscopic
cholecystectomies are autodidactic. They heard about the technique on congresses.
They visited clinical demonstrations in centres of excellence. Thereafter they planned
the first procedures in their own hospital. It is not surprising that the results are not as
good as reported in the literature in the early periods. The steep learning curve was
moved on patients. A sufficient training and formal assessment of the surgical team

Learning Surgical Interventions by Navigating in Virtual Reality Case Spaces 1017

before introducing the new technique into the hospital is not available. Moreover,
more complex intervention techniques are rapidly developed and introduced in the
daily practice. An example of this is the endovascular exclusion of infernal aortic
aneurysms with an endograft. Cuijper recently reported in his thesis that only after an
endovascular experience of 30 electively treated triple A the complication ratio is
sloping down to acceptable levels. In the Netherlands only a few hospitals have such
an experience. Also the first ruptured aortic aneurysms are treated in the endovascular
way with a very good outcome.
However, this emergency procedure demands a large endovascular experienced
team available during day and night. Gaining enough experience with this procedure
is not possible in most of the hospitals in the Netherlands. Unfortunately, it is not
possible to transport patient with a ruptured triple A to centres of excellence because
of hemodynamical instability. In other words, the patients do not survive delay of
treatment due to transportation. The next generation, more complex endografts with
the possibility of perirenal sealing is underway. The results of the first clinical
experiments came from “down under”. It is clear that a perfect preoperative
visualisation and planning and a dummy operation of the whole procedure is essential.
2.3 The Urgency for Training in Virtual Reality
The conventional and still actual surgical teaching method, introduced more than a
century ago, is a close daily working relation between the practised teacher (a
consultant surgeon) and the unskilled pupil (the surgical resident). Working-weeks of
70 to 90 hours were accepted and after 6 years of gaining theoretical and especially
practical skills under direct supervision of the consultant the resident becomes a
surgeon. Nowadays our society does not accept such long periods of formal learning
and the working week is shortened to a maximum of 48 hours. This results in a 40%
decline of directly supervised practical experience of residents in their first years of
surgical training. Moreover, the government asked the surgical society to offer the
basic surgical training in only 5 years!
On the other side the same government makes laws as the BIG and the WGBO.
The surgeons are obliged to be qualified (formal licensed) and to be skilled and
properly trained to offer and execute an intervention to or on a patient. Due to the
“Schengen convention” there is a right of free establishing of the citizens of the
European community in the participating countries. The formal training of resident
and consultants in the European countries showed large diversities. Objective and
proper methods for assessment and comparison of the outcome of the surgical training
in the European countries are not available. It is clear that the conventional surgical
teaching methods do not fulfil the demands of patients, the society, the government
and the surgical profession. New training methods have to be developed.
The development of virtual reality surgical tools for theoretical and practical
training and assessment of the resident is urgent [4]. Moreover, virtual surgical tools
should be available for life-long medical education and assessment of the surgical
consultant maintaining a high level of expertise and skills in the profession. This

1018 P. Kommers et al.

project intends to contribute to the steep increasing need for practical training and
objective assessment for the surgeon in training.
2.4 Goals of the DIME Project
1.

2.

3.

4.

To create a VR learning environment that allows surgical trainees to both
practice their skills in the ’Operating Room’ Virtual Environment (VE) and
enhance their understanding of the procedure under study by using the
’Library’ VE or the peer-to-peer chat function [5].
DIME aims at identifying the more ’objective’ training elements that need to
be conveyed before the constructionistic learning starts. This is the reason
that the first stage arranges teams with the various expertises that play a role
for the definition of the anchoring points in the training of the future surgeon
[7].
Most of the VR projects have invested in the actual building of the models
and have no didactic interface yet. The DIME project sees this need and aims
at defining a generic instructional method that intermediates between a VR
medical model and a novice who needs to understand and optimize its
functioning.
To specify and evaluate VR elements for the pre-clinical training phase of
novices in artery surgery.

3 A-priory Expert System for Risk-Evaluation of Endovascular
Stent Prosthesis Placement
The VREST3 group has undertaken the formalization of dimensioning the stent
orthesis for the AAA patients. In order to obtain an uncomplicated passage and a
lasting exclusion of an infrarenal abdominal aorta aneurysm (AAA) through
endovascular placement of a stent-prosthesis, one has to take into account many
unique anatomical properties of the aortic-iliac-femoral trajectory and many unique
properties of the stent prosthesis.
Because of this large amount of relevant anatomical and stent-prosthestic variables
it is not easy, even for the experienced clinician to make the correct assessment. A
validated stent-prosthesis expert system can offer support to the clinician in choosing
between endovascular and transabdominal exclusion of the AAA. Such a system can
also offer support in choosing the optimal type of stent-prosthesis, and in planning the
procedure.

3

The members of the VREST team (VREST: Virtual Reality Educational Surgical Tools) (Rödel SGJ,
Kunst EE, Teijink JAW, Herwaarden JA van, Berg JC van den, Oude Groothuis P, Moll F, Palen J van der,
Huisman A, Det RJ van, Geelkerken RH)

Learning Surgical Interventions by Navigating in Virtual Reality Case Spaces 1019

3.1 Goal
The goal of this prior study was the validation of a custom developed stentprosthesis expert system. The anatomical AAA criteria were measured in 202 patients
from two endovascular centers. Every AAA was divided in ten segments; suprarenal
aorta, infrarenal aorta, aneurysm, aorta bifuration, right, left and common iliac artery
and common left and right artery. For each segment, the following characteristics
were recorded: length, thrombus, sclerosis, angulation and configuration. These 202
AAA’s were then judged by five endovascular trained clinicians on anatomical fitness
for placing the stent prosthesis [6].

Fig. 1. The Stent Orthesis for the AAA Patients
Table 1. Correspondence Between the Clinicians and the Expert System
Agreement

False positive

False negative

Discussion

Surgeon 1

73.4

0.0

1.7

24.9

Surgeon 2

75.5

0.7

2.5

21.3

Surgeon 3

73.7

0.0

1.8

24.7

Radiologist 1

70.6

0.5

4.2

24.8

Radiologist 2

64.8

0.0

8.1

27.1

Total

71.6

0.2

3.7

24.6

Agreement:

Same advice clinician and expert system.

False positive:

Advice clinician = no intervention, advice expert system = intervention.

False negative:

Advice clinician = intervention, advice expert system = no intervention.

Discussion:

Advice clinician = high risk intervention, expert system = no intervention

The chances for successful sealing were independently expressed in ‘complication
rating’ for each AAA by five clinicians and the expert program. The complication
rating was divided in 0% to 59% (low to intermediate risk), 60% to 94% (intermediate
to high risk), 95% to 98% (very high risk), 99% (practically impossible) and 100%
(impossible) to obtain sealing. It was allowed to choose between all configurations of
three commercially available stent-prostheses. A total of 3030 AAA assessments were

1020 P. Kommers et al.

given by the five clinicians. These were compared to the assessments of the expert
system.

Fig. 2. Abdominal aorta aneurysm anatomical data input screen

3.2 Results and Preliminary Conclusion
There appeared to be a good correspondence between the assessments of the
clinicians and the expert system as finally visualized as in Figure 2. Specifically the
chances for an incorrect positive advice from the expert system are minimal (1:500
assessments). In case of a high complication rating the expert system tends to advise
negative on stent placement in more cases then the experienced clinician does.

Fig. 3. Discrete Modeling Rational for the go-no go and the Dimensioning of the Stent Artifact

The basic underlying rational for the go-no go and the dimensioning of the stent
artifact has been certified in this way. The envisaged DIME project plans the support

Learning Surgical Interventions by Navigating in Virtual Reality Case Spaces 1021

of the 3D aspects of the particular patient in concern. Both the experienced and the
novice vascular surgeon will increase effectiveness and task efficiency as the MRA
images are transformed into three-dimensional models that can be inspected for
critical morphologies and to anticipate better to the actual medical intervention.
3.3 Initial Architecture of the Proposed VR Learning Context
The surgical skills and its continuous sophistication; how should it benefit ideally
from the virtual Operating Room? In this practice “space” (at the right side of Figure
2) the cycle goes around diagnosis, prepare and execute the intervention. But at
unforeseen moments we expect that students consult a library of domain expertise.
Based on the log data generated by this VE,
- the coach and trainee can evaluate his/her progress and set out an
appropriate personal learning path
- the coach can extract general trends in learning of his/her trainees, as well
as differences in learning styles of individual trainees.
Though the overall of this architecture looks adequate and robust, we decided not
to adopt it basically, because of the suggested antagonism between the two [2]. More
adequate and fair seemed the model where the learning between the various
approaches due to variations in patients and the subsequent surgeon experts and the
various trainees was the central core of the learning.

Fig. 4. The interplay between the students’theory versus skill-driven learning

The alternative to the theory/practice model above was left behind and the key idea
for the VR training space was called “Interconnected Expertise”. It aims at bring the

1022 P. Kommers et al.

novice in a quasi continuum of surgical interventions. Learning in this space allows a
fluent transition between patients, surgeons and various stages in the intervention. The
more natural one is by tracing the treatment by one surgeon in one patient through the
natural chronology of the operation. But there are good reasons to switch between
patients as it shows typical morphologies that clarify the reason why the initial
treatment was needed there [1].

4 Imagining VR as Interconnected Expertise
VR as representation of the targeted object world may be propagated sufficiently.
More intriguing is the question how learners may benefit from the prior experts and
successful peer-learners. This question was recently addressed and came to the idea
that three main dimensions need to be articulated before a meaningful navigation by
the learner may take place.

4

Episodes of procedur

3

episode 4
episode 3

2

episode 2
1

episode 1
1

2

3

4

Trainees (quality range)

Fig. 5. Three main dimensions for allowing the learner to navigate in prior vascular interventions

1. The first dimension (called Cases) is the set of indexed patients who vary
from obeying the prototypical standard medical problem as listed in the study books;
in this case the abdominal aorta aneurism is clearly there, but with a minimum of
complicated side effects and the patients is in a good overall condition. At the other
end of the continuum there is the patient who suffers from a severe AAA phenomena,
but at the same time a large number of constraining factors can be discerned like
stenosis, aneurisms before and after the bifurcation and a complex artery morphology

Learning Surgical Interventions by Navigating in Virtual Reality Case Spaces 1023

2. The second dimension (called Trainees) varies between the highlyexperienced vascular surgeons who performed in the Endograft stent VR model quite
punctual and highly correct AAA interventions, to most of the embedded cases. At the
other end of this dimension one can find recorded AAA interventions by freshmen
demonstrating the many thinkable flaws. At each of the suboptimal interventions the
ultimate surgeon marked the reason of labeling the flaw as being suboptimal and
activates links to the real good solutions that should have been made.
3. The third dimension (called Episode 1..n) captures the subsequent stages in
the AAA intervention. Two criteria for ordering them can be taken: The chronology
of sub actions from early to later, versus the ordering from easy to complex.
Analytical and experimental validation still needs to be performed in order to make a
sensible choice here. In any case following the strict order of this dimension allows
the learner to follow the prior interventions in it chronological order.

5 Conclusion
Though virtual reality is one of the prime candidates in vitalizing learning by its
realism and direct appeal to the students’ natural affordance to act upon urgencies
rather than to “know” what experts are saying; VR in itself is not enough to make the
learning more effective. By logic: Realism in VR does not suffice to exceed the real
situation itself. We know from for instance link trainers for airplane pilots that the
simulation can be more effective, once it elicits the novice to go into critically
complex situations; exactly those situations that we never hope to meet in reality. Its
added value is not only that the learner’s reflexes are trained to survive in the panic of
preciously decisive seconds. Its value is also that after all the fundamental
understanding of complex mechanisms can best be understood if the learner is
allowed to walk on the edge of what is a success versus a failure.

References
1.
2.

3.
4.

Beck K. and Cunningham W. (1989), A laboratory for teaching object-oriented thinking.
In Proc. OOPSLA’89, ACM Sigplan Notices 17(4), pp. 1-6.
Kommers, P.A.M & Zhiming, Z.; (1998) Conceptual Support with Virtual Reality in Webbased Learning. (Co-author Zhao Zhiming). In: International Journal of Continuing
Engineering Education and Life-Long Learning. ISSN 0957-4344. Volume 8, No 1/2. pp
184-204.
Kommers, P.A.M.; (2003). Experiential Learning through Constructivist Learning Tools.
In: International Journal of Computers and Applications, Vol. 25, No 1, 2003. (pp 1-12).
ACTA Press. ISSN: 1206-212X (202).
Lanier, Jaron; (1992). Virtual Reality: The Promise of the Future. In: Interactive Learning
International, v8 n4 p275-79 Oct-Dec 1992 ISSN: 0748-5743.

1024 P. Kommers et al.

5.

6.
7.

McLellan, Hilary (1995) 6p.;Magical Stories: Blending Virtual Reality and Artificial
Intelligence In: Imagery and Visual Literacy: Selected Readings from the Annual
Conference of the International Visual Literacy Association (26th, Tempe, Arizona,
October 12- 16, 1994).
Moshell, J.M., and Hughes, C.E. (1994, January). Shared Virtual Worlds for Education.
Virtual Reality World, 2 (1), 63-74.
Psotka, Joseph; Immersive Training Systems: Virtual Reality and Education and Training.
In: Instructional Science, v23 n5-6 p405-31 Nov 1995. ISSN: 0020-4277.

