Measurement Models for Survivability and
Competitiveness of Very Large E-marketplace
Jingzhi Guo and Chengzheng Sun
School of Computing and Information Technology, Griffith University
Nathan, QLD 4111, Australian
{J.Guo, C.Sun}@cit.gu.edu.au

Abstract. E-Marketplace is a man-made profit center with emergent customer
requirements. This emergence nature poses many difficulties for e-marketplace
to satisfy its customers and thus affects its survivability and competitiveness.
To challenge this issue, this paper has introduced a novel emergent emarketplace model, and analyzed and quantified the emergent properties of emarketplace from simple ESMs to very large complex electronic intermediary
EIMs. The measurement models developed in this paper are very useful for
producing dynamic interaction records appropriate for further simulation model
of e-marketplaces.

1

Introduction

Business-to-business electronic marketplace (e-marketplace) is man-made, which
involves costs [8] such as setup cost, maintenance fees, content creation fees,
telecommunication link fees and software development fees [10], and needs revenues
such as service fees [7] to offset the costs and earn profits for survivals and increasing
market competition ability. To achieve this enterprise goal, the best practice is to
satisfy customer requirements to deliver the needed services [1], [3], [5], [11].
However, an e-marketplace is an emergent organization, a very large distributed
Internet application that supports the mediation of sellers and buyers (simply called as
“customers”) to finish business deals, in which customers’ requirements are in
continuous change [2], [6]. This changing nature results in difficulties in capturing
customer requirements to design an e-marketplace system [4].
To challenge the above issue, an e-marketplace must be continuously analyzed,
measured and dynamically negotiated with customers about emergent requirements.
System structure must be flexible to adapt to the incomplete and ambiguous
specifications for continuous redevelopment of emergent e-marketplace [12].
Nevertheless, despite the widespread adoption and active roles that e-marketplaces
have played, to our best knowledge there is no direct work published on the formal
analysis of the emergent e-marketplace requirements for survivability and
competitiveness. It is not clear what indicators should be adopted to measure
survivability and competitiveness and what properties should be considered to design
and simulate an emergent e-marketplace.
P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2658, pp. 802−811, 2003.
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

Measurement Models for Survivability and Competitiveness

803

The purpose of this paper, therefore, is to undertake a formal analysis of the
requirements for emergent e-marketplaces to quantify the measurements of what are
the key factors to the survivability and competitiveness of an emergent e-marketplace.
In the rest of this paper, Section 2 will introduce a novel but generic model of
emergent e-marketplace. In Section 3, we will develop the key survivability
measurements of a single seller/buyer owned e-marketplace. Section 4 analyzes the
key competitiveness measurements of an electronic intermediary e-marketplace.
Finally in Section 5, a conclusion will be given and future work will be mentioned.

2

Emergent E-marketplace

An emergent e-marketplace is a shared reality in which actors continuously interact
with each other to achieve a common goal, lowering business cost and increase
revenue but for their own [12]. This shared reality forms the current abstract shape of
an e-marketplace and therefore exposes a set of fixed requirements to support the
existence of the e-marketplace. These requirements are the “persistent properties
(PP)” to satisfy the existence of an e-marketplace. In contrast, the emergent
requirements of actors make the e-marketplace in constant negotiation and in
continuous change by referencing the original e-marketplace identity. We call these
emergent requirements as “emergent properties (EP)”, which are the forces to make
an e-marketplace fluid.
2.1

Persistent Properties

Persistent properties of an e-marketplace can be derived by the analysis of the
commonalities and differences between traditional market and e-marketplace.
Traditional market is defined as “an arrangement by which buyers and sellers of a
commodity interact to determine its price and quantity” [9]. The resemblance between
an e-marketplace and a traditional market is that both have products, sellers, buyers,
and an arrangement for trading interactions. The difference is the means of how to
arrange interaction for sellers and buyers. In traditional market, sellers and buyers
interact by face-to-face meeting, verbal or written descriptions of their products to
deliver trading information. In e-marketplace, product information is delivered and
shared between sellers and buyers in electronic representations via network (generally
Internet). Sharing electronic product representations is fundamental to transform a
traditional market to an e-marketplace and is the primary task and condition to build
an e-marketplace. Although transactional (such as negotiation and payment) and
institutional functions (such as legal systems) are often in e-marketplace definition
domain [1], they are not the primary task to make e-marketplace alive. So only sellers
S, buyers B, products P, electronic product representations R, and public accessible
network N are considered as persistent properties of an e-marketplace. These
persistent properties exist in the lifetime of an emergent e-marketplace.
The persistent properties are footstones of an e-marketplace. Applying for them,
we define an e-marketplace as an emergent two-stage functional business
organization on Internet. Its first stage functions are about e-matching by forming an

804

J. Guo and C. Sun

e-marketplace. Its second stage functions are about e-trading by realizing
transactional and institutional functions. E-matching is fundamental to e-trading and
has two major tasks: e-representation defined as electronically representing realworld products into machine-readable and multi-firm sharable data, and e-mapping
defined as logically mapping sellers’ and buyers’ electronic product representations
into e-tradable forms for trade interactions. In this paper we focus our analysis on the
e-matching stage and assume that the profitability of e-trading stage is proportional to
the efforts of e-matching stage. So the survivability and competitiveness of an emarketplace is thus dependent on how the first stage tasks are fulfilled.
2.2

Persistent Relationships

Persistent properties are not enough to understand how an e-marketplace operates.
Only relationships between persistent properties, persistent relationships (PR), reflect
the operation of an e-marketplace.
PR 1: Sellers S owns a set of products SP ⊆ P, expressed as S Own SP.
PR 2: Buyers B owns a set of products BP ⊆ P, expressed as B Own BP.
PR 3: A set of sellers’ products SEP ⊆ SP is electronically represented as SER,
expressed as SEP RepAs SER.
PR 4: A set of buyers’ products BEP ⊆ BP is electronically represented as BER,
expressed as BEP RepAs BER.
PR 5: A set of sellers’ product representations SER is displayed on N, expressed as
SER DispOn N
PR 6: A set of buyers’ product representations BER is displayed on N, expressed as
BER DispOn N.
These six relationships are persistent during the lifetime of an e-marketplace. The
sum of them defines an e-marketplace.
Definition 1 (Emergent E-marketplace “EEM”): An emergent e-marketplace EEM
exists if and only if there exist persistent relationships PR1 and PR2 and PR3 and PR4
and PR5 and PR6.
2.3

Emergent Properties and Relationships

Definition 1 provides a static framework and existent conditions of an EEM. To study
how an EEM is emergent, we assume that there is a mechanism to make a market
arrangement for sellers S and buyers B to interact [9], which is called as interaction
mechanism I and releases a dynamic force, originated from sellers S or buyers B,
acted on network N to have S and B interacting each other. The effects that I generates
are the normalized emergent requirements (emergent properties EP) of customers.
The fundamental relationships between EPs (emergent relationship ER) are:
− When an EP generates a set of positive effects, a set of persistent properties (PPs)
change themselves in quantity with favorable outcomes for an EEM and further
generate a new set of EPs to require EEM to adapt to them.

Measurement Models for Survivability and Competitiveness

805

− When an EP generates a set of negative effects, a set of PPs change themselves in
quantity with unfavorable outcomes for an EEM and further generate a new set of
EPs to require the EEM to improve them.
− If the effects that a set of EPs generates lead to any PP disappeared in an EEM
such that the quantity of the PP goes to zero, then the EEM is dead.
2.4

EEM Operational Model

To describe the interactions between sellers and buyers and to quantify the emergent
requirements of an EEM, we define the following interactive relationships:
Definition 2 (Logical Intersection “I”): Given three sets of emergent properties X, Y
and Ixy, then Ixy = X I Y, called X logically intersected with Y at Ixy if and only if (1) X
is originated from S, Y is originated from B and Ixy is originated from I, and (2) Ixy
logically agrees with both at least zero number of X and at least zero number of Y.
Definition 3 (Interaction Model): An EEM is said to be interactive if and only if (1)
there exists an I, and (2) a set ER is generated based on Ixy = X I Y and ER ≠ ∅.
Emergent relationships are generated in the process of continuous interactions
between sellers and buyers. The matched results by interaction mechanism of their
emergent requirements become the emergent properties and they further require an
EEM to react.
Corollary 1: If I is missing in an EEM, then an EEM generates no EP and is static as
Definition 1, then it only provides the e-representation service such as a plain online
product catalogue displaying product information.
Corollary 1 shows an interactive EEM is conditional to the existence of I. Actually
different I qualities lead to different types of EEMs:
Table 1. Types of Electronic Marketplaces

No
EEM Type
EEM Owner
1 One seller, multiple buyers
Seller
2 One buyer, multiple sellers
Buyer
3 Multiple buyers, multiple sellers Third-party market provider
Type 1 and type 2 are most common. Each company website can be regarded as an
EEM as it at least provides e-representation service if they do not provide interaction
mechanism. Type 3 is the advanced form of type 1 and 2. It aggregates multiple
sellers and buyers and runs by a separate firm to serve as an e-marketplace via
interaction mechanism.

3

Survivability Analysis

In this section, we will first study the simplest e-marketplace, type 1 and 2 of EEMs
and refer them as “ESM”. To unveil how they survive, we begin by investigating how
the emergent properties generated by a seller’s or buyer’s interaction mechanism I
affect their survivability.

806

3.1

J. Guo and C. Sun

Tradability Analysis

Given an emergent ESM, then its I generates an emergent property – tradability. This
part describes how it is generated and affects the ESM’s market efficiency.
Definition 4 (Total Marketing Size “TMS”): ESM total marketing size TMS is defined
as the sum of SER and BER defined in PR3 and PR4, or expressed as (SER + BER).
TMS reflects an ESM’s total market scale at a certain time.
Definition 5 (Tradable Product Representations “T”): Given SER and BER defined in
PR 3 and PR 4, a set of product representations T is called “tradable” if and only if T
= SER I BER.
T determines the current exchangeable products between sellers and buyers. It
reflects how many electronically represented products are actually tradable.
Definition 6 (Tradability “T”): Given T and TMS defined in definition 4 and 5, the
tradability T in an ESM is measured as:
T = T / (TMS – T)

(1)

Tradability measures the capability of an EEM to link sellers and buyers together
for trading. It tells how efficient an ESM to satisfy customers’ emergent requirements
to match the product of sellers or buyers. The ESM’s market efficiency measured by
T is dependent on the capability of interaction mechanism I either provided by sellers
or buyers that assists the conversion and mapping of product representations.
3.2

Profitability Analysis

A fully efficient ESM may not be necessarily profitable in an emergent e-business
environment. For example, the increase of tradability may be increased by decreasing
both T and TMS and decrease total profit. As a profit center, an important emergent
property – profitability realized at the seller/buyer’s interaction mechanism must be
introduced to measure and control cost and revenue. To analyze, we assume:
Assumption 1: A piece of electronic product representation Ri ⊆ TMS defined in
Definition 4 has an average cost AC.
Assumption 2: A piece of electronic tradable product representation Ti defined in
definition 5 generates an average revenue AR.
Immediately, we have two corollaries:
Corollary 2: If given total marketing size TMS defined in definition 4, then according
to Assumption 1, an ESM’s total cost TC = TMS*AC.
Corollary 3: If given a set of tradable product representations T defined in definition
5, then according to assumption 2, an ESM’s total revenue TR = T*AR.
These assumptions and corollaries enable us to define profitability.
Definition 7 (Profitability “P”): Given TC and TR derived from Corollary 2 and 3, the
profitability of an ESM is measured as:
P = (TR – TC) / TR

(2)

Corollary 4: If profitability P ≤ 0, then an ESM is in difficulty to survive. If
profitability P > 0, then an ESM is in a favorable survival position. If P goes to 1, then

Measurement Models for Survivability and Competitiveness

807

the cost of an ESM goes to 0 and the ESM tends to be frictionless like the traditional
market assuming that market is efficient and no informational cost.
Obviously, the profitability of ESM is positively proportional to the tradable
product representations T and negatively proportional to the total market size TMS.
However high profitability may not contribute to improving tradability if both TMS
and T remain constant but the unit revenue of T is increased when a seller or buyer
adopts a radical profit strategy or the ESM tends to be frictionless.
3.3

Survivability Analysis

The analysis of Section 3.1 and 3.2 shows the tradability and profitability may
independently increase or decrease. It suggests that we must further develop
survivability to include the joint effects of the above two emergent properties.
Definition 8 (Survivability “S”): At a given time if profitability is P and tradability is
T, then the survivability is.
S = P*T

(3)

Survivability reflects at a given time the quality of an ESM in terms of e-market
efficiency and profits. To further analyze the dynamic effects of tradability and
profitability, we gather a time series of survivability data to reflect the changes of an
ESM’s survivability.
Definition 9 (Market Growth Rate “G”): If from time ta to tb, survivability is from Sa
to Sb, then the market growth rate is:.
G = (Sb – Sa) / (tb – ta)

(4)

Market growth rate reflects the ability of an ESM to cope with the long-run
emergent ESM requirements.
Corollary 5: If G is positive, an ESM is in a favorable survival condition. If G is
negative, an ESM is in an unfavorable survival condition.
In summary, an ESM’s survivability depends on the emergent requirements of
tradability and profitability. However, it is worth to note that the live of an ESM may
be independent of survivability in that a seller/buyer may only want to benefit from
the e-representation to display products as promotional purpose.

4

Competition Analysis

Emergence theory assumes an organization is in the state of being continual process,
never arriving but always in transition [12]. Coincidently, economic theories prove
that changes of market power between sellers and buyers change the competition
power and market type [9]. Often competition power can be obtained by
reconstructing market types by alliance. Applying these theories, this section will
analyze the competitiveness of type 3 e-marketplace evolved from a set of ESMs.

808

4.1

J. Guo and C. Sun

Electronic Intermediary Marketplace

Drives of E-intermediary Marketplace. The ESM described in Section 3 is a typical
EEM under perfect competition where all sellers and buyers are responsible for their
own e-matching service and fully compete with each other. It is often presented as a
website such as a standalone electronic catalogue or a corporate website with
embedded catalogue [10] such as GE Polymerland1. It is comparatively small and has
no enough power to exert influences on selling or buying. Its customers are limited to
the related partners in a narrow industry or random product seekers. From the
viewpoint of all TMSs of ESMs, an individual ESM is insignificant in market share
because its product information is difficult to reach to and share by all customers in emarketplaces. To attract more customers, one choice is to aggregate multiple ESMs
into an electronic intermediary marketplace (EIM) representing a superset of some
ESMs, in which a larger set of sellers and/or buyers map their electronic product
representations via brokering, mediation, federation and mapping. A practical
example is CommerceOne2 who provide third-party B2B marketplaces. This choice
is a natural evolution of the ESM development. The benefits of adopting an EIM are:
− Aggregating a set of individual ESMs to increase competition power.
− Reaching some consensus to adopt a unified product representation standard for all
its sellers and buyers to increase tradability. The proper standards enable an EIM to
compete with those un-joined sellers, buyers and other EIMs.
− Integrating the increased number of de facto product standards, international
standards and ad-hoc electronic product representations.
EIM Persistent Properties and Relationships. As a superset of some ESMs, an EIM
has its special persistent properties that are: an EIM provider who represents a certain
set of sellers and buyers, and a set of mediating product representations (IER) that
mediates sellers’ and buyers’ product representations SER and BER defined in PR3
and PR4. So the new persistent relationships in EIM are:
PR 7: Some sellers’ SER is mediated via a set of mediating product representations
IER provided by an EIM provider, expressed as SER MedBy IER.
PR 8: Some buyers’ BER is mediated via a set of mediating product representations
IER provided by an EIM provider, expressed as BER MedBy IER.
PR 9: A set of product representations IER is owned by an EIM provider, expressed
EIM Own IER.
PR 10: A set of product presentations IER is displayed on network N, expressed as
IER DispOn N.
Definition 10 (Electronic Intermediary Marketplace “EIM”): An electronic
intermediary marketplace EIM exists if and only if there exist persistent relationships
PR1, PR2, PR3, PR4, PR7, PR8, PR9 and PR10.
Unlike an ESM, an EIM acts as an independent interaction mechanism. The
relationships existed in an EIM reflect the existence conditions of an EIM.
1
2

http://www.gepolymerland.com
http://www.commerceone.com

Measurement Models for Survivability and Competitiveness

4.2

809

EIM Mediability

Similar to tradability in an ESM, the emergent property, mediating ability, for sellers’
and buyers’ product representations is important to an EIM’s survival and should be
accurately defined.
Definition 11 (Target Mediating Volume “TMV”): Given SER and BER defined in
PR 3 and PR4, a set of product representations TMV is called “target mediating
volume” if and only if there exist two sets of product representations MSR and MBR
such that MSR ⊆ SER and MBR ⊆ BER, and TMV = MSR + MBR.
MSR and MBR are sellers’ and buyers’ electronic product representations ready to
be mediated in an EIM. The sum of them is the target volume for an EIM to mediate.
It must be noted that the quantity of SER and/or BER in an EIM may have increased
compared with that in an ESM where SER/BER is from only one seller/buyer if this
ESM is a seller’s or buyer’s EEM.
Definition 12 (Mediable Representations “M”): Given MSR and MBR defined in
Definition 11, IER defined in PR 9, a set of product representations M is said to be
“mediable” if M = MSR I IER ∩ IER I MBR.
The volume of mediable product representations indicates how many e-mapping
services an EIM can provide to satisfy its sellers and/or buyers. It reflects the
fulfillment of the target market.
Definition 13 (Mediability “M”): Given TMV and M defined in definition 11 and
definition 12, the mediability of M is measured as:
M = M / (TMV - M)

(5)

Mediability reflects an EIM’s market efficiency about its target market. An EIM’s
profitability, survivability and market growth rate are similar to ESM. The indicators
can be directly given as:
Definition 14 (EIM Profitability “IP”, EIM Survivability “IS” and EIM Market
Growth Rate “IG”): If given TMC=TMV*AC and TMR=M*AR derived from
Assumption 1, 2 and definition 11 and 12, then:
IP = (TMR – TMC) / TMR

(6)

IS = IP * M

(7)

IG = (ISb – ISa) / (tb – ta)

(8)

The above indicators jointly describe the long-run survivability of an EIM.
4.3.

EIM Competition Power

To completely reflect the competitiveness of an EIM in an emergent EEM, we should
compare with other EIMs. We compare survivability between EIMs to determine an
EIM’s competition power.

810

J. Guo and C. Sun

Definition 15 (EIM Competition Power “CP”): Given a set of EIM = d{0≤ i,j ≤ n |
EIMi,j} defined in Definition 10, and a set of EIM survivability IS = d{0≤ i,j ≤ n |
ISi,j} defined in Definition 14(2), then:
EIMi’s relative competition power against EIMj is:
CPi,j = (ISi – ISj) / ISj

(9)

EIMi’s absolute competition power against the whole set of EIM is:
CPi = (ISi – IS) / IS

(10)

Relative competitive power compares an EIM with another EIM. Absolute
competitive power compares an EIM with the whole intermediary provider market. A
positive figure means a strong market competition power to attract sellers and buyers
to join in.
Corollary 6: For any two EIMi and EIMj, if any CPi,j is approximate to 0, the
overall EIM marketplace goes to perfect competition.
Corollary 7: If there exist one EIMi such that CPi,j is always approximate to 1
against EIMj, EIMi goes to be monopolistic in the overall EIM marketplace.
Corollary 7 and 8 measures the market power of an EIM over the sellers, buyers
and other EIMs, which changes e-marketplace types.
4.4

Competitive Analysis

The above sections have described the changes of an EIM’s competition power. But
how to increase EIM competition power is still not clear. This section, we will
analyze the changing relationships between emergent properties to find out the
solution. As Definition 14, EIM profit is determined by the factors of TMREIM
=M*AREIM and TMCEIM=TMV*(ACEIM+ACSB). So an EIM’s total profit is TMREIM –
TMCEIM and the target is to either increase M and AREIM, or decrease ACEIM + ACSB.
For the total customers of the EIM, if, for each mediable product representation, it can
gain ARSB, then its profit from using the EIM is M*ARSB – TMV*ACSB. Obviously,
AREIM partially and proportionally determines ACSB in that part of ACSB is the AREIM.
For example, EIM increases service fees to increase AREIM but it also increases the
cost of customers’ ACSB. Another part of ACSB is the sinking cost of sell customers
who electronically represent their products by themselves. Therefore the limit for an
EIM to increase AREIM is that the decreasing total profit of customers is still positive
and the conditions that other EIMs have not provided customers better profit rates.
Otherwise customers will either exit from the EIM or turn to other EIMs. Another
method to increase profit is to decrease TMV, but it is not under an EIM’s control,
customers may increase product representation volume hence increase their emarketplace sinking cost but still try to find a better EIM to absorb it. Further method
is to decrease ACEIM but it may hinder an EIM to provide better e-mapping service
due to the less input of the development fees. The obvious better solution is to
increase M, which has no limit and has the greatest potential. To increase volume M is
to map more sellers’ and buyers’ electronic product representations.

Measurement Models for Survivability and Competitiveness

811

5 Conclusion
By introducing a novel emergent e-marketplace model, this paper has formally
analyzed the emergent properties of simple ESMs and large and complex EIMs.
Concomitantly, it has quantified the key measurements of survivability and
competitiveness of a very large e-marketplace. As an analysis result, it points out that
the key to adapt to the customers’ emergent requirements is to increase mediability.
Satisfying this requirement can keep an EIM in a favorable market position with high
survivability and strong competition power and obtain a win-win outcome.
Measurement models developed in this paper have many implications in which the
most direct is to apply these models to simulation models of very large emarketplaces. The changing values of emergent properties over time are appropriate
interaction records for simulation. The future work includes to explore the appropriate
electronic representation of products and to further develop measurement model for etrading of the second stage e-marketplace.

References
1. Bakos, Y., The Emerging Role of Electronic Marketplaces on the Internet, Communications
of the ACM, Vol. 41/No. 8, August 1998, 35-42.
2. Damsgaad, J., and Truex, D., Binary Trading Relations and the Limits of EDI Standards:
The Procrustean Bed of Standards, European Journal of Information Systems, 2000, 9(3)
173-188.
3. Hoffner, Y., Facciorusso, C., Field, S., and Schade, A., Distribution Issues in the Design and
Implementation of a Virtual Market Place, Computer Networks, 32 (2000) 717-730.
4. Maidantchik, C., Montoni, M., and Santos, G., Learning Organizational Knowledge: An
Evolutionary Proposal for Requirements Enginnering, in Proceeding of ACM SEKE’02, July
15-19, 2002, Ischia, Italy, 151-157.
5. Malone, T. W., Yates, J., and Benjamin, R., Electronic Markets And Electronic Hierarchies,
Communications of the ACM, Vol. 30/No. 6, June 1987, 484-497
6. Ngwenyama, O. K., Groupware, social action and organizational emergence: on the process
dynamics of computer mediated distributed work, Accounting, Management and
Information Technology, 8 (1998) 127-146.
7. Phillips, C. and Meeker, M., Collaborative Commerce, The B2B Internet Report, Morgan
Stanley Dean Witter, April 2000.
8. Rose, M., Implications of Costly Information, The Library of Economics and Liberty, April
22, 2002, http://www. econlib.org/library/Columns/Teachers/information.html.
9. Samuelson, P.A., Nordhaus, W. D., Richardson, S., Scott, G., and Wallace, R., Economics –
Volume 1 Microeconomics, Third Australian Edition, McGraw-Hill Book Company Sydney,
1992.
10.Segev, A., Wan, D., and Beam, C., Electronic Catalogs: a Technology Overview and Survey
Results, in proceedings of ACM CIKM’95, Baltimore, MD, USA, 1995, 11-18.
11.Strader, T., and Shaw, M., Characteristics of Electronic Markets, Decision Support Systems,
21 (1997) 185-198.
12.Truex, D. P., Baskerville, R., and Klein, H., Growing Systems in Emergent Organizations,
Communications of the ACM, Vol. 42/No. 8, August 1999, 117-123.

