Partial Dual Unicasting Based Handoﬀ for
Real-Time Traﬃc in MIPv6 Networks
DaeKyu Choi and Hyunseung Choo
School of Information and Communication Engineering
Sungkyunkwan University
440-746, Suwon, KOREA +82-31-290-7145
{eunpiri, choo}@ece.skku.ac.kr

Abstract. Recently QoS guaranteed real-time data support with user
mobility in wireless Internet becomes more signiﬁcant due to drastic
increase of network users called netizens. Mobile IP(MIP) supporting
user mobility evolves from versions v4 to v6 with comprehensive analysis
of mobile users. However, Mobile IPv6 still has the buﬀering problem and
problems occurred by the zigzag eﬀect. In this paper, we propose a new
MIPv6 handoﬀ mechanism called partial dual unicasting(PDU) based
on QoS supported RSVP signaling protocol. This scheme reduces the
handoﬀ failure rate up to about 24% and guarantees the time for the
handoﬀ completion. Furthermore, it resolves the ineﬀectiveness of path
usage in dual unicasting(DU).

1

Introduction

The number of Internet users has been drastically increasing. Since the late
1990s, network users access various kinds of services such as e-mails, chattings,
and multimedia applications in the wired life. Nowadays current users demand
the similar services in the wireless mobile environment and even they want
QoS guaranteed real-time data. Therefore, a mobile enabling protocol, Mobile
IP(MIP)[1], is combined with Resource ReSerVation Protocol(RSVP)[2] as an
active approach to support the enhanced user mobility.
The earlier version of MIP, Mobile IPv4(MIPv4), has various problems. Basically it employs 32-bit address hierarchy that is expected the lack of address
space in the near future. It will become more serious with the popular use of
mobile devices such as laptops and PDAs. There is a triangle routing problem in path establishment which creates not only an ineﬃcient path in data
transmission but also traﬃc bottleneck in home agent(HA). As we all know,
sender-receiver communication is terminated when HA is failed.
In Mobile IPv6(MIPv6)[3], a mobile node(MN) sends a binding update(BU)
to both correspondent node(CN) and HA when it moves to other networks. It
takes some time to send data to the changed care of address(CoA) after CN
receives it. If CN transmits data to MN during this time, data are lost. To
Dr. Choo is the corresponding author.
P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2660, pp. 443–452, 2003.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

444

D. Choi and H. Choo

prevent this in MIPv6, MN sends a BU to the previous old access router(oAR)
when MN moves to other networks. Then the oAR knows the movement of MN
through this message, and transmits to the new AR(nAR) packets for MN. As
a problem of this scheme, oAR must save packets arrived for MN until receiving
BU message from nAR. Increase of the number of MNs leads to the required
amount of buﬀers to be fairly increased. Therefore data loss occurs when buﬀers
in AR are not enough to hold data for MNs in handoﬀ. This problem becomes
more signiﬁcant when MN density is high. While MN moves into other networks,
it is possible to be in ping-ponging state in a boundary area. Ping-ponging occurs
when there is not much diﬀerence in the strength of signal power between two
networks and thus MN registration to someone is ambiguous at the moment.
According to the increased handoﬀ messages on ping-ponging, two corresponding
ARs should handle a certain amount of operations. The series of processing
procedures burdens ARs and thus networks therefore the probability of handoﬀ
failure increases.
In this paper, we propose a fast handoﬀ scheme called partial dual unicasting(PDU) based on QoS supporting RSVP which solves buﬀering problem
in ARs and also ping-ponging problem in networks. PDU scheme concurrently
maintains CoAs of old and new networks in the binding cache of CN. The proposed scheme provides the longer handoﬀ execution time on MNs due to the
relative increase of handoﬀ area, and thus handoﬀ failure rate is decreased up
to about 24%. Likewise it solves the ineﬃciency of dual unicasting(DU) on path
use and enables to eliminate eﬀectively the ping-ponging state.
This paper is organized as follows. In section 2, related works, trends, and
problems in handoﬀ are discussed. The new scheme is presented in section 3 to
improve the current method. In section 4 the proposed PDU scheme is evaluated.
Finally, we conclude our paper with the future direction.

2

Related Works

In MIPv4, when CN sends a packet to MN, it passes through the following
procedure. When MN is located at home network, CN sends data to HA that
are relayed to MN. As MN moves into foreign networks, HA intercepts data which
CN sends to MN and encapsulates its packet, and ﬁnally sends it to CoA of MN.
Foreign agent(FA) of MN accepts and sends it to MN after the decapsulation
process. On the other hand, MN sends data directly to CN without passing
through additional agents and it is known as a triangle routing. After the triangle
routing is established, the time for packet transmission delay becomes longer
and the route is used ineﬃciently. Also packets must pass the HA, thus the HA
becomes an obvious bottleneck in data transmission. Many studies[4,5] are done
for solving the triangle routing problem. For this, the route optimization scheme
is proposed in [5]. Although this scheme provides a solution for the routing path
ineﬃciency, it still remains unsolved problems. First, buﬀering is required in
FAs. Secondly, the extra reordering process is necessary when MN receives the
buﬀered packets. Finally, IPv4 cannot handle security issues by itself.

Partial Dual Unicasting Based Handoﬀ for Real-Time Traﬃc

445

In MIPv6, MN typically acquires its CoA through stateless or stateful (e.g.,
DHCPv6) address autoconﬁguration based on the methods in IPv6 Neighbor
Discovery. CoA for MN is changed when MN moves to other networks. When
CoA is changed, MN sends BU message to its HA and all CNs. If MN demands
an acknowledgement from CN for this, CN responds to MN by using the binding acknowledgement option. CN avoids the problem of the triangle routing by
maintaining binding update of MN whenever MN moves. Even though MIPv6
improves MIPv4 in triangle routing, it still keeps some basic problems in MIPv4.
IETF Int-Service(Int-Serv) working group(WG) has researched on IP packet
transmission methods based on the new service model which supports the realtime service demand for QoS [6]. There is an Int-Serv model proposed by the
WG on real-time applications which divides services due to the ﬂow unit, and
thus QoS guaranteed services and unguaranteed services on relaying packets.
The guaranteed employ RSVP signaling protocol to reserve the resource for
the transmission delay. The paper [10] proposes MRSVP for RSVP adopted in
mobile environments. For the QoS support in RSVP, MRSVP keeps the state in
each protocol supported router. Using the state information stored, MN sends
additional BU(ABU) message to determine merged AR(MAR) in the proposed
scheme.

3

The Proposed Scheme

As shown in Fig. 1, we consider the case that MN moves from Network A to
Network B. MN receives the radio advertisement for the ﬁrst time from AR of
Network B when it reaches P1. The advertisement message contains CoA2 value
which is used when MN moves to Network B.

Fig. 1. Handoﬀs by movement of MN

As soon as MN receives the advertisement from AR of Network B, it generates a new BU message based on the value of CoA2. This message should
be distinguished from the previously deﬁned BU information and thus called
as additional binding update(ABU). MN sends this message at the same time
to both nAR and oAR, they deliver ABU message through the routing path.
Routers supporting QoS protocols (MRSVP, RSVP), save a certain state. An

446

D. Choi and H. Choo

ABU message which is delivered at the same time to oAR and nAR follows the
two corresponding routing paths, respectively. This message records the movements of each message in QoS supported router. The ﬁrst router which takes two
ABU messages becomes {merged access router }(MAR) on those routing paths.
All packets sent from CN are made into two copies in MAR to transfer to nAR
and oAR each. In other words, the original packets are delivered to oAR, and
the copied that are made based on the routing extension header are transferred
to nAR. We called this scheme as {Partial Dual Unicasting}(PDU).

Fig. 2. CN binding list after receiving the ABU message

The PDU scheme is technically implemented as follows. CN should handle
an ABU messages diﬀerently comparing to a BU. In general, CN which takes
the BU message replaces the existing BU to the new one. Meanwhile, CN which
takes an ABU message does not delete the ﬁeld for CoA1 but rather it adds
a new ﬁeld for CoA2. Due to the completion of appending a new ﬁeld to have
CoA2 value, the binding list is updated as shown in Fig. 2. CN records the
information to be added for CoA2 and delivers the packet eventually to MN
through the addresses of CoA1 and CoA2 by using the routing extension header
of IPv6. The packets made in this manner are delivered to MAR and the MAR
checks the routing extension header of the packet to ﬁgure out that they must
be delivered to both oAR and nAR. MAR decides those packets must be sent
to both oAR and nAR, and generates two packages, one for oAR and the other
for nAR. The generation method makes those packets go to the oAR with the
information at the typical header and to the nAR based on the information at
the routing extension header. This process eliminates the message duplication
in the path from CN to MAR, and thus routing resources are more eﬀectively.
Each message in Fig. 3 is described as follows. (1) MN arrives at P1. (2) MN
takes the message of nAR(advertisement), and ﬁnds out new CoA(CoA2). (3)
ABU is created. (4) It is transmitted to both oAR and nAR at the same time. (5)
Both oAR and nAR send it to MAR. (6) MAR transmits it to CN. (7) CN gets
the message and decides if it is either ABU or BU. (8) CN updates the ABU list.
(9) ABU acknowledgement(ABUA) is created. (10) CN sends ABUA to MAR.
(11) MAR transmits ABUA to both oAR and nAR. (12) oAR or nAR sends

Partial Dual Unicasting Based Handoﬀ for Real-Time Traﬃc

447

data packets to MN. (13) MN maintains the link to oAR until MN completely
moves to nAR.

Fig. 3. Flow of total message

(14) When MN passes over the point P2(Fig. 1), it makes ABU deletion
message(ABUD). (15) ABUD is sent to nAR. (16) The nAR relays it to MAR.
(17) MAR sends it to CN. (18) CN checks the ABU list for message deletion.
(19) CN eliminates the ABU ﬁeld.

4
4.1

Performance Evaluation
Modeling

At each step the time to send a message is composed of transmission time,
propagation time, and processing time, i.e. M i = αi + β i + γ i . In here, i
represents the step i. The transmission time αi is computed by the size of the
control message in bits over the bit rate of the link on which the message is sent,
b
i.e. αi = M
B , where Mb is a control message assuming the ﬁxed size. The B is
the bandwidth of the link, Bl for the wired line, and Bw for the wireless case.
The propagation time β i varies depending on the transmission medium, i.e. βl
is the time for the wired line, and βw is for the wireless one. The processing
time γ i has the same value at intermediate routers, MN, CN, oAR, and nAR.
The wired medium is more stable than the wireless one, so the retransmission
is not needed. Therefore, the physical transmission time(T i ) is represented by

448

D. Choi and H. Choo

M i (= Ml ). Later in each step the message processing time on the wired and
wireless cases are represented as Ml and Mw , respectively. At the wireless link,
the message retransmission is necessary because a message can be lost in any
moment. MN retransmits the message when lost in the air transmission. By
considering the number of link failures (Nf ail ) and the probability of link failure,
we obtain the additional signal processing time at these steps in the wireless
∞
˜i
case, i.e. Twi =
Nf ail =0 {Tw (Nf ail ) · P rob(Nf ail f ailures and 1 success)}.
Whenever ACK signal may not be received for Tout after the request signal is
sent, we assume that the message is lost and the control signal is retransmitted.
If there are Nf ail failures, then Tout and the message retransmission occur
Nf ail times. So T˜wi (Nf ail ) is induced as T˜wi (Nf ail ) = Mw + Nf ail · (Tout + Mw ).
Therefore signal processing time for retransmission steps becomes

Twi =

∞

{Mw + Nf ail (Tout + Mw )} · P rob(Nf ail f ailures and 1 success)
Nf ail =0
∞

Nf ail · P rob(Nf ail f ailures and 1 success)(1)

= Mw + (Tout + Mw )
Nf ail =0
∞

Here Nf ail =0 {Nf ail · P rob(Nf ail f ailures and 1 success)} is obtained by the
inﬁnite geometric progression. Usually, link failure probability q is smaller than
∞
q
1. Therefore,
Nf ail =0 {Nf ail · P rob(Nf ail f ailures and 1 success)} = 1−q .
Generally, q has the value of 0.5. So (1) becomes Mw + (Tout + Mw ) 0.5
0.5 = 2Mw +
Tout . In the proposed scheme, the additional message processing time is required.
It is assumed to be the message processing time Tproc .
4.2

Total Handoﬀ Time

The system parameters used to analyze the system are listed in Table 1. Each
value is deﬁned based on [7,8,9]. Fig. 3 represents the ﬂows of messages. Based on
the scheme in this ﬁgure, we compute the total handoﬀ time. Handoﬀ completion
time is acquired by summing I, II, III, and IV below.
I. Sum of the processing time(SP T )
The processing time is required in steps 2, 3, 7, 9, 14, and 18. So, SP T =
2
3
7
9
14
18
i
+ Tproc
+ Tproc
+ Tproc
+ Tproc
+ Tproc
. In the above case Tproc
has a ﬁxed
Tproc
value(Tproc ) at each step which is just as much as the processing time. Therefore,
SP T = 6Tproc .
II. The total time for message transmission in wired links(SM Tl )
Message transmission in the wired line states are in steps 5, 6, 10, 11, 16, and
17. In these cases, the total time for message transmission is
SP Tl = min{Tl5 · HM AR,oAR , Tl5 · HM AR,nAR } + Tl6 · HM AR,CN
+ Tl10 · HM AR,CN + min{Tl11 · HM AR,oAR , Tl11 · HM AR,nAR }
+ Tl16 · HM AR,nAR + Tl17 · HM AR,CN

(2)

Partial Dual Unicasting Based Handoﬀ for Real-Time Traﬃc

449

We assume that each Tli (i = 5, 6, 10, 11, 16, 17) has a ﬁxed value(Tl ), and thus
SP Tl = 2min{Tl · HM AR,oAR , Tl · HM AR,nAR } + Tl {3HM AR,CN
+ HM AR,nAR }.

(3)

Table 1. System parameters.
Variables
Deﬁnitions
Tproc
extra processing time
Bl
bits rate of wired link
Bw
bits rate of wireless link
Mb
a control message size
βl
wired link message propagation time
βw
wireless link message propagation time
γ
message processing time
Tout
message loss judgment time
Tbut
binding update time
q
probability of message loss
Ha,b
number of hops between a and b

Values
0.5 msec
155 Mbps
144 Kbps
50 bytes
0.5 msec
2 msec
0.5 msec
2 msec
5 msec
0.5

III. Sum of transmission time in wireless links(SM Tw )
Message transmissions are in steps 4, 12, and 15 in wireless links. Here message
transmission time is SM Tw = Tw4 + Tw12 + Tw15 . From the equation Twi , SM Tw
becomes SM Tw = 3Tw (Tw = 2Mw + Tout ) = 3(2Mw + Tout ).
IV. Sum of binding update time(SBU T )
The binding update time Tbut is a system variable and given before the
8
19
+ Tbut
= 2Tbut .
computation. SBU T = Tbut
Therefore, we obtain the total required time for the handoﬀ completion
by the summation from step I to step IV.
Treq = SP T + SM Tl + SM Tw + SBU T
= 6Tproc + 2min{Tl · HM AR,oAR , Tl · HM AR,nAR }
+ Tl {3HM AR,CN + HM AR,nAR } + 3(2Mw + Tout ) + 2Tbut
4.3

(4)

Handoﬀ Failure Rate

The T is a random variable of the time for MN staying in the overlapped area
and the Treq is the time required for the handoﬀ completion. Hence, the handoﬀ
failure rate is represented as P = P rob(T < Treq ), where we assume that T is
exponentially distributed. Thus,
P = P rob(T < Treq ) = 1 − exp(−λTreq ) < Pf

(5)

450

D. Choi and H. Choo

Here is λ the arrival rate of MN into the boundary cell and its movement direction
is uniformly distributed on the interval [0, 2π). So λ is calculated by the equation
λ = VπSL [11]. Here V is the expected velocity for MN that varies in the given
environment and L is the length of the boundary at the overlapped area assuming
a circle with radius l, i.e. L = 16 2πl2 = 23 πl. The area of the overlapped space
√
S is S = 2( 16 (πl2 − 43 l2 )). Therefore, λ is induced by equations regarding as l.
Hence we get the handoﬀ failure rate by Treq in (5) and λ above.
l>

4V Treq
√
(2π − 3 3)log(1/(1 − Pf ))

(6)

Similarly, when the desired handoﬀ failure rate is given, then V is calculated.
Thus,
√
l(2π − 3 3)log(l/(1 − Pf ))
>V
(7)
4Treq
Consequently, the desired maximum velocity is acquired.
4.4

Experimental Results

Fig. 4 compares results for the probability of handoﬀ failure between the existing
scheme and the proposed one. It is obtained by using system parameters given
in Table 1.

Fig. 4. By the increment of V

Partial Dual Unicasting Based Handoﬀ for Real-Time Traﬃc

451

The probability of handoﬀ failure is inﬂuenced by few factors that are the velocity
of MN, hop count(HM AR,CN ) from MAR to CN, hop count(HM AR,oAR ) from
MAR to oAR, hop count(HM AR,nAR ) from MAR to nAR, and the radius of a
cell(l). The increase of MN velocity V means the handoﬀ should be completed
within relatively short period of time. If MN moves faster than the regular speed,
handoﬀ time may not be suﬃcient and consequently the handoﬀ is failed. In Fig.
4, for the various V , we investigate the probability of handoﬀ failure in percentage
with the cell radius 100m, and they are 1.09, 6.37, 10.39, and 19.71%. On the
other hand, in our proposed scheme, they are 0.83, 4.87, 7.99, and 15.34%. The
proposed scheme shows the relatively low handoﬀ failure rate comparing to the
previous one so it provides the more stable performance.

Fig. 5. The probability of handoﬀ failure by the hop count

We assume in Fig. 5 that V is 4km/h, HM AR,oAR and HM AR,nAR are 1 each.
We get the probability of handoﬀ failure in terms of the number of hops. Increase
of the hop count reﬂects the increment of handoﬀ delay. We calculate the cell size
when HM AR,CN is 5, the probability of handoﬀ failure is 2%, and the velocity
of MN is 10km/h. By the equation (6), the minimum cell radius of the existing
scheme is 53.4m, meanwhile the proposed one is 40.4m. Therefore, the proposed
scheme is more eﬃcient than the existing one in terms of cell radius and the
eﬃciency is improved up to about 24%. Similarly, by the equation (7), we are
able to calculate the speed of MN. In case that HM AR,CN is 5, HM AR,oAR and
HM AR,nAR are 1 each, the probability of handoﬀ failure is 2% and the radius of l

452

D. Choi and H. Choo

is 500m. Then the maximum velocity of MN in the existing scheme is 25.5km/h
while the proposed one is 33.7km/h. As a result, the proposed scheme is overall
superior to the existing one and even it supports more stable environments.

5

Conclusion

In this paper, we propose the new MIPv6 based handoﬀ scheme which supports
QoS guaranteed real-time data service called partial dual unicasting(PDU). The
PDU scheme is basically cooperated with RSVP signaling protocol, and resolves
buﬀering problem and problems occurred by the ping-ponging eﬀect. This can
be accomplished by concurrently maintaining CoAs of old and new networks in
binding cache of CN. According to the analytical model and the comprehensive
experimental results, the handoﬀ execution time on MNs is relatively longer
comparing to the previous approach and the handoﬀ failure rate is signiﬁcantly
decreased up to about 24% with almost negligible signaling overhead. Neighbor
casting mechanism based on the proposed PDU scheme is underway.

References
1. C. Perkins(ed.), “IP Mobility Support,” RFC 2002, October 1996.
2. R. Braden(ed.), “Resource ReSerVation Protocol(RSVP)-Version 1 Functional
Speciﬁcation,” RFC 2205, September 1997.
3. B. David, C. Perkins, and J. Arkko, “Mobility Support in IPv6,” IETF draft,
Internet Draft draft-ietf-mobileip-ipv6-17.txt, May 2002, work in progress.
4. W. Woo and C. M. Leung, “Handoﬀ enhancement in mobile-IP environment,”
IEEE International Conference on Universal Personal Communications, vol. 2, pp.
760–764, 1996.
5. C. Perkins and K. Wang, “Optimized smooth handoﬀs in Mobile IP,” IEEE International Symposium on Comupters and Communications, pp. 340–346, 1999.
6. IETF old Working Group, “http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/old/intservcharter.html”
7. J. McNair, I. F. Akyildiz, and M. D. Bender, “An inter-system handoﬀ technique
for the IMT-2000 system,” IEEE INFOCOM, vol.1, pp. 208–216, 2000.
8. J. McNair, I. F. Akyildiz, and M. D. Bender, “Handoﬀs for real-time traﬃc in
mobile IP version 6 networks,” IEEE GLOBECOM, vol.6, pp. 3463–3467, 2001.
9. J. Xie, and I. F. Akyildiz, “An optimal location management scheme for minimizing
signaling cost in mobile IP,” IEEE ICC, vol.5 , pp. 3313–3317, 2002.
10. A. K. Talukdar, B. R. Badrinath, and A. Acharya, “MRSVP: A Resource Reservation Protocol for an Integrated services network with mobile hosts,” Wireless
Networks, vol.7 pp. 5–19, 2001.
11. R. Thomas, H. Gilbert, and G. Mazziotto, “Inﬂuence of the moving of the mobile
stations on the performance of a radio mobile cellular network,” in Proceedings of
the 3rd Nordic Seminar, 1988.

