Improved Objective Functions for Tetrahedral
Mesh Optimisation
Rafael Montenegro, Jos´e Mar´ıa Escobar, Eduardo Rodr´ıguez,
Gustavo Montero, and Jos´e Mar´ıa Gonz´
alez-Yuste
University Institute of Intelligent Systems and Numerical Applications in Engineering,
University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria,
Ediﬁcio Instituto Polivalente, Campus Universitario de Taﬁra,
35017 Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain
jescobar@iusiani.ulpgc.es, {rafa,barrera,gustavo}@dma.ulpgc.es,
josem@sinf.ulpgc.es

Abstract. The quality improvement in mesh optimisation techniques
that preserve its connectivity are obtained by an iterative process in
which each node of the mesh is moved to a new position that minimises
a certain objective function. In general, objective functions are derived
from some quality measure of the local submesh, that is, the set of tetrahedra connected to the adjustable or free node. Although these objective
functions are suitable to improve the quality of a mesh in which there
are non inverted elements, they are not when the mesh is tangled. This
is due to the fact that usual objective functions are not deﬁned on all R3
and they present several discontinuities and local minima that prevent
the use of conventional optimisation procedures. Otherwise, when the
mesh is tangled, there are local submeshes for which the free node is out
of the feasible region, or this does not exist. In this paper we propose the
substitution of objective functions having barriers by modiﬁed versions
that are deﬁned and regular on all R3 . With these modiﬁcations, the
optimisation process is also directly applicable to meshes with inverted
elements, making a previous untangling procedure unnecessary.

1

Introduction

In ﬁnite element simulation the mesh quality is a crucial aspect for good numerical behaviour of the method. In a ﬁrst stage, some automatic 3-D mesh
generator constructs meshes with poor quality and, in special cases, for example
when node movement is required, inverted elements may appear. So, it is necessary to develop a procedure that optimises the pre-existing mesh. This process
must be able to smooth and untangle the mesh.
The most usual techniques to improve the quality of a valid mesh, that
is, one that does not have inverted elements, are based upon local smoothing.
In short, these techniques consist of ﬁnding the new positions that the mesh
Partially supported by MCYT, Spain. Grant contract: REN2001-0925-C03-02/CLI
The authors acknowledge Dr. David Shea for editorial assistance
P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2657, pp. 568–578, 2003.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

Improved Objective Functions for Tetrahedral Mesh Optimisation

569

nodes must hold, in such a way that they optimise an objective function. Such a
function is based on a certain measurement of the quality of the local submesh,
N (v), formed by the set of tetrahedra connected to the free node v. As it is a
local optimisation process, we can not guarantee that the ﬁnal mesh is globally
optimum. Nevertheless, after repeating this process several times for all the nodes
of the current mesh, quite satisfactory results can be achieved. Usually, objective
functions are appropriate to improve the quality of a valid mesh, but they do not
work properly when there are inverted elements. This is because they present
singularities (barriers) when any tetrahedron of N (v) changes the sign of its
Jacobian determinant. To avoid this problem we can proceed as Freitag et al in
[7,9,10], where an optimisation method consisting of two stages is proposed. In
the ﬁrst one, the possible inverted elements are untangled by an algorithm that
maximises their negative Jacobian determinants [9]; in the second, the resulting
mesh from the ﬁrst stage is smoothed using another objective function based on a
quality metric of the tetrahedra of N (v) [10]. One of these objective functions are
present in Section 2. After the untangling procedure, the mesh has a very poor
quality because the technique has no motivation to create good-quality elements.
As remarked in [7], it is not possible to apply a gradient-based algorithm to
optimise the objective function because it is not continuous all over R3 , making
it necessary to use other non-standard approaches.
In Section 3 we propose an alternative to this procedure, such that the untangling and smoothing are carried out in the same stage. For this purpose, we
use a suitable modiﬁcation of the objective function such that it is regular all
over R3 . When a feasible region (subset of R3 where v could be placed, being
N (v) a valid submesh) exists, the minima of the original and modiﬁed objective
functions are very close and, when this region does not exist, the minimum of
the modiﬁed objective function is located in such a way that it tends to untangle
N (v). The latter occurs, for example, when the ﬁxed boundary of N (v) is tangled. With this approach, we can use any standard and eﬃcient unconstrained
optimisation method to ﬁnd the minimum of the modiﬁed objective function,
see for example [2].
In this work we have applied the proposed modiﬁcation to one objective
function derived from an algebraic mesh quality metric studied in [11], but it
would also be possible to apply it to other objective functions which have barriers
like those presented in [12]. The results for two test problems are shown in Section
4. Finally, conclusions and future research are presented in Section 5.

2

Objective Functions

Several tetrahedron shape measures [4] could be used to construct an objective function. Nevertheless those obtained by algebraic operations are specially
indicated for our purpose because they can be computed very eﬃciently. The
above mentioned algebraic mesh quality metric and the corresponding objective
function are shown in this Section.

570

R. Montenegro et al.

Let T be a tetrahedral element in the physical space whose vertices are given
T
by xk = (xk , yk , zk ) ∈ R3 , k = 0, 1, 2, 3 and TR be the reference tetrahedron
T
with vertices u0 = (0, 0, 0)T , u1 = (1, 0, 0)T , u2 = (0, 1, 0)T and u3 = (0, 0, 1) .
If we choose x0 as the translation vector, the aﬃne map that takes TR to T
is x =Au + x0 , where A is the Jacobian matrix of the aﬃne map referenced to
node x0 , and expressed as A = (x1 − x0 , x2 − x0 , x3 − x0 ).
Let now TI be an equilateral tetrahedron with all its edges of length
one
√
and vertices located at v0 = (0, 0, 0)T , v1 = (1, 0, 0)T , v2 = (1/2, 3/2, 0)T ,
√
√ √ T
v3 = 1/2, 3/6, 2/ 3 . Let v =W u be the linear map that takes TR to TI ,
being W = (v1 , v2 , v3 ) its Jacobian matrix.
Therefore, the aﬃne map that takes TI to T is given by x =AW −1 v + x0 ,
and its Jacobian matrix is S = AW −1 . This weighted matrix S is independent
of the node chosen as reference; it is said to be node invariant [11]. We can use
matrix norms, determinant or trace of S to construct algebraic quality measures
of T . For example, the Frobenius norm of S, deﬁned by |S| = tr (S T S), is
specially indicated because it is easily computable. Thus, it is shown in [11]
2

3
is an algebraic quality measure of T , where σ = det (S). The
that q = 3σ
|S|2
maximum value of these quality measures is the unity and it corresponds to
equilateral tetrahedron. Besides, any ﬂat tetrahedron has quality measure zero.
We can derive an optimisation function from this quality measure. Thus, let
T
x = (x, y, z) be the free node position of v, and let Sm be the weighted Jacobian
matrix of the m-th tetrahedron of N (v). We deﬁne the objective function of x,
associated to an m-th tetrahedron as

2

ηm =

|Sm |

(1)

2

3
3σm

Then, the corresponding objective function for N (v) can be constructed by using
the p-norm of (η1 , η2 , . . . , ηM ) as
1
p

M
p
ηm

|Kη |p (x) =

(x)

(2)

m=1

where M is the number of tetrahedra in N (v). The objective function |Kη |1 was
deduced and used in [1] for smoothing and adapting of 2-D meshes. The same
function was introduced in [3], for both 2 and 3-D mesh smoothing, as a result
of a force-directed method. Finally, this function, among others, is studied and
compared in [12]. We note that the cited authors only use this objective function
for smoothing valid meshes.
Although this optimisation function is smooth in those points where N (v) is
a valid submesh, it becomes discontinuous when the volume of any tetrahedron
of N (v) goes to zero. It is due to the fact that ηm approaches inﬁnity when
σm tends to zero and its numerator is bounded below. In fact, it is possible
to prove that |Sm | reaches its minimum, with strictly positive value, when v is
placed in the geometric centre of the ﬁxed face of the m-th tetrahedron. The

Improved Objective Functions for Tetrahedral Mesh Optimisation

571

positions where v must be located to get N (v) to be valid, i.e., the feasible
region, is the interior of the polyhedral set P deﬁned as P =

M

m=1

Hm , where Hm

are the half-spaces deﬁned by σm (x) 0. This set can occasionally be empty,
for example, when the ﬁxed boundary of N (v) is tangled. In this situation,
function |Kη |p stops being useful as optimisation function. On the other hand,
when the feasible region exists, that is int P = ∅, the objective function tends to
inﬁnity as v approaches the boundary of P . Due to these singularities, a barrier
is formed which avoids reaching the appropriate minimum by using gradientbased algorithms, when these start from a free node outside the feasible region.
In other words, with these algorithms we can not optimise a tangled mesh N (v)
with the above objective function.

3

Modiﬁed Objective Functions

We propose a modiﬁcation in the previous objective function (2), so that the
barrier associated with its singularities will be eliminated and the new function
will be smooth all over R3 . An essential requirement is that the minima of
the original and modiﬁed functions are nearly identical when int P = ∅. Our
modiﬁcation consists of substituting σ in (2) by the positive and increasing
function
h(σ) =

1
(σ +
2

σ 2 + 4δ 2 )

(3)

being the parameter δ = h(0). We represent in Fig. 1 the function h(σ). Thus,
the new objective function here proposed is given by
M

Kη∗

p

p

1
p

∗
(ηm
) (x)

(x) =

(4)

m=1

where
∗
ηm
=

2

|Sm |

(5)

2

3h 3 (σm )

is the modiﬁed objective function for the m-th tetrahedron.
The behaviour of h(σ) in function of δ parameter is such that, lim h(σ) = σ,
δ→0

∀σ ≥ 0 and lim h(σ) = 0, ∀σ ≤ 0. Thus, if int P = ∅, then ∀x ∈ int P we
δ→0

have σm (x) > 0, for m = 1, 2, . . . , M and, as smaller values of δ are chosen,
h (σm ) behaves very much as σm , so that, the original objective function and its
corresponding modiﬁed version are very close in the feasible region. Particularly,
in the feasible region, as δ → 0, function Kη∗ p converges pointwise to |Kη |p .
Besides, by considering that ∀σ > 0, lim h (σ) = 1 and lim h(n) (σ) = 0, for
δ→0

δ→0

n ≥ 2, it is easy to prove that the derivatives of this objective function verify

572

R. Montenegro et al.

the same property of convergence. As a result of these considerations, it may be
concluded that the positions of v that minimise original and modiﬁed objective
functions are nearly identical when δ is small. Actually, the value of δ is selected
in terms of point v under consideration, making it as small as possible and
in such a way that the evaluation of the minimum of modiﬁed functions does
not present any computational problem. Suppose that int P = ∅, then the

Fig. 1. Representation of function h (σ).

original objective function, |Kη |p , is not suitable for our purpose because it is
not correctly deﬁned. Nevertheless, modiﬁed function is well deﬁned and tends to
solve the tangle. We can reason it from a qualitative point of view by considering
that the dominant terms in Kη∗ p are those associated to the tetrahedra with
more negative values of σ and, therefore, the minimisation of these terms imply
the increase of these values. It must be remarked that h (σ) is an increasing
function and Kη∗ p tends to ∞ when the volume of any tetrahedron of N (v)
tends to −∞, since lim h (σ) = 0.
σ→−∞

In conclusion, by using the modiﬁed objective function, we can untangle the
mesh and, at the same time, improve its quality. Obviously, the modiﬁcation
here proposed can be easily applied to other objective functions.
For a better understanding of the behaviour of the objective function and
its modiﬁcation, we propose the following 2-D test example. Let us consider a
simple 2-D mesh formed
by three triangles, vBC, vCA and vAB, where we have
√
ﬁxed A(0, −1), B( 3, 0), C(0, 1) and v(x, y) is the free node. In this case, the
feasible region is the interior of the equilateral triangle ABC. In Fig. 2(a) we
show |Kη |2 (solid line) and Kη∗ 2 (dashed line) as a function of x for a ﬁxed
value y = 0 (the y-coordinate of the optimal solution). The chosen parameter δ
is 0.1. We can see that original objective function presents several local minima
and discontinuities, opposite to the modiﬁed one. Besides, the original function
reach their absolute minimum outside the feasible region. Vertical asymptotes

Improved Objective Functions for Tetrahedral Mesh Optimisation

573

in original objective function correspond to positions of the free node for which
σ = 0 for any tetrahedra of the local mesh. As
√ might be expected, the optimal
solution for the modiﬁed function results in v( 3/3, 0). The original and modiﬁed
functions are nearly identical in the proximity of this point, see Fig. 2(a).

Fig. 2. (a) Transversal cut of |Kη |2 (solid line) and Kη∗ 2 (dashed line) for the 2-D
test example; (b) the same objective functions for the tangled mesh.

Let us√now consider √
the tangled mesh obtained by changing the position of
point B( 3, 0) to B (− 3, 0). Here, the mesh is constituted by the triangles
vB C, vCA and vAB , where vB C and vAB are inverted. The feasible region
does not exist in this new situation. The graphics of functions |Kη |2 and Kη∗ 2
are √
represented in Fig. 2(b). Although the mesh can not be untangled, we get
v(− 3/3, 0) as the optimal position of the free node by using our modiﬁed
objective function. For this position the three triangles are “equally inverted”
(same negative values of σ). In this example the same result could be achieved
by maximising the minimum value of σ in the mesh, as proposed in [9].

4

Applications

To check the eﬃciency of the proposed techniques we ﬁrst consider a regular
mesh of a unit cube with 750 tetrahedra, 216 nodes uniformly distributed and a
maximum valence of 16. In order to get a tangled test mesh, we transform the
unit cube into a greater one (10 × 10 × 10) changing the positions of some nodes
and preserving their connectivities. The inner nodes remains in their original
positions, the nodes sited on the edges of the unit cube are replaced on the
edges of new cube and, ﬁnally, the interior nodes of each face of the unit cube
are projected on the corresponding face of the new cube. The initial tangled
mesh, shown in Fig. 3(a), has 10 inverted tetrahedra and an average quality
measure of qavg = 0.384 (the average quality of the regular mesh is 0.749).

574

R. Montenegro et al.

(a)

(b)
Fig. 3. (a) Initial tangled mesh of a cube and (b) the resulting mesh after twenty four
steps of the optimisation process.

Besides, approximately the 50% of tetrahedra has a very poor quality (less than
0.04). Here we have chosen the quality measure proposed in [7], q = |S |3S −1 , for
m | m |
valid tetrahedra and q = 0 for inverted ones. The result after twenty four sweeps
of the mesh optimisation process with Kη∗ 2 is shown in Fig. 3(b). In this case,
the steepest descent algorithm was used for the optimisation of the objective

Improved Objective Functions for Tetrahedral Mesh Optimisation

575

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

qavg

0.2

qmin

0.1

5

10

15

20

25

Fig. 4. Values of the average quality qavg and the minimal quality qmin in terms of the
number of iterations of the mesh optimisation process for the cube test.

function. In Fig. 4 we present the evolution of the average quality measure, qavg ,
and the minimal quality, qmin , in terms of the number of iterations of the mesh
optimisation process. Note that the average quality initially decreases because
the number of inverted tetrahedra increases in former iterations. The mesh has
22 inverted tetrahedra after the ﬁrst iteration, 33 after the second, 16 after the
third, 11 after the fourth and 0 after the ﬁfth.
We have also used these optimisation techniques to construct 3-D meshes
adapted to complex surfaces as those deﬁned by irregular terrains [13] and [14].
A version of the reﬁnement/dereﬁnement algorithm presented in [6] and the
3-D Delaunay triangulation analysed in [5] are implemented in this mesh generator. In the resulting mesh there can be occasional low quality elements, or
even inverted elements, thus making it necessary to apply any untangling and
smoothing procedure. As application of the mesh generator and the optimisation
procedure we have taken under consideration the “volcano” test problem shown
in Fig. 5. The meshes have 20038 tetrahedra and 4013 nodes, with a maximum
valence of 31. The initial tangled mesh has 576 inverted tetrahedra with an average quality measure qavg = 0.529. The node distribution is modiﬁed during
the optimisation process in such a way that all the inverted elements disappear
in the fourth step of this process and the average quality measure increases to
qavg = 0.615 in the sixth step. We remark that only a few seconds of CPU time
on an XEON were necessary to obtain the optimised mesh applying six steps
of this latter procedure and using BFGS method [2] to minimise the objective
function.

576

R. Montenegro et al.

(a)

(b)
Fig. 5. “Volcano” test problem: (a) initial mesh with 576 inverted tetrahedra and (b)
resulting valid mesh after six steps of the optimisation process.

Improved Objective Functions for Tetrahedral Mesh Optimisation

5

577

Conclusions and Future Research

In this paper we present a way to avoid the singularities of common objective
functions used to optimise tetrahedral meshes. To do so, we propose a modiﬁcation of these functions in such a way that it makes them regular all over R3 .
Thus, the modiﬁed objective functions can be used to smooth and untangle the
mesh simultaneously. The regularity shown by the modiﬁed objective functions
allows the use of standard optimisation algorithms as steepest descent, conjugate gradient, quasi-Newton, etc. In principle, a similar modiﬁcation could be
also applicable to other objective functions having the same behaviour as that
studied here. These techniques can be implemented in a parallel algorithm, as
reported in [8], in order to reduce the computational time of the process.
We have eﬃciently used these techniques in the generation of 3-D meshes
adapted to complex surfaces [13] and [14], and in other applications [15]. A
promising ﬁeld of study would combine the 3-D reﬁnement/dereﬁnement of
nested meshes with node movement, where the ideas presented here could be
introduced. Good recent results have been obtained in [16] and [17] using these
techniques, for determining the shape and size of the elements in anisotropic
problems.

References
1. Bank, R.E., Smith, R.K.: Mesh Smoothing Using a Posteriori Error Estimates.
SIAM J. Numer. Anal. 34 (1997) 979–997
2. Bazaraa, M.S., Sherali, H.D., Shetty, C.M.: Nonlinear Programing: Theory and
Algorithms. John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York, (1993)
3. Djidjev, H.N.: Force-Directed Methods for Smoothing Unstructured Triangular
and Tetrahedral Meshes. Tech. Report, Department of Computer Science, Univ. of
Warwick, Coventry, UK, (2000). Available from http://www.andrew.cmu.edu/user
4. Dompierre, J., Labb´e, P., Guibault, F., Camarero, R.: Proposal of Benchmarks
for 3D Unstructured Tetrahedral Mesh Optimization. In Proc. 7th International
Meshing Roundtable. Sandia National Laboratories (1998) 459–478
5. Escobar, J.M., Montenegro, R.: Several Aspects of Three-Dimensional Delaunay
Triangulation. Adv. Eng. Soft. 27(1/2) (1996) 27–39
6. Ferragut, L., Montenegro, R., Plaza, A.: Eﬃcient Reﬁnement/Dereﬁnement Algorithm of Nested Meshes to Solve Evolution Problems. Comm. Numer. Meth. Eng.
10 (1994) 403–412
7. Freitag, L.A., Knupp, P.M.: Tetrahedral Element Shape Optimization Via the Jacobian Determinant and Condition Number. In Proc. of the 8th International Meshing Roundtable. Sandia National Laboratories (1999) 247–258
8. Freitag, L.A., Jones, M., Plassmann, P.: A Parallel Algorithm for Mesh Smoothing.
SIAM J. Sci. Comput. 20 (2000) 2023–2040
9. Freitag, L.A., Plassmann, P.: Local Optimization-based Simplicial Mesh Untangling and Improvement. Int. J. Numer. Meth. Eng. 49 (2000) 109–125
10. Freitag, L.A., Knupp, P.M.: Tetrahedral Mesh Improvement via Optimization of
the Element Condition Number. Int. J. Numer. Meth. Eng. 53 (2002) 1377–1391
11. Knupp, P.M.: Algebraic Mesh Quality Metrics. SIAM J. Sci. Comput. 23 (2001)
193–218

578

R. Montenegro et al.

12. Knupp, P.M.: Achieving Finite Element Mesh Quality via Optimization of the
Jacobian Matrix Norm and Associated Quantities. Part II - A Frame Work for
Volume Mesh Optimization and the Condition Number of the Jacobian Matrix.
Int. J. Numer. Meth. Eng. 48 (2000) 1165–1185
13. Montenegro, R., Montero, G., Escobar, J.M., Rodr´ıguez, E., Gonz´
alez-Yuste, J.M.:
Tetrahedral Mesh Generation for Environmental Problems over Complex Terrains.
In: Sloot, P.M.A., Tan, C.J.K., Dongarra, J.J., Hoekstra, A.G. (eds.): Computational Science-ICCS’2002. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 2329. SpringerVerlag, Berlin Heidelberg New York (2002) 335–344
14. Montenegro, R., Montero, G., Escobar, J.M., Rodr´ıguez, E.: Eﬃcient Strategies
for Adaptive 3-D Mesh Generation over Complex Orography. Neural, Parallel &
Scientiﬁc Computation 10(1) (2002) 57–76
15. Rodr´ıguez, E., Montero, G., Montenegro, R., Escobar, J.M., Gonz´
alez-Yuste, J.M.:
Parameter Estimation in a Three-dimensional Wind Field Model Using Genetic
Algorithms. In: Sloot, P.M.A., Tan, C.J.K., Dongarra, J.J., Hoekstra, A.G. (eds.):
Computational Science-ICCS’2002. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 2329.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg New York (2002) 950–959
16. Pain, C.C., Umpleby, A.P., Oliveira, C.R.E. de, Goddard, A.J.H.: Tetrahedral Mesh
Optimization for Steady-State and Transient Finite Element Calculations. Comput. Meth. Appl. Mech. Eng. 190 (2001) 3771–3796
17. Tam, A., Ait-Ali-Yahia, D., Robichaud, M.P., Moore, A., Kozel, V., Habashi, W.G.:
Anisotropic Mesh Adaptation for 3-D Flows on Structured and Unstructured Grids.
Comput. Meth. Appl. Mech. Eng. 189 (2000) 1205–1230

