Binary Distillation Column Design Using
Mathematica
Akemi G´alvez and Andr´es Iglesias
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computational Sciences, University of
Cantabria, Avda. de los Castros, s/n, E-39005, Santander, Spain
{galveza,iglesias}@unican.es

Abstract. The accurate design of distillation columns is a very important topic in chemical industry. In this paper, we describe a Mathematica program for the design of distillation columns for binary mixtures.
For simplicity, it is assumed that the columns are designed by following
McCabe-Thiele’s procedure, a graphical method which determines both
the number of stages required for the desired degree of separation and the
location of the feed tray. Then, some other relevant column parameters
(such as the height and diameter of the column, for example) are also
determined. All results are obtained from an adequate combination of
symbolic and numerical calculations taking advantage of the symbolic,
numerical and graphical Mathematica programming tools. We remark
that the same approach can be applied to any other kind of distillation
columns by simply replacing our assumptions by those of each speciﬁc
case. The performance of this program is shown through some illustrative
examples. Finally, potential applications to both teaching and industry
are also discussed.

1

Introduction

Nowadays it is unanimously recognized that chemical industry plays a basic role
in our current technological and industrial development. Very recently, it has
been reported that chemical industry represents a 455-billion-dollar-a-year business and their markets are rapidly expanding worldwide everyday. Its spectrum
of products includes cosmetics and beauty products, phamaceuticals, health care
products, food aditives, liquors and many others. Perhaps, the most typical example that comes to our minds is the gasoline we pump for our cars almost daily.
This gasoline is obtained from crude oil by distillation, undoubtely one of the
most important processes in chemical industry [2].
From the manufacturing point of view, distillation is the most common separation technique. For example, it is the basic ingredient in the oil reﬁning process
to make gasoline, kerosene, diesel fuel, heating oil, chemicals of various grades
for making plastics and other polymers, etc. This process is performed through
distillation columns, which are designed to achieve this separation eﬃciently.
However, they consume enormous amounts of energy, often contributing to more
P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2657, pp. 848–857, 2003.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

Binary Distillation Column Design Using Mathematica

849

than 50% of plant operating costs [9]. From this, it becomes clear that the correct
design of distillation columns is a very important question in industry.
Traditionally, the design of distillation columns has been a numerical task:
during the last three decades many numerical programs have been developed on
a number of standard programming languages such as Pascal, C++ or Visual
Basic, general-purpose numerical packages, such as Matlab [5] or Web-oriented
tools such as Java applets [3]. They are generally based on the idea of manipulating a relatively large number of look-up table numerical data obtained from
experiments and then interpolating them to obtain the vapor-liquid equilibrium
(VLE) curve, which is actually the starting point of the diﬀerent distillation
column design methods. As a second step, an approximation of the diﬀerent
equilibrium rate equations is calculated. However, it has been reported that the
determination of some column parameters (such as the number of trays or their
location, to quote only two examples) can be very susceptible to a great variety
of errors, yielding a more expensive column due to an incorrect design.
Perhaps the most natural solution to overcome this problem is to consider
a symbolic approach. In fact, in the last few years computer algebra systems
(CAS) become one of the most exciting tools for scientiﬁc computing. One of
the most remarkable features of these computer algebra systems is their ability to
integrate very powerful numerical, symbolic and graphical capabilities within a
uniform framework. This feature is specially interesting because the current CAS
are not able to give analytical solutions for all the equilibrium rate equations
and hence, an adequate combination of numerical and symbolic procedures must
be considered instead.
In this paper, we describe a Mathematica program for distillation column
design. Of course, there are many types of distillation columns, each designed to
perform speciﬁc types of separations, and each design diﬀers in terms of complexity. For simplicity, in this paper we restrict ourselves to the case of continuous
distillation columns for binary mixtures. It should be remarked, however, that
our approach is very general in the sense that it can be applied to any other
kind of distillation columns by simply replacing our assumptions by those of
each speciﬁc case. In our example, we assume that the columns are designed
through McCabe-Thiele’s procedure. This is a graphical method which determines the number of stages required for the desired degree of separation and the
location of the feed tray as functions of some parameters of the problem. The
program is general enough to analyze a number of diﬀerent mixtures under different conditions as well as the role of many relevant parameters of this process.
To this end, an adequate combination of symbolic and numerical calculations
is achieved. From these calculations, both numerical and graphical outputs are
obtained. As shown later, the graphical output is actually a Mathematica movie
of McCabe-Thiele’s diagram. Finally, the performance of the design method is
shown through some illustrative examples.
The structure of the paper is as follows: in Section 2 we introduce some basic
concepts and the terminology to be used throughout the paper. Then, Section 3
gives a brief summary of McCabe-Thiele’s method. In Section 4 an illustrative

850

A. G´
alvez and A. Iglesias

example is described in detail. In addition, some comments on the implementation process are also given. Finally, the paper closes with the conclusions and
some further remarks.

2

Distillation: Basic Concepts and Terminology

According to [2], distillation is simply deﬁned as a process in which a liquid
or vapor mixture of two or more substances is separated into its component
fractions of desired purity, by the application and removal of heat. The main
purpose of distillation is to separate a mixture of several components (water
and alcohol, for instance) by taking advantage of their diﬀerent volatilities. For
example, the water boils at 100o C while alcohol boils at only 78.5o C. In this
case, distillation consists of heating this water-alcohol mixture until its more
volatile component (alcohol) passes into the vapor phase. As a consequence, the
vapor that rises is richer in alcohol and poorer in water than the liquid from
which it came. After this heating stage, this vapor is cooled to recover such
component in liquid form by condensation.
If the diﬀerence in volatility (and hence in boiling point) among the components is great, complete separation may be easily accomplished by a single
distillation; otherwise, several redistillations could be required. For example, the
vapor from a single-stage water-alcohol distillation is not actually pure alcohol:
to obtain a 50 % solution (common for whiskey), the distillate must be redistilled
once or twice, and if industrial (95 %) alcohol is desired, many redistillations are
needed.
Distillation is performed through many diﬀerent types of distillation columns.
Two examples of distillation columns are shown in Figure 1. Basically, they can
be classiﬁed into batch columns (the feed to the column is introduced batch-wise)
and the most common continuous columns (no interruptions occur unless there
is a problem with the column or surrounding process units). In this paper we
only focus on binary columns, a kind of continuous columns whose feed contains
only two components (water and alcohol, for instance). Figure 2 shows a typical
equipment for distillation, which often includes a distillation column (indicated
by the dashed square in the ﬁgure), a reboiler and a condenser.
The distillation column (1) consists of several trays (2), which allow the simultaneous travel of liquid down the tray and vapor up the tray, allowing mixing
of the two phases and therefore equilibrium. The liquid mixture that is to be
processed is known as the feed (3) and it is introduced usually somewhere near
the middle of the column to a tray known as the feed tray. The feed tray divides the column into a top (enriching or rectiﬁcation) section (4) and a bottom
(stripping) section (5). The feed ﬂows down the column where it is collected at
the bottom in the reboiler. Heat from the reboiler (6) vaporizes a portion of the
liquid feed, and all vaporous feed travels up the column into rectifying section,
while all liquid feed travels down into the stripping section of the column. When
the liquid reaches the bottom of the column, it is fed into the reboiler were heat
generation causes a portion of liquid to vaporize; when all of the liquid enter-

Binary Distillation Column Design Using Mathematica

851

Fig. 1. Two examples of distillation columns

Condenser (8)
Distillation column (1)

Reflux
drum
(9)

Reflux (10)

{
{

Enriching
(rectification)
section (4)
Feed (3)

Distillate
(11)
Trays (2)

Stripping
section
(5)

Bottoms (7)

Heat in
Reboiler
(6)

Heat out

Fig. 2. Basic scheme of a distillation column

ing from the bottom plate is vaporized, this is called a total reboiler. All vapor
produced is returned to the bottom of the column, while any liquid remaining
is removed as bottom product or bottoms (7).

852

A. G´
alvez and A. Iglesias

A similar event occurs at the top of the column. The vapour moves up the
column, and as it exits the top of the unit, it is cooled by a condenser (8). The
condensed liquid is stored in a holding vessel known as the reﬂux drum (9).
Some of this liquid is recycled back to the top of the column and this is called
the reﬂux (10). The condensed liquid that is removed from the system is known
as the top product or distillate (11). Thus, there are internal ﬂows of vapour and
liquid within the column as well as external ﬂows of feeds and product streams,
into and out of the column.

3

McCabe-Thiele’s Method

One of the most typical methods to calculate the design parameters of the column
is the graphical scheme originally developed by McCabe and Thiele [6]. This
is the simplest method to ﬁnd the number of equilibrium stages for a given
distillation process. It should be remarked, however, that it only can be used
for systems containing two components. Because of that, we usually omit the
component index for the light component, i.e. we write x = x1 (light component)
and x2 = 1−x (heavy component). On the other hand, McCabe-Thiele’s method
also requires some additional assumptions. In particular, it is assumed that:
(1) the molar overﬂow is constant, (2) the molal heats of vaporization of the
components are roughly the same and (3) heat eﬀects are negligible.
Under these conditions, McCabe-Thiele’s method allows us to determine the
theoretical number of stages for the separation of a binary mixture and hence,
the number of trays required for the distillation column design. The method is
also useful to analyze the eﬀects of some column parameters on such a number,
as we will show later.
The ﬁrst step in McCabe-Thiele’s method is to plot the vapor-liquid equilibrium data for a component of the binary mixture of composition xf . To this end,
the compositions of liquid and vapor are plotted on the x-axis and the y-axis
respectively (see Fig. 3(a)). One method for determining the equilibrium curve
is given by:
αx
y=
(1)
1 + (α − 1) x
where α is the geometric average relative volatility of the lighter component with
respect to the heavier one. In this paper we will consider α as a constant. This
assumption holds well for the separation of similar components, for example, for
alcohols or for hydrocarbons. However, this is not true for non-ideal mixtures
such as azeotropes. The picture of Eq. (1) is known as the vapor-liquid equilibrium
(VLE) plot (see Fig. 3(a)). Then, the operating lines deﬁning the mass balance
relationships between the liquid and vapor phases are drawn as follows: ﬁrst,
we set the desired compositions of the destillate xd and the bottoms xb . In the
example of Figure 3 they are 0.85 and 0.05, respectively. The next step is to
plot the operating line for the rectiﬁcation section of the column (the part of the
column above the feed tray, as shown in Fig. 3(c)). This operating line is given
by:

Binary Distillation Column Design Using Mathematica

853

Fig. 3. McCabe-Thiele’s method for binary distillation column design: (a)-(h) diﬀerent
steps of the method (see the body text for details)

854

A. G´
alvez and A. Iglesias

y=

xd
R
x+
R+1
R+1

(2)

R
L
where R =
is called the reﬂux ratio and is a
R+1
D
measure of how much of the material going up the top of the column is returned
back to the column as reﬂux L, the rest being the distillate ﬂow D. Then, we
consider the feed line, plotted from the point (xd , 0) until the straight line y = x
and then, depending on the state of the feed, considering diﬀerent slopes q. For
example, q = 0 corresponds to saturated vapor (see [7] for details). Finally, the
operating line for the stripping section is obtained by tracing a vertical line from
the point (xb , 0) until reaching the diagonal line, and then another line from
such a point (xb , xb ) until the intersection point between the operating line of
the rectiﬁcation section and the feed line, as shown in Figure 3(d).
It is important to remark that the previous scheme describes actually the
case of total eﬃciency. However, in many situations it is more realistic to use of
the so-called Murphree’s eﬃciency Ef ∈ [0, 1]. The consequence of this factor is
a modiﬁcation of the original VLE curve. For example, for Ef = 0.6 the VLE
curve displayed in Figure 3(a) must be replaced by the new VLE curve shown
in Figure 3(e).
The next phase of McCabe-Thiele’s graphical method is the determination
of the number of stages in the distillation process. This is a sequence of similar
steps giving rise to a number of “corner” sections, associated with the stages. To
understand how they are constructed, let x and y denote the liquid and vapor
compositions and the subscripts denote the origin of the ﬂows or compositions.
That is, n − 1 will mean “from the stage below stage n” while n + 1 will mean
“from the stage above stage n”. The liquid in stage n and the vapor above it
are in equilibrium implying that xn and yn lie on the equilibrium curve. Since
the vapour is carried to the tray above without changing composition, this is
depicted as a horizontal line on the VLE plot. Its intersection with the operating
line will give the composition of the liquid on tray n + 1 as the operating line
deﬁnes the material balance on the trays. The composition of the vapour above
the n + 1 tray is obtained from the intersection of the vertical line from this
point to the equilibrium curve. Figure 3(f) shows this process for the third stage
(i.e. for n = 3). Repeating this sequence back from point (xd , xd ) until crossing
the vertical line at xb , the diagram of Figure 3(g) is obtained. The calculation of
the number of stages reduces simply to count the number of “corners” as shown
in 3(g). In our example, we ﬁnally obtained a destillation column with 10 trays,
where this number also includes the reboiler (see Figure 2).
and hence its slope is

4

An Illustrative Example

The method described in the previous section has been implemented as a Mathematica package, called MTBDC.m, where this acronym stands for McCabe-Thiele
Binary Distillation Column. This section describes one example of application

Binary Distillation Column Design Using Mathematica

855

of this program to a equimolar (i.e. xf = 0.5) binary mixture whose relative
volatility is α = 4. Our target is to design a distillation column that obtains
a destillate with 85 % of purity (i.e. xd = 0.85) and bottoms with 5 % of purity (i.e. xb = 0.05). The ﬁrst comand Reflux[xd,xf,alpha] determines three
values: the reﬂux, and the liquid and vapor compositions of the more volatile
component:
In[1]:= Needs["MCBDC‘"]
In[2]:= Reflux[0.85,0.5,4]
Out[2] := {1.75, 0.2, 0.5}
Then, the command OperatingLines[xd,xf,alpha] is applied to the calculation of the operating lines of the rectiﬁcation section (given by Eq. 2) and the
stripping section, shown in Fig. 3(d). The third step is to apply McCabe-Thiele’s
method to determine the number of trays of the column as well as the location
of the feed tray. To this end, we deﬁne the MTPlot command, which accepts ﬁve
diﬀerent arguments, namely, xd , xf , xb , α and the eﬃciency Ef (see Section 3
for details). For example, MTPlot[0.85,0.5,0.05,4,0.6] returns a sequence
of 49 frames corresponding to the diﬀerent steps of McCabe-Thiele’s method.
Eight of these frames are displayed in Figure 3.
One of the most outstanding Mathematica features in this work is the possibility to generate QuickTimeT M movies [1]. For example, the diﬀerent images
in Figure 3 correspond to eight frames of a QuickTime movie that reproduces
McCabe-Thiele’s method in a graphical way. The movie is automatically generated from the MTPlot command. Diﬀerent values of its arguments are associated
with diﬀerent initial mixtures and/or ﬁnal products. This option is specially
valuable for educational and training purposes, as we can obtain a virtually
unlimited set of distillation columns in a fast, simple and free-error way.
McCabe-Thiele’s method does not allow us to determine all the relevant distillation column parameters and thus, some additional equations must also be
considered. The discussion is beyond the scope of this paper and will not be
included here. The interested readers are referred to [2,7] for a detailed description on these topics. At this time it is enough to say that a number of diﬀerent
Mathematica commands incorporating these additional equations have been implemented by the authors in the MTBDC.m package. For example, if we start with
an equimolar mixture of heptane-octane with a relative volatility α = 2.17 and
eﬃciency Ef = 1 and we wish to obtain a destillate with 98 % of heptane and
bottoms with only a 5% of heptane, the column parameters can be determined
as:
In[3]:= ColumnParameters[0.98,0.05,0.5,2.17,1]
Out[3]:= Number of trays = 14 (rebolier included)
Number of Feed tray = 9
Column height = 8.4 meters
Distance between trays = 0.6 meters

856

A. G´
alvez and A. Iglesias

1
3

21

4
5

0.8
V
a
p
o
r
0.6
c
o
m
p
o
s0.4
i
t
i
o
n
0.2

6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
xb

0
0

xf
0.2

0.4
0.6
0.8
Liquid Composition

1
6
0.8
V
a
p
o
r
0.6
c
o
m
p
o
s0.4
i
t
i
o
n
0.2

5

xd
1

21
43

7
8
9
10

11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
xb
xf
0
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Liquid Composition

xd
1

Fig. 4. McCabe-Thiele’s method for an equimolar heptane-octane mixture with xd =
0.98, xf = 0.5, xb = 0.05 and α = 2.17: Ef = 1 (above); Ef = 0.65 (below)

Figure 4 shows the McCabe-Thiele’s diagram of the column for total eﬃciency
Ef = 1 (above) and when the eﬃciency of the process is only a 65 %, that is
Ef = 0.65 (below). In the ﬁrst case, the column has only 14 trays and its height

Binary Distillation Column Design Using Mathematica

857

is 8.4 meters, while in the second case the number of trays increases up to 22
and the column height is now 13.2 meters.

5

Conclusions and Further Remarks

In this paper, we describe a Mathematica program for the design of distillation
columns for binary mixtures through McCabe-Thiele’s method. This program
is adequate simulate a virtually unlimited set of distillation columns as well
as to analyze the role of the diﬀerent parameters involved in a very easy way.
For example, the simple case of Figure 4 shows how much a single parameter
(the eﬃciency of the distillation process, for instance) can inﬂuence the column
design, by modifying many relevant parameters such as the number of trays,
their location and the height and diameter of the column. We can conclude that
the package has a potential from both the industrial and the pedagogical points
of view.
All the commands have been implemented in Mathematica version 4 [12]. The
symbolic capabilities and the powerful Mathematica functional programming [4]
have been extensively used to make the program shorter and more eﬃcient. We
ﬁnally remark that in the case of multicomponent mixtures, the mathematical
representation of the VLE becomes more complex, making necessary to use more
complex equations. This is actually our proposal for future work.

References
1. Apple Computer QuickTime. Web Page: http://www.apple.com/quicktime/
2. Cheremisinoﬀ, N.P.: Handbook of Chemical Processing Equipment, ButterworthHeinemann, Boston, MA (2000)
3. Web page: http://www.eng.usf.edu/˜bhethana/McTh/example.html
4. Maeder, R.: Programming in Mathematica, Second Edition, Addison-Wesley, Redwood City, CA (1991)
5. Web page: http://www.nt.ntnu.no/˜skoge/book/matlab m/cola/cola.html
6. McCabe, W.L., Thiele, E.W.: Graphical design of distillation columns, Ind. Eng.
Chem., 17 (1925) 605
7. McCabe, W.L., Smith, J. C., Harriott, P.: Unit Operations of Chemical Engineering, Sixth Edition, McGraw-Hill, Boston (2001)
8. Nevres, N.: Physical and Chemical Equilibrium for Chemical Engineers, John Wiley and Sons, New York (2002)
9. Peters, M.S., Timmerhaus, K.D.: Plant Design and Economics for Chemical Engineers, Fourth Edition, McGraw-Hill, New York (1991)
10. Skogestad, S.: Dynamics and control of distillation columns. A tutorial introduction, Trans IChemE, Part A, 75 (1997) 539–562
11. Skogestad, S.: Dynamics and control of distillation columns. A critical survey,
Modeling, Identiﬁcation and Control, 18 (1997) 177–217
12. Wolfram, S.: The Mathematica Book, Fourth Edition, Wolfram Media, Champaign,
IL & Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1999)

