Local Correlation Models
Martin Head-Gordon, Troy Van Voorhis, Gregory J.O. Beran, and Barry Dunietz
Department of Chemistry, University of California, and,
Chemical Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley. National Laboratory,
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.
mhg@cchem.berkeley.edu

Abstract. Local correlation models that meet the requirements of a theoretical
model chemistry are discussed. Two types of models are considered. The first
class uses a valence active space that associates one correlating orbital for each
occupied valence orbital. In these models the fundamental quantity is the electron pair; even the simplest local approximation (perfect pairing) exactly treats
an isolated electron pair in this active space. The second class of models uses no
active space. In this case we argue that the most appropriate fundamental quantity is the atom; even the simplest local approximation (atoms-in-molecules) exactly treats an isolated atom.

1 Introduction
Theoretical chemical models are systematic approximations to exact quantum mechanics that traditionally involve two approximations. The first one is a limited treatment of electron correlation. Within wavefunction-based theory this has evolved into a
hierarchy that goes from Hartree-Fock (HF) theory (no correlation) to MP2 theory
(perturbative 2-electron substitutions), to singles and doubles coupled cluster theory
(CCSD; self-consistent 2-electron substitutions), and finally to perturbative inclusion
of 3-electron correlations via CCSD(T). The second approximation, of course, is the
selection of a limited atomic orbital expansion space.
While the correlation treatments mentioned above are convergent in accuracy (at
5
6
least in most usual applications), they increase in cost as M (MP2), M (CCSD), and
7
M (CCSD(T)), as a function of molecule size M. It is clearly highly desirable to reduce these high computational cost scalings. As electron correlation is primarily a
short-range phenomenon, arising from the electron-electron cusp, this is possible by
imposing spatial truncations, forming the basis of low-scaling local correlation methods. The modern era of local correlation research was initiated with the work of Pulay, and Pulay and Sæbø [1], with subsequent important extensions by many others.
In principle, local correlation approximations can be made at a sufficiently conservative level that numerical results (and thus the theoretical chemical model) are unaffected. In practice, however, this approach is probably too conservative, and thus, led
by the ideas of Pulay and Sæbø, much work has been performed on local correlation
P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2660, pp. 96–102, 2003.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

Local Correlation Models

97

approaches that recover a large percentage, though not all, of the correlation energy of
a given approximated theory. Great numerical success has been achieved, including
linear scaling of computation with molecule size [2]. However, the Pulay-Sæbø approach fails to be a well-defined theoretical chemical model, because it depends on
one or more numerical parameters to define which occupied orbitals are correlated by
which unoccupied orbitals. Connected with this issue, it fails to yield properly continuous potential energy surfaces, and therefore has not found major application in
geometry optimizations.
In this article we discuss alternative local correlation models that do satisfy the requirements of a well-defined theoretical model chemistry. In our opinion, these are:
i) The theory should be uniquely defined for any nuclear configuration without any
adjustable parameters, such as thresholds, cutoff lengths, or selection criteria, that
affect the result.
ii) The theory should yield potential energy surfaces that are strictly continuous so
that chemical reactions can be studied.
iii) The theory should yield additive energies when applied to non-interacting systems (size consistency property).
iv) The theory should possess a reasonable degree of accuracy and feasibility.
Clearly more accurate models tend to be less feasible for application to large molecules.

2 Valence Active Space Models
We choose to begin our discussion of local correlation models by assuming that electron correlation is treated not in the full correlating space of all empty (virtual) orbitals, but rather in a limited space of valence orbitals that are divided into a nominally
occupied set and a matching set of nominally empty orbitals [3]. The occupied and
empty orbitals are paired such that there is a 1:1 association between each occupied
orbital j and each corresponding empty (correlating) orbital j*. As a result an isolated
electron pair can be exactly described by a 2-configuration wavefunction, where the
two orbitals, and the excitation amplitude, are to be optimized.
The important thing is that a valence active space of this type (or simple generalizations that associate 2 or 3 or n correlating orbitals with each occupied orbital) partitions the orbital set into spatially localized functions that describe individual electron
pairs separately without repetition or duplication. This contrasts with the situation
when no active space is introduced: then the same virtual functions are usually called
on to describe intrapair correlations in a number of nearby pairs.
The simplest valence active space local correlation model is the one that treats intra-pair correlations exactly, and at the same time completely neglects all interpair
excitations. This is the perfect pairing (PP) model; where the number of 2-electron
substitutions is just linear in the size of the system:

TˆPP =

valence
pairs

∑
i

ti ai†*ai†*ai ai

(1)

98

M. Head-Gordon et al.

In the context of coupled cluster theory, it was first explored by Cullen in the chemical
literature [4]. PP can also be generalized to permit nonorthogonal orbitals [5], which
can overcome some symmetry-breaking artifacts for molecules with multiple resonance structures. Note that the PP model is defined completely without parameters.
Furthermore all orbitals are optimized to minimize the energy. Physically the merit of
the PP model is that it exactly describes the making and breaking of any (or each)
individual electron-pair bond within the valence active space. As molecules are collections of interacting electron pairs, this is clearly a logical starting point for local
correlation modeling.
The next logical level of local correlation must include 2-electron excitations that
also couple together different electrons pairs. 2-electron excitations that couple together two electron pairs without net transfer of electrons are the leading contributions
of this type. Such excitations are responsible for the long-range van der Waals interactions between separated electron pairs. It is likely also to be the dominant part of
short-range pair-pair correlations also. The model which adds these correlations has
been somewhat whimsically defined as “imperfect pairing’ (IP) [6]. It increases the
number of 2-electron correlations from linear in the PP model (intra-pair only) to
quadratic, and thus also necessarily increases the computational complexity. At the
3
present stage [7], its computational cost scales approximately with M , which is
roughly the square root of growth of the full theory including all 2-electron correlations in the valence active space.
It remains somewhat less certain as to how best to define a third level of local correlation modeling in the valence space. At present we are exploring the inclusion of
inter-pair correlations that account for the two possible types of single electron transfers between pairs, as a result of correlated fluctuations. The first type, which might be
called “charge coalescence”, begins with separate electrons in occupied levels of two
different pairs, and excites them into the correlating orbital of just one pair. The second type, “charge splitting”, begins with both electrons in the occupied level of a single pair and promotes them into two correlating levels one of which is on the same
pair, and the other on a different pair. This level of theory could be defined as “singly
ionic pairing” (SIP).

TˆSIP = TˆIP +

∑ {t

pairs

a a a j ai + tiii * j *ai†*a †j *ai ai

i *i * † †
i* i *
ij

ij

}

(2)

An alternative is to additionally include 2-electron transfers between electron pairs or
doubly ionic pairing (DIP).
2-electron excitations also exist that couple together more than two electron pairs.
In particular the most general excitations couple together 4 pairs. We shall not concern
ourselves with 3-pair couplings in this work. We shall use results based on the full 2electron substitution operator as a benchmark against which to test the simpler approximations later. This full theory is then valence optimized doubles (VOD) [8].

Local Correlation Models

99

3 Full Space Models
We turn next to the formulation of local correlation models for the electron correlation
operator when no active space is in use. The localized orbitals spanning the full virtual
space are very effectively defined (that is with very small fractional redundancy) by
projecting the atomic orbitals (AO’s) into the virtual space with 1-P, where P is the 1particle density matrix. This, for a large molecule, automatically gives atom-centered
functions spanning the virtual space, with the same locality properties as P (which of
course is exponentially localized for insulators). Furthermore, these functions are also
atom-labeled as they derive from the atom-labeled AO’s via a direct mapping. So,
while the virtual functions in the case of the valence active space partitioned naturally
amongst the electron pairs (one per pair), here they partition naturally by atoms.
This suggests that we should build up a set of local correlation methods starting
with an atomic partitioning of the orbitals and thus the correlation contributions. To
make such a partitioning possible, we also need to partition the occupied orbitals
amongst the atoms. Except for such uninteresting special cases as noble gas clusters,
an atomic partitioning is not possible with orthogonal orbitals because bonding occupied orbitals are intrinsically shared between atoms. Therefore an over-complete (and
thus non-orthogonal) set must be used to describe the occupied space. The least overcomplete set that we could use is a minimal atomic orbital basis, which gives each
atom a number of functions equal to the sum of its core and valence atomic orbitals.
While these orbitals could be defined using some independent definition (such as
“extracted polarized atomic orbitals”) it is clearly best if they are defined to minimize
the local correlation energy, just as the occupied and virtual functions defining the
valence active space were optimized in the previous section.
The simplest full space local correlation model can now be defined as “atoms-inmolecules” (AIM). First, we express the correlation operator (for whatever method
we are developing the local correlation model) in the combined minimal occupied and
full virtual atomic representation discussed above. Then all correlation amplitudes that
are localized entirely on a single atom are retained, while all correlation amplitudes
coupling together two or more atoms are discarded. This model is manifestly exact for
an isolated atom (or an ensemble of isolated atoms), and is the most drastic local correlation that is sensible.
Note that no parameters enter, and the AIM model meets all the criteria of a welldefined theoretical model chemistry. No results have been reported with the AIM
model hitherto, and so, in the following section, one of our main objectives is to assess
its performance on a judiciously chosen model problem. There are only a linear number of degrees of freedom in the AIM model, and so high-performance low-scaling
implementations should be possible. This work is in progress for MP2 and orbitaloptimized CCD (OD), for which the correlation operator then takes the form:
atoms  occ occ virt virt

TˆAIM = ∑  ∑∑∑∑ tijab aa† ab†a j ai 
(3)
A  i∈A j∈ A a∈ A b∈A

We view AIM as the most reasonable analog of PP for the case when correlation is
allowed in the full space.

100

M. Head-Gordon et al.

The next logical level of local correlation modeling is to include those correlation
amplitudes that couple together pairs of atoms, but without permitting net electron
transfer between them. At the level of 2-electron excitations (correlations), this model,
“diatomics-in-molecules” (DIM) fully recovers long-range correlation. It has already
3
been explored [9] and quite efficiently implemented (M scaling) for large-scale MP2
calculations. However the minimal atomic orbitals were not fully optimized, which is
desirable in future work.
More complete 2-center local correlation models can also be defined, but has not
been explored hitherto, primarily because of implementation challenges that have not
yet been fully overcome. Disregarding practical challenges for the present, it is logical
to next include the two classes of two-center terms responsible for single electron
transfers between atoms. There were previously referred to as “charge coalescence
and charge splitting in the previous section. This model will also be assessed in the
following section via calculations on a toy system. Applied to double (2-electron)
excitations, it includes all 2-center amplitudes apart from those that excite 2 electrons
from one atom to another. They are omitted because they are clearly associated with
basis set superposition effects: two electrons from one atom are correlating their motion by “borrowing” virtual functions from another atom.
Three-center models are also possible, and we have explored them with some success in other work [9]. However we shall not consider them further here.

4 Calculations on a Toy Model
To provide some assessment of how the different local correlation methods discussed
in the previous sections perform, we shall consider some pilot calculations on a simple
toy model system. It consists of 8 H2 molecules, each arranged at the center of the
sides of an octagon. Each intra-molecular H-H distance has its standard value of 0.74
Å, while the intermolecular spacing is variable. The 6-31G basis was used for the
calculations, and the calculations were performed with test codes that were attached to
the Q-Chem program package [10].
The results of local MP2 calculations using various local models discussed above
are presented in Table 1, as a function of intermolecular spacing. The quantity reported is the percentage of the full MP2 correlation energy recovered by each local
correlation method. We note that all local models are exact for isolated H2 molecules,
and thus the interesting regime is the transition from highly localized electronic structure (nearly non-interacting H2 molecules) towards more and more de-localized electronic structure. At the same time, in terms of electron correlation we are changing
from well-separated electron pairs completely dominated by intra-pair correlation
towards less and less distinct sets of pairs, where inter-pair correlations are becoming
stronger in both absolute and relative senses. So, while these are toy calculations, they
can still pose a challenging test for local correlation methods.

Local Correlation Models

101

Table 1. Local MP2 calculations using the AIM, DIM, and DIM+SI models. The results are
expressed as percentage recovery of the full MP2/6-31G correlation energy for this system,
which is a ring of hydrogen molecules, with various intermolecular spacings. To roughly characterize the electronic structure of the system at each separation, the bandwidth and bandgaps
obtained with canonical Hartree-Fock orbitals are also reported. All calculations used a minimal
basis of modified atomic orbitals to span the occupied space

R /Å
EHOMO-E1 /eV
ELUMO-EHOMO /eV
AIM /%
DIM /%
+ singly ionic /%

1.9
2.72
19.27
95.87
99.36
99.84

1.5
5.58
17.74
91.23
98.73
99.49

1.2
9.63
15.37
83.22
97.82
98.85

1.0
13.88
12.73
74.94
96.82
98.21

0.8
20.11
8.76
65.28
95.12
97.31

A quite rapid convergence of the results towards 100% is seen for this hierarchy of
3 models. The very strongly truncated AIM model still recovers clearly the leading
contribution of electron correlation. It is quite possible that this will be a useful starting point for the development of local coupled cluster methods. The DIM model then
recovers a substantial majority of the correlation neglected by the AIM model, substantiating its value as the next level of model. Singly ionic pair terms in turn cover a
majority of the remaining discrepancy in this model system. Roughly we estimate that
stable molecules might correspond to roughly between 1.2 and 1.5 in this toy system.
Table 2. Local valence coupled cluster doubles calculations using the PP, IP, SIP and DIP
models. The results are expressed as percentage recovery of the full VOD/6-31G correlation
energy for this system, which is the same as used for Table 1. All calculations used the PP
orbitals

R /Å
PP /%
IP /%
SIP /%
DIP /%

1.9
97.9
99.1
99.9
100.0

1.5
93.9
96.4
99.3
99.5

1.2
85.9
90.6
97.1
98.0

1.0
75.6
82.4
92.6
94.8

0.8
60.0
75.4
82.8
87.4

In Table 2, we summarize a similar series of calculations on exactly the same systems, but this time using valence coupled cluster methods truncated with the local
correlation models discussed in Sec. 2. These results are generally similar to those
reported in Table 1. PP, containing just a linear number of degrees of freedom, nevertheless recovers the leading correlation contributions. IP is perhaps slightly less successful than DIM at correcting for the missing correlations, although it is still clearly a
significant improvement. The singly ionic (SIP) and doubly ionic (DIP) pairing models add successively smaller improvements.
Overall, the results in Tables 1 and 2 provide a useful quantification of the performance of the local correlation models discussed here for a simple but illustrative

102

M. Head-Gordon et al.

model system. We hope to present additional calculations and studies that further
characterize these methods in due course, as well as algorithmic developments that
permit efficient implementation.

Acknowledgments. This work was supported by a grant from the Department of
Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, SciDAC Computational Chemistry Program
(Grant No. DE-FG02-01ER403301).

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

9.

10.

Saebo, S.; Pulay, P.: Local Treatment of Electron Correlation. Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem.
44 (1993) 213–236
Schutz, M.; Werner, H. J.: Low-order scaling local electron correlation methods. IV.
Linear scaling local coupled-cluster (LCCSD). J. Chem. Phys. 114 (2001) 661–681
Goddard, W. A.; Harding, L. B.: Description of Chemical Bonding from Ab initio Calculations. Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 29 (1978) 363–396
Cullen, J.: Generalized valence bond solutions from a constrained coupled cluster
method. Chem. Phys. 202 (1996) 217–229
Van Voorhis, T.; Head-Gordon, M.: A nonorthogonal approach to perfect pairing. J.
Chem. Phys. 112 (2000) 5633–5638
Van Voorhis, T.; Head-Gordon, M.: The imperfect pairing approximation. Chem. Phys.
Lett. 317 (2000) 575–580
Van Voorhis, T.; Head-Gordon, M.: Implementation of generalized valence bondinspired coupled cluster theories. J. Chem. Phys. 117 (2002) 9190–9201
Sherrill, C. D.; Krylov, A. I.; Byrd, E. F. C.; Head-Gordon, M.: Energies and analytic
gradients for a coupled-cluster doubles model using variational Brueckner orbitals: Application to symmetry breaking in O-4(+). J. Chem. Phys. 109 (1998) 4171–4181
Lee, M. S.; Maslen, P. E.; Head-Gordon, M.: Closely approximating second-order Moller-Plesset perturbation theory with a local triatomics in molecules model. J. Chem.
Phys. 112 (2000) 3592–3601
Kong, J.; White, C. A.; Krylov, A. I.; Sherrill, D.; Adamson, R. D.; Furlani, T. R.; Lee,
M. S.; Lee, A. M.; Gwaltney, S. R.; Adams, T. R.; Ochsenfeld, C.; Gilbert, A. T. B.;
Kedziora, G. S.; Rassolov, V. A.; Maurice, D. R.; Nair, N.; Shao, Y. H.; Besley, N. A.;
Maslen, P. E.; Dombroski, J. P.; Daschel, H.; Zhang, W. M.; Korambath, P. P.; Baker, J.;
Byrd, E. F. C.; Van Voorhis, T.; Oumi, M.; Hirata, S.; Hsu, C. P.; Ishikawa, N.; Florian,
J.; Warshel, A.; Johnson, B. G.; Gill, P. M. W.; Head-Gordon, M.; Pople, J. A.: Q-Chem
2.0: A high-performance ab initio electronic structure program package. J. Comput.
Chem. 21 (2000) 1532–1548

