Telecommunication Network Modeling and
Planning Tool on ASP Clusters
P. Bacquet, O. Brun, J.M. Garcia, T. Monteil, P. Pascal, and S. Richard
DELTA Partners SA ANITE Group and LAAS-CNRS, Toulouse, France
monteil@laas.fr
http://www.laas.fr/CASP

Abstract. The development of Internet allows to consider new execution paradigm in industrial context: ASP model (Application Service
Provider). An interesting execution support to implement this concept is
clusters of PC. General principles of the ASP are described. The architecture for the resource manager and watcher is described. A set of existing
or created tools to materialize a solution to this problem is explained.
An industrial telecommunication modeling and planning software is used
on the ASP. In particular, the analytical performance evaluation kernel
of this software is parallelized on the cluster through the ASP. Several
results on cluster are given.

1

Introduction

Many users around the world need a set of applications to administer the companies, to manage relations with customers or to solve scientiﬁc problems. Those
kinds of software could be heavy, expensive and sometimes made with many speciﬁc components depending on utilization (plug in notion). They could require
speciﬁc help during hard work time or for complex problems. They could also
need powerful computers (processor, memory or data storage) and the purchase
of a lot of licenses for punctual work.
For diﬀerent reasons (ﬁnancial, human resources, complexity of solution, ...) ,
the potential user of those software could have diﬃculties to eﬃciently use those
applications on the machine in his oﬃce. Another aspect, is the response time
requested for the application which can be very short.
A solution to those problems is to use remote applications on remote resources: ASP model (Application Service Provider) to save money and time. The
most common way to oﬀer all those services is to use Internet or Intranet. The
machines that could run those remote applications should be multi-processors
for parallel or sequential applications. The clusters of PC is, at this time, the best
execution support due to its low price and its capacity of scalability, modularity
and evolution.
Nevertheless, the utilization of clusters in ASP model requires speciﬁc software to administrate the clusters, to manage the resources, to communicate
through the network and to insure security. An important aspect for industrial
P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2659, pp. 514–523, 2003.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

Telecommunication Network Modeling and Planning Tool on ASP Clusters

515

utilization is to insure high availability, diﬀerent classes of quality of service and
exact accounting.
This article deals with an ASP solution developed in the CASP project (Clusters for Application Service Providers)1 and its validation on the NetQUAD
telecommunication modeling software (DELTA Partners SA, a company of Anite group) [1]. The main contributions of this article are to propose a set of tools
to create ASP on clusters and to present the experiments done on an industrial
application. In Sect. 2, an ASP model is proposed. Then, the NetQUAD software
is described. A speciﬁc NetQUAD plug-in for ASP utilization and a new parallel
kernel are detailed. Finally, some results are given on an ASP cluster.

2

ASP Model Proposed

2.1

Introduction

CASP (Clusters for Application Service Providers) project aims at creation of
remote Internet services on a cluster for high performance applications. Two
entities are deﬁned: the customers and the providers. The providers own the
resources (processors, disks, memory and applications servers) and the customers
possess all the necessary tools to express their needs (quality of service, resources,
software). The providers and the customers could be in the same network area, in
this case the network used is an Intranet. The providers could also be outside the
customers company. In this case the network between customers and providers
could be dedicated or free like the Internet.
Cluster architecture is used because of its extension capacities and modularity
capacities. A software infrastructure is needed to manage the cluster in order
to make ASP. Resources management with quality of service and an Internet
portal are also needed.
The goal of this project is to put on the market a generic product for ASP
running on Linux with an end to end solution. It is composed of:
– Software managing reliable communications between a client and a remote
application.
– Tools to guarantee a quality of service to make an industrial and commercial
use (resources management, high availability).
– Software to manage the provider platform.
The project allows to use cluster in an industrial and commercial world, in
the supercomputing and ASP domain.
1

This project is a cooperation between Alinka SA, Delta Partners SA group Anite and
LAAS-CNRS and is funded by the French Ministry of Industry and RNTL (Reseau
National des Technologies Logicielles)

516

2.2

P. Bacquet et al.

AROMA

AROMA (scAlable ResOurces Manager and wAtcher) is the part of CASP integrating all the necessary tools to manage the remote execution with a deﬁned
quality of service to produce an ASP. AROMA integrates a resource management system [2,3], an application launcher and an accounting system. This tool
is an evolution of works done on Network-Analyser system [4].
It must have an easy-to-use graphical interface which must adapt to diﬀerent
classes of users: resource customers, administrators. They have access to diﬀerent
dynamic services: visualization of dynamic and static information on resources
(CPU, memory, network, libraries) on diﬀerent times (last seconds, minutes,
hours, days, weeks, months, years) and mapping services. The customers can use
diﬀerent services depending on their permissions. The user interface is dynamic
and depends on permissions and evolution of the services. A client deﬁnes a
contract with the provider. According to this contract, the provider guarantees
a quality of service and the client pays according to the account.
At ﬁrst (Fig. 1), the customers build all the necessary information for the
job to execute. The connection to the remote system is deﬁned with a login, a
group and a contract key. The contract will deﬁne utilization of resources and
quality level for the remote execution. The ﬁrst connection is used to deﬁne the
diﬀerent permissions on all the AROMA systems services and on the remote
applications controlled by AROMA. The data base of AROMA is used to do
this. It is also used to update or load services on the client host. It could be
new services given to customers or services acquired with an evolution of their
contract. It is dynamic and transparent for users.
A request is sent to AROMA to execute all or a part of the work. A negotiation is established between AROMA and the application depending on the
quality of service. Finally the job is executed into AROMA environment.
AROMA is able to control the execution (real time resources consummation,
end of application detection). This functionality is used by the accounting system
for example to stop a job which has consumed too many resources. When the
remote application is ﬁnished, customers are advertised and can manually or
automatically get the results.
The AROMA resource manager has to face three problems: portability, dynamicity and eﬃciency.
– Portability: The Java programming language has been chosen to ensure
portability. It guarantees code portability without re-writing.
– Dynamicity: Two levels of dynamicity can be distinguished. Dynamicity
due to changes in the cluster topology and dynamicity due to users permissions. Both aspects are resolved using Jini technologies and Java Remote
Method Invocation system 2 . Jini communication protocols are used to detect
changes in the cluster architecture, while RMI dynamic class downloading is
used to oﬀer diﬀerent services depending on the client permissions.
2

Java, all Java-based marks, Jini and all Jini-based marks are trademarks or registered
trademarks of Sun Microsystems, Inc. in the U.S. and other countries.

Telecommunication Network Modeling and Planning Tool on ASP Clusters

517

Administration
Customers
Local Applications

Aroma API

− Connection
− Get permissions on Aroma Services
and update/load services

WEB Portal
− Send Request for Remote execution
− Negociating of Quality of Service
Internet and/or Intranet
− Get Results

WEB Portal

AROMA
resources
management

AROMA Data Base
(Users, Observations,
Applications)

Cluster and
software
administration
Remote Applications
Providers

Fig. 1. Communication between customers and providers

– Eﬃciency: Mapping with Quality of Service implies watching a lot of resources. The mapping decision has to be as quick as possible and must not
create a system overload. C language is used to collect system dependent
information in a very eﬃcient way. Communication between C modules and
Java servers is ensured using the Java Native Interface.
2.3

WEB Portal

With the Internet portal an enterprise can have a personalized access to its
applications. All dialogues between clients and providers use a WEB portal to
insure security and transparent communications (Fig. 1).
2.4

Clusters and Application Administration

To insure a good quality of service of the whole system in a cluster utilization, the
software Alinka raisin [5] is used. It manages quick installation and conﬁguration
of Linux kernel and useful software. Installation and management of clusters
could be done using Alinka raisin. It helps providers to manage diﬀerent clusters
and operating system version. It could automatically create the architecture of
AROMA. It is also used to link UNIX users on the provider clusters and remote
users on the customer machine.

3
3.1

Telecom Modeling Application
Principle

The NetQUAD Network Planning Tool. NetQUAD is a software suite that
provides a set of tools for the design, optimization and performance evaluation

518

P. Bacquet et al.

of large scale telecommunication networks [6]. Most network technologies are
included in the various plug-in: Telephone networks, IP networks, IP-DiﬀServMPLS networks, ATM, Frame Relay, SDH. This software is used by many operators and manufacturers.
A key point in the NetQUAD kernel is the diﬀerential traﬃc theory that is
used for the analytical modeling of stochastic traﬃc (link carried traﬃcs, end to
end carried traﬃcs, blocking probabilities, waiting times, jitter ...) [7,8]. These
models are very accurate and far more faster than discrete event simulations for
performance evaluation of large scale telecommunication systems with complex
routing and complex traﬃc patterns [9].
Nevertheless solving the whole set of non-linear coupled diﬀerential equations
can take several hours of computing time for real networks. Computing time
reduction is a major issue when one is interested in testing several changes in
the network or implementing iterative optimization algorithms.
In the following we describe the circuit-switched models used in the
NetQUAD Telephony plug-in and how these models have been parallelized in
order to drastically reduce the computing times for very large scale networks
(millions of ﬂows, thousands of links, etc.).

Circuit-Switched Network Modeling in NetQUAD. Using classical exponential inter arrival time and service time laws, a rigorous description of the
state of a circuit-switched network is given by a Markov chain. Though such
hypothesis can be practically veriﬁed, they are not suited for modeling because
of the huge number of states that need to be considered in a real network.
It is the aim of “traﬃc modeling” (queuing theory) to give ways to evaluate
network performances such as the mean and variance of carried traﬃcs as well
as nodes and trunks blocking probabilities [10,11].
Theoretical studies have permitted to study the form of the mean diﬀerential
equation associated with each network resource in the case of simple “cells” [12,
13]. These cells reﬂect classical “serial/parallel” structures that can be found
within a network. This analysis has been done for call routing combining loadsharing and overﬂow. The ﬁrst fundamental idea, developed within NetQUAD
Telephony, is to model the traﬃc starting from the exact diﬀerential equation
of each traﬃc ﬂow. The second idea is to approximate blocking probabilities
by means of ﬁctitious oﬀered traﬃcs (equivalent traﬃcs) linked to such set of
diﬀerential equations.
Finally, the model is described by a set of ordinary diﬀerential equations
whose structure (and number of equations) depends on the call routing rules.
Within this model, call routing is generic; this allows any network topology
associated to any call routing mechanism (multiple overﬂows and cross-overﬂows,
load-sharing on primary or overﬂow routes, etc.)
These studies have led to the deﬁnition of a new eﬃcient and generic
tool targeted to circuit-switched networks performance analysis. NetQUAD
Telephony includes an algorithm named VTAM (Voice Traﬃc Analytical

Telecommunication Network Modeling and Planning Tool on ASP Clusters

519

Modeling), the numerical translation of this model. The main advantages of
VTAM are the following:
– good accuracy compared to other approaches,
– dynamical model avoiding heavy event-driven simulations when the need to
study transient behavior arises,
– easy computation of the stationary solution due to an eﬃcient ﬁxed point
algorithm (contraction property),
– diﬀerentiable with respect to network parameters (allowing gradients computation and parameter optimization).
In particular, the ﬁxed point algorithm used to solve the nonlinear system
of equations works as follows. At each iteration, once the blocking probabilities have been computed, new values of carried traﬃcs are computed according
to the traﬃc nonlinear equations. These equations are applied for each traﬃc
ﬂow independently. The blocking probabilities on trunks, set of trunks or path,
are then updated by applying the Erlang-B formula to ﬁctitious oﬀered traﬃcs.
This process is repeated until the global convergence of the blocking probabilities.
VTAM Parallel Algorithm. The most straightforward way to take advantage of the inherent parallelism of the VTAM algorithm is to use a synchronous data parallel approach. It consists in partitioning the set of all ﬂows
into several independent separate subsets. Each subset is assigned to one processor.
The assignment of the N ﬂows to the K parallel tasks is of course a major
issue in achieving a good load-balancing. Assigning nearly N/K ﬂows to each
task does not always lead to a good load-balancing. Indeed the computational
load of a parallel task greatly depends on the number of routing commands ri
of the ﬂows i assigned to that task.
The assignment policy we have used can be described as follows. Let l1j and
l2j be respectively the ﬁrst and last ﬂows assigned to task j = 0, . . . , K − 1.
Obviously, we have the following relations (1):
l10 = 0, l11 = l20 + 1, . . . , l1K − 1 = l2K−2 + 1

and l2K−1 = N − 1

(1)

For tasks j = 0, . . . , K −2, the last ﬂow l2j assigned to task j can be computed
recursively using the following formula (2):
l2j = min{k > l1j−1 such that

k

N

ri >
i=l1j

ri /K}

(2)

i=0

Experimental results have shown that this assignment policy allows to obtain
a very good load-balancing of the parallel tasks.
Once ﬂows have been assigned to tasks, the associated nonlinear system
of diﬀerential equations is solved. To this end, the K parallel tasks iteratively

520

P. Bacquet et al.

performs a ﬁxed point algorithm. This parallel algorithm is based on the message
passing paradigm and uses the MPI communication library. Iteration k of this
algorithm proceeds as follows:
1. Computation of Carried Traﬃcs. Each task j = 0, . . . , K − 1 computes
new values of carried traﬃcs Xjl (k) for each link l using its own subset of
ﬂows. This computation is done independently by the K tasks using the
same algorithm than in the sequential algorithm.
2. Global Reduction Operation. Each task j = 0, . . . , K − 1 exchanges
its vector (Xj0 (k), . . . , XjL (k)) of carried traﬃcs with all other tasks and
K−1
computes the global carried traﬃc X l (k) = j=0 Xjl (k) for each link l.
3. Update of Blocking Probabilities. Each task j = 0, . . . , K − 1 independently updates the blocking probabilities of each link, set of links or path
using the carried traﬃcs X l (k), l = 0, . . . , L.
This process is repeated until the global convergence of the blocking probabilities.
3.2

ASP Utilization

Interactions between NetQUAD and CASP servers are illustrated by (Fig. 2).
NetQUAD connection to AROMA is made without any change to the
NetQUAD initial code. All the work is performed by a special plug-in called
the Interactor.
The aim of the Interactor is to handle the communication work between the
local NetQUAD and the CASP servers. The Interactor uses both NetQUAD
and AROMA Application Programming Interfaces to perform authentication,
authorization, submission, reporting and negotiation.
Authorization and authentication is done in two steps. First, a local veriﬁcation is made in order to know if the user owns a NetQUAD license, then a
remote veriﬁcation is done to test if the user is known as an AROMA client.
This remote veriﬁcation is performed with each later communication between
the Interactor and the CASP servers in order to be sure that the user has right
to make the associated operation.

CASP Cluster

Client host
Interactor

CASP server
User DataBase

NetQUAD

Licence manager

Parallel
Modeling
Application
Reporting logs

Fig. 2. Interaction between NetQUAD and CASP servers

Telecommunication Network Modeling and Planning Tool on ASP Clusters

521

Once the user has been identiﬁed as an AROMA client, he can submit its jobs.
The Interactor then communicates with the CASP servers to make reporting or
to collect results. Both operations can be done in-line or in batch mode.
An AROMA client is linked to a contract which speciﬁed the client limitations
on resources utilization (globally: number of processors, maximum cpu time,
memory size...). For every new submission, a veriﬁcation is performed to test if
the user respects its contract resource limitations. If it not the case, the Interactor
is in charge of modifying and re-submitting the NetQUAD request so that it can
suit the user contract limitations.
3.3

Validation on ASP Cluster

The results given in the following have been obtained on a linux PC cluster.
The main features of the cluster nodes are given in Table 1. These nodes are
interconnected by a 1 Gb/s myrinet network.
The testbed networks used to assess the performance of the parallel algorithm
are described in Table 2. The AN2 topology approaches real topologies with very
large trunk groups. The AN2-C/2 topology has been obtained from the AN2
topology by reducing the link capacities by a factor 2.
The parallel computing times obtained on the linux PC cluster with the 4
testbed networks are given in Fig. 3a while the corresponding parallel speedups
are shown in Fig. 3b.
The best speedups are obtained for the large size networks AN2 and AN2C/2. For the AN2-C/2 topology, the computing time falls from 138 seconds on 1
Table 1. Main features of the cluster nodes
Number of Processors
2
Model Name
Pentium III (Katmai)
CPU MHz
451.032
RAM memory
128 MB
Cache Size
512 KB
Table 2. Main features of the testbed networks
Number of Nodes
Number of Links
Average capacity per link
Number of ﬂows
Total Traﬃc (Erlangs)
Max Number of Hops
Max number of OverFlows
Number of Iterations
Size of the input ﬁle (MB)

EN2
113
287
136.64
12321
12321
3
1
5
19.9

AN1
208
388
380.94
11200
11200
4
1
3
42

AN2 AN2-C/2
312
312
606
606
532.83 266.41
25200 25200
25200 25200
4
4
1
1
3
40
100
100

522

P. Bacquet et al.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 3. VTAM computing times and parallel speedups

processor to only 27.9 seconds on 6 processors. However, when the I/O processing
time is a signiﬁcant part of the computing time, worst speedups are obtained.

4

Conclusion

The ASP model developed in the CASP project will respond to industrial needs.
Many high performance application will use remote Internet services on cluster
with ASP. The Internet portal guarantees security and transparency to industrial
customers. The client part is portable (use of Java Virtual Machine) and the API
allows to convert diﬀerent applications to the ASP model.
The ASP concept developed within the CASP project has been validated
using the NetQUAD telecommunication modeling software, an industrial application used by many operators and manufacturers around the world. The new
NetQUAD parallel plug-in speciﬁcally developed for ASP execution on cluster
demonstrates the power of this concept. As can be seen from the experimental
results, such analytic simulations are eﬃciently parallelized on clusters and can
also support remote execution by using input and output ﬁles.
New researches are undertaken in order to supply several grades of service to
applications running on the parallel cluster according to contracts between the
customers and the provider.

References
1. http://www.anite.com
2. Sun Grid Engine. http://www.gridengine.sunsource.net
3. Karl Czajkowski, Ian Foster, Nick Karonis, Carl Kesselman and Stuart Martin.
A resource management architecture for metacomputing systems. Proceedings 4th
workshop on Job Scheduling Strategies for Parallel Processing,pp 62–82 SpringerVerlag LNCS 1459, 1998.

Telecommunication Network Modeling and Planning Tool on ASP Clusters

523

4. T. Monteil, J.M. Garcia Task Allocation Strategies on Workstations Using Processor Load Prediction. PDPTA97, International Conference on Parallel and Distributed Processing Techniques and Applications, pp. 416–421, Las Vegas USA,
1997
5. http://www.alinka.com
6. http://www.delta.fr
7. JM Garcia, D. Gauchard, O. Brun, P. Bacquet, J. Sexton and E. Lawless.
Mod´elisation Diﬀ´erentielle et Simulation Hybride Distribu´ee, R´eseaux et Syst`emes
R´epartis, Volume 13, No 6, 2001.
8. Garcia J.M. A new approach for analytical modelling of packet switched telecommunication networks . LAAS Research Report N o 98443, 1998.
9. Misra J. Distributed Discrete-Event Simulation. ACM Computing Surveys, Vol.18,
N o 1, 1986.
10. Roberts, J. et al Eds Broadband Network Teletraﬃc, Final Report of Action Cost
242. Springer Berlin, 1996.
11. Takacs, L. Introduction to the Theory of Queues. Oxford University Press, 1962.
12. Garcia J. M., Le Gall F. et Bernussou J. A model for telephone networks and its
use for routing optimization purposes, newblock IEEE Journal on selected areas in
communication, Special issue on communication network performance evaluation,
Vol. 4, No 6, september 1986.
13. Garcia J.M. Probl`emes li´es a
` la mod´
elisation du traﬃc et a
` l’acheminement des
appels dans un r´eseau t´el´ephonique. Th`ese de doctorat, Universit´e Paul sabatier
(Toulouse), 1980.

