On the Extraction of the Valid Speech-Sound by
the Merging Algorithm with the Discrete
Wavelet Transform
Jin Ok Kim1 , Han Wook Paek2 , Chin Hyun Chung2 , Jun Hwang3 , and
Woongjae Lee3
1

School of Information and Communication Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University,
300, Chunchun-dong, Jangan-gu, Suwon, Kyunggi-do, 440-746, KOREA
jinny@ece.skku.ac.kr
2
Department of Information and Control Engineering, Kwangwoon University,
447-1, Wolgye-dong, Nowon-gu, Seoul, 139-701, KOREA
chung@kw.ac.kr
3
Division of Information and Communication Engineering, Seoul Women’s
University, 126, Kongnung2-dong, Nowon-gu, Seoul, 139-774, KOREA
wjlee@swu.ac.kr

Abstract. A valid speech-sound block can be classiﬁed to provide important information for speech recognition. The classiﬁcation of the speechsound block comes from the MRA(multi-resolution analysis) property of
the DWT(discrete wavelet transform), which is used to reduce the computational time for the pre-processing of speech recognition. The merging
algorithm is proposed to extract valid speech-sounds in terms of position
and frequency range. It needs some numerical methods for an adaptive
DWT implementation and performs unvoiced/voiced classiﬁcation and
denoising. Since the merging algorithm can decide the processing parameters relating to voices only and is independent of system noises, it is
useful for extracting valid speech-sounds. The merging algorithm has an
adaptive feature for arbitrary system noises and an excellent denoising
SNR (signal-to-noise ratio).

1

Introduction

In the case of building a speech recognition system, we spend a lot of time in
tuning up the pre- or post-process of an imported speech because the quality of
the pre- or post-process is sometimes dependent on the range of the speech that
is coming in or out. Even a valid speech may overlap with some high frequency
noises. The Fourier transform method to extract valid speech takes a lot of
processing time and is limited in the frequency analysis. Since a zero-crossing
method is very sensitive to external noises, it could be ineﬀective [1].
In order to obtain reliable and valid speech, the MRA property is proposed
because it can track and reconstruct the unvoiced phonemes in speech. The merging algorithm is proposed to extract valid speech data, especially the unvoiced
speech-sound blocks that consider position and frequency range.
P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2657, pp. 314−322, 2003.
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

On the Extraction of the Valid Speech-Sound

315

When extracting a valid speech-sound block, much work has to be devoted
to the search of the frequency range included in the voiced/unvoiced speech and
in each of its positions. However, the simultaneous analysis of the frequency
and time (position) can hardly be obtained by the Fourier transform [2] [3].
Extracting data from the desired frequency range of the original signal by the
DWT involves considering the denoising eﬀect and the compression eﬀect on the
speech signal [4] [5] [6] [7]. Thus, the DWT is used for simultaneous analysis and
for a decrease in its computational amount.
The merging algorithm is therefore proposed to discriminate between valid
phonemes and silence.

2

Discrete Wavelet Transform

In general, a wavelet is a small wave which has its energy concentrated in time.
It can be used to give a tool for the analysis of transient, nonstationary, or timevarying phenomena. A wavelet still maintains an oscillating wavelike characteristic but also has the ability to allow simultaneous time and frequency analysis
with a ﬂexible mathematical foundation [4] [8]. The two-dimensional parameters are achieved from a function called “the generating wavelet” or “mother
wavelet” [9], ψ(t) by
ψj,k (t) = 2j/2 ψ(2j t − k),
ϕj,k (t) = 2j/2 ϕ(2j t − k),

j, k ∈ Z

(1)

j, k ∈ Z

(2)

j/2

maintains a constant norm.
where Z is the set of all integers and the factor 2
The parameters of the time or space location by k and the frequency or scale
(actually the logarithm of scale) by j turn out to be extraordinarily eﬀective [10].
The goal is to generate a set of expansion functions so that any signal L2 (R)
can be represented by the series
aj,k 2j/2 ψ(2j t − k)

f (t) =

(3)

j,k

where the two-dimensional set of coeﬃcients aj,k is called the discrete wavelet
transform of f (t). The MRA property of the DWT is well deﬁned in the implementation [11], which is formulated by requiring a nesting of the spanned spaces
as
(4)
· · · ⊂ V−1 ⊂ V0 ⊂ V1 ⊂ V2 ⊂ · · · ⊂ L2
or
Vj ⊂ Vj+1

for all j ∈ Z

with
V−∞ = {0},

V∞ = L2

(5)
(6)

J−1

f (t) =

cJ0 (k)ϕJ0 ,k (t) +
k

dj (k)ψj,k (t)
k j=J0

(7)

316

J.O. Kim et al.
Sn

Daubechies 6

Extraction

Windowing
AMDF

Valid block
mask

Thresholding

Merging
algorithm

Fig. 1. Processing diagram

3

Merging Algorithm

A band in which the vowels or voiced sounds are dominant in the speech signal
is selected for analysis. The statistical results of many vowels of adult males and
females indicate that the ﬁrst formant frequency does not exist below approximately 100 Hz [10] [12] [13]. However, the unvoiced sound is spread over all
frequencies as noise. Thus, when searching for valid unvoiced speech sounds, one
can make the following assumptions;
– The energy of noise is less than the valid voiced sound.
– The valid unvoiced sound wraps the voiced sound.
– The valid unvoiced sound spreads over the band that is less than about 3
kHz.
In general, a speech sound obtained by a microphone includes less noise than a
valid unvoiced speech sound [14] [15]. However, if a system is constructed in real
ﬁelds, denoising high frequency noises is included [16]. The merging algorithm is
proposed to focus on denoising and the extraction of the unvoiced speech-sound
block.
The silence-discrimination method that uses energy and zero-crossing is useful in the case of an extremely high SNR (signal-to-noise ratio). However, such
ideal conditions are not practical for most application environments in which
a neighboring device occasionally generates high frequency noises. The merging
algorithm is used in the extraction process with a position array of each phoneme
and a higher frequency of unvoiced speech than of voiced speech. Several processes are dedicated to the extraction of the valid block in order to merge each
phoneme block. These are processed in terms of the phoneme-block to increase
the discrimination property.
Figure 1 shows a block diagram of the merging algorithm and its detailed
algorithm is described in Algorithm 1.
Figure 2 shows an array of phonemes. The signal is merged with the information and the pre-deﬁned rules. In general, a person produces speech at an average
rate of about 10 phonemes per second. Therefore, for classiﬁcation purposes, at

On the Extraction of the Valid Speech-Sound

317

Algorithm 1: The Merging Algorithm
: speech signal with high frequency noises and unvoiced speech-sound
block
Result : denoising and extraction of unvoiced speech-sound block
Data

1

2

begin
Discrete Wavelet Transform (Daubechies - 6): Our interests are concentrated on the coeﬃcients spread in the MRA domain processed by the
DWT. The data in the assumed frequency range (100 ∼ 3,000 Hz) will be
extracted by the thresholding process with a proper value. In step 1, the
valid speech data spread over that range are classiﬁed by the DWT and
weighted with a proper value at each frequency band. The Daubechies-6
wavelet is applied to avoid interferences from the neighbor-band wavelet
packets in the reconstruction.
Filtering: For the extraction of the valid speech-sound block, the windowing AMDF(average magnitude diﬀerence function) is used as a ﬁlter
to diminish the ripples and contours in the signals. The equation used to
implement the ﬁlter is deﬁned as
p

|x(n + m) − x(n + m + 1)|

γ(n) = β

(8)

m=0

where β is a normalizing coeﬃcient and p is the block size. The windowing
AMDF is applied to generate the basic resources of the merging process.
It can ﬁlter the transformed data when considering a valid speech-sound
block and preparing the thresholding process.
3

Thresholding: The result obtained in step 2 is thresholded to the adjustable value which is made from many trials. It is processed from a valid
speech-sound block.

4

Merging the valid speech-sound block: The input, speech data, is
puriﬁed for the discrimination of valid and unvalid speech-sound blocks
with the MRA. Several processing facts are merged to extract the valid
speech-sound block according to the rules proposed in this paper.
To merge the valid phoneme block, the following rules are necessary because
of the experimental results: A stand-alone block which consists of less than
300 samples is not valid. A block that consists of less than 300 samples can
be included in the valid blocks.
end

least 1,000 samples are needed in a sampling frequency of 11,025 Hz. Except for
the detail classiﬁcation, the minimum size of a valid block frame is suggested at
300 ∼ 500 samples. To determine the valid block, we should consider the energy
and position of each frame simultaneously. Since the valid block is extracted by
the merging rules described, its valid speech-sound block can be classiﬁed.

318

J.O. Kim et al.
Table 1. Denoising SNR.

4

Original Signal

0.962391

Denoised Signal + 6 kHz Sin

254.214

Experiment Results

The merging algorithm is implemented to get the sample data through a microphone within the sampling rate of 11,025 Hz.
To describe the DWT’s extraction performance of the desired frequency
range, Fig. 3 shows the denoising(ﬁltering a band range’s data) eﬀect of the
DWT.
SNR =

E[x2 (n)]
=
E[e2 (n)]

x2 (n)
2
n e (n)

n

(9)

Table 1 shows that the noises have no interference following the extraction
of the desired band, if the desired frequency range is added.
Figure 4 shows that the merging algorithm has an adaptive feature for arbitrary system noises. The original signal includes the high frequency system
noises, whereas in the result signal, the merging algorithm shows an improved
extraction performance, especially when denoising the higher frequency noise.
Figures 5 and 6 show that the original signals compounded with 80 Hz and
6,000 Hz sin wave are processed by the merging algorithm. They also show that
the merging algorithm is not disturbed by an unexpected system interference.
Table 2 shows a comparison of the merging algorithm with the “Zero-Crossing
& Energy Consideration”. The merging algorithm is independent of system
noises and it has an adaptive feature for spot noises.

5

Conclusion

In general, high frequency noises included in a normal speech stream are diﬃcult
to remove from the speech stream. Because an unvoiced phoneme seems like a

α

β

γ

α: unvoiced speech
β: voiced speech
γ: silence range
Fig. 2. The position array of each phoneme

On the Extraction of the Valid Speech-Sound

(a) a speech signal of “six” added with system noises

(b) a speech signal of “six” added with system noises
and 6kHz sine wave

(c) denoising the speech signal of “six” added with system noises

(d) denoising the speech signal of “six” added with system noises and 6kHz sine wave
Fig. 3. Denoising.
Table 2. Property comparison.
Item

Zero-crossing &

Merging algorithm

energy consideration
System dependency

Higher

Lower

Spot-noise

Non-Adaptive

Adaptive

Signal analysis

None

DWT’s MRA

Unvoiced phoneme

Dependent on

Dependent on

System

the frequency range

319

320

J.O. Kim et al.

high frequency noise, it may be removed during denoising. A low frequency noise
(hum noise), on the other hand, may come from a circuitry imbalance, a wrongly
designed ground point in PCB, or imbalance among the parts mounted on a
board. This experiment results show that the merging algorithm is very robust
against external eﬀects. Since the merging algorithm proposed in this paper is
based on the MRA with the DWT, its computation seems complicated. However,
because the basic computation of the DWT is processed by convolution, it can
be done more quickly by the pipeline processing of convolution. Since the other
methods must decide the processing parameters of system noises and voices,
they can hardly tune themselves. The merging algorithm is useful for extracting
valid speech-sounds since it can decide the processing parameters relating to
voices only and is independent of system noises. The merging algorithm has an
adaptive feature for arbitrary system noises and an excellent denoising SNR.

References
1. Goldberg, R., Riek, L.: A Practical Handbook of Speech Coders. CRC Press, Boca
Raton, FL (2000)
2. Goswami, J.C., Chan, A.K.: Fundamentals of Wavelets: Theory, Algorithms and
Applications. John Wiley & Sons, New York (1999)
3. Teolis, A.: Computational Signal Processing with Wavelets. Springer Verlag, New
York (1998)
4. Burrus, C.S., Gopinath, R.A., Guo, H.: Introduction to Wavelets and Wavelet
Transforms: A Primer. Prentice Hall, New Jersey (1997)
5. Marzetta, T.L.: A new interpretation for capon’s maximum likelihood method of
frequency–wavenumber spectral estimation. IEEE Trans. Acoustics, Speech, and
Signal Processing 31 (1983)
6. Deller, J.R., Hansen, J.H.L., Proakis, J.G.: Discrete-Time Processing of Speech
Signals. IEEE Press, New York (2000)
7. Donoho, D.L.: Denoising by soft-thresholding. IEEE Trans. Information Theory
41 (1995)
8. Abbate, A., Decusatis, C.M., Das, P.K.: Wavelets and Subband: Fundamentals
and Applications. Birkhauser, Stuttgart, Germany (2001)
9. Ogden, R.T.: Essential Wavelets for Statistical Applications and Data Analysis.
Springer Verlag, New York (1996)
10. Parsons, T.W.: Voice and Speech Processing. McGraw-Hill, New York (1986)
11. Furui, S.: Digital Speech Processing, Synthesis and Recognition. 2nd edn. Marcel
Dekker, New York (2001)
12. Jurasfky, D., Martin, J.H., Linden, K.V., Jurafsky, D.: Speech and Language
Processing: An Introduction to Natural Language Processing, Computational Linguistics and Speech Recognition. Prentice Hall, New Jersey (2000)
13. Morgan, N., Gold, B.: Speech and Audio Signal Processing: Processing and Perception of Speech and Music. John Wiley & Sons, New York (1999)
14. Rabiner, L., Juang, B.H., Juang, B.H.: Fundamentals of Speech Recognition. Prentice Hall, New Jersey (1993)
15. Huang, X., Acero, A., Hon, H.W., Reddy, R.: Spoken Language Processing. Prentice Hall, New Jersey (2001)
16. Quatieri, T.F.: Discrete-Time Speech Signal Processing. Prentice Hall, New Jersey
(2001)

On the Extraction of the Valid Speech-Sound

(a) a speech signal

(b) a signal ﬁltered by the DWT

(c) a windowing AMDF

(d) a thresholding data

(e) an extraction mask

(f) an extracted signal
Fig. 4. Extraction.

321

322

J.O. Kim et al.

(a) a speech signal

(b) a speech signal added with a
noise of 80 Hz

(c) a speech signal classiﬁed and
compressed by the merging algorithm
Fig. 5. Classiﬁcation and compression from the signal added with a noise of 80 Hz

(a) a speech signal

(b) a speech signal added with a
noise of 6 kHz

(c) a speech signal classiﬁed and
compressed by the merging algorithm
Fig. 6. Classiﬁcation and compression from the signal added with a noise of 6 kHz

