A Multi Dimensional Visualization and Analysis
Toolkit for Astrophysics
Daniela Ferro1 , Vincenzo Antonuccio-Delogu1, Ugo Becciani1 , Angela
German´
a1 , Claudio Gheller2 , and Maura Melotti2
1

INAF Astrophisical Observatory of Catania, via S.Sofia 78, Catania 95100, Italy,
dferro@ct.astro.it,
http://woac.ct.astro.it/
2
CINECA, via Magnanelli 6-3,
Casalecchio di Reno BOLOGNA, Italy

Abstract. The AstroMD toolkit is a visualization and analysis software, specifically oriented to astrophysical data representation. It is included in the project Cosmo.Lab, financed by the European Community,
which involves several European astrophysical institutions and CINECA.
This tool gives a 3D graphic representation of the data exploiting all
the available information and making use of the immersive visualization techniques. AstroMD uses the most advanced visualization technology, based on virtual reality, in order to build a leading edge instrument both for scientific research and for cultural dissemination and
education. It is developed using the Visualization Toolkit (VTK) by Kitware (http://www.kitware.com), a freely available visualization library
portable on several platforms. AstroMD is an open source completely
free code which is freely available (http://cosmolab.cineca.it).

1

Introduction

Since the beginning of modern astronomy, the scientific community expressed a
great interest in scientific visualization tools. A great improvement in this direction was determined by the introduction of modern CCD detectors to collect
observational data in a digital format. Today, almost all the standard measures
are digital and each measure can be generally considered as a collection of images
forming a multi-dimensional data set. In many cases extensive image processing is required to obtain meaningful images. Useful scientific information can
be obtained from the raw data only using a data reduction pipeline. The improvement of technology and the availability of super-computing multiprocessor
systems, has led to a dramatic increase of the volume of data coming from numerical simulations. Today, astrophysical simulations produce many gigabytes
of data which have to be efficiently visualized and analysed. Visualization is the
most intuitive approach to the data and basic information can be obtained just
”at a glance”. Then the possibility of moving inside the data allows the scientist
to focus on regions of interest and there to perform quantitative calculations.
Therefore image processing tools are of fundamental importance in astronomy.
P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2658, pp. 1032−1041, 2003.
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

A Multi Dimensional Visualization and Analysis Toolkit for Astrophysics 1033

AstroMD is a new data visualization and analysis software specifically projected
to deal with astrophysical data and can handle powerfully large datasets allowing both their graphical representation and analysis, responding to the requirements proposed by several research fields. The basic application on which
the new software is applied focus on the dataset of the VIRMOS (observational
galaxy catalogue) project, the data coming from observations of extragalactic
radio sources and those obtained by cosmological simulations. Although these
fields do not cover all the requirements of astronomy, they pose many typical
problems that we expect to be solved by AstroMD and therefore represent a
significant test-case. The solution to these problems was implemented following the suggestions and the indications of the research groups involved in the
project and of a User Interest group. Astrophysical data have peculiarities that
make them different from data coming from any other kind of simulation or
experiment. Therefore they require a specific treatment. For example, cosmological simulations consider both baryonic matter (described by fluid-dynamics)
and dark matter (described by N-body algorithms). Further components, like
stars or different chemical species, can be introduced and followed in a specific
way. These different species requires different types of visualization. Dark matter
needs particles position or velocity rendering while baryons require mesh based
visualization. Furthermore particle associated quantities, like the mass density or
the gravitational potential, require their calculation and visualization on a mesh.
Then simulated structures have a fully three-dimensional distribution. Therefore
it is necessary to have a clear 3D representation and efficient and fast tools of
navigation, selection, zoom and the possibility of improving the resolution and
the accuracy of calculations in specific, user-selected, regions. Moreover evolution can change dramatically the properties of the simulated objects and the
information that can be retrieved, therefore it is important to control efficiently
sequences of time-frames.
The scientific goals of the project are the study of the evolution of field galaxies,
the evolution of large scale structure, the evolution of galaxies in clusters and
the search for distant quasars. For extragalactic radio sources AstroMD provides
tools to guide the understanding of the emissivity, flow and field structure, a process which is currently limited by our ability to compute rapidly and visualize
the results. In cosmological simulations, one tries to reproduce the formation,
evolution and the properties of large scale structures of the universe.

2

The Software

In order to build a widely used product it was chosen to use a low cost software
portable on a number of different platforms, the Visualization Toolkit (VTK)
by Kitware [4]. VTK is an open source, freely available software system for 3D
computer graphics, image processing, and visualization. It includes a C++ class
library and several interpreted interface layers. VTK has been ported on nearly
every Unix-based platform (e.g. Linux or IRIX) and PC’s (Windows NT and
Windows 98). The design and implementation of the library has been strongly

1034 D. Ferro et al.

influenced by object-oriented principles. The graphical model in VTK is at a
higher level of abstraction than rendering libraries like OpenGL or PEX. This
means it is much easier to create useful graphics and visualization applications.
In VTK applications can be written directly in C++, Tcl, Java, or Python.
Using these languages it is possible to build powerful, fast and portable applications. The built-in functionalities are controlled by a specific Graphic User
Interface (Fig 2), written in incrTcl/Tk that contains the OO philosophy, slowly
adding code as new functionality are added to the package. Each object can
represent a reader, that allows to read data from a file or from a database,
a filter, that allows to manipulate data, or a viewer, that allows to visualize
the results. VTK supports a wide variety of visualization algorithms including
scalar, vector, tensor, texture, and volumetric methods and advanced modelling
techniques. It supports stereographic rendering and can be used for virtual reality visualization [?]. Furthermore, being easily extensible, the system allows
ad hoc implementation of specific modules. All the features described above
are integrated in the AstroMD package. Furthermore efficient manipulation and

Fig. 1. The main GUI of AstroMD allows to visualize data (Render Window), to define
variables and projects, to control variables and filters and to save results. The side of the
cubic box is 50 Mpc wide. The sample consists of 15000 particles extracted from a Nbody simulation of 16 millions of particles at redshift step z=0, showing the formation
of several structures.

analysis tools, like smoothing of the particle masses on a mesh or calculation of
the power spectrum and correlation functions, are parts of the basic functionalities. AstroMD has also stereographic rendering capabilities, which makes it
usable for immersive visualization, presently implemented at the Virtual Theatre
of CINECA. This completes and improve its capabilities in the representation
of three dimensional data set. Sitting in the chairs of the theatre and wearing

A Multi Dimensional Visualization and Analysis Toolkit for Astrophysics 1035

stereoscopic glasses viewers can experience a semi-immersive Virtual Reality experience. Nevertheless this tool is exploited on different platforms, from the very
sophisticated virtual theatre, down to the personal workstation. AstroMD, in
fact, is developed with particular care to the portability issues in order to make
it usable on many different platforms and to allow a large diffusion and usage
inside the scientific community and educational institutions.
2.1

Basic Functionalities

AstroMD is thought to work with large datasets and uses advanced visualization tools, therefore it requires a corresponding powerful computational system. It suggested, at least, to use a PIII 500 PC with 256/512 Mbytes RAM
memory, 100 Mbytes of free disk space and a high level graphic card. The required software consists in: Open GL (MSWindows) or Mesa (Linux) visualization libraries, TCL-TK 8.2 (or later), and the Visual ToolKit (VTK), which
is distributed together with the AstroMD package. AstroMD allows to treat
both particles (unstructured data) and continuous fields discretely represented
over a computational mesh (structured data). Data must be written as sequences of 3D coordinates in the case of particles and as sequences of scalar
values (fortran or C order) in the case of meshes. The input data Formats
presently accepted by AstroMD is the common unformatted C standard, the
Raw Format, the TIPSY and the FITS Formats. Raw files are simply dump
of the memory, written in a continuous sequence of x, y, z coordinates with
no labels or other symbols in within. TIPSY is a visualization toolkit specifically designed to quickly display and analyse the results of N-body simulations
(http://www-hpcc.astro.washington.edu/tools/tipsy/tipsy.html). Tipsy requires
a specific data Format to work with, supported also by AstroMD. The basic data
structure is an array of particle structures in three separate arrays for each of the
types of particle used in the simulations: collisionless particles, SPH particles,
star particles and their characteristic properties, as potential energy and temperature. Binary and ASCII files can be read. Data are visualized with respect
to a cubic box which describes the computational region. A cubic or spherical
sub-region can be selected interactively inside the parent box with a different
spatial resolution, in order to focus on the most interesting regions. Data inside
the sampler can be studied with the analysed tools or can be saved in specific
files for a off-line analysis. Boxes can be translated, rotated, zoomed in and out
with respect to selected positions. Colours and luminosities can be chosen by
the user. Images of different evolutionary stages can be combined in order to
obtain a dynamic view of the behaviour of the system. The opacity of the particles can be increased, so that low density regions are more easily detectable,
or decreased, so that the details of the high density regions substructures are
shown. Different particles species (e.g. dark matter and baryons) can be visualizes at the same time using different colours. Other particles related continuous
quantities, like density fields, can be calculated as typical grid bades fields and
visualized as isosurfaces or volumes (Fig. 2). Scalars fields can be visualized by
isosurfaces or by volume rendering. The value of the isosurface can be selected on

1036 D. Ferro et al.

Fig. 2. Formation of clusters of galaxies in the universe, with overdensity of 200 with
respect to the background density, during the evolution of a sample of 15000 particles
in a cubic box of 50 Mpc.

the user interface. The volume rendering can be calculated using both the texture mapping and the ray tracing technique, depending on the specific hardware
that is used (Fig. 3). Different time frames can be shown in a sequence. When
particle-representation is used, the position of particles are interpolated between
one time-step and the following. This improves the quality of the ”animation”
giving a fluidity otherwise unachievable. Both the single images and the whole
sequence can be saved in bitmap or jpeg format to prepare an animation of the
evolution. Enabling the steady-cam, the system can be rotated in Azimuth and
Elevation during its evolution. Zoom-in and zoom-out possibilities are also offered. The whole set of particles can be visualized but it’s also possible to use a
sub-sample of the data, in order to get a faster and easier visualization. It was
implemented a procedure which select randomly the sub-sample of data. Specific
care has been devoted to avoid systematic errors in the selection procedure, so
that the sample is still statistically significant.
2.2

Data Analysis Functionalities

Some built-in-tools, specifically directed to cosmological results of simulation,
were implemented to allow an efficient manipulation and analysis of the data.
At present the following functionality are implemented.
Particles mass density The mass density field associated to the particle distribution is calculated distributing the mass of each particle over the computational
mesh by a eight points Cloud in Cell smoothing algorithm [?]. The computation
can be done with the maximum accuracy using all the particles over a uniform

A Multi Dimensional Visualization and Analysis Toolkit for Astrophysics 1037

Fig. 3. Formation of clusters of galaxies in the universe, with overdensity of 200 with
respect to the background density, during the evolution of a sample of 15000 particles
in a cubic box of 50 Mpc.

high resolution mesh, but AstroMD allows the user to use only a sample of the
whole set of particles, and the final result can be extrapolated to all particles
of the simulation, reducing the CPU time consuming and the memory request.
The smoothing of the masses can be performed generally using a coarse grid,
that can be refined where high resolution is necessary.
The same tool can be used to calculate other fields related to quantities possibly
associated to the particles, like, for example, the thermal energy density field or
the X-ray luminosity field.
Gravitational field calculation Considering the mass density ρ(x) defined
over the computational mesh as above, the gravitational field can be calculated
solving the Poisson equation
φ(x) ∝ ∇2 ρ(x),

(1)

where φ(x) is the gravitational potential, by a Fourier Transform procedure.
The Poisson equation is transformed in its momentum space image using a FFT
VTK built-in function. This reduces the equation to a much simpler algrebric
operation
1
φ(k) ∝ 2 ρ(k),
(2)
|k |
where φ(k) and ρ(k) are the Fourier images of the potential and of the density and |k|2 is the square module of the wavenumber. Finally, the potential is
transformed to the physical space using an inverse FFT.

1038 D. Ferro et al.

Fourier decomposition, Power Spectrum and Correlation Function
The quantity ρ(k) is used to calculate the Power Spectrum P (k) of the matter distribution, which is defined as the average value of the square norm of
ρ(k):
(3)
P (k) = |ρ(k)|2 .
The Power Spectrum expresses the weight of each of the Fourier components of
the mass distribution between kmin and kmax which represents the inverse of
the size of the computational mesh and the Nyquist frequency [3]. The Power
Spectrum is a powerful measure of the statistical properties of the distribution, together with the associated Correlation Function ξ(r), which is its Fourier
Transform. The two-point Correlation Function indicates the probability to find

Fig. 4. Power Spectrum of the ΛCDM simulation sample.

a particle at a distance r from any other particle, and is usually used to analyze the clustering properties of a sample of discrete objects (particle, galaxies,
galaxy clusters, etc) [1]. It was used HAM as his function estimator, because it
is preferable at large scale, for samples with non uniform density [2]. The clustered zone is inserted in the sampler in which it is calculated the Correlation
Function and the Power Spectrum. The plot 2D are shown in another window
and is updated when the user points out to another clustered zone with mouse.
Minkowski Functionals The Minkowski Functionals provide a novel tool to
characterize the large-scale distribution in the Universe [?]. They describe the
Geometry, the Curvature and the Topology of a point set. Considering the set
of points in 3D space, supplied by galaxies of a cluster of galaxies, and decorating each point with a ball of radius r, the tool measures the size, shape and

A Multi Dimensional Visualization and Analysis Toolkit for Astrophysics 1039

Fig. 5. Correlation Function of the ΛCDM simulation sample.

connectivity of the spatial pattern formed by the union set of these balls. These
characteristics change with the radius r, which may be employed as a diagnostic
parameter.
Friend of Friend Algorithm It was inserted a group finder, known as Friendsof-Friends [?] (http//hpcc.astro.washington.edu/tools/). A particle belongs to a
FoF group if it is within some linking length of any other particle in the group.
After all such groups are found, those with less than a specified minimum number
of group members are rejected. User must set two parameters: the maximum
distance among particles forming clustering and numMembers, the minimum
number of clustered particles. At last, FoF cancels all groups whose members
are less than numMembers. It was also implemented the calculation of the centre
of mass of each group, the number of components of groups and the radius of
each group. The graphical output contains the grouped particles. The centre of
mass of each group identified by ball with radius as clustered group radius. In
another window is displayed the plot of the fraction of grouped particles versus
the number of components of the groups. When the parameters are changed by
user, FoF updates all its outputs.

3

Conclusions

AstroMD represents the first experience of a tool of immersive visualisation and
data analysis in astrophysics. It will be a valuable tool for the scientific groups,
which will be able to interact efficiently with large amount of data, easily ’navigating’ inside them, analysing their properties, calculating their statistical properties and reconstructing their three dimensional shapes and features. This will

1040 D. Ferro et al.

Fig. 6. Minkowski Functionals of a ΛCDM simulation.

Fig. 7. FoF tool.

A Multi Dimensional Visualization and Analysis Toolkit for Astrophysics 1041

Fig. 8. FoF tool.

lead to a deeper understanding of the scientific problems and to their easier
solution. The software developers and visualisation experts will have the possibility of strongly improving their knowledge in the involved techniques and
their experience on the possible applications of 3D visualisation and immersive
technology in the scientific research applications. Finally, the use of AstroMD
for educational purposes will be a very effective way of presenting astrophysical
problems to students, giving the possibility of observing objects and structures
from a privileged and personalised.

References
1. Blanchard, A., Alimi, J.: Practical determination of the spatial correlation function.
Astron. Astrophys. 203 (1988) L1–L4
2. Pons-Border´ia, M.J., Mart´inez, V.J. et al: Comparing estimators of the galaxy correlation function. ApJ 523 (1999) 480–491
3. Jenkins, A., Frenk, C.S., Pearce, F.R. et al: Evolution of Structure in Cold Dark
Matter Universes. Astrophys. J. 499 (1998) 20
4. Schroeder, W., Ken M., Lorensen B.: The Visualization Toolkit. Prentice Hall (1999)
5. Rabinowitz, P.: On subharmonic solutions of a Hamiltonian system. Comm. Pure
Appl. Math. 33 (1980) 609–633

