Strategies for the Detection and Analysis of Space-Time
Patterns of Earthquakes on Complex Fault Systems
1

2

3

John B. Rundle , William Klein , Kristy Tiampo ,
4
5
Andrea Donnellan , and Geoffrey Fox
1

Departments of Physics, Geology, Civil & Environmental Engineering, and Center for
Computational Science and Engineering, University of California, Davis, Davis, CA 95616;
and Distinguished Visiting Scientist, Earth & Space Sciences Division
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, CA 91125
rundle@physics.ucdavis.edu; http://naniloa.ucdavis.edu/~rundle/
2
Department of Physics and Center for Computational Science, Boston University
Boston, MA 02215; and X-7, LANL, Los Alamos, NM
3
Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Science, University of Colorado
Boulder, CO 80309; University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada; and
Universidad Complutense Madrid, Madrid, Spain
4
Earth & Space Sciences Division, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, CA
5
Department of Computer Science, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN

Abstract. Our research focuses on computational techniques to understand the dynamics of space-time patterns in driven threshold systems,
particularly on earthquake fault systems. We discuss the scientific and
computational formulation of strategies for understanding such spacetime patterns, leading optimistically to earthquake forecasting and prediction. In particular, we describe pattern dynamics techniques that can
be used to relate the observable processes on earthquake fault systems
to the fundamentally unobservable dynamical processes. To illustrate
our results, we study the emergent modes of the earthquake fault system in southern California, both with models (Virtual California) and
with data.

1

Introduction

Earthquake faults occur in topologically complex, multi-scale networks that are
driven to failure by external forces arising from plate tectonic motions. Such networks are prominent examples of driven threshold systems, other instances of which
are the human brain, convective circulations in the atmosphere, one-dimensional
electron waves in solids, driven foams, and magnetic de-pinning transitions in high
temperature superconductors. The basic problem in this class of systems is that the
true (force-displacement or current-voltage) dynamics is usually unobservable. Since
to define the dynamics, one needs to know values of the variables in which the dynamics is formulated, lack of such knowledge precludes a deterministic approach to
P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2659, pp. 827–836, 2003.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

828

J.B. Rundle et al.

forecasting the future evolution of the system. With respect to earthquakes, the
space time patterns associated with the time, location, and magnitude of the sudden
events (earthquakes) from the force threshold are observable. Our scientific focus
is therefore on understanding the observable space-time earthquake patterns that
arise from fundamentally unobservable dynamics, using new data-mining, pattern
recognition, and ensemble forecasting techniques appropriate for these multi-scale
systems.

2

Earthquakes

Earthquakes are a complex nonlinear dynamical system, so that techniques appropriate for the study of linear systems have not been of much utility. For example, earthquake forecasting based on linear fits to historic data have not been successful [1,2].
Moreover, the nonlinear dynamics, combined with our lack of microscopic knowledge
about the system means that earthquake forecasting and predictability cannot be understood using deterministic dynamical methods, but must instead be approached as a
stochastic problem. In addition, as Edward Lorenz showed [3], for nonlinear dynamical systems such as weather and earthquakes, the past is not necessarily the key to the
future. Therefore, one must be extremely wary of simply extrapolating past behavior
into the future, as the Parkfield prediction experience has shown [1,2].
2.1

Numerical Simulations

As elaborated below, there are two serious drawbacks to a purely observational approach to the problem of earthquake forecasting: 1) Inaccessible and unobservable
stress-strain dynamics, and 2) Multiscale dynamics that cover a vast range of space
and time scales. Because of these fundamental problems, the use of numerical simulations, together with theory and analysis, is mandatory if we are to discover answers
to the questions above. Correspondingly, all types of earthquake-related data, including seismic, geodetic, paleoseismic, and laboratory rock mechanics experiments must
be employed. The data are used both to determine physical properties of the models
we simulate, a process of data assimilation, as well as to critically test the results of
our simulation-derived hypotheses, so that future hypotheses can be developed.
Moreover, as the computational complexity of the simulation process increases, we
are necessarily led to the adoption of modern Information Technology (IT) approaches, that allow rapid prototyping of candidate models within a flexible, webbased computing framework. While advances in IT are thus an integral part of a systematic approach to numerical simulation of complex dynamical systems, our work is
focused primarily on the use of simulations to advance scientific understanding of the
fault system problem.
2.2

Unobservable Dynamics

Earthquake faults occur in topologically complex, multi-scale networks that are driven
to failure by external forces arising from plate tectonic motions [4–7]. The basic
problem in this class of systems is that the true stress-strain dynamics is inaccessible
to direct observations, or unobservable. For example, the best current compendium of

Strategies for the Detection and Analysis of Space-Time Patterns of Earthquakes

829

stress magnitudes and directions in the earth’s crust is the World Stress Map [8], entries on which represent point static time-averaged estimates of maximum and minimum principal stresses in space. Since to define the fault dynamics, one needs dynamic stresses and strains for all space and time, the WSM data will not be sufficient
for this purpose.
Conversely, the space time patterns associated with the time, location, and magnitude of the earthquakes are easily observable. Our scientific focus is therefore on
understanding how the observable space-time earthquake patterns are related to the
fundamentally inaccessible and unobservable dynamics, thus we are developing new
data-mining, pattern recognition, theoretical analysis and ensemble forecasting techniques. In view of the lack of direct observational data, any new techniques that use
space-time patterns of earthquakes to interpret underlying dynamics and forecast
future activity must be developed via knowledge acquisition and knowledge reasoning
techniques derived from the integration of diverse and indirect observations, combined with a spectrum of increasingly detailed and realistic numerical simulations of
candidate models.
2.3

Multiscale Dynamics

The second problem, equally serious, is that earthquake dynamics is strongly coupled
across a vast range of space and time scales that are both much smaller and much
larger than “human” dimensions [9-13]. The important spatial scales span the range
from the grain scale, of 1 nm to 1 cm; the fault zone scale, at 1 cm to 100 m; the fault
segment scale, at 100 m to 10 km; the fault system or network scale, at 10 km to 1000
km; finally to the Tectonic plate boundary scale in excess of 1000 km. Important
time scales span the range from the source process time scale of fractions of seconds
to seconds; to the stress transfer scale of seconds to years; to event recurrence time
scales of years to many thousands of years; finally to the fault topology evolution
scale, in excess of many thousands of years up to millions of years. There is considerable evidence that many/most/all of these spatial and temporal scales are strongly
coupled by the dynamics. Consider, as evidence, the Gutenberg-Richter relation,
which is a power law for frequency of events in terms of cumulative event sizes.
Power laws are a fundamental property of scale-invariant, self-organizing systems
[14,15] whose dynamics and structures are strongly coupled and correlated across
many scales in space and time. If the dynamics were were instead unconnected or
random, one would expect to see Gaussian or Poisson statistics.
Simulations can help us to understand how processes operating on time scales of
seconds and spatial scales of meters, such as source process times in fault zones, influence processes that are observed to occur over time scales of hundreds of years and
spatial scales of hundreds of kilometers, such as recurrence of great earthquakes.
Numerical simulations also allow us to connect observable surface data to underlying
unobservable stress-strain dynamics, so we can determine how these are related.
Thus we conclude that numerical simulations are mandatory if we are to understand
the physics of earthquake fault systems. However, simulations of such complex systems are, at present, impossible to understand without some parallel theoretical investigation which gives us a framework to both interpret the vast amount of data generated and to ask the proper questions.

830

3

J.B. Rundle et al.

The Virtual California Model

Although all scales are important, we place more emphasis on the fault system or fault
network scale, since this is the scale of most current and planned observational data
networks. It is also the scale upon which the data we are interested in understanding,
large and great earthquakes, occur. Furthermore, since it is not possible to uniquely
determine the stress distribution on the southern California fault system, and since the
friction laws and elastic stress transfer moduli are not known, it makes little sense to
pursue a deterministic computation to model the space-time evolution of stress on the
fault system. We therefore coarse-grain over times shorter than the source process
time, which means we either neglect wave-mediated stress transfer, or we represent it
in simple ways.
The Virtual_California model [5,6] is a stochastic, cellular automata instantiation
of an earthquake backslip model, in that loading of each fault segment occurs via the
accumulation of slip deficit S(t)-Vt, where S(t) is slip, V is long term slip rate, and t is
time. At the present time, faults used in the model are exclusively vertical strike slip
faults, the most active faults in California, and upon which most of the seismic moment release is localized. Thrust earthquakes, such as the 1994 Northridge and 1971
San Fernando faults, are certainly damaging, but they occur infrequently and are
therefore regarded as perturbations on the primary strike slip fault structures. The
Virtual_California model also has the following additional characteristics:
1. Surfaces of discontinuity (faults) across which slip is discontinuous at the
time of an earthquake, and which are subject to frictional resistance. Surfaces analyzed in current models range from infinitely long, vertically dipping faults to topologically complex systems of vertically dipping faults mirroring the complexity found
on natural fault networks.
2. Persistent increase of stresses on the fault surfaces arising from plate tectonic
forcing parameterized via the backslip method.
3. Linear elastic stress transfer or interactions between fault surfaces. In some
model implementations, elastic waves and inertial effects may be included in simple
ways. In other implementations, details of the rupture and stress transfer process are
absorbed into stochastic terms in the dynamical equations, and quasistatic stress
Green’s functions are used. Other types of linear stress transfer are also possible,
including linear viscoelastic and linear poroelastic physics [16].
4. Parameters for friction laws and fault topology that are determined by assimilating seismic, paleoseismic, geodetic, and other geophysical data from events
occurring over the last ~200 years in California.
5. Frictional resistance laws that range from the simplest Amontons-Coulomb
stick-slip friction [17], to heuristic laws such as slip- or velocity-weakening laws
[4,17,18], to laws based on recent laboratory friction experiments including rate-andstate [19–28] and leaky threshold laws [18,25,26,28], to other types of rupture and
healing laws characterized by inner- and outer- physical scales [7].

Strategies for the Detection and Analysis of Space-Time Patterns of Earthquakes

831

In general, any of the friction laws described in bullet 5 can be written in either of
the following representative, equivalent forms on an element of fault surface:

∂σ( t )
= K L V − f [!(t ), V(t)]
∂t
or

KL

(1)

dS(t)
= f [σ( t ), V( t )]
dt

Here σ is the shear stress, and KL is the self-interaction or “stress drop stiffness” and
f[σ,V] is the stress dissipation function [29]. For example, the "Amontons" or Coulomb friction law, having a sharp failure threshold, can be written in the form (1)
using a Dirac delta function [28].

4 Software Technology
Virtual California simulates fault interaction to determine correlated patterns in the
nonlinear complex system of an entire plate boundary region. The evolution of these
patterns enables forecasts of future large events. Capturing the nonlinear pattern
dynamics of the fault system along a plate boundary implies the realization of a digital laboratory, which allows understanding of the mechanisms behind the observations
and patterns. Our software technology development is based on the principle of scalability. When it is fully deployed, researchers will be able to create and verify patterns
down to ever smaller spatial scales, which will enable cross-scale parameterization
and validations, thus in turn enabling plate-boundary system analysis. The possibility
of forecasting large earthquakes will therefore be greatly enhanced.

Fig. 1. Model fault segment network for southern California

832

J.B. Rundle et al.

Fig. 2. First two correlation eigenpatterns for model fault network shown in Fig. 1

Pattern analysis methods are another type of recently developed tool. One method
bins many decades of seismic activity on a gridded representation of California. Eigensystem analysis reveals clusters of correlated space and time activity. These eigenpatterns can be used to develop forecast methods [28]. When these methods attain
parallel speedup we will produce better forecasts and enable speedy tests of earthquake correlations and predictions. This will be due to the ability to use much smaller
geographic cell sizes and so forecast the frequent magnitude 4 earthquakes, not just
the rare magnitude 6 events.
Examples of recent results using Virtual California simulations are shown in
Figs. 1–2, while results from observed data in southern California are shown in Fig. 3.
In Fig. 1 we have defined a network of fault segments based upon the actual network
of faults in southern California. Figure 2 shows two of the eigenpatterns produced by
activity in the model fault system. Red segments are positively correlated with red
segments, negatively correlated with blue segments, and uncorrelated with other segments. Figure 3 shows similar eigenpatterns for the actual earthquake data in southern California.

Fig. 3. First two correlation eigenpatterns for the actual earthquake data in southern California since 1932.

Strategies for the Detection and Analysis of Space-Time Patterns of Earthquakes

5

833

Community Grid

As part of our work, we are also leveraging the Grid-based Community Modeling
Environment (CME) under development by the Southern California Earthquake Center (SCEC) to produce an emergent computational framework for a broad class of
stress-evolution simulations (SES) for the dynamics of earthquake fault systems. The
purpose of SES models is to enhance basic understanding of the phenomena of earthquakes, as well as to build the computational and scientific foundations that will be
needed to forecast large and damaging events. The scientific and information technology requirements for this class of physics-based simulations demand that our
emergent Grid-computational framework address the following requirements of modern IT systems:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

6.

Space-time pattern analysis using both simulation-based approaches to computational forecasts of catastrophic and damaging earthquakes.
Prototyping computational methods to separate stochastic and nonlinear dynamical factors in earthquake fault networks.
Multi-scale analysis and modeling of the physical processes and patterns.
Knowledge discovery, visualization and interpretation of highly heterogeneous
simulation data sets.
Integration of data into the simulations arising from multiple sources including
surface deformation, historic and recent seismic activity, geological field investigations, and laboratory-derived friction data.
Integrating advanced methods for information storage and retrieval to enhance
the interoperability and linkage of fixed and streaming data from observations
and simulations.

We term the international collection of scientists and Grid [30-38] or web resources in a particular field as a Community Grid. Our IT research is oriented at enabling and enhancing the interaction of all components of the Community Semantic
Grid for Earthquake Science (CSGES) for the SES effort, leading to an emergent
multi-scale Grid. We are using the ideas and artifacts produced by other relevant
activities from both the computer science and earth science areas, including [42-52]:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

The major SCEC/CME-led effort to build Grid resources for the earthquake field
and an information system to describe them.
Ontologies and XML data structures being built by SCEC, ACES (with GEM)
and related fields as illustrated by OpenGIS and XMML for the mining community.
Parallel simulation codes with a portal interface (Gateway) [39-41] developed by
GEM as part of a NASA HPCC project. The Gateway Grid Computational Environment will be a key part of the initial CSGES deployment.
International ACES capabilities such as the GeoFEM software and Earth Simulator hardware from Japan and the Australian ACcESS simulation software.
Basic collaboration capabilities among some participants including audio/video
conferencing (Access Grid) and the ability for simple sharing of web pages and
other documents as implemented in our system Garnet.
Initial designs of use of Web service technologies (WSDL, UDDI) to provide a
component model for some relevant web resources.

834

7.
8.

6

J.B. Rundle et al.

Development of new dynamic models for collaborative environments coming
from use of JXTA and other Peer-to-Peer technologies, integrating these with existing event-based collaborative environments.
Server or peer-to-peer discovery mechanisms (as in UDDI and JXTA) combining
with a component model (WSDL) to lay the groundwork for emergent information systems. Note all components (objects) in the system will have in the spirit
of the semantic web, meta-data defined for them which will enable the linkage of
components in our proposed Semantic Grid.

Final Remarks

The results of our research are critical prerequisites for the analysis and understanding
of space-time patterns of earthquakes on arbitrary complex earthquake fault systems.
In turn, such understanding is mandatory if earthquake forecasting and prediction is to
become a reality. The instantiation of any and all simulations of the dynamics of
complex earthquake fault networks must allow use of the full range of methods, attributes, and parameters represented in the current physics-based earthquake simulation literature. Our work is complementary to, but does not duplicate research underway within the SCEC/ITR effort, which is focused primarily on integrating conventional and elastic-wave- based seismic hazard analysis within an emergent Gridcomputational environment. Our methods emphasize the process of optimizing, executing, integrating and analyzing SES. Indeed, we argue that it is precisely the lack
of an adequate multi-scale computational framework allowing rapid prototyping and
analysis of candidate SES models that has seriously retarded the development of these
types of simulations.
Acknowledgements. This work has been supported by CIRES and NASA student
fellowships (KFT and SM); by US DOE grant DE-FG03-95ER14499 (JBR); by
NASA grant NAG5-5168 (SJG). WK was supported by USDOE/OBES grant DEFG02-95ER14498 and W-7405-ENG-6 at LANL. WK would also like to acknowledge the hospitality and support of CNLS at LANL.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Bakun, W and Lindh, A., The Parkfield, California earthquake prediction experiment,
Science, 89, (1985) 3051–3058
Jones, L.M., Earthquake prediction: The interaction of public policy and science, Proc.
Nat. Acad. USA, 93, (1996) 3721–3725
Lorenz, E.N., Deterministic nonperiodic flow, J. Atmos. Sci., 20, (1963) 130–141
Scholz, C.H., The Mechanics of Earthquakes and Faulting, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK (1990)
Rundle, J.B., Turcotte, D.L., and Klein, W., eds., Geocomplexity and the Physics of
Earthquakes, Geophysical Monograph 120, American Geophysical Union, Washington,
DC (2000).

Strategies for the Detection and Analysis of Space-Time Patterns of Earthquakes
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.

27.
28.

29.
30.
31.
32.
33.

835

Rundle, P.B., Rundle, J.B., Tiampo, K.F., Martins, J.S.S., McGinnis, S., and Klein, W.,
Nonlinear network dynamics on earthquake fault systems, Phys. Rev. Lett., 87, (2001)
148501(1–4) (2001)
Ward, S.N., San Francisco bay area earthquake simulations, a step towards a standard
physical model, Bull. Seism. Soc. Am., 90, (2000) 370–386
Zoback, M.L., 1st-order and 2nd-order patterns of stress in the lithosphere – The World
Stress Map project, J. Geophys. Res., 97, (1992) 11703–11728
GEM home page, http://geodynamics.jpl.nasa.gov/gem/
ACES home page, http://quakes.earth.uq.edu.au/ACES/
Southern California Earthquake Center, http://www.scec.org/
Mora, P., ed., Proceedings of the 1st ACES Workshop, published by APEC Cooperation
for Earthquake Simulation, Brisbane, Queensland, AU (1999).
Matsu’ura, M., Nakajima, K., and Mora, P., eds., Proceedings of the 2nd ACES Workshop,
published by APEC Cooperation for Earthquake Simulation, Brisbane, Queensland, AU
(2001).
Vicsek, T., Fractal Growth Phenomena, World Scientific, Singapore (1989).
Gouyet, J.-F., Physics and Fractal Structures, Springer-Verlag, Berlin (1996).
Miller, S.A., Ben-Zion, Y., and Burg, J.P., A three-dimensional fluid-controlled earthquake model: Behavior and implications, J. Geophys. Res., 104, (1999) 10621–10638
Persson, B.N.J., Sliding Friction, Physical Principles and Applications (Springer-Verlag,
Berlin (1998).
Rundle, J.B., Klein, W., Gross, S., and Ferguson, C.D., The traveling density wave model
for earthquakes and driven threshold systems, Phys. Rev. E, 56, (1997) 293–307
Dieterich J.H., and Kilgore, B., Implications for fault constitutive properties for earthquake
prediction, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, 93, 3787 (1996).
Dieterich, J.H., and Kilgore, B., Direct observation for frictional contacts – New insights
for state-dependent properties, PAGEOPH, 143, 283–302 (1994).
Dieterich, J.H., Modeling of rock friction 1, Experimental results and constitutive equations, J. Geophys. Res., 84, (1979) 2161–2175
Rice, J.R., Lapusta, N., and Ranjith, K., Rate and state dependent friction and the stability
of sliding between elastically deformable solids, J. Mech. Phys. Sol., 49, (200) 1865–1898
Ranjith, K. and J.R. Rice, J.R., Slip dynamics between at an interface between dissimilar
materials, J. Mech. Phys. Sol., 49, (2001) 341–361
Ruina, A., Slip instability and state-variable friction laws, J. Geophys. Res., 88, (1983)
359–370
Tullis, T.E., Rock friction and its implications for earthquake prediction examined via
models of Parkfield earthquakes, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci USA, 93, (1996) 3803–3810
Karner, S.L., and Marone, C., Effects of loading rate and normal stress on stress drop and
stick slip recurrence interval, pp. 187–198 in Rundle, J.B., Turcotte, D.L., and Klein, W.,
eds., Geocomplexity and the Physics of Earthquakes, Geophysical Monograph 120,
American Geophysical Union, Washington, DC (2000).
Beeler, N.M., Tullis, T.E., and Blanpied, M.L., and Weeks, J.D., Frictional behavior of
large displacement experimental faults, J. Geophys. Res., 101, (1996) 8697–8715
Rundle, J.B., Tiampo, K.F., Klein, W., Martins, J.S.S., Self-organization in leaky threshold systems: The influence of near mean field dynamics and its implications for earthquakes, neurobiology and forecasting, in press, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, (2001) 2463–
2465
Klein, W., Rundle, J.B., and Ferguson, C.D., Scaling and nucleation in models of earthquake faults, Phys. Rev. Lett., 78, (1997) 3793–3796
Particle Physics Data Grid, http://www.cacr.caltech.edu/ppdg/
GriPhyN Project Site, http://www.griphyn.org
NEES Earthquake Engineering Grid, http://www-meesgrod.org/
Resource Description Framework (RDF),
http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-rdf-syntax/

836
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.

43.
44.

45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.

J.B. Rundle et al.
Ninja Project, http://ninja.cs.berkeley.edu/
Semantic Web, http://www.w3.org/2001/sw/
The Grid Forum http://www.gridforum.org
Grid Forum Computing Environment Working Group,
http://www.computingportals.org/cbp.html
Grid Message System,
http://aspen.csit.fsu.edu/users/shrideep/mspaces/
General Review of Portals by G. Fox,
http://aspen.csit.fsu.edu/collabtools/CollabReviewfeb2501.html
Portals and Frameworks for Web-based Education and Computational Science,
http://www.new-npac.org/users/fox/documents/pajavaapril00/
Gateway Computational Portal, http://www.gatewayportal.org
See talk by CCA lead Rob Armstrong of Sandia at LLNL meeting on Software Components July 2001
http://www.llnl.gov/CASC/workshops/components_2001/
viewgraphs/RobArmstrong.ppt
Web Services Description Language (WSDL) 1.1
http://www.w3.org/TR/wsdl.
Presentation on Web Services by Francesco Curbera of IBM at DoE Components Workshop July 23–25, 2001. Livermore, California.
http://www.llnl.gov/CASC/workshops/components_2001/
viewgraphs/FranciscoCurbera.ppt
Doe Babel project http://www.llnl.gov/CASC/components/babel.html
IBM Web Services Invocation Framework
http://www.alphaworks.ibm.com/tech/wsif
XML based messaging and protocol specifications SOAP.
http://www.w3.org/2000/xp/.
W3C Resource Description Framework
http://www.w3.org/RDF/
Sun Microsystems JXTA Peer to Peer technology. http://www.jxta.org.
Universal Description, Discovery and Integration Project http://www.uddi.org/
Semantic Web from W3C to describe self organizing Intelligence from enhanced web
resources. http://www.w3.org/2001/sw/.
W3C description of Naming and Addressing
http://www.w3.org/Addressing/

