Reliability Theory Model and Expected Life
Shortest Path in Stochastic and
Time-Dependent Networks
Guo-zhen Tan1 , Xiang-fu Xia1 , and Wen Gao2
1

2

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Dalian University of
Technology Dalian, Liaoning 116024, China
gztan@dlut.edu.cn
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing
100080,China

Abstract. We consider the priori expected shortest path problem from
a single origin to a single destination for each departure time in stochastic and time-dependent networks. Such problem requires more than standard shortest path techniques. First, we transform this problem into the
problem of systemic reliability, and identify a weaker consistent reliability
condition that insures the validity of generalized dynamic-programming
method based on reliability priority. Furthermore, we propose a new
dominance discriminance, which makes the parameter in traditional discriminance drop from two dimensions to one dimension and reduces the
possibility of not doing dominance compare among paths. Finally, we
present the expected life shortest path algorithm.

1

Introduction

The study of routing problem in stochastic time-dependent networks is of timely
importance, as stochasticity in traﬃc networks is both conceptually recognized
and experimentally proved [1]. A stochastic time-dependent network is a network where link travel times are random variables with time-dependent distributions [2].
Many researchers have tried to use diﬀerent ways to solve the stochastic
shortest path problem, including reducing the search space to ﬁnd feasible solutions. A method proposed by Alexopoulos is based on iterative partitioning of
the network state space and provides bounds that improve each iteration and
eventually become equal to the respective measures related to the shortest paths
in networks [3]. We have studied the shortest path algorithm in time-dependent
networks, and got some valuable conclusions [4]. Hall has studied a speciﬁc variant of optimal routing problem in stochastic and time-dependent networks where
a routing policy depends only on arrival times at decision nodes [5]. Wellman,
Ford, and Larson have demonstrated that standard search algorithms could ﬁnd
This work was supported in part by Grand 99025 of Ministry of Education and
Grand 9810200104 of Liaoning Science Foundation, China.
P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2660, pp. 829–838, 2003.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

830

G.-z. Tan, X.-f. Xia, and W. Gao

the shortest path when arc travel times have weaker stochastic consistency [6].
This property in turn justiﬁes a generic pruning method using stochastic dominance. But the dominance discriminance used in [6] contains two parameters.
J.Boyan and M.Mitzenmacher [7] have studied the problem of the scheduling
policy in stochastic networks, using the reliability theory. They consider the
waiting time for buses, and they present the optimal scheduling algorithm when
the waiting times are independent random variables with increasing failure rate.
But they cannot realize this algorithm.
In this paper, we study the shortest path problem in stochastic and timedependent networks, an important problem in communication, transportation
and internet systems. Using reliability theory, this problem is transformed into
ﬁnding a path based on reliability priority. We consider the travel time of the
entire path from source node to destination node, and our goal is to select a
statistically optimal path. We identify a weaker consistent reliability condition
that insures the validity of generalized dynamic-programming method based on
reliability theory. The consistent reliability property essentially is to make use
of reliability theory to describe the First-in-First-out property of every arc in
the networks. Furthermore, a new discriminance is proposed to reduce the two
parameters in extant discriminance [8] to one, which makes this discriminance
feasible and reduces the possibility of not doing compare among paths. Finally,
we present the Expected-Life-Shortest-Path algorithm, which can be used to
solve problems of considerably great size.

2

Preliminary Knowledge

We ﬁrst brieﬂy introduce the basic concepts associated with reliability theory,
which makes this paper easier to understand. Further information can be found
in texts such as [8] or [9].
We use a non-negative random variable X to denote a system’s life, where X
has cumulative distribution function F (t). Then we deﬁne the survival function
of this system to be S(t) = 1 − F (t). Obviously, S(t) describes the system’s
viability in the time interval between 0 and t.
The system’s mean life is
∞

EX =

∞

tdF (t) =
0

∞

t

dF (t)
0

dx =
0

∞

dx
0

∞

dF (t) =
x

S(t)dt. (1)
0

The mean residual life of the system at time t is E[X − t | X ≥ t], which is
dependent of t.
Let d = sup{t | S(t) > 0}, and D = [0, d).
Suppose f (t) is the probability density function of X, then we deﬁne the
failure rate of this system to be
r(t) =

f (t)
,
S(t)

On second thoughts, we can get (3) and (4)

t∈D

(2)

Reliability Theory Model and Expected Life Shortest Path

831

d
ln S(t)
dt

(3)

r(t) = −

−

S(t) = e

3

t
0

r(x)dx

(4)

Reliability Theory Model

Since the reliability theory is the theory focusing on a system’s stochastic life, we
ﬁrst depict the stochastic and time-dependent network as a system, called STDNR network system.Then we transform the shortest path problem in stochastic
and time-dependent networks into the problem of the system’s life. We construct
a system consisting of the entire public transit network together with travel
time T, where T is the time that a traveller takes from the source node to the
destination node, thus T is the system’s life. To give expression to the dynamic
process of the system life, we introduce the concept of path life. The life of a
path is the travel time that a traveller has spent from the source node to node
vi .
In the STDN-R network system, the system’s life is stochastic due to the
fact that the arcs’ lives (i.e.costs) are stochastic. We use a non-negative random
variable X to denote the system’s life. The optimal goal is to manage to make
the system’s life as short as possible. That is to say, we expect to ﬁnd a t small
enough to make the system’s viability lowest (that is failure rate maximal) in
time range from 0 to t.
In this system, the traveller’s arriving at the last node of the current path
leads to an event called failure. The initial failure time of a system is the time
when the traveller starts at the source node of the network system; the expected
failure time of a system is the expected time when the traveller reaches the
destination node of the network system; the initial failure time of an arc is the
time when the traveller leaves the tail node of the arc; the expected failure time
of an arc is the expected time when the traveller arrives at the head node of the
arc.
3.1

STDN-R Network System

In this paper, the reliability theory model in stochastic and time-dependent
networks is called STDN-R network system. Its formalization expression is
ST DN − R = (V, A, L, Φ), where V is a non-empty set of nodes; A ⊆ V × V
is a ﬁnite set of arcs; L is a ﬁnite set of the possibly least life of every arc;
Φ = {ϕIm (t) | I = (tm−1
, tm
ij ], vi , vj ∈ A, 1 ≤ m ≤ Nij }. Thereinto, m is a
ij
number assigned to certain stream,the numbers are assigned based on their departure schedule at vi along the arc vi , vj , and the quantity of all the streams
on the arc vi , vj is called traﬃc Nij , m ∈ {1, 2, ..., Nij }; I = (tm−1
, tm
ij ] is the
ij
time range that a stream arrives at vi , where this stream is certain stream on
I
the former arc adjacent to node vi ; tm
ij is the departure time of m at vi ; ϕm (t) is

832

G.-z. Tan, X.-f. Xia, and W. Gao

the density function of the probability distribution which t subjects to, where t
is the time arriving at vj for m along the arc vi , vj .
This is a abstract model of the network-optimizing problem, which has diﬀerent meanings in diﬀerent ﬁelds. For example, in bus networks, a stream represents
a bus on certain arc; in computer networks, a stream represents a data package
on certain link.
Let the sequence {s = v0 , v1 , v2 , ..., vh−1 , vh = d} represent the path from s
to d and denote it as Psd , where vj−1 , vj ∈ A 1 ≤ j ≤ h. Let the expected
failure time of path Psd be ET (Psd ), and let its expected life be be EL(Psd ).
The relationship between them is
ET (Psd ) = EL(Psd ) + µ0

(5)

where µ0 is the initial failure time.
In this network system, the problem of expected life shortest path is a priori
expected shortest path problem from a single origin to a single destination for
each departure time.
3.2

Consistent Reliability Property

Deﬁnition 1. In STDN-R network system, let lij (x) represent the actual life of
the arc vi , vj whose initial failure time is x. Let 0 ≤ s ≤ t, for ∀ vi , vj ∈ A, if
the network satisﬁes
(6)
r(s + lij (s)) ≥ r(t + lij (t))
we say that the network has the consistent reliability property.
This deﬁnition makes it clear that even though the initial failure time is
late, failure rate will not increase. That is, the consistent reliability property
essentially is to make use of reliability theory to describe the First-in-First-out
property of every arc in the network.
3.3

Reliability Priority

Reliability Priority. The reliability priority describes the properties of certain path in the network, while the consistent reliability property describes the
characteristics of each arc in the entire network.
Deﬁnition 2. Let r1 (z) represent the failure rate of system at time z along
the path P1 , and let r2 (z) represent the failure rate of system at time z along
the path P2 . For ∀z, if r1 (z) ≥ r2 (z), we say that path P1 has the reliability
priority relative to path P2 , i.e. P1 ≤ad P2 .
From (3) and (4), we can know that r1 (z) ≥ r2 (z) ⇐⇒ S1 (z) ≤ S2 (z), so we
can get the property as follows.
Deduction 1. Let S1 (z) represent the survival function of system at time z
along the path P1 , and let S2 (z) represent the survival function of system at time
z along the path P2 . Then we can get, for ∀z, S1 (z) ≤ S2 (z) ⇐⇒ P1 ≤ad P2 .

Reliability Theory Model and Expected Life Shortest Path

833

In fact, the intuitionistic meaning of reliability priority is to say, if the expected life of path P1 is not longer than that of path P2 , then path P1 has the
reliability priority relative to path P2 .
Theorem 1. P1 ≤ad P2 ⇐⇒ EL(P1 ) ≤ EL(P2 ) ⇐⇒ ET (P1 ) ≤ ET (P2 ).
Proof: We ﬁrst prove P1 ≤ad P2 ⇐⇒ EL(P1 ) ≤ EL(P2 ).
=⇒: Given that P1 ≤ad P2 , from Deduction 1, for ∀z, we have S1 (z) ≤ S2 (z).
∞
∞
Then, from (1), we can conclude that EL(P1 ) = 0 S1 (z)dz ≤ 0 S2 (z)dz =
EL(P2 ), i.e.EL(P1 ) ≤ EL(P2 ).
⇐=: Obviously.
So P1 ≤ad P2 ⇐⇒ EL(P1 ) ≤ EL(P2 ).
From (5), we can conclude that EL(P1 ) ≤ EL(P2 ) ⇐⇒ ET (P1 ) ≤ ET (P2 ).
Proof is end.
Dominance Discriminance based on Reliability Theory. For the failure
time of an arc subjects to exponential distribution EXP (M, λ), where M is the
possibly earliest failure time of the arc and λ is the mean residual life of the arc
overstep M, the traditional dominance discriminance contains two parameters
[8], i.e. M, λ: A has stochastic dominance relative to B, iﬀ MA ≤ MB and
λA ≤ λB . But when MA ≤ MB and λA ≥ λB , or MA ≥ MB and λA ≤ λB ,
A can’t do compare with B. In this paper, a new discriminance is proposed to
reduce the two parameters in extant discriminance [8] to one, which reduces the
possibility of not doing compare among paths.
Now, we consider the discriminance based on reliability theory when the
probability distribution is exponential distribution EXP (M, λ). Because the dist−M
tribution function is F (t) = 1 − e− λ
t ≥ M , the failure rate is r(t) = λ1 .
Let the two paths that can reach the destination node be P and P respectively.
The failure time on the last arc of path P that satisﬁes EXP (M1 , λ1 ) has probability p1 . The one that satisﬁes EXP (M2 , λ2 ) has probability p2 and so on.
Reorder the exponential distribution sequence of P and let any adjacent terms
EXP (Mi , λi ) and EXP (Mi+1 , λi+1 ) satisfy λi ≤ λi+1 . Do the same to path P
to obtain
P : (EXP (M1 , λ1 ), p1 ), (EXP (M2 , λ2 ), p2 ), · · · , (EXP (Mi , λi ), pi ), · · ·
P : (EXP (M1 , λ1 ), p1 ), (EXP (M2 , λ2 ), p2 ), · · · , (EXP (Mi , λi ), pi ), · · ·
i
Using the notation epi = k=1 pk and the above two sequences, we can get
the sequences of partial sums of probability as follows:
P : ep1 , ep2 , · · · , epi , · · · , 1
P : ep1 , ep2 , · · · , epi , · · · , 1
Let us rearrange the elements of the sequences of partial sums of probability
in ascending order. We obtain the following sequence:
mp1 , mp2 , · · · , mpi , · · · , 1.
Taking any element mpi from above sequence, and letting q = mink {k |
epk ≥ mpi }, q = mink {k | epk ≥ mpi }.
For ∀mpi , if λq ≤ λq , then P ≤ad P .
Theorem 2. The dominance discriminance based on reliability theory is true.

834

G.-z. Tan, X.-f. Xia, and W. Gao

Proof: For each [mpi−1 , mpi ] (i ≥ 1, mp0 = 0) in the probability range
[0, 1], there exist λq ≤ λq , so for ∀z, we can get r(z) = λ1q ≥ λ1 = r (z) in
q

[mpi−1 , mpi ], i.e. P ≤ad P in [mpi−1 , mpi ]. Then let diﬀerent probability interval [mpi−1 , mpi ] multiply their singly relevant failure rate, and then ﬁnd the sum.
We conclude that r(z) = Σi (mpi −mpi−1 )· λ1q ≥ Σi (mpi −mpi−1 )· λ1 = r (z). In
q

fact, r(z) represents the failure rate of system at time z along path P , r (z) represents the failure rate of system at time z along path P . So, for ∀z, r(z) ≥ r (z),
from Deﬁnition 2 we can conclude P ≤ad P . Proof is end.
3.4

The Monotonicity Principle

Theorem 3. In the given STDN-R network system, let
P1 = {s = v0 , v1 , v2 , · · · , vi−1 , vi }, P1 = {s = v0 , v1 , v2 , · · · , vi−1 , vi , vj }, P2 =
{s = v0 , v1 , v2 , · · · , vi−1 , vi }, P2 = {s = v0 , v1 , v2 , · · · , vi−1 , vi , vj }. If the STDNR network has the consistent reliability property, then P1 ≤ad P2 =⇒ P1 ≤ad P2 .

r1 (t 1
P1

t1
vi

S

l ij ( t1 ))

l ij ( t 1 )

vj

l ij (t 2 )
t2
P2
r2 ( t 2

l ij (t 2 ))

Fig. 1. Monotonicity Demonstration

Proof: Let t1 be the failure time of path P1 and t2 be the failure time of path
P2 . Because of P1 ≤ad P2 , we can conclude there must be t1 ≤ t2 according to
Theorem 1. Let r1 (z) represent the failure rate of system at time z along path P1 ,
r2 (z) represent the failure rate of system at time z along path P2 , and let lij (x)
represent the actual life of the arc vi , vj whose initial failure time is x. Because
STDN-R network has the consistent reliability property, from Deﬁnition 1, we
can conclude r1 (t1 + lij (t1 )) ≥ r2 (t2 + lij (t2 )). Because the above conclusion
is always tenable for starting from source node at every time, we must have
P1 ≤ad P2 .

4

Calculation of Expected Failure Time and Expected
Life

Let event Am
ij represent a trip in which a traveller takes bus m at node vi
along arc vi , vj , m ∈ {1, 2, · · · , Nij }, where m is a number assigned to the

Reliability Theory Model and Expected Life Shortest Path

835

bus starting from vi to vj .The numbers are assigned based on their departure
schedule. Nij represents the total number of buses travelling on arc vi , vj . Then
the set{Am
ij | 1 ≤ m ≤ Nij } is the partition of the sample space Ω. That is,
Nij
n
Am
ij ∩ Aij = Φ,

m
Am
ij = Ω and P r(Aij ) ≥ 0 where 1 ≤ n = m ≤ Nij .
m=1

If the ﬁrst bus that departs from node vi at time µi is m, then P r(Am
ij ) =
1, P r(Anij ) = 0, where 1 ≤ n = m ≤ Nij , µi is the initial failure time of arc
vi , vj .
Assuming that we have already known P r(Anij ), where 1 ≤ n ≤ Nij , the time
< µi ≤ tnij . The arrival
that bus n arrives at vj satisﬁes t ∼ ϕn (t), where tn−1
ij
time of bus m which departs from vj and arrives at vk satisﬁes t ∼ ϕm (t), where
m
n
< µj ≤ tm
tm−1
jk , then P r(Ajk | Aij ) =
jk

tm
jk

tm−1
jk

ϕn (t)dt. According to the total

probability formula, we can get
Nij

P r(Am
jk )

Nij

P r(Anij )

=

·

P r(Am
jk

n=1

|

Anij )

P r(Anij )

=
n=1

·

tm
jk
tm−1
jk

ϕn (t)dt.

Now that, we have known path P = {v0 , v1 , · · · , vi−1 , vi , vi+1 , · · · , vh−1 , vh }
and its initial failure time µ0 , then the calculation method of the expected failure
time ET (P ) and the expected life EL(P ) as follows:

P r(Am
if tm−1
< µ0 ≤ tm

01 ) = 1,
01 ,
01


m

P
r(A
)
=
0,
else

01



··· ··· ··· ···



tm
N(i−1)i
i(i+1)
P r(Am
P r(An(i−1)i ) · tm−1
ϕn (t)dt
n=1
i(i+1) ) =
i(i+1)



··· ··· ··· ···



 ET (P ) = N(h−1)h P r(Am

t · ϕm (t)dt

1h
m=1
(h−1)h ) ·


EL(P1h ) = ET (P1h ) − µ0

5

RELSP Algorithm

If one path reached node vi has the reliability priority relative to another, then
the consistent reliability property insures that the latter cannot become one
part of the optimal path. According to the dominance discriminance based on
reliability theory, RELSP algorithm deletes the sub-paths without reliability
priority. If there are lots of paths without reliability priority, then the algorithm
will not use bigger storage space and computing time.
Input: an expanded stochastic and time-dependent network, which has consistent reliability property; source node s; destination node d ; initial failure time
µ0 ; a non-increasing utility function u(x).
Output: the optimal path from source node s to destination node d.

836

G.-z. Tan, X.-f. Xia, and W. Gao

Data structures:
open: the set of expanded nodes. Let each expanded node only map to one
path. These expanded nodes are represented by the numbers assigned to each
node. Each node can map to multiple expanded nodes. Sort the elements in open
according to utility function u(x).
SET (v) = {w | v, w ∈ A}represents the set of all nodes adjacent to node v.
DPv saves all paths with reliability priority from source node s to node v,
where v ∈ V .
Algorithm:
Step1: Initializes the expanded node that source node s is corresponding to,
and put the expanded node into open;
Step2: If open is non-empty, goto Step3; otherwise, goto Step9;
Step3: Take out the element q whose value of the utility function is maximal
from open, and let the last node that q is corresponding to be v, if v is destination
node d, goto Step9; otherwise, goto Step4;
Step4: Review all the arc v, w that is derivate from node v, and get the
set SET (v) of nodes adjacent to v ;
Step5: If SET (v) is non-empty, then take out a node w from SET (v), and
expand the path corresponding to q to w, and get a new expanded node num,
goto step6; otherwise, goto step2;
Step6: If there is a path has the reliability priority relative to the path that
num is corresponding to, then the algorithm do nothing, goto Step5; otherwise,
put the path that num is corresponding to into DPw , goto Step7;
Step7: Calculate the expected failure time and expected life that num is
corresponding to;
Step8: According to utility function u insert num into the appropriate place
in open; goto step5;
Step9: Output the optimal path from source node s to destination node d,
the algorithm is end.
Theorem 4. If the input network of the RELSP algorithm has consistent
reliability property, and the utility function u(x) is non-increasing, then the
RELSP algorithm will ﬁnd the optimal path from source node s to destination
node d.
Proof : During the iteration, the algorithm divided path spaces having been
searched into two parts: one part is the space of deleted paths, and let the set
of nodes that the space contains be NDP ; the other part is the space of saved
paths, and let the set of nodes that the space contains be DP. But, there still
exists path space having not been searched when the algorithm is end, and
let the set of nodes that the space contains be NSP. Thus, V is divided into
three subclasses, the relationship among them is shown by Fig. 2. Obviously,
{s, d} ∈ DP ∩ N DP ∩ N SP .
The terminative condition of the algorithm is that open is empty or searching
d. The ﬁrst condition means that there are no path from s to d at all; We merely
prove that the second condition means that we have found the optimal path from
s to d.

Reliability Theory Model and Expected Life Shortest Path

837

DP
vk 1
P3

P1

vk 4
s

vi

vj

vk 3
d

vk 5
NSP

P2
vk 2
NDP

Fig. 2. The Validity of RELSP algorithm

Let P1 be the sub-path passing through vk1 ∈ DP − N DP and reaching
vi ∈ DP ∩ N DP , P2 is the sub-path passing through vk2 ∈ N DP − DP and
reaching vi ∈ DP ∩ N DP , and P1 ≤ad P2 . During the iteration, the algorithm
deleted sub-path P2 . Then we prove the validity of the deleting operation as
follows. Let the node set adjacent to vi be SET (vi ) = {vj | vi , vj ∈ A}.
For ∀vj ∈ SET (vi ), expand P1 and P2 respectively, thus we can get P1 and
P2 . Because P1 ≤ad P2 , we can conclude P1 ≤ad P2 according to Theorem 3.
Therefore, P2 will never become the sub-path of the optimal path from s to d,
so we may delete it.
In addition, the paths not being searched when the algorithm is end will not
become the optimal path. This because that if we want to search these paths,
we can carry our point only by expanding the sub-paths that are corresponding
to those residual elements in open. For example, as Fig. 2 is shown, let P3 =
{s, · · · , vk3 , · · · , vk4 , vk5 , · · · , d} be certain path having still not been searched
when algorithm is end, if we want to search P3 , then we must expand P3 =
{s, · · · , vk3 , vk4 } to vk5 , where P3 is the path corresponding to certain element
num in open, · · ·, continue to expand till d. However, in open, num is behind the
element corresponding to the path just searched, i.e.the value of utility function
of P3 is not bigger than that of the path just searched. We get P3 by expanding
P3 , so the value of utility function of P3 is smaller than that of P3 . Thereby,
the value of utility function of P3 must not be bigger than that of the path
just searched, i.e. it is impossible for P3 to become the optimal path. As well
as, during the course of iterative, the algorithm takes out the optimal element
from open every time. Therefore, the path that has just been found must be the
optimal path from s to d. Proof is end.
Finally, we show an application example of the RELSP algorithm in [10],
and make an comparison with the PFS-Dominance algorithm of Wellman (see
[6]), and our RELSP algorithm is proved very eﬃcient.

838

6

G.-z. Tan, X.-f. Xia, and W. Gao

Conclusions

Compared with traditional deterministic networks, stochastic and timedependent networks have more applications, in particular, in the ﬁelds such as
wireless communications, intelligent transportation systems, and the Internet.
All these new network applications have stochastic and time-dependent properties. Therefore, research on these stochastic and time-dependent networks is very
important. Besides transportation networks, our study results should be applicable to other similar networks, such as computer networks and communication
networks. Note that how to determine reliability priority is not an essential and
necessary condition but a necessary condition. If an essential and necessary condition can be found, the search space can be further reduced.

References
1. J.A. Bottom, Anticipatory Consistent Route Guidance, Ph.D.thesis, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Step, 2000.
2. Song Gao; Chabini, I. Optimal routing policy problems in stochastic timedependent networks part I: framework and taxonomy. Intelligent Transportation Systems, 2002. Proceedings. The IEEE 5th International Conference on,
2002.Page(s): 549–554.
3. Christos Alexopoulos, “State Space Partitioning Methods for Stochastic Shortest
Path Problems,” Networks, vol. 30, no. 1, 1997, pp. 9–21.
4. Tan Guozhen, Gao Wen. Shortest path algorithm in time-dependent networks.
Chinese J.Computers, 2002, 25(2) 165–172 (in Chinese).
5. R.W. Hall, “The fastest path through a network with random time-dependent
travel times”, Transportation Science, vol.20, no.3, pp.91–101, 1986.
6. Michael P. Wellman, Matthew Ford, and Kenneth Larson, “Path Planning under
Time-Dependent Uncertainty,” Proc. Eleventh Conf. On Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, Aug. 1995, pp. 532–539.
7. Justin Boyan and Michael Mitzenmacher.Improved Results for Route Planning in
Stochastic Transportation Network. SODA. 2001.
8. D.Stoyan. Comparison Methods for Queues and Other Stochastic Models. John
Wiley and Sons, New York, 1983.
9. S.Ross. Stochastic Process. John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1983.
10. TAN Guo-zhen and XIA Xiang-fu. Algorithms for routing in stochastic and timedependent networks based on reliability theory. Research report of Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering, Dalian University of Technology. No 200201.

