A Fuzzy Artiﬁcial World: Zamin II
Ramin Halavati and Saeed Bagheri Shouraki
Computer Eng. Department,
Sharif University of Technology,
Tehran, Iran
{halavati, sbagheri}@ce.sharif.edu

Abstract. Zamin has previously been introduced as a fast and expandable artiﬁcial world for cognitive studies. Zamin’s organisms have a simple
case based reasoning decision making and unsupervised learning system.
In this paper, we improve Zamin organisms’ CBR brains to Fuzzy CBR
brains and conclude the new brain system helps in evolution of more
complex behavior and more successful life.

1

Introduction

In [1] Zamin1 is introduced as a fast and expandable artiﬁcial life model based
on ERL [2] and a more suitable model for cognitive A-Life studies in compare
with known models like Echo [3], LEE [4] and Tierra [5].
Zamin creatures (which are called Aryos2 ) must compete for food, escape
from predators and reproduce to keep up their species. Aryos choose their actions
using a simple case based reasoning algorithm and are trained during their life
time using case based learning. They are also subject to evolution during the
lifetime of their species.
As shown in [1], Aryos are quite successful in development of several simple,
but suﬃcient, strategies for living inside Zamin environment. But due to the
simplicity of the evolved strategies, Aryos can not resist harsher environmental
state like less food, more energy suﬀrages, more predators, etc.
In this paper, we’ll improve Aryos’ brains to fuzzy brains to increase the
computational power and in turn, complexity of Aryos’ living strategies. The
paper is comprised of 4 sections:
The ﬁrst one describes Zamin and its inhabitants.
Second section deals with the fuzziﬁcation of Zamin creatures.
At the third section, some results from Fuzzy Zamin runs will be presented.
And the last section presents the conclusion and further works.

1
2

Zamin means ‘Earth’ in Persian. It is also the abbreviation of ‘Zoological Agents for
Modiﬁcation and Improvement of Neo-creatures’.
Aryo is a Persian name taken from Aryobarzan, a warlord living 2500 years ago.

P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2657, pp. 601–609, 2003.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

602

2

R. Halavati and S.B. Shouraki

Zamin I in a Nutshell

Zamin environment consists of a simple lattice and three types of inhabitants:
The Aryos which are mobile and learner organisms and are the main subject of
our study; the Sentinels which are another mobile organisms, but their behavior
is hard-coded and they are just aimed to kill the Aryos; and the plants which
are the green energy resource of the Aryos.
2.1

Zamin Environment

Zamin environment is a simple spherical lattice (if an organism keeps moving in one direction, it will reach its source position again).
Each cell of this environment can at most include one Aryo or Sentinel (Thus, once a cell
is occupied by an organism, no other organism
can move there). Energy is fed into this environment by the plants which are created by a
constant growth-rate, but also have a maximum
total, to assume a dependency on another limited resource.
2.2

Fig. 1. The Environment

Aryos’ Body and Life Cycle

The main creatures of this environment are the Aryos. Each Aryo has an internal
energy state which is increased if it eats a plant or the ﬂesh of a dead organism,
and decreased, as it is attacked by other creatures. The energy level is also
decreased by a constant usage factor and must be kept above a certain limit
to prevent death. Once an Aryo is dead, its body remains for some period in
the cell where it is dead. During this period, the body can be eaten by other
organisms to gain energy.
Each Aryo can reproduce (asexually) once its energy level exceeds a threshold. After the reproduction, a certain amount of parent’s energy is given to the
child.
The same as almost all zoological organisms we know, Aryos’ also have a face
(which is called their direction). They receive inputs from that direction and can
move only towards that. This direction property can be one of the four North,
South, East, and West main directions.
2.3

Aryos’ Genetic Code and Evolution

Many of the Aryo properties are not constant and are speciﬁed by a data structure which is called the Genetic Code or Genome. When an Aryo is born, the
parent Genome is mutated by a predeﬁned factor and passed to the infant.
Then the infant is initialized using this code. Following the Mendel theory [6],

A Fuzzy Artiﬁcial World: Zamin II

603

an Aryo’s genome remains unchanged during the life time of the organism. It
can be mutated only during its passing to the infant.
The existence of this genome, the possibility of mutations on it, and the
competitions between Aryos in ﬁnding energy resources and escaping enemies,
composes an evolution based on natural selection [6]. Thus we can expect long
evolutionary trends and organisms’ performance increment during the long running time. [6]
As Aryos’ reproduction is asexual, no combination operator is used.
2.4

Aryos’ Action Choices

At each time step, each Aryo can choose an action. This action can be a choice
of a move to one of the three cells in-front of the current cell or a changing of
direction, reproduction, attacking to the organism in-front, eating or nothing at
all.
As stated in 2.1, each Aryo has a current direction. As seen in
Fig. 2, the Aryo can always choose to move to one the three cells
in front, which are the cell directly in-front and the ones on its right
and left sides. The organism can also choose to turn left or right to
change its direction. A choice of movement to a cell which is occupied
by another organism will result in discarding the action
and an energy decrement penalty for the organism that has
chosen the wrong action. Aryos
also have an internal tiredness
property. Tiredness is increased by moving or attacking and
decreased by other action choices. Once an Aryo has reached
its maximum tiredness, it can
Fig. 2. Direction: Movements and Sensory
not move any more and a choice
Inputs
of move will again result in
wrong-action energy penalty. The tiredness limit has a gene in Aryos’ genome.
A high value of this gene will result in higher tiredness limit, but as a side eﬀect,
results in more energy decrement by moving.
‘Eating’ is another action choice for an Aryo. Once there is a plant or a ﬂesh
in the cell where Aryo is, it can choose Eat command to eat it and increase
its energy. As stated in [1], to increase the chance of evolution of specialized
species and in turn species competitions, there is a gene in Aryos’ genome called
‘Carnivorousness’ which speciﬁes what percent of a plant or ﬂesh’s energy is
absorbed by the organism. An organism with a high value carnivorousness gene
can get all the energy in a ﬂesh, but a little from a plant, and reverse for an
Aryo with low carnivorousness.
‘Attacking’ is another action choice. Once there is another organism (Aryo
or Sentinel) in-front, Aryo can choose to attack it. Attacking will result in decre-

604

R. Halavati and S.B. Shouraki

ment of a speciﬁc amount of energy from the organism which is being attacked.
Choosing attack when there is no other organism in front will result in wrongaction energy penalty.
‘Reproduction’ or ‘Splitting’ is the last action choice. Once an Aryo has more
energy than a speciﬁc limit (this limit is speciﬁed in its genome), it can reproduce
and create a child. The infant would be initialized using a genome similar to its
parent’s genome but with a few mutations. Some percent of the parent energy
is also given to the infant. This amount is also speciﬁed in the genome.
An organism can also choose not to do anything at each time step.
2.5

Aryos’ Sensory Inputs

Each Aryo has two types of sensory input sources. The ﬁrst is its internal state
which is composed of its energy level, its last change of energy level, its age and
some ﬂags specifying what it has done as its last action. The external sensory
inputs specify the type and some properties of the most near object in their
view point. These properties vary depending on the type of the object in-front.
For a plant, only distance, relative angle and plant energy is given as sensory
input, but for another Aryo or Sentinel, its energy level, carnivorousness, age,
tiredness, etc. are given.
2.6

Aryos’ Pleasure System

To guide Aryo’s unsupervised learning system, each Aryo has an internal pleasure
system which speciﬁes how favorable its current state is. If the pleasure level is
positive, it means that organism is pleased with its current state while a negative
pleasure level means it is in pain. The absolute value of pleasure measure states
the severity of organism’s pleasure or pain.
The pleasure system uses a case based reasoning method. Each case is in the
form of a pair (S, P ) or (State, Pleasure) and says if current sensory input is S,
then organism pleasure is P. We call each of theses cases a rule. Whenever there
is a need of computation of pleasure, the current sensory inputs are compared
with all pleasure rules S parts, and then, a weighted average of their P parts with
weights relative to the similarity of the S parts to sensory inputs is computed
as current pleasure level.
Pleasure rules remain unchanged during the life time of an Aryo and are
initiated by the genome it receives. Thus, they only change by evolution.
2.7

Aryos’ Decision Making

Another set of cases compose Aryos’ decision making system. Each case (also
called a “decision rule”) is in the form of a triple (S, A, P ) or (state, action,
pleasure) which states that “in an experience where the sensory inputs have been
S, action A was chosen and it has resulted in pleasure level P ”. At each action
choice, sensory inputs are compared with the S parts of all action rules. Then
the case which its similarity multiplied by its P part is the bigger is selected. At
last, its A part is chosen as the action to perform.

A Fuzzy Artiﬁcial World: Zamin II

2.8

605

Aryos’ Learning

Once an action is selected and applied, pleasure is computed and its value is
combined with the P part of the triple which has chosen the action.
2.9

Sentinels

Sentinels are quite similar to the Aryos. They have only two major diﬀerences:
First, their behavior is hard-coded and they have no learning and genome. They
have just one goal which is to search for the Aryos and killing them. Second,
they gain energy by attacking to Aryos and do not eat anything.

3

Zamin II: Fuzziﬁed Zamin I

In [1], we compared Zamin I with some other A-Life models from the view point
of a research on evolution of complex behavior. We concluded that Zamin is a
better choice than Artiﬁcial Chemistry (e.g. see [7]), Cellular Automata (e.g.
see [8]), or Assembly Code models (e.g. see [5]) because it starts from a much
more complex organisms base and therefore does not take time for evolution of
primitive capabilities. It is also more suitable than models like Echo and LEE
because it is less abstract than such models and provides easier comparisons
with real world organisms for the experimenter.
Zamin I was successful in presenting some basic strategies for self organizing
creatures, and overcame ERL creatures in average and maximum life time. But
the resulting strategies were very simple and this simplicity was due to their
simple decision making system. This section explains the changes we made to
Zamin I creatures to alter their crisp reasoning system to a fuzzy one in order
to overcome the inability of developing more complex behaviors. We have also
made some reﬁnements to the environment to facilitate the evolution of diﬀerent
species and in turn, competitions between species and arm races [6].
The CBR method used in Zamin I was quite crisp, and therefore, generalization and encapsulation of similar cases or states was impossible (e.g., an Aryo
needed to have diﬀerent rules to follow and eat food when it had diﬀerent energy
levels). To overcome this problem, we promoted the Aryos’ brain system to Fuzzy
CBR. In this model, all the State parts in pleasure and action rules are replaced
by fuzzy rules, as follows:
3.1

Pleasure Rules

Each pleasure rule is again in the form of (S, P ) pairs but this time the S part
is speciﬁed with fuzzy sets. (See Fig. 3). In the previous model, S was a set of
state values, for example it could say that “Energy Level is . . . , Delta Energy
Level is . . . , Last Action is . . . , Object in front is . . . , etc.” but in fuzzy model,
it is in the form of: “Energy Level belongs to fuzzy set . . . , Delta Energy Level
belongs to fuzzy set . . . , etc.”.

606

R. Halavati and S.B. Shouraki

Fig. 3. General View of a Fuzzy Pleasure Rule

3.2

Pleasure Computation

The computation of pleasure has also changed as follows: After the current state
is fed into each pleasure rule, each sensory input’s value is put in its fuzzy set
and fuzzy set outcomes are computed (as in Fig. 4). Then, the minimum value
of the fuzzy set results is regarded as the rule activation value. Rules whose
activation value is below a speciﬁc threshold are cut oﬀ at this level and not
used in this step (This threshold has a gene). Then the ﬁnal result of each rule is
computed by multiplying the activation value to the pleasure value (the P part
of the rule). Several methods were implemented for combining the rule results
and each method has a gene specifying its likelihood of being used.

Fig. 4. Computation of Rule Activation

3.3

Decision Rules

The same as pleasure rules, decision rules are promoted to fuzzy, so that their
S parts are described using fuzzy sets. Here again, a minimum limit for rule
activation and several combination methods are used and each have a gene in
genome.
3.4

Limited Fuzzy Sets

We have used a trapezoid shape for each fuzzy set, and therefore we need 4
points (genes) to specify each fuzzy membership set (Fig. 5). This makes the
entire genetic space for rules very vast and in turn slows down the evolution (see
more discussion in [1]). To overcome this problem, we have added a gene which
limits the number of fuzzy membership sets to some predeﬁned number namely
low, middle, high, proportional, not proportional, zero, none-zero and eﬀect-less.
This gene is called Fuzzy-Bounding-Gene.

A Fuzzy Artiﬁcial World: Zamin II

607

Fig. 5. Computation of Rule Activation

3.5

Learning

After each choice of action and applying the results, learning procedure is applied
as in Fig. 6.3
3.6

Learning Gene

To have a measure of usefulness of learning for Aryos, there exist a gene which
sets on or oﬀ the learning mechanism. When learning is active, more energy is
spent in each time step but in return, every experience is passed to learning
module.
3.7

Precision

To add the possibility of uncertain behavior, a precision gene is added which
decides how fuzzy will the organism computations be. The higher its value, the
more imprecise the brain processes will go on.

4

Fuzzy Zamin Results

Comparing with Zamin results, the average Aryo age is increased from about
170 to about 740 time units and the maximum age is increased from around 1800
to around 12000. These values indicate that Aryos have been quite successful in
adopting their fuzzy brains.
Aryos in Zamin II can also tolerate much harsher environment. They can
resist in environments in which the penalties for wrong actions are about 5
times more than the value at the beginning of simulation and the number of
plants is half.
Fuzzy Zamin creatures are very much dependant on their learning system.
All long life species have a learning gene which grants learning in all creatures
of species population and disabling the learning system results in immediate
extinction of the population.
In 95% of Zamin II runs, the Fuzzy-Bounding-Gene has a value which states
that the creatures just use the 8 predeﬁned sets. This complies with the common
recommendation in fuzzy control design which states: ‘Start with few membership
functions.’
3

The absolute value of pleasure values are compared, because the most severe cases
must be memorized.

608

R. Halavati and S.B. Shouraki

Fig. 6. The learning algorithm.

Fig. 7. Age comparison between Zamin I and II

5

Conclusion and Further Works

Zamin I, was a fast and expandable alife model, suitable for cognitive studies.
Zamin creatures (called Aryos) develop their lifetime strategies by using a simple
Case Based Reasoning brain and are trained both by evolution in long term and
Case Based Learning in short term. Zamin I inhabitants develop simple strategies

A Fuzzy Artiﬁcial World: Zamin II

609

for their living inside Zamin but are not able to expand these strategies to more
complex ones or resist harder environmental states.
In this paper, we promoted the simple CBR brains to Fuzzy CBR brains
by changing all state variables from crisp values to fuzzy values and adding
imprecise computation choice.
We showed that the average life time of the organisms and their resistance
against environmental pressures has increased. Also it was shown that Aryos have
well accepted their learning system and have chosen it. The evolution of several
specialized living strategies also states our success in facilitating the evolution
of more complex behaviors.
In the next step of this research, we are trying to extend the brain system
to a 3 layer fuzzy model in which, the world state is ﬁrst translated into some
internal image and then used to make decisions. This is supposed to be helpful
in studying the evolution of communication.

References
1. R. Halavati, S. B. Shouraki. (2002) “Zamin, An Artiﬁcial Ecosystem”. In M.H.
Shafazand, A. M. Tjoa, editors, Proceedings of Eurasia-ICT 2002, pages 1008-1016,
Springer-Verlag, D-69121 Heidelberg, Germany, 2002.
2. D. H. Ackley, M. Littman. (1992) “Interactions Between Learning and Evolution.”
In C. G. Langton, C. Taylor, J. D. Farmer, and S. Rasmussen, editors, Artiﬁcial
Life II, Volume X of SFI Studies in the Sciences of Complexity, pages 487–507,
Addison-Wesley, Redwood City, CA, 1992.
3. S. Forrest, P. T. Hraber, T. Jones. 1996 “The Ecology of ECHO”.
4. F. Menczer, R. K. Belew. (1993) “Latent Energy Environments: A Tool for Artiﬁcial
Life Simulations”.
5. T. S. Ray. (1992) “An approach to the Synthesis of Life.” In C. G. Langton, C.
Taylor, J. D. Farmer, and S. Rasmussen, editors, Artiﬁcial Life II, Volume X of SFI
Studies in the Sciences of Complexity, pages 371–401, Addison-Wesley, Redwood
City, CA, 1992.
6. R. Dawkins (1997) “The Blind Watchmaker”, W.W.Norton & Company Inc.
7. P. Dittrich, J. Ziegler, W. Banzhaf. (2000) “Artiﬁcial Chemistries, A Review”
http://ls11-www.cs.uni-dortmund.de
8. J. von Neumann. (1966) “Theory of Self-Reproducing Automata”. University of
Illinois Press, Illinois, 1966. Edited and completed by A. W. Burks.

