A Performance Evaluation on Qos-Supporting
Multicast Protocol over Conventional Multicast Protocol
Won-Hyuck Choi, Tae-Seung Lee, and Jung-Sun Kim
School of Electronics, Telecommunication and Computer Engineering
Hankuk Aviation University, Seoul, Korea
rbooo@korea.com, thestaff@hitel.net,
jskim@mail.hangkong.ac.kr

Abstract. Recently there have been many requirements for reliability from the
multicast communication services that have peer-to-multiple or multiple-tomultiple connecting ability unlike the previous peer-to-peer communications.
Multicast protocols include the distance vector multicast routing protocol
(DVMRP), multicast extension to open shortest path first (MOSPF), core based
tree (CBT) and protocol independent multicast (PIM) structures. These protocols use their own local distance algorithms to utilize characteristics of network
packets as routing costs in transferring data. However, multimedia applications
require more efficient multicast protocols as well as broadband network connection, real-time transmission. To the requirement, the quality of service sensitive multicast Internet protocol (QosMIC) is urged to be used in Internet. The
QosMIC supports several quality of service (Qos) properties: reliability, efficient resource management and flexibility of multicast networks. The QosMIC
is in distinction from the existing protocols in that the QosMIC presents data in
advance. This paper analyzes the QosMIC and CBT by using objective and
practical bandwidths in transferring data packets, and measures their performances on a simulation to test such bandwidths.

1

Introduction

Recently multimedia workstations, distributed systems and high speed communication systems have had remarkable advances. The combination of these systems encourages the distributed multimedia systems to be developed, and not only workstations but also personal computers can transfer the non-text signals such as voice,
image, audio and graphic. Such services can be considered as an aim of data transmission implemented on network and transport layers. The transmission protocols define
and implement functions to support the atoms of the services. The up-to-date network
communications require the higher layers than transport layer to take over appropriate
roles. As a result, users will be ultimately able to enjoy several multimedia applications at a time, each application supplying its own characteristic service.
There are increasing requests on the current multicast communications to have reliability on peer-to-multiple or multiple-to-multiple communication services. In addition to it, broadband network connection, real-time transmission and more efficient
multicast protocols are also needed to support multimedia applications. Nevertheless,
P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2659, pp. 453–462, 2003.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

454

W.-H. Choi, T.-S. Lee, and J.-S. Kim

the multicast protocols such as the distance vector multicast routing protocol
(DVMRP), multicast extension to open shortest path first (MOSPF), core based tree
(CBT), protocol independent multicast (PIM) structures, are lack of communication
processing performance, bandwidth and quality of service (Qos), which are fundamental requirements on viable multicasting. It is because such multicast protocols use
only their own local distance algorithms as routing costs of packets.
This problem urges to introduce multicast group communication into the service
layer newly added to Internet. The service layer provides services necessary to next
generations of Internet. The multicasting has fundamental role in the service layer.
Multicast must transfer similar information to multiple receivers. This fact results in
that single multicast group might suffer from transmission delay which is a defect to
unicast communication, since multiple packets are moved through network at a time.
Moreover, the quality of user receiving has to be assured.
Network communication must be considered with respect to social exchange, value
of the communication and dependency on service. Such properties are sustained by
consistent management of Qos layer. The existing multicast routing protocols cannot
implement applications to provide such Qos properties. Most of the protocols adopt
the PIM, CBT and BGMP as the best efficient structures of Internet. The protocols
present users with single path routing. If there is not sufficient resource, they cannot
satisfy user’s requirements.
Multicasts are divided into conventional methods and methods to improve network
service. A representative method of conventional methods is the CBT. The CBT is the
most effective method of the existing multicasts to enhance network speed, but it does
not consider Qos. Qos enables resource of a source to be connected in shorter time
when the source is disconnected from a receiver of network. Therefore, the multicast
to present Qos can provide more reliability by preparing sufficient resource.
In this paper, the authors attempt to evaluate a Qos application by using a reliable
and efficient multicast protocol, the quality of service sensitive multicast Internet
protocol (QosMIC), on Internet. The multicast protocol does meet three requirements:
(1) Qos support, (2) reliability, and (3) efficient resource management. The QosMIC
is based on multiple routing and Qos supporting, so involves in multicast group connection and fully satisfies the multiple routing and Qos requirements. To compare the
QosMIC and the CBT, the best popular one of the existing multicast protocols, a
simulation is conducted [1,5].
The hereafter composition of this paper is as follows: section 2 describes the overview of multicast protocols, section 3 describes the QosMIC method, section 4 reports
the result of the simulation to compare the QosMIC performance and CBT, and section 5 finally concludes our work.

2 Multicast Protocol
Of the previous multicast protocols, four have been commonly used: the source based
tree (SBT) multicast protocol constructs trees for each source, the shared tree (ShT)
shares trees with multiple sources, the Intra-Domain establishes trees in the same

A Performance Evaluation on Qos-Supporting Multicast Protocol

455

domain as to their locations, and the Inter-Domain establishes trees in different domains.
2.1

Source Based Tree Protocol

The SBT is also called the source distribution tree (SDT), or the shortest path tree
(SPT) in that it is based on the shortest path algorithm. When trees of the SBT are
represented, (S, G) is used to denote the source S. The SBT which has a good delay
characteristic of traffic is efficient in multicast services like the internet broadcasting
that has a few senders but many receivers. The distance vector multicast routing protocol (DVMRP), one derivation of the SBT, establishes the shortest path to the receiver to forward datagrams in multicasting mode. And the multicast extension to
open shortest path first (MOSPF) protocol is the one that, as you can infer from its
name, extends the second version of the open shortest path first (OSPF) (RFC1583).
Its name signifies it is independent of unicast routing mechanism, though it has some
similar characteristic to unicast protocols. The PIM uses only the resulting tables
without associating with algorithms or protocols that put out an unicast routing table.
When the density of a tree with a distribution of group members is considered, the
PIM is classified into the dense mode (DM) if the density is high and the sparse mode
(SM) otherwise [6].
2.2

Shared Tree Protocol

The ShT is denoted as (*, G), where * means the whole sources and G the group. The
size of the real tree has the value of O(|G|) independently of the number of sources
since it is the shared tree. The cost in constructing trees is not expensive, but a serious
traffic delay might be caused by the increasing number of sources. The ShT is appropriate when multicast services are supplied in the networks that have somewhat narrow bandwidth traffic but many senders. The core based tree (CBT) is one of the ShT
and has a core router on the center of the shared tree. In contrast to the PIM-SM protocol that operates as an uni-direction tree and so has constraints on selecting the
optimal routing path, the CBT tree operates as bi-direct tree and has more flexible
extensibility of networks in comparison with the existing source-based multicast routing protocols.
The best advantage of the CBT protocol is that the change of overhead to manage
trees is not very severe when the configuration of member or source is changed. It is
due to single tree shared with all members of a multicast group. In addition to it, the
CBT can utilize efficiently resource of network including bandwidth of a link because
it does not require periodic information to manage groups as the IGMP does and use
its bandwidth only for multicast traffic. On the other hand, the disadvantage of the
CBT is that it might cause to increase link cost to establish the whole routing path of a
tree on the basis of core router and make a bottleneck at core link to condense traffic
to the core. That is, high link load needed for overloading the bandwidth of core link
makes a bottleneck. When this situation gets more strained, it might result in the
deadlock of core link and lead to the stop of multicast service.

456

W.-H. Choi, T.-S. Lee, and J.-S. Kim

The PIM-SM protocol uses the rendezvous point (RP) that is shared with the whole
receiver routers for each multicast group, and it is used as an uni-direction tree [3].

3 Protocol Description: The QosMIC
3.1

Overview

The main parts of the QosMIC support functions to select a router. In other words, the
QosMIC is defined as collection of Qos routing information about multiple paths.
When a new node is selected from a multicast tree, Qos requires the exact path by
gathering information. To the requirement, the QosMIC is classified into the most upto-date router. The main parts of the router try to search the adjacent routers from tree.
Figure 1 shows the node accessing method of the QosMIC. It has to be noted how the
core router cannot be used. In the method, the group member of the near node is active and the router selects the Join, and this results in eliminating the necessity of the
cores. The QosMIC is superior to the unicast protocol and core-based tree protocols
when such advantage is born in mind [1].

Manager

Memo :
branch
Possible branch
New

Fig. 1. Approach of the QosMIC

A Performance Evaluation on Qos-Supporting Multicast Protocol

457

Manager
Multicast
Tree Search

Local Search

New

Fig. 2. Searching procedure of the QosMIC

3.2

Structure and Message Forwarding Method of the QosMIC

The transmission in the QosMIC structure is implemented as receiver sending on
multicast tree and consists of three stages. In the first stage, a router is defined if a tree
exists and the tree is able to join other trees through the interfaces of them. These
trees are called candidates. In the second stage, the candidates inform the new router
of their own information by command messages. In the final stage, the joined router
selects nodes that need information. The QosMIC is a source-based tree that Qos
characteristic is improved, and is switched such that sharing tree is avoided. The message handling of the QosMIC is implemented as follows. All the routers contain multicast routing information. The information forwards individual multicast packets and
executes the appropriate members linked. Each link has entries of tree table in an
isolated tree partition. If the packet transferred matches an entry of the routing table, it
is linked. In unique tree method, when packets from all sources of a group are
matched, the routing entry takes them from shared tree. In (S, G) of the source-based
tree, G represents the group and S the source. The shared tree uses (*, G) notation,
where * designates the source. The routing location in most multicast protocols of
IETF takes lower level. It means that the routing location will be vanished. The adjoining messages correspond with each other periodically and the incoming links from
them are newly combined [1], [4].

458

3.3

W.-H. Choi, T.-S. Lee, and J.-S. Kim

Multicast Tree Searching

When the new router requires a multicast group joined, a new link is added in the
multicast tree location and is executed. If the new router already has a group entry, a
link is established; otherwise a creator of local searching or multicast tree searching is
employed. The creator of router searching is called manager. Manager receives messages from candidate routers of local tree nodes and forwards the messages to multicast routers. This procedure is shown in Figure 2. The candidate selection process is
much serious in the QosMIC. The sequential process is conducted like below [8]:
1) Local Search
c The New router “floods” a BID-REQ message in its neighborhood. Reverse
path multicasting with scope controlled by the time to live (TTL) field. Because QosMIC has the Multicast Tree Search, the TTL value can be kept
very small. The advantage should be considered meaningful at the results of
simulation conducted later in this paper.
d Every In-Tree router that receives a BID-REQ message, becomes a Candidate router, and unicast a BID message back to the New router. The BID
message on its way collects information on the expected performance of the
path, based on dynamic Qos metrics. The Candidate router considers the
New router as a tentative dependent, and cannot leave the tree unless the tentative status is timed out.
e The New router collects BID messages. The procedure termincates
unsuccessfully, if the New router does not receive any replies before the
expiration of a timer set for this purpose. Otherwise, we enter the phase of
establishing the connection.
2) Multicast Tree Search
c New router sends an M-JOIN message to the Manager of the group.
d The Manager “orders” a bidding session with a BID-ORDER message.
Some subset of the routers that receive the BID-ORDER become Candidates.
e The Candidates unicast BID’s to the New router. The BID’s are identical to
the BID’s in the Local Search.

4

Simulation

We compare and analyze the multicast protocols, the QosMIC and CBT described in
Sect. 3. The first experiment compares the average speed of traffic flows between
terminals when the QosMIC and CBT are used alone. It is to measure the performances in speed, which is the most significant property in networks. The second experiment compares the average delays between terminals. It is to measure how much
the Qos between terminals is satisfied when network information is transferred. To do
this, a multicast simulation model is established first. The comparison of the QosMIC
and CBT routings parameterizes the number and bandwidths of multicast groups, the
delay time of packets and the size of data packets as to the characteristic of an appli-

A Performance Evaluation on Qos-Supporting Multicast Protocol

459

cation program. The simulation platform is a PC machine with 512MByte memory
and 1.5GHz Intel Pentium Processor, the operating system of the machine the Linux
RedHat 7.0 and the tool the Network Simulator – ns Version 2 which is used widely
in PC-based environments. In the first experiment, packet sizes to test are 210byte and
512byte.
Figures 3 and 4 report the 4.53% improvement of the QosMIC with respect to the
CBT for 210byte packets and the 10.25% for 512byte packets. The time measurements in the second experiment are the average delay times to the total traffic as with
the increasing number of groups between terminals when all nodes linked with a
router are considered.
Figures 5 and 6 present the measurements of the average delay times between terminals when the size of packets is 210byte and 512byte, respectively. It is noted that
the delay characteristic of the QosMIC routing is slightly superior to that of the CBT.
The delay characteristics of the QosMIC against the CBT are recorded as 12.23% for
210byte packets and 14.4% for 512byte packets.

QosM IC
CBT

150
140
130

Receiving rate(byte/sec)

120
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

Steps

Fig. 3. Data receiving rates for 210byte packets

40

W.-H. Choi, T.-S. Lee, and J.-S. Kim

QosM IC
CBT

140
130
120

Receiving rate (byte/sec)

110
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

Steps

Fig. 4. Data receiving rates for 512byte packets

QosMIC
CBT
0.045
0.040

Average end-to-end delay(sec)

460

0.035
0.030
0.025
0.020
0.015
0.010
0.005
5

10

15

20

25

30

Delay link

Fig. 5. The average delays between terminals for 210byte packets

A Performance Evaluation on Qos-Supporting Multicast Protocol

461

Fig. 6. The average delays between terminals for 512byte packets

5

Conclusion

In this paper, we measured the packet processing times and average delay times between terminals for 210byte packets and 512byte packets, respectively. From the first
experiment results, the 4.53% and 10.25% improvements of the QosMIC against the
CBT at the two packet sizes were obtained. And the average delay times were reduced
by the 12.23% and 14.4%. The delay times of the CBT increase more than them of the
QosMIC when the number of links of senders is high, the packet size is large and the
number of groups of receivers is high. Those evidences strongly confirm the fact that
the increasing number of CBT groups induces the increase of the number of groups in
Core and the more delays of data packets, and the QosMIC remedies such defect. In
the future work, it is required to measure the average delay time and data processing
time between terminals as well as the reliabilities on higher levels. Additionally, other
multicast protocols beside the CBT must be compared and analyzed in the process
between the QosMIC and terminal, and the reliabilities of higher levels be analyzed.

References
1. The QoSMIC Implementation Web-Site. Available at
∼
http://www.cs.ucr.edu/ michalis/qosmic.html
2. Almerith, K.: A Long-Term Analysis of Growth and Usage Patterns in Multicast Backbone.
IEEE INFOCOM. 2 (2000) 824–833

462

W.-H. Choi, T.-S. Lee, and J.-S. Kim

3. Ballardie, A.: Core Based Trees (CBT version 2) Multicast Routing – Protocol Specification. RFC2189. (1997)
4. Chen, S., Nahrstedt, K., Shavitt, Y.: A QoS-Aware Multicast Routing Protocols. IEEE
INFOCOM. 3 (2000) 1594–1603
5. Fei, A., Gerla, M.: Receiver-Initiated Multicasting with Multiple QoS Constraints. IEEE
INFOCOM. 1 (2000) 62–70
6. Moy, J.: Multicast Extensions to OSPF. IETF RFC 1584. (1994)
7. Parsa, M., Garcia-Luna-Aceves, J. J.: A Protocol for Scalable Loop-Free Multicast Routing.
IEEE J. Select. Areas Comm. 15 (1997) 316–331
8. Yan, S.: Implementation and Evaluation of QoSMIC – A New Internet Multicast Routing
Protocol. Master's thesis, Dept. of Elect. Eng., Univ. of Toronto. (1999)

