Threat Description for the PP by Using the
Concept of the Assets Protected by TOE
Tai-hoon Kim1 , Byung-gyu No1 , and Dong Chun Lee2
1

KISA, 78, Garak-Dong, Songpa-Gu, Seoul, Korea
{taihoon, nono}@kisa.or.kr
2
Dept. of Computer Science Howon Univ., Korea
ldch@sunny.howon.ac.kr

Abstract. Evaluation has been the traditional means of providing assurance and is the basis for prior evaluation criteria documents such as
ITSEC. The Common Criteria (CC) defines a Protection Profile (PP)
that defines the security environments and specifies the security requirements and protections of the product to be evaluated. The security environments consist of assumptions, threats, and organizational security
policies, so the editor of the PP must describe the threats for the PP.
In this paper, we propose a method for the description of the threats for
the PP by introducing the concept of the assets protected by Target of
Evaluations (TOE).

1

Introduction

The CC philosophy is to provide assurance based upon an evaluation of the IT
product or system that is to be trusted. Evaluation has been the traditional
means of providing assurance.
There are many evaluation criteria. The Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria (TCSEC), the European Information Technology Security Evaluation Criteria (ITSEC), and the Canadian Trusted Computer Product Evaluation
Criteria (CTCPEC) existed, and they have evolved into a single evaluation entity, the CC. The CC for Information Technology Security Evaluation is the
result of an international project involving NIST and the National Security
Agency (NSA), on behalf of the United States and security organizations in
Canada, France, Germany, the Netherlands, and the United Kingdom. These
countries have worked in close cooperation with the International Organization
for Standard (IOS) 15408 [1][2][3][4].
The CC is a standard for specifying and evaluating the security features of IT
products and systems, and is intended to replace previous security criteria such
as the TCSEC. This evaluation process establishes a level of confidence that the
security functions of such products and systems, and the assurance measures
applied to them, must meet.
The CC defines a PP that specifies the security requirements and protections
of the product to be evaluated. If someone wants to select IT systems which
P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2660, pp. 605–613, 2003.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

606

T.-h. Kim, B.-g. No, and D.C. Lee

meet his requirements for security, he can use the PP to express his security
requirements.
Those who want to express their security requirements using the PP must
first define the security environments which consist of assumptions, threats, and
organizational security policies, and connect the security environments to the
security objectives and security requirements in the CC. When the writing the
threat phrases for the PP, we use the production rule of multi-stage graph. But
the assets and the attack methods increase rapidly, the count of the total threat
phrases increases too and some new method for reducing these is needed.
In this paper we introduce the concept of the ’assets protected by TOE’ and
propose a new method for reducing the count of the threat phrases by using that
concept.

2
2.1

Threat Description for the PP
Protection Profile

A PP defines an implementation-independent set of IT security requirements for
a category of TOEs. Such TOEs are intended to meet common consumer needs
for IT security. Consumers can therefore construct or cite a PP to express their
IT security needs without reference to any specific TOE.
The purpose of a PP is to state a security problem rigorously for a given
collection of systems or products (known as the TOE) and to specify security
requirements to address that problem without dictating how these requirements
will be implemented. For this reason, a PP is said to provide an implementationindependent security description. A PP thus includes several related kinds of
security information (See the Fig. 1).
A description of the TOE security environment which refines the statement
of need with respect to the intended environment of use, producing the threats
to be countered and the organizational security policies to be met in light of
specific assumptions.
2.2

Threating Be Identified

A ’threat’ is simply an undesirable event, which is characterized in terms of a
threat agent, a presumed attack method, an identification of the asset under
attack, and so on. In order to identify what the threats are, we therefore need
to answer the following questions:
– What are the assets that require protection? : The assets subject to the
attack (e.g., sensitive data),
– Who or what are the threat agents? : The threat agent (e.g., an authorized
user of the TOE),
– What attack methods or undesirable events do the assets need to be protected from? : The attack methods employed (e.g., impersonation of an authorized user of the TOE).

Threat Description for the PP

607

Fig. 1. Protection Profile content

2.3

Threats of the Wireless Networks

There are many kinds of ’threat’ in the wireless networks and these are expressed
in many books [7][8][9] or web-sites. But these threats are not the unusual things
which are different from the threats other systems have. In fact, the security
functional requirements in the Part 2 of CC are not restricted to the network
systems as though they are the major target for development of the PP.
For example, there is the FPT TDC family in the Part 2 of the CC which
means ’Inter-TSF TSF data consistency’. In some cases, especially in a distributed or composite system environment, a TOE may need to exchange TSF
data with another trusted IT product. The FPT TDC family defines the requirements for sharing and consistent interpretation of these attributes between
the TSF of the TOE and a different trusted IT product. But this family does
not comment whether the environment is wire or wireless networks. In fact, the

608

T.-h. Kim, B.-g. No, and D.C. Lee

difference between wire and wireless networks is not important for meeting of
the requirements of the FTP TDC.
The security functional requirements of the CC are described as high level
form independent on a special technical factor. Therefore, they can be applied
to many kinds of systems and security environments.

3

Describing the Threats in the PP

In the PP, in order to ensure we have a ’concise’ statement of threats, the threat
descriptions should be ’disjoint’ as far as possible. In other words, there should
be minimal overlap between different threats. This will help avoid potential
confusion on the part of the reader of the PP as well as helping to simplify the
PP rationale by avoiding needless repetition.
If we specify all threats at the same level of detail, the overlaps between
threats can be more easily avoided. For example, it’s not good that a threat
description contains a detailed attack method against a specific asset if this is
a specific attack scenario that is already associated with a more general threat
stated elsewhere in the PP. Therefore, if we want to describe the threats for the
PP, more considerations are needed.
Actually, all IT systems and communications channels face security threats
that can compromise the systems themselves, the services they provide, the data
stored on, and the data transmitted between them. For describing the threats
for the PP, next items must be identified.
3.1

Identifying the Assets

In the case of writing threat phrases, it is very important to categorize the asset.
When considering the assets of systems, we first think the factors threat agents
want to compromise. Maybe we can use the next items as assets of the wireless
networks.
–
–
–
–
–

Wireless devices or systems
Service that wireless networks provide
Data stored on the wireless networks
Data transmitted between the wireless networks.
Other network resources.

In fact, these are very simple categorization of asset. For example, let’s consider a wireless phone. The device user has is an important asset and must be
protected from unauthorized user. If the device provides a commerce service,
the service is protected from misuse, abuse, and so on. And the phone numbers or keys or passwords stored in the device are critical things and if these
data transmitted to other system, they must be checked for confidentiality and
integrity.
As mentioned earlier, the categorization of asset is very important thing to
write threat phrases for the PP, because the threat may be described by using
the assets.

Threat Description for the PP

3.2

609

Identifying the Threat Agents

Threat agents may either be human or non-human, and we can use the next
items as threat agents of the wireless networks.
–
–
–
–

Authorized users or owners of the wireless networks.
Unauthorized users of the wireless networks.
Attackers or intruders or hackers.
IT entities.

When we consider the threats described in the PP, authorized users or owners
of the wireless device is looked on as threat agent because they can commit abuse
or unauthorized use.
In the field of requirement engineering, the concept of user is inclined to be
restricted to human. But in the CC, the concept of user is extended to the IT
entities and this may be correct thing because the malicious codes or viruses can
be the user of the function.
3.3

Identifying the Attack Methods

Having identified the assets to be protected and the threat agents which may be
the subject of attack, the next step is to identify the possible attack methods
which could lead to a compromise of the assets.
This will be based on what is known regarding the TOE security environment.
There is a very important thing must be considered. If we want to consider
all attack methods already known, maybe it is impossible because the attack
methods are too various and created or found everyday. Therefore, if we want to
describe the threats about the TCP/IP, should use the phrase ’by using TCP/IP
vulnerabilities already known’ not dividing as like flooding, spoofing, DoS, and
so on.

4

Description of Threat in the PP

After identifying the assets, threat agents, and attack method, we can describe
the threats for the PP. For example, we can describe the threats concerned with
the confidentiality of assets in the PP as like this:
–
–
–
–
–

Threat agents may discover wireless networks by unauthorized methods,
Threat agents may disclose the services provided by unauthorized methods,
Threat agents may disclose the data stored by unauthorized methods,
Threat agents may disclose the data transmitted by unauthorized methods,
Threat agents may disclose the systems or network resources by unauthorized
methods,
– Etc.

But if we describe the threats as like these, there can be too many threat
phrases in the PP, so a new method defining the threat is needed. We did not
consider various threat agents and the threat methods above. If we divide the
threat agents as authorized user and unauthorized user, threats may be two
times as above.

610

4.1

T.-h. Kim, B.-g. No, and D.C. Lee

Identifying of the Threats Considered the Composition of the
Assets, the Threat Agents, and the Attack Methods

Many cases, when we describe the threats in the PP, we can use the ’production
rule of multi-stage graph’ (See the Fig. 2). In other words, the threats can
be described by the combination of the assets, the threat agents, the attack
methods, and so on. (But the Fig. 2 is not complete form.) Therefore, there can
be very many phrases for the threats, and these phrases are the headache of the
editors of PP.

Threat agents

Attack Methods

Assets

Impacts

Devices
Unauthorized users
Attackers
IT entities
……

Exploit vulnerability
Social engineering
……

Systems

Confidentiality

Services

Integrity

Data stored

Availability

Data transmitted
……

……

Fig. 2. Threat production rule of multi-stage graph (Example)

As you saw in the Fig. 2, the count of the threat phrase is decided by the
next numerical formula:
Count of threat = Threat agent * Attack method * asset * Impact * Etc.
Therefore, we must re-consider and minimize the terms of numerical formula
mentioned above for the efficient writing of threat phrases. In many cases, we can
solve this problem by adjusting the ‘Assumption’ and ‘Organizational Security
Policy (OSP)’, but this method is ‘minimizing the threat agent’ or ‘reducing the
attack methods possible’. When developing the systems which consider the security, most functional requirements are implemented by the threats not assumption or OSP. If we describe the security environments with many assumptions
and OSPs, many of the functional requirements can’t be implemented correctly
and these systems may not cover the real threats.
4.2

Assets Protected by TOE

We propose a method for minimizing the assets of IT systems including wireless
systems to reduce the count of threat phrases. As mentioned earlier, maybe we
can use the next items as assets of the wireless networks.

Threat Description for the PP

–
–
–
–
–

611

Wireless devices or systems,
Service that wireless systems provide,
Data stored on the wireless systems,
Data transmitted between the wireless systems,
Other network resources

In the aspects of the security requirements and the evaluation of the IT
systems, we can re-identify the assets as like;
– TOE (target of evaluation),
– Assets protected by TOE
• Systems not included in the TOE
• Services provided
• Data stored
• Data transmitted
• etc.
This method for identifying of assets is available for the PP, because the
identifying of the security environments is connected to the security functional
requirements included in the CC.
For example, let’s describe the threat concerned with the confidentiality of
assets (In this example, we didn’t classify the threat agents and the attack
methods, and applied ’the assets protected by TOE’ to the description).
– Threat agents may compromise the confidentiality of the assets protected by
TOE by unauthorized methods.
But this phrase is not sufficient because the threat agents and the attack
methods are having the possibility to be divided.
It’s very important to keep in mind that many kinds of threat agents and
attack methods may exist in the ‘assets protected by TOE. Therefore, the threat
agents and the attack methods must be considered to contain all cases. For example, the phrase ‘by unauthorized methods’ is not suitable in some cases, because
the ‘threat agents’ can contain the ‘authorized users’ and the authorized users
may comprise the confidentiality of the assets protected by TOE by accident. So
we should remove the phrases ‘by unauthorized methods’ and ‘Threat agents’,
because all types of users and attack methods must be considered. We can use
the threat description as like:
– The confidentiality of the assets protected by TOE may be compromised
As seen at the above phrase, in the case we use the concept of the ‘assets
protected by TOE’, the descriptions for the threat are expressed as a kind of
‘possibility’ of attack. Some examples are like these:
– Malicious code may exist in the assets protected by TOE,
– Vulnerabilities may exist in the assets protected by TOE,
– Etc.

612

T.-h. Kim, B.-g. No, and D.C. Lee

Systems, services, and others are included in the assets protected by TOE,
and systems and services may consist of resources and source codes. Therefore,
they may contain the malicious codes or vulnerabilities in the resources and
codes.
4.3

Benefits

The benefits of this method we proposed are the following things:
Simplicity: When describing the threat in the PP for security environments,
many threat phrases which finally come to same security functional requirement are needed because the assets, attack methods, and the threat agents
are different. Sometimes, it’s possible to use the assumptions or OSPs to
reduce the threats, it is not sufficient. If we use the concept ’the assets protected by TOE’, we can reduce the count of the threat phrase because the
reason of dividing threat may be removed.
Expandability: Because of the fast growth of technology, everyday we are faced
to many new malicious codes, viruses, and security holes. If does the new
asset is added in the operating environments? If does the new vulnerability
is found in the source codes which consist of a service? In these cases, we
can solve problems by adding a few phrases to the ’PP INTRODUCTION’
part of the PP, or maybe, if we are lucky, nothing will be changed.
Comprehensiveness: In fact, the form we used does not help the reader to
understand what the security need is, especially since it applies to any TOE.
But this may be another benefit of the method we proposed. The method
using the concept of the assets protected by TOE is applied to many security
systems like as Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS), Firewall, Virtual Private
Network (VPN), and so on. The assets of these systems can be divided by
using same way we proposed in this paper.
It’s very important to keep in mind that the method we proposed is applicable
only to the assets must be protected by the TOE. The threat descriptions for
the TOE should only refer to potential events which could ’directly’ compromise
the assets requiring protection.

5

Conclusions

Many kinds of PPs are developed already and they have strong theoretical rationale about the development process. But there is no consistent theory for
describing the security environments especially threats. Therefore, when readers review the PPs developed by other person or company and developers write
the PPs they are to use make many kinds of mistakes and feel complexity. In
fact, when we develop the PPs, we can find that there are many similar things
between secure systems because the IT systems which aim to protect something
have the similar structures and characteristics.
In this paper we proposed a method for dividing the assets and this method
will be helpful to describe the threat phrase for the PP.

Threat Description for the PP

613

References
1. ISO. ISO/IEC 15408-1:1999 Information technology – Security techniques – Evaluation criteria for IT security – Part 1: Introduction and general model
2. ISO. ISO/IEC 15408-2:1999 Information technology – Security techniques – Evaluation criteria for IT security – Part 2: Security functional requirements
3. ISO. ISO/IEC 15408-3:1999 Information technology – Security techniques – Evaluation criteria for IT security – Part 3: Security assurance requirements
4. KISA. Information Security Systems & Certification Guide, 2002
5. ISO. ISO/IEC 15292:2001 Information technology – Security techniques – Protection Profile registration procedures
6. ISO. ISO/IEC PDTR 15446 Guide for the Production of PPs and STs, Version
0.92
7. Russell Dean Vines. Wireless Security Essentials, 2002
8. Brian Carter and Russell Shumway. Wireless Security End-To-End, 2002
9. Randall K. Nichols and Panos C. Lekkas. Wireless Security Models, Threats, and
Solutions, 2002
10. ISO. ISO/IEC WD 18045 Methodology for IT Security Evaluation
11. ISO. ISO/IEC WD 18028 Information Technology – Security techniques – IT Network Security
12. Science Applications International Corporation. Intrusion Detection System System Protection Profile, Version 1.4, February 4, 2002
13. Science Applications International Corporation. Intrusion Detection System Scanner Protection Profile, Version 1.1, December 10, 2001
14. Science Applications International Corporation. Intrusion Detection System Sensor
Protection Profile, Version 1.1, December 10, 2001
15. Science Applications International Corporation. Intrusion Detection System Analyzer Protection Profile, Version 1.1, December 10, 2001
16. DGA. Protection Profile Firewall a exigences reduites, Version 2.2, 1999
17. NSA and SPARTA. U.S. Department of Defense Traffic-Filter Firewall Protection
Profile For Medium Robustness Environments, Version 1.4, 2000
18. NSA. Mobile Code Desktop Draft, Version 1.0, 2000
19. NSA. Protection Profile For Multilevel Operating Systems In Environments Requiring Medium Robustness, Version 1.22, 2001
20. Schlumberger. Smartcard Embedded Software Protection Profile, Version 1.2, 1999
21. Atmel Smart Card Ics. Smartcard IC Platform Protection Profile, Version1.0, 2001

