Designated Veriﬁcation of Digital Watermark for
Network Based Image Distribution
Hyung-Woo Lee1 and Im-Yeong Lee2
1

2

Dept. of Software, Hanshin University, Osan, Kyunggi, Korea, 447-791
hwlee@hanshin.ac.kr
http://infocom.cheonan.ac.kr/˜hwlee/index.html
Div. of Information Technology Engineering, Soonchunhyang University,
Chungnam, Korea, 336-745
imylee@sch.ac.kr

Abstract. Digital watermark have been proposed as the means for
copyright protection on network based digital image distribution framework. However, there are some problems in existing digital watermarking
mechanism as the rightful ownership cannot be resolved by current watermarking schemes alone. Specially, some one can provide counterfeited
watermark which can be performed on a watermarked image to allow
multiple claims of rightful ownerships. Therefore, we can use undeniable veriﬁcation scheme in the watermarking process. And using designated veriﬁer prooﬁng schemes, watermark can be veriﬁed by commitment methods. The conﬁrmer of a watermark can sure that only the
intended veriﬁer can be convinced about the validity of the watermark.

1

Introduction

An unlimited number of perfect copies can be illegally produced is a serious
threat to the rights of content owners. The primary tool available to help protect
content owners’s rights is to use a encryption module. However, after receipt and
subsequent decryption, the data is no longer protected and is in the clear.
Watermarking compliments encryption. A digital watermark is a piece of
information that is hidden directly in media content, in such a way that it
is imperceptible to a human observer, but easily detected by a computer. The
principal advantage of this is that the content is inseparable from the watermark.
This makes watermarks suitable for several applications, including:
– Signatures: The watermark identiﬁes the owner of the content. This information can be used by a potential user to obtain legal rights to copy or publish
the content from the contact owner.
– Fingerprinting: Watermarks can also be used to identify the content buyers.
This may potentially assist in tracing the source of illegal copies. Each copies
holds a watermark that uniquely identiﬁes the player in every movie that is
played.
This work was supported by grant No. (R05-2001-000-01468-0) from the Basic Research Program of the Korea Science & Engineering Foundation.
P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2660, pp. 1069–1078, 2003.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

1070

H.-W. Lee and I.-Y. Lee

– Authentication: The watermark encodes information required to determine
that the content is authentic. If the watermark is present, and properly
matches the content, the user of the content can be assured that it has not
been altered since the watermark was inserted.
– Copy control: The watermark contains information about the rules of usage
and copying which the content owner wishes to enforce.
– Secret communication: The embedded signal is used to transmit secret information from one person (or computer) to another, without anyone along
the way knowing that this information is being sent. This is the classical
application of steganography – the hiding of one piece of information within
another.
A digital watermark is a signal added to digital data such that it could be
used (1) to identify source of the data or uniquely establish ownership, (2) to
identify its intended recipient, and (3) to check if the data has been tampered
with. Within each class of applications, there could be variations on the requirement of the watermarking scheme[1]. Therefore, digital watermarks have been
proposed as the means for copyright protection of multimedia data on network
based digital image distribution structure. However, there are some problems in
existing digital watermarking mechanism as the rightful ownerships cannot be
resolved by current watermarking schemes alone. Specially, some one can provide counterfeited watermark which can be performed on a watermarked image
to allow multiple claims of rightful ownerships[2].
There are several attacks in current digital watermark system. In ﬁrst case,
we can suppose that Alice and Bob use the same digital watermarking technique
to watermark and there is one unique decoding scheme to extract the labels
embedded in the images. In this case, if a watermarked image contains both
Alice and Bob’s signatures, how can we decide the originality of this marked
image? And we also think another scenario. Let’s suppose that Alice and Bob
use diﬀerent watermarking techniques. And Given a watermarked image, Alice
can take this image and decode the label using her decoding scheme. Similarly
Bob can perform the label extraction process with his decoding scheme. If Alice’s
decoder indicates that the image belongs to her while Bob’s decoder indicates
that it is his image, then how can we decide the ownership of this marked image?
In these two cases, rightful ownership cannot be resolved by invisible watermarks
alone. They present in detail a counterfeit watermarking scheme that allows
multiple claims of ownerships.
Undeniable watermark diﬀer from ordinary digital watermark in that the
veriﬁer should be unable to distinguish between valid and invalid watermark.
But, original watermarker can change it into correct one. If the message in is
copyright owner’s information, the scheme can be non-invertible. And we can also
introduce zero-knowledge based watermarking mechanism. Using zero-knowledge
protocols[3], watermarks can be made public enough to be detected yet private
enough to be unremovable. i.e., watermarking scheme in which the watermark’s
presence can be veriﬁed without ever revealing enough information to remove
the mark.

Designated Veriﬁcation of Digital Watermark

1071

We ﬁrst present the overall digital watermark mechanism and review the
existing model in section 2. We then consider re-watermarking attack and its
possible solution in section 3. And then we propose designated veriﬁcation process with commitment scheme in section 4. Furthermore, we discuss the proof
of ownership in section 5 and conclude this study with the consideration of the
future works in ﬁnal section.

2
2.1

Network Based Digital Image Distribution
Watermark: Function and Mechanism

In general, there are two types of digital watermarks addressed in existing literature, (1) visible and (2) invisible watermarks. These watermarking schemes are
designed mainly for two purposes : copyright protection and data authentication. In this paper we shall focus on the applicability of watermarking techniques
for one instance of ownership veriﬁcation, identiﬁcation of an content’s rightful
owner(s)[2].
The watermarks embedded in an image have to be recoverable, despite intentional or unintentional modiﬁcation of the image. They must also be invulnerable
to deliberate attempts to forge, remove, or invalidate watermarks. Unfortunately,
many of existing schemes have not addressed the ends of invisible watermarking
schemes. They instead focused on the means to label an image invisibly and the
robustness of the inserted labels against malicious attacks. Without any veriﬁcation techniques or speciﬁcation of certain requirements for digital watermark,
anyone can claim ownership of any image by using his/her own veriﬁcation methods. Therefore, it is crucial that watermark for copyright protection be able to
be undeniably veriﬁed with original watermark embedder’s veriﬁcation.
We deﬁne in general terms the process of watermark insertion into an image
and the use of undeniable watermarks to determine the ownership of a watermarked image. A watermark is inserted into an image, and the decoding process
by which a watermark is recovered and then compared to the inserted watermark. We use to denote I an image, W a watermark consisting of a sequence of
ownership labels W = { w1 , w2 , ..., wn } and the watermarked image I W . E is
an encoder function if it takes an image I and a watermark W and generates a
new image which is called the watermarked image I W i.e., E(I,W)= I W .
We can construct both encoding and corresponding decoding processes. One
common approach is to embed a watermark W = { w1 , w2 , ..., wn } into a set
of derived features F(I) = { f1 (I), f2 (I), ..., fn (I) } . The embedding process
is achieved by an insertion ⊕ operation, fi∗ = fi ⊕ wi . The insertion operation
has an inverse operation, namely the extraction operation, that we denote by
i.e., fi∗ fi = wi .

1072

2.2

H.-W. Lee and I.-Y. Lee

Watermark Veriﬁcation

A watermarking scheme with detection consists of four polynomial-time algorithms GENKEY , GENW , embed function E, and detection function D.
GENKEY and GENW are probabilistic and generate a key-pair (kemb , kdet ) and
a watermark W . The algorithm E(I, W, kemb ) imperceptibly embeds the watermark W into the cover-data I, using the key kemb . This results in stego-data I W
(watermarked version of I). The algorithm D(I , W, I, kdet ) returns a boolean
value, which states whether the cover data I contains the watermark W relative to the reference data I, using key kdet . A symmetric watermarking scheme
needs the same key kw ) for detection as for embedding. Unkeyed watermarking
schemes need no key for embedding or detection. Watermarking schemes whose
detect algorithms D do not require the input of reference data I are called blind,
in contrast to non-blind schemes.
We can consider three watermark mechanisms for digital data D , which
are the (1) watermark(W ) casting mechanism, (2) signature(D∗ ) signing
mechanism, and (3) signature hiding and veriﬁcation mechanism. In this Fig. 2,
we can easily understand two mechanisms among these three mechanism. We
can embed some mark W on digital data D . So, it is the common watermark
embedding and veriﬁcation(recovery) mechanism(mark casting mechanism).
The other one is the cryptographic mechanism as we can attach digital signature
D∗ on digital data D for authentication(signing mechanism). From these two
mechanism, we can consider new hybrid mechanism(signature hiding and veriﬁcation mechanism). As we can think signature as its watermark information,
we can hide this signature on its digital data for verifying ownership and
authentication. So, we can construct hybrid mechanism on digital watermark
veriﬁcation and authentication system.

3
3.1

Attack and Its Solution
Re-watermarking Attack

In common case, we can assume that there is only one watermark in image for
ownership dispute. It is not unreasonable to assume that multiple watermarked
versions of the same image may indeed exist. But, if there are multiple watermark in one image, how can we decide the original watermark? And if we
cannot ﬁnd out which so-called original image is the true original, how can we
decide which watermarked version of an image is the truely watermarked version in circulation? Bob is free to create as many watermarked versions with his
own watermarks embedded after he has reverse-engineered a counterfeit original
from Alice’s watermarked version. To counter the claims, Bob has to prove the
presence of his watermark in these watermarked images and the watermarked
version of Alice, in addition to the presence of his watermark in Alice’s original.
S. Craver solves this problems as follows. He deﬁne non-invertible watermark
and advanced non-quasi-invertible watermark scheme. By using this concepts,

Designated Veriﬁcation of Digital Watermark

1073

he can do prevent multiple watermark attacks. But there are some unsolved
problems in above mechanism.
3.2

Solution: Undeniable Veriﬁcation

Multiple watermarking problem must be solved easily if we consider it in veriﬁcation process. In case of several attack proposed by S. Craver, we only review
its robustness on veriﬁcation module. Therefore, we can solve proposed attack
problems from diﬀerent directions compared with S. Craver’s mechanism. In
proposed system, if there are multiple watermarked image, the owner(pseudoowner:prover) can cooperate its veriﬁcation process. So, in case that the examined watermark (pseudo-watermark) can also be matched with the veriﬁer’s input
message on true-watermark, we can trust the pseudo-owner as really true-owner.
3.3

Undeniable Property of Digital Watermark

Digital watermarks are veriﬁed as authentic by anyone using the veriﬁcation process. However, this self-veriﬁcation property is unsuitable from many applications such as watermark based commercial digital contents distribution system.
The validity or invalidity of an undeniable watermark can be ascertained by
conducting a veriﬁcation process with original watermarker. If a conﬁrmation
process is needed, the cooperating original watermarker gives exponentially-high
certainty to the veriﬁer that the watermark does correspond to the legal one.
We can use undeniable scheme in the watermarking process. This is because the
conﬁdence measure relies on the fact that the watermark vector can be later
extracted, and using a commitment mechanism make designated veriﬁer can
certiﬁcate the legal owner on embedded watermark information.
Multimedia image company could embed the watermark which they signed
using an undeniable scheme. Only someone who had directly purchased the image from that company could verify the watermark and be certain that the
image were right. Undeniable watermark veriﬁcation could also be useful in any
situation in which an individual wishes to sign a data anonymously.
3.4

New Veriﬁcation Mechanism

We can propose a new veriﬁcation mechanism by using designated veriﬁcation
mechanism as Fig. 1. In ﬁrst case, the original watermarker can embed his
own secret(true watermark) on cover data and generate watermarked data.
And it is distrubuted to the buyer by using network protocol. And then the
authorized user can buy or get this data. However, the attacker can also
multiply re-watermark his own fabricated watermark on distributed data. In
this case, illegal data can be generated by attacker. So, if this data will be used
by unauthorized user, we must verify and proof its legality and correctness on
copied data. Therefore, we can suggest a new designated veriﬁcation mechanism
on watermarked data as the authorized user can verify its correctness by doing
a undeniable-style proof with original watermarker.

1074

H.-W. Lee and I.-Y. Lee

Fig. 1. New Watermark Veriﬁcation Mechanism.

4

Designated Veriﬁcation for Network Based Image
Distribution

When a content owner sells a digital products, he only want to paying customers
to be able to verify the validity of these image. Therefore, the designated veriﬁer
mechanism resolves this problems. We can designate a veriﬁer when we ascertain
that nobody but this participant can be convinded by the proof. With a small
change in the conﬁrmation protocol, we can designate veriﬁer and demonstrate
watermark veriﬁcation scheme.
We can deﬁne designated veriﬁer as follows. Let (PA , PB ) be a protocol for
Alice to prove the truth of the watermark to Bob. In this case, we can say that
Bob is a designated veriﬁed if the following is true: For any protocol (PA , PB , PC )
involving Alice, Bob and Cindy, in which Bob proves the truth of v to Cindy,
there is another protocol (PB , PC ) such that Bob can perform the calculations
of PB and Cindy cannot distinguish transcripts of (PA , PB , PC ) from those of
(PB , PC ).
4.1

Commitment Scheme[4]

A commitment scheme (com, open) for the message space M and commitment
space C consists of a two-party protocol com to commit to a value m ∈ M and a
protocol open that opens a commitment. A commitment to a value m is denoted
by com(m, parcom ) where parcom stands for all public parameters needed to
compute the commitment value. To open a commitment com the committer

Designated Veriﬁcation of Digital Watermark

1075

runs the protocol open(com, parcom , skcom ) where skcom is the secret opening
information of the committer.
The security requirements are the binding(committing) and hiding(secrecy)
properties. The ﬁrst one requires that a dishonest committer cannot open a
commitment to another message m than the one to which he committed and
the second one requires that the commitment does not reveal any information
about the message m to the veriﬁer.
We require that the commitment scheme has following homomorphic property: Let com(m1 ) and com(m2 ) be commitments to arbitrary messages
m1 , m2 ∈ M . Then the committer can open com(m1 )∗com(m2 ) to m1 +m2 without revealing additional information about the image of com(m1 ) and com(m2 ).
So, we can combine these commitment mechanism on digital watermark veriﬁcation procedures, if additional trap-door one-way properties are hold.
4.2

Trap-Door Commitment

For hybrid this commitment mechanism on designated veriﬁcation technique, we
consider trap-door primitives, in which we say that c is a trap-door commitment
scheme if and only if :
1. no polynomial-time machine can, given yi , ﬁnd a multiple (ω1 , r1 ), (ω2 , r2 )
such that c(yi , ω1 , r1 ) = c(yi , ω2 , r2 ).
2. no polynomial-time machine can, given yi and c(yi , ω, r), output ω.
3. there is a polynomial-time machine that given any quadruple (xi , w1 , r1 , ω2 )
in the set of possible quadruples ﬁnds r2 such that c(yi , ω1 , r1 ) = c(yi , ω2 , r2 )
for the public key yi corresponding to the secret key xi .
Using this deﬁnitions[4], we can review simple trap-door commitment scheme.
1.
2.
3.
4.

Secret extracting(decryption) scheme from watermarked data : D(·).
Public embedding(encryption) scheme for watermarked data : E(·).
Value to commit to : ω ∈ Range(E).
Commitment : Alice randomly selects r ∈ Range(E). And Alice calculates
a commitment c = E(ω) ⊕ E(r), where ⊕ is a combiner such as XOR.
5. Decommitment : Alice sends Bob (ω, r).
It is a trap-door commitment scheme if arbitrary collisions (ω1 , r1 ), (ω1 , r1 )
such that E(ω1 ) ⊕ E(r1 ) = E(ω2 ) ⊕ E(r2 ) can be found if and only if D(·)
is known. By using this mechanism, we can show hot to change the normal
watermark veriﬁcation scheme for undeniable veriﬁcation. Using this scheme,
we can apply it into designated veriﬁcation for undeniable watermark system.
4.3

Undeniable Veriﬁcation with Commitment

Let (com, open) be a secure commitment scheme. A watermark veriﬁcation protocol for the (GENKEY , GENW , E, D) is a undeniable proof protocol between

1076

H.-W. Lee and I.-Y. Lee

a prover P and a veriﬁer V : The common protocol input of P and V is the
stego-data I W , com(I), com(W ), com(kw ), i.e., commitments on the watermark,
the reference data and the detection key respectively, as well as the public paW
I
kw
rameters parcom = (parcom
, parcom
, parcom
) of these commitments. The private
input of the prover is the secret opening information of these commitments
W
I
kw
skcom = (skcom
, skcom
, skcom
). P outputs a boolean value to the veriﬁer, stating
whether to accept the proof or not.
We can think a non-interactive designated veriﬁer proof of an undeniable
watermark. Such a scheme can diminish the diﬀerence between public watermark and undeniable watermark, in that it limits who can verify it without help
from the prover, but does not necessary condition. We can use commit protocol.
Therfore, the common three steps can be changed into one single step.
1. Generating and Proprocessing a Key/Data
– Generate prover Alice’s secret key/public key pair : xA and yA ≡
g xA mod p.
– Generate veriﬁer Bob’s secret key/public key pair : xB and yB ≡
g xB mod p. (In this step, we use key generation function GENKEY ).
– Using hash function h(·), generate m = h(I) on cover data I
– Alice selects ω, r, t ∈ Zq .
2. Generating and embedding a Watermark.
– The veriﬁer sends hashed value m to prover.
– The prover generate a watermark W using his own secret key xA : W ≡
mxA mod p. (In this step, we use watermark generation function GENW
and we can tell the prover as a watermarker or signer).
– The prover embed this watermark W into cover data I. Then the watermarked data I W will be generated. (In this step, we use embedding
function E).
3. Constructing a Proof.
r
– The prover calculates c = g ω yB
mod p, G ≡ g t mod p, M ≡ mt mod p,
and d ≡ t + (xA · ω) mod q.
– And the prover sends commitment (ω, r, G, M, d) to the veriﬁer.
4. Verifying a Proof.
– The veriﬁer extract the embedded pseudo-watermark W from the I .
(In this step, we use detection function D).
r
– Using the commitment, the veriﬁer calculates c ≡ g ω yB
mod p and G ·
ω
yA
≡ g t · g xA ·ω mod p ≡ g d mod p.
– On the extracted pseudo-watermark, the (designated) veriﬁer calculate
M · W ω ≡ md mod p.

5

Discussion: Zero Knowledge Proof of Ownership

Existing mechanism suﬀer from the watermark veriﬁcation process: the disputing
parties have to disclose information, which is necessary to detect the watermark,
to the dispute-resolver. However, this information is in most cases also suﬃcient

Designated Veriﬁcation of Digital Watermark

1077

to remove attack and re-watermarking attack from this opened watermark(the
disputed data). As a solution, zero-knowledge watermark veriﬁcation eliminates
this security risk, because it enables a prover to prove to an untrusted veriﬁer
that a certain watermark is present in watermarked data without revealing any
information about the watermark, the reference data and the detection key. We
can combine this properties with proof of owner procedures.
If ownership is challenged, both challenger and owner has to disclosed the
proof of their ownership. So ownership is an issue, though people are seldom
aware of it. If you are not able to prove you are the owner of something in the
ﬁrst place, you cannot ask for any payments concerning any kind of copyright.
It is also important in digitized watermark system.
In proposed scheme, we suggest undeniable veriﬁcation procedure. And it
can be applicable to the proof of copyright or onwership of some resources by
trusted third party T or certiﬁcate authority CA. The copyright hodler H can
proof his own privilege as follows. We can considers H to be the owner of a work
I if and only if the following conditions hold:
– H has previously registered a new work I on trusted third party T
– I is similar to I and
– I is the ﬁrst registered work to which I is similar.
Therefore, we can construct ownership prooﬁng function from the undeniable veriﬁcation system. And the detailed mechanism can also be suggested by
combining identiﬁcation module with watermark veriﬁcation. So, the real owner
can be determined by similar veriﬁcation procedure proposed in this study.

6

Conclusions

Digital watermarks have been proposed as the means for copyright protection
of multimedia data. However, there are some problems in existing digital watermarking mechanism as the rightful ownerships cannot be resolved from diverse
attacks such as re-watermarking. In this study, we solve multiple watermarking
problem as we consider it by the designated veriﬁcation process. In proposed
system, if there are multiple watermarked image, the original owner can cooperate its veriﬁcation process. So, in case that the examined labelpseudo-watermark
can also be matched with the veriﬁer’s input message as a true-watermark, we
can trust the veriﬁerpseudo-owner as real true-owner by the proposed designated
veriﬁcation mechanism.
As there are some problems in existing digital watermarking mechanism, the
rightful ownership cannot be resolved by existing watermarking schemes alone.
Specially, some one can provide counterfeited watermark which can be performed
on a watermarked image to allow multiple claims of rightful ownerships. Therefore, we proposed undeniable veriﬁcation scheme in the watermarking process on
network based secure image distribution. And using designated veriﬁer prooﬁng
schemes, watermark can be veriﬁed by commitment methods. In the future, we
can consider zero-knowledge based designated veriﬁcation mechanism when the

1078

H.-W. Lee and I.-Y. Lee

conﬁrmer of a watermark verify the validity of the watermark owner without
revealing the secret of true watermark information of originator.

References
1. Andre Adelsbach, Birgit Pﬁtzmann, Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi, “Proving Ownership
of Digital Content”, 3rd International Information Hiding Workshop (IHW ’99),
LNCS 1768, Springer-Verlag, 117–133, 1999.
2. Scott Craver, Nasir Memon, Boon-Lock Yeo, Minerva M. Yeung, “Resolving Rightful Ownerships with Invisible Watermarking Techniques: Limitations, Attacks, and
Implications”, IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications 16/4 (1998)
573–586.
3. Andre Adelsbach, Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi, “Zero-Knowledge Watermark Detection
and Proof of Ownership”, 4th International Information Hiding Workshop (IHW
’01), LNCS 2137, Springer-Verlag, 273–288, 2001.
4. Markus Jakobsson, Kazue Sako, and Russell Impagliazzo, “Designated veriﬁer
proofs and their applications”, Advances in Cryptology - EUROCRYPT 96, LNCS
1070, Springer-Verlag, 143–154, 1996.
5. T. P. Pedersen, “Distributed provers with applications to undeniable signatures”,
Advances in Cryptology, Proceedings of Eurocrypt91, LNCS 547, pages 221–242,
1991.
6. T. ElGamal, “A Public Key Cryptosystem and a Signature Scheme based on Discrete Logarithm”, IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, Vol. IT-30, No. 4,
pp. 469–472, 1985.
7. I. B. D. J. Boyar, D. Chaum and T. P. Pedersen, “Convertible undeniable signatures”, Advances in Cryptology, Proceedings of Crypto90, pages 189–205, 1991.
8. Alfred J. Menezed, Paul C. van Oorschot, Scott A. Vanstone (ed.), “Handbook of
Applied Cryptography”, CRC Press, 1996.
9. B. Schneier, “Applied Cryptography”, Second Edition, Wiley, 1996.
10. D. Chaum, “Undeniable signatures”, Advances in Cryptology, Proceedings of
CRYPTO89, pages 212–216, 1989.
11. W. Diﬃe and M. Hellman, “New directions in cryptography”, IEEE Transactions
on Information Theory, IT-22(6):472-492, November 1976.

