New Mobility Scheme for Reducing Location
Traﬃc in Mobile Networks
Il-Sun Hwang1 , Myungsun Lee1 , Ki-sung Yoo1 , and Jin-wook Chung2
1

2

R&D Network Management KISTI, Korea
his@kisti.re.kr
Dept. of Computer Eng. SungKyunKwan Univ., Korea

Abstract. A major problem in such a mobile networks is how to locate
mobile hosts. Two major operations,the location registration and the call
tracking, are involved in managing a mobile host’s location. The previous
works can only minimize the traﬃc cost of one of these two operations.
In this paper we propose new strategy that minimize the costs of both
operations. Our performance analysis proves that the proposed strategy
is superior to the previous methods.

1

Introduction

A great diﬀerence between wireless network environment and traditional wired
communication environment us that it allows users to migrate anywhere and to
retrieve all kinds of data they want anytime in mobile computing environment.
To eﬀectively monitor the movement of each mobile client, a large geographical
region is partitioned into small Registration Areas (RA). Each RA has a Mobile
Switching Center (MSC)which serves as the local processing center of the RA.
The proﬁles of mobile clients inside a RA are kept, in the MSC’s Visitor Location
Register (VLR). On top of several MSC/VLRs is a Local signaling Transfer Point
(LSTP) and on top of several LSTPs again is a Remote Signaling Transfer Point
(RSTP). In this way, the whole system forms a hierarchy of station. The LSTP
and the RSTP are routers for handling message transfer between stations. For
one RSTP there is a Home Location Register (HLR). Each mobile client must
register in a HLR.Communication cost depends on how high the message has to
go up the hierarchy, as it indicates the distance and routers it has to go through.
In spite of many advantages available in wireless communication. It is not
without diﬃculties to realize such systems. The ﬁrst problem is how to locate a
mobile user in a wireless environment. The IS-41 standard strategy is most often
referred in resolving this problem. IS-41 used in the United States and GMS [6]
used in Europe are examples of this strategy. Many papers in the literature
have demonstrated that the IS-41 strategy does not perform well. This is mainly
because whenever a mobile client moves. The VLR of a RA which detected the
arrival of the client always reports to the HLR about the client’s new location.
Several other location management strategies have been proposed to improve
the performance of the IS-41 strategy. Among them, the Forwarding strategy
P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2660, pp. 576–585, 2003.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

New Mobility Scheme for Reducing Location Traﬃc in Mobile Networks

577

[4][5] the Local Anchor (LA) strategy [8], and the Caching strategy [11] are
representatives of the old VLR to the new VLR. Update of the client’s location
to the HLR’s database is not always needed to minimize communications to
the HLR. To locate a callee however, some extra time is required to follow the
forwarding link(s) to locate the client. When the number of the forwarding links
is high, the locating cost becomes signiﬁcant. Our strategy, termed the Dynamic
Cache & Carry (DCC) strategy, tries to further improve the performance of
these previous methods by minimizing the locating cost. The key idea is for each
mobile client (1) we deﬁne the VLRs that have been linked to by the same LA
as the overseen VLRs of this LA, (2) a link from the overseen VLR to its LA is
cached in the VLR, and (3) we allow multiple such LAs to be linked together
by using forwarding links. In order to computer the performance improvement
over the previous methods can be achieved.

2

The IS-41 Strategy

According to the IS-41 strategy, the HLR always knows exactly the ID of the
serving VLR of a mobile terminal. We outline the major steps of the IS-41
location registration scheme as follows [6]:
1. The mobile terminal sends a registrationrequest(REGREQ) message to the
new VLR.
2. The new VLR checks whether the terminalis already registered. If not, it
sends a registration notiﬁcation (REGNOT) message to the HLR
3. The HLR sends a registration cancellation (REGCANC) message to the old
VLR.
The old VLR deletes the information of the terminal and the IS-41 call tracking scheme is outlined as follows:
1. The VLR of caller is queried for the information of callee. If the callee is
registered to the VLR,the SEARCH process is over and the call is established.
If not,the VLR sends a location Request (LOCREQ) message to the HLR.
2. The HLR ﬁnds out to which VLR the callee is registered, and sends a routing
request (ROUTREQ) message to the VLR serving the callee. The VLR ﬁnds
out the location information of the callee.
3. The serving MSC assigns a temporary local directory numbers(TLDN) and
returns the digits to the VLR which sends it to the HLR.
4. The HLR sends the TLDN to the MSC of the caller.
5. The MSC of the caller establishes a call by using the TLDN to the MSC of
the callee. Among the above 5 steps, the SEARCH process is composed of
step1 and step2.

3

DCC Strategy

The previous methods for improving the IS-41 mechanism were all designed to
reduce the locating cost.

578

3.1

I.-S. Hwang et al.

Location Registration

The basic idea of the DCC strategy is that the new VLR determines whether
reports to the LA or the HLR the mobile client’s new location when a mobile
client comes into its territory. Figure 1 tells how the new VLR reports to the
HLR about the mobile client’s new location. How the new VLR informs the
HLR is new in this strategy. How the new VLR informs the HLR is new in this
strategy. The algorithm is as follows.
1. When the new VLR learns that a mobile client is coming into its territory, it
will determine whether requesting a location update to the LA or the HLR.
If the new location of the mobile client is outside the area that the LSTP
of the LA controls (before the mobile client moves to the new VLR), jump
to the Step 7 (the new VLR will request a location update to the HLR).
Otherwise, go on to the next step (the new VLR informs the LA of location
Update).
2. The old VLR replies an acknowledgement to the new VLR.
3. The old VLR informs the LA that the mobile client has moved to the new
VLR. Also the old VLR update its own MCL table by replacing the mobile
client’s Type value with “Visited VLR” and the Pointer value with the LA’s
;location.
4. The LA replies a message to the old VLR, and updates its own MCL table.
The Type value of the mobile client is not changed. The Pointer value is
modiﬁed to the new VLR’s location.
5. End of the Location Registration.
6. Goto Step 13.
7. The new VLR informs the HLR of the arrival of the mobile client.
8. The HLR returns an acknowledgement to the new VLR. The MCL table
of the new VLR is inserted a record. If the mobile client has never visited
this VLR, whose three attribute values are respectively MCi d, “Latest LA”,
and NULL. Otherwise. Only updates the Type and the Pointer values of its
record.
9. The HLR updates its data about the mobile client’s new location and informs
the old LA about the movement of the mobile client.
10. The mobile client’s record in the MCL table of the old LA is updated. Its
second and third attribute values are modiﬁed to the “Visited LA” and the
new LA’s location. Respectively. The old LA also sends an acknowledgement
message to the HLR.
11. The old LA informs the old VLR of location change of the mobile client.
12. The mobile client’s record in the old VLR’s MCL table is updated. Its second
and third attribute values changed to “Visited VLR” and the location of the
old LA, respectively. The old VLR also sends an acknowledgement to the
old LA.
13. End of the Location Registration.

New Mobility Scheme for Reducing Location Traﬃc in Mobile Networks

579

HLR
(10)

(12)

(9)

(7)

(8)

(11)
New MSC/VLR
New LA

(1)

Old MSC/VLR

Fig. 1. The case which the new VLR informs the HLR

3.2

Call Tracking

Figure 2 are a example that could occur while locating the callee. The details of
the operation is as follows.
1. When a VLR receives a request of locating a callee, it ﬁrst checks whether
its MCL table has the callee’s record. If yes, then sends the locating requite
to the LA stated in this record. Otherwise, jump to Step 7.
2. /* The caller is currently at a location where the callee visited before.*/ if
the record of the MCL table of the LA stated in Step 1 says that this LA is
a “Visited LA”, then goto Step 3. If it says “Latest LA”, goto Step 4.
3. The Locating request is forwarded to this visited LA (following the pointer
given in the record of Step 2). While the request is forwarded to the next
LA, the callee’s record is again searched from this LA’s MCL table. Goto
Step 2.
4. The latest LA (who is overseeing the callee) ﬁnds the callee’s record from
the MCL table. If the value of the Pointer ﬁeld is NULL, then the callee is
right in one of this LA’s governing Ras. Hence, a message is forwarded to
the caller’s VLR to make the connection. Goto step 13. If the value of the
Pointer ﬁeld is not NULL, then it must be a VLR who is currently overseeing
the callee. Hence, the locating request is sent to the latest VLR to which the
Pointer ﬁeld refers.
5. The latest VLR sends a message to the caller’s VLR to make a connection.
6. Goto Step 13
7. /* The caller is at a location where the callee has not visited before. Updates
of the callee’s new location in the LA, VLR, and HLR are associated with
this locating operation */
8. The HLR forwards the request to the callee’s LA.
9. The callee’s latest LA forwards the request to the latest VLR. Also, the
callee’s record in this VLR’s MCL table is updated by replacing its type
with “Latest LA” and Pointer with NULL.
10. The callee’s VLR acknowledges the receipt of the message to the LA and the
LA will then update the callee’s record in its MCL table by replacing type
with “Visited LA” and Pointer with a pointer to the callee’s current residing
VLR.

580

I.-S. Hwang et al.

11. the callee’s VLR sends a message to the GLR. The HLR updates the callee’s
new location to the new latest LA (i.e., the callee’s current VLR).
12. The HLR forwards the message about the current location (VLR) of the
callee to the caller’s VLR and the connection between the caller’s VLR and
the callee’s VLR is built.
13. End of the Call Tracking Operation.

HLR

(11)
(8)
(12)

(7)
(10)
(9)

MSC/VLR

MSC/VLR

callee
caller

Fig. 2. The case of locating through the HLR

4

Traﬃc Cost Model

We present the traﬃc cost models that used to evaluate the performance of the
proposed strategy.
The parameters used in our cost models are listed in Table 1. The costs of the
IS-41 strategy, was discussed in the literature [4] [8]. In order to make a fair
and reasonable comparison, we make some general assumptions and based on
which we derive their cost functions in a uniform way. As the local database
processing cost is insigniﬁcant comparing to the long communication time, we
only consider communication cost in this derivation. Communication cost is
dependent on the “distance” between two parties, and is classiﬁed into three
levels: two parties are under diﬀerent RSTPs, two parties are under the same
RSTP but diﬀerent LSTPs, and two parties under the same LSTP. Their costs
are respectively h1, h2 and h3, we also need to use probability to model the
location distribution of two communicating parties.

4.1

Cost Functions

The tasks of location management include managing registration operations
and call tracking operations. Hence, the location management cost is computed

New Mobility Scheme for Reducing Location Traﬃc in Mobile Networks

581

Table 1. The symbols of the parameters and their meanings
System Parameters
Symbol Meaning
h1

The cost of sending a message from VLR to another VLR under
a diﬀerent RSTP;

h2

The cost of sending a message from VLR to another VLR under
a diﬀerent LSTP but the same RSTP;

h3

The cost of sending a message from VLR to another VLR under
the same LSTP;

PL

The probability of a mobile client’s moving into a new RA which is under
the same LSTP as the last RA that the client just left;

PR

The probability of a mobile client’s moving into a new RA which is under
the same RSTP as the last RA that the client just left;

CMR The call-to-mobility ratio;

according to these two operations. As the ratio of the number of calls (locating
a callee) to mobility and deﬁned as
1
total cost = CM
R · Registration cost + Calltracking cost
where CMR is the Call-to-Mobility Ratio.
We will use this deﬁnition in calculating the total cost of each strategy. For
each operation, the time (cost) is counted from the instant that the VLR of the
mobile client submits a request is ﬁnished. The cost of an operation that is not
directly related to the locating operation is not counted in our cost functions.
For instance, in the IS-41 scheme the location operation is counted from the
time the client’s new arriving VLR sending a request to the HLR till the time
this VLE receives a message from the HLR to indicate that the location of the
client has been update in the HLR. This is the cost of a location operation
in the IS-41 scheme. Other operations such as sending a message from the
HLR to the former VLR to remove the obsolete record from its table are not
counted in our cost models. This is mainly because these operations are not
as urgent and can be executed at a later time. Note that ignoring such a cost
in our model is for reason of understanding the eﬀect of other key steps in an
operation. All such operations in diﬀerent strategies are treated in the same way.

4.2

Cost Functions of the IS-41 Strategy

The IS-41 strategy is a standard scheme and is often used to be compared with
other strategy. Hence, we ﬁrst present the cost functions of the IS-41 strategy.
total
Based on the deﬁnition of total cost, the total cost CBasic
of the IS-41 strategy
can be represented as follows.
1
total
R
T
CIS−41
= ( CM
R ) · CIS−41 + CIS−41

582

I.-S. Hwang et al.

For clearness reason, we list the steps of the IS-41 strategy in the following
for a reference. Its idea has been discussed in Section 2.The registration cost of
the IS-41 strategy is therefore.
R
CIS−41
= 2 · h1
In this algorithm, the call tracking cost of the strategy becomes
T
= 4 · h1
CIS−41
4.3

Cost Functions of the DCC Strategy

We derive the total cost of the DCC strategy. Again, total cost can be stated as
follows:
1
total
M
L
CDCC
= ( CM
R · CDCC + CDCC
The algorithm of the DCC strategy is the same as that of the Dynamic LA
strategy. That is,
M
CDCC
=

(PR · h2 + PL · h3 ) +
2 · h1

1
2

· (h2 + h3 ) if
if

1−PL −PR
CM R
1−PL −PR
CM R

<1
≥1

As for the location cost, there is a subtle the DCC strategies in
computing the cost. Notice that in the DCC strategy wherever a client
moves out of the range of a RSTP, the new VLR (that the client just
entered) becomes the new LA (an update). Updating a new latest LA
makes the distance between two linked LAs much shorter than that
in the previous strategy, and so does the communication cost, This
factor is considered in the cost model.Two cases are considered.
1. Locate the callee through HLR.
2. Locate the callee througha VLR where the callee visited before.
As for case 2, its cost also involves four tasks (a), (b), (c), and (d). The costs
of (a) and (c) of this strategy, however, are both 12 · (h2 + h3 ) The factor of
h1 is not in this cost, because the LA and its linked VLR will always be in the
same RSTP. The cost of (d) is still 13 (h1 + h2 + h3 ). Computing the cost of (b)
involves two cases:
• Two linked LAs belong to diﬀerent RSTPs: Between two consecutive calls,
1
a mobile client makes on average CM
R moves. As the region of a RSTP is rather
large, we assume that the callee will at most move out of the region of a RSTP
1
once between two consecutive calls/ The other ( CM
R − 1) moves are all within
the same RSTP. That is, the cost of this case is
1

1
CM R −1 · (1 − P
(1 − ( CM
L − PR )) · h1
R · (PL + PR )

• Two linked LAs belong to the same RSTP: The probability of this case is
1
1
CM R −1 · (1 − P
1-(the above case) which is (1 − ( CM
L − PR )) For
R · (PL + PR )
two LAs within the same RSTP, as they may be either within the same LSTP or
diﬀerent LSTPs, we simply take the average in computing their communication
cost, which is 12 · (h2 + h3 ) Finally, we have the total cost

New Mobility Scheme for Reducing Location Traﬃc in Mobile Networks

583

L
CDCC
= P + Q, where

P = (1 −
Q=(

KC&C
i=0

KC&C
i=0

+i · [(1 −

L
Pi ) · CDLA
KC&C 1
[2
i=0

1
Pi ) · { KC&C
·

1
CM R

· (h2 + h3 )

1

· (PL + PR ) CM R −1 · (1 − PL − PR )) · ( 12 · (h2 + h3 ))
1

1
CM R −1 · (1 − P
+( CM
L − PR )) · h1 ] +
R · (PL + PR )

1
2

· (h2 + h3 )

+ 13 · (h1 + h2 + h3 )}

5

Performance Analysis

We see two important factors that aﬀect the performance of the DCC
strategy:KC&C and Pi where KC&C is the length of a forwarding and Pi is the
probability that a caller’s request is issued from LAi and its overseeing VLRs.
Hence, we ﬁrst study the eﬀect of these factor to the DCC strategies. Also, we
vary the ratio h1/ h3, which represents varying region size of a RSTP versus a
LSTP. This is a general factor which aﬀects all strategies. The default values of
the parameters used in our evaluation are given Table 2.
Table 2. Default values of parameters
Parameter
Default Value

5.1

h1 h2 h3 PL PR CMR kdc&c Pi
8 4 1 0.7 0.2 0.5
6 0.05

The Cost Result of Pi

Pi is the probability that a caller places a call from a VLR that happens to
be under one of the linked LAs of the callee. When this occurs, the locating
cost is cheap. We vary Pi from 0.01 to 0.16. As the default KC&C is 6, the
KC&C
total probability of a call from the VLR under a linked LAs (i.e., i=1
Pi ) is
actually 0.06∼0.96 The result given in Figure 3 shows. However, for the C&C
strategies a dramatic decrease of the cost when Pi increases. Although in general
Pi may not be large for every kind of mobile clients, it could deﬁnitely be so
for a certain type of users. For instance, most of the commuters always drive
along the same route between their oﬃces and houses. Many oﬃce workers and
students, etc., also appear at several ﬁxed location regularly. Our performance
result shows that the proposed strategy is especially good for managing mobile
clients of this kind. The curves of the other strategies are ﬂat because they are
independent of the varying parameter Pi .

584

I.-S. Hwang et al.
65

70

60
55
50
45
40

60

Time Cost

50
40
30
20
10
0

Basic HLR/VLR
DCC

0.020.040.060.080.1 0.120.140.16

Fig. 3. Pi to the IS-41 strategies

5.2

35
30
25
20
150

Basic HLR/VLR
DCC

1

2

3

4

5

6

Fig. 4. 4 KDCC to the DCC strategy

The Cost Result of KDCC

In our proposed strategy, multiple LAs may be liked together due to the movement of a mobile client. The length of this link is represented by KDCC . Figure 8
shows the result by varying KDCC . A large KDCC means that many VLRs that
are under the linked LAs can locate a callee through the providing links of LAs,
which helps to reduce the locating cost. However, the curves of the proposed
strategy will become high after a certain KDCC point. This is because the locating cost will increase with the lengthy linked LAs. The longer the linked LAs,
the longer it takes to locate a callee. According to our derivation earlier, the
length of the link should be less than [4*h1 /c1 -3] in order to have beneﬁt. The
improvement of the proposed strategy over the IS-41 strategy is very signiﬁcant.
The reason is the links in the proposed strategy are built on LAs. While a
mobile client moves, he/she may move out of the boundary of a VLR easily and
get into another VLR. But in the proposed strategy, the client doe not move out
of the boundary of a LA so easily because the region of a LA could be much
larger than that of a VLR.

6

Conclusions

In this paper we proposed a new mobility strategy for reducing location traﬃc
cost in mobile networks. Diﬀerent from the previous strategies, the proposed
strategy can reduce the locating cost at the same time. The proposed strategy
avoids updating the client’s location to the HLR when the client moves to a new
VLR. The client’s new VLR always updates the client’s location to the LA. We
also derived the cost models of the proposed strategies and the related work. Our
analysis results reveal that in most case the proposed strategy performs better
than the IS-41 strategies. This is mainly because it can reduce the locating
cost simultaneously, while the other strategies only reduces one of them. Our
strategies are also easy to implement based on mobile computing environment.

New Mobility Scheme for Reducing Location Traﬃc in Mobile Networks

585

References
1. Amotz Bar-Noy and Ilan Kessler, “Tracking Mobile Users in Wireless Communication Networks”, IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, Vol. 39, No. 6, 1993,
pp. 1877–1886.
2. Ing-Ray Chen, Tsong-Min Chen, and Chiang Lee, “Modeling and Analysis of Forwarding and Resetting Strategies for Location Management in Mobile Environments”, in Proceedings of the 1996 International Computer Symposium (ICS‘96),
Kaohsiung, Taiwan, R.O.C., December 1996, pp. 121–128.
3. Ing-Ray Chen, Tsong-Min Chen, and Chiang Lee, “Performance Characterization
of Forwarding Strategies in Personal Communication Networks”, in 21th IEEE
International conferences of Computer Software and Application (COMPSAC‘97),
Washington, D.C., August 1997, pp. 137–142.
4. Ing-Ray Chen, Tsong-Min Chen, and chiang Lee, “Performance Evaluation of Forwarding Strategies for Location Management in Mobile Networks”, The Computer
Journal, Vol. 41, No. 4, August 1998, pp. 243–253.
5. Ing-Ray Chen, Tsong-Min Chen, and Chiang Lee, “Analysis and Comparison of
Location Strategies for Reducing Registration Cost in CS Networks”, Wireless
Personal Communications journal, Vol. 12, No. 2, 2000, pp. 117–136.
6. EIA/TIA IS-41.3, “Cellular Radio Telecommunications Intersystem Operations”,
Technical Report, Technical Report (RevisionB), July 1997.
7. Joseph S. M. Ho and Ian F. Akyildiz, “A Dynamic Mobility Tracking Policy for
Wireless Personal Communications Networks”, In IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference (GLOBECOM‘95), Singapore, November 1995, pp. 1–5.
8. Joseph S. M. Ho and Ian F. Akyildiz, “Local Anchor Scheme for Reducing Signaling Costs in Personal Communications Networks”, IEEE/ACM Transactions on
Networking, Vol. 4, No. 5, October 1996, pp. 709–725.
9. T. Imielinski and B. R. Badrinath, “Querying in Highly Mobile Distributed Environments”, in Proceedings of the 18th VLDB Conference, Vancouver. British
Columbia. Canada, 1992, pp. 41–52.
10. T. Imielinski and B. R. Badrinath, “Mobile Wireless Computing: Challenges in
Data Management”, Communications of the ACM, Vol. 37, No. 10, 1994, pp. 18–
28.
11. Ravi Jain, Yi-Bing Lin, Charles Lo, and Seshadri Mohan, “A Caching Strategy to
Reduce Network Impacts of PCS”, EEEE Journal on Selected Ares in Communications. Vol. 12, No. 8, October 1994, pp. 1434–1444.

