Multi-model Simulations of Chicken Limb
Morphogenesis
R. Chaturvedi1, J.A. Izaguirre1, C. Huang1, T. Cickovski1, P. Virtue1,
G. Thomas2, G. Forgacs3, M. Alber4, G. Hentschel5, S.A. Newman6, and J.A. Glazier7
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Notre Dame, IN 46556
Corresponding author: izaguirr@nd.edu
Tel: (574) 631-7454 Fax: (574) 727-0873
2 Department of Physics, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556
3 Departments of Physics and Biology, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65201
4 Department of Mathematics, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556
5 Department of Physics, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30332
6 Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, New York Medical College,
Valhalla, NY10595
7 Biocomplexity Institute and Department of Physics, Indiana University,
Bloomington, IN 47405
Abstract. Early development of multicellular organisms (morphogenesis) is a
complex phenomenon. We present COMPUCELL, a multi-model software
framework for simulations of morphogenesis. As an example, we simulate the
formation of the skeletal pattern in the avian limb bud, which requires simulations based on interactions of the genetic regulatory network with generic cellular mechanisms (cell adhesion, haptotaxis, and chemotaxis). A combination of a
rule-based state automaton and sets of differential equations, both subcellular
ordinary differential equations (ODEs) and domain-level reaction-diffusion partial differential equations (PDEs) models genetic regulation. This regulation
controls the differentiation of cells, and also cell-cell and cell-extracellular matrix interactions that give rise to cell pattern formation and cell rearrangements
such as mesenchymal condensation. The cellular Potts model (CPM) models
cell dynamics (cell movement and rearrangement). These models couple;
COMPUCELL provides an integrated framework for such computations. Binaries for Microsoft Windows and Solaris are available1. Source code is available
on request, via email: compucell@cse.nd.edu.

1 Introduction
In the fields of bioinformatics and computational biology an aim is to link the wealth
of data (e.g. genetic sequences and genetic regulatory networks) to the understanding
of biological processes such as development of multicellular organisms (morphogenesis). Computational systems biology concerns itself with creating such integrated
models. Relatively little integrated modeling of multicellular organisms exists; examples are: development models of the Drosophila embryo [1], and analysis of the gene

1

http://www.nd.edu/~lcls/compucell

P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2659, pp. 39–49, 2003.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

40

R. Chaturvedi et al.

regulatory network of developing sea urchin [2]. These efforts are confined mainly to
the modeling of gene regulation. For morphogenesis, we need to model cell behaviors
like release and absorption of diffusible factors, adhesion, and motility [3], in addition
to differential regulation of gene activity.
We have implemented the software framework COMPUCELL to model early
morphogenesis. It allows interaction of the genetic regulatory network with cellular
mechanisms; features include biosynthesis, cell adhesion, haptotaxis (the movement of
cells along a gradient of a molecule deposited on a substrate) and chemotaxis (the
movement of cells along a gradient of a chemical diffusing in the extracellular environment), and diffusion of morphogens (molecules released by cells that affect the
behavior of other cells during development). The interplay of these factors results in
arrangements of cells specific to a given organism, cf. [4]. We describe the model and
apply it to simulate the skeletal pattern formation in avian (chicken) limb.
Biological Background: Skeletal pattern formation occurs within a mesenchymal
tissue (mesenchyme are cells arranged loosely in a hydrated extracellular matrix
(ECM); they make only minimal contact with one another) surrounded by a thin
bounding layer, the ectoderm; Figure 1 shows a schematic of vertebrate limb. Our
two-dimensional (2-d) simulation attempts to reproduce the pattern of development of
bones in the forelimb of a chicken viewed from above when it lies palm down on a flat
surface. The long axis from the body to the digits is the proximodistal direction
(proximal means close to the body); from the thumb to the little finger is the anteroposterior direction. Thickness of the limb, from back to front (the dorsoventral direction) is one skeletal element throughout, justifying our 2-d simplification. Although
asymmetry along the dorsoventral axis as seen in the typical paddle shape of limb is
important to function, our initial simulations ignore it in favor of the more striking
asymmetries along the two other axes. Apical ectodermal ridge (AER), the narrow
strip of the ectoderm running along the apex of the growing limb bud, is necessary for
elongation and patterning of limb. AER releases fibroblast growth factors (FGFs),
which control mitosis (division) of mesenchymal cells. FGF concentrations increase in
the distal direction. Rates of cell division are known experimentally for the avian limb
[5]. Limb growth and pattern formation has been conceptualized by considering the
space within the developing limb to comprise three zones – (1) apical zone where only
growth takes place, (2) active zone where dynamics of pattern formation and cell
rearrangement into precartilage condensations occur and (3) frozen zone where condensations have progressed to differentiated cartilage and no additional patterning
occurs. In development in species with a bony skeleton, bone later isomorphically
replaces the cartilaginous skeleton. Active zone may be the locus of a reactiondiffusion system in which one or more members of the TGF-β family of growth factors
act as the activating morphogens [6]. Thus the active zone (2) is further classified into
(2a) cell active zone where cells rearrange locally into precartilage condensations,
(2b) reaction-diffusion active zone where reaction-diffusion mechanisms operate.
Growth continues in both the active zones but not in the frozen zone. At sites of incipient condensation, cells bearing a second FGF receptor may release a laterally
inhibitory morphogen, a necessary component of some pattern-forming reactiondiffusion schemes. Rather than use a reaction-diffusion scheme based on the actual

Multi-model Simulations of Chicken Limb Morphogenesis

41

biochemical interactions (they are still poorly characterized) we choose for heuristic
purposes to use the well-studied Schnakenberg reaction-diffusion equations, Equation (5). We refer to ‘u’ in Schnakenberg equations as the reaction-diffusion activator,
rather than identify it with a specific molecule TGF-β.
Cells sensing activator levels above a threshold secrete an adhesive material onto
the substrate and become intrinsically stickier than surrounding cells. In the actual
limb, TGF-β induces cells in active zones to produce the ECM glycoprotein fibronectin [7]. Fibronectin adheres to the cell surface, causing cells to accumulate at
focal sites. Cells at these sites also become more adhesive to one another by producing
a homophilic cell-surface adhesion protein N-cadherin [8]. The spatiotemporal pattern
of activator thus results in a corresponding set of cell condensations. In the description
of our model and simulation results for avian limb, we refer to the secreted substrate
adhesive molecule that promotes haptotaxis as SAM (surface adhesion molecule) and
the cell-cell adhesive molecule as CAM (cell adhesion molecule). The current model
omits the mitogen (FGF) field due to AER, instead assuming that cell division is uniform throughout the limb bud [5].

Fig. 1. Schematic representation of a developing vertebrate limb: We indicate the three major
axes and the first two tiers of skeletal elements to form. In the chicken forelimb these elements are the humerus, shown as already differentiated (dark gray), followed by the radius and
ulna, which are in the process of forming (light gray). Still to form are the wrist bones and
digits. The apical ectodermal ridge runs along the distal tip of the limb approximately between
the two points that the arrow indicating the anteroposterior axis intersects.

Brief Description of the Model: Steinberg’s Differential Adhesion Hypothesis (DAH)
uses cell-cell and cell-matrix adhesive interactions to explain cell rearrangement, including mesenchymal cell condensation [9]. This generic aspect of cell behavior is
modeled using CPM [10], which we have extended to account for haptotaxis and
chemotaxis. Cells may respond to morphogens they or their neighbors produce by
altering their gene activity in continuous or discontinuous (switch-like) fashion; such
nonlinear feedback loops may lead to differentiation into more specific cell types. We
model the network of expressed genes and their products as a set of rules that trigger
growth, cell division, cell death, secretion of morphogens and strength of adhesion
between cells; in the limb they are mediated by level of activity and distribution of
growth factors. [11] reviews these and other approaches to modeling gene regulatory
networks. A reaction-diffusion mechanism may underlie limb skeletal pattern formation
as well as other biological spatiotemporal patterning [12–14]. We propose a

42

R. Chaturvedi et al.

model that uses domain-level PDEs to simulate reaction-diffusion mechanisms. In our
biological example, these PDEs generate morphogen concentration distributions that
establish a prepattern for mesenchymal cell condensation. The rules also interact with
the stochastic CPM which governs dynamics and geometry of cell growth and division.
Domain growth follows from cell growth. Details are provided below.

(a)Initial distribution

(b)Growing limb bud

(c)Fully grown limb

Fig. 2. Simulation of skeletal pattern formation in avian limb using COMPUCELL. For full
limb, height to width ratio is 3 to 1. Figure not to scale.

Simulation of Avian Limb Development Using COMPUCELL: Figure 2 presents
COMPUCELL simulation results of the biological model: (i) The pre-pattern formed by the
morphogen (activator) chemical field (middle frame), (ii) The SAM concentration field
produced by the cells in response to the activator after a delay (right frame), and (iii) The
organization of mesenchymal cells into precartilaginous tissue in response to these fields
(left frame). The typical bone pattern (Figure 1) of one proximal rod-shaped element
followed by two elements of the mid-arm, and then three digits reflects the temporal
progress of chicken limb morphogenesis. It is generally similar to formation of other
vertebrate limbs. Our long-term goal is to explore developmental mechanisms such as
avian limb pattern formation using realistic gene regulatory/reaction-diffusion networks
and cell-cell adhesion measurements. In the absence of information on the interactions
and quantities required for a biologically accurate simulation, the current simulations
restrict themselves to describing the major biological issues involved in avian limb bud
development. We have focused on simulating mesenchymal cell condensation and emergence of a skeletal pattern resembling that of chicken forelimb. COMPUCELL’s modular
architecture allows iteratively replacing the interactions and quantities with more detailed
and realistic ones as they become available. Although our simulations use a rectangular,
2-d domain instead of a curvilinear, paddle-shaped domain, and differential equations
that do not correspond exactly to the genetic processes in the living limb bud, they do
adequately illustrate a general conceptual framework for vertebrate limb organogenesis.
A similar statement can be made with regard to accurate measurements of tissue properties that serve as input to CPM. Figure 2 also shows growing zones and their interfaces
moving in distal direction. Cells formed by division move downward (out of apical zone)
and replenish active zones. Lowermost frozen zone grows as cells condense into a bonelike pattern.

Multi-model Simulations of Chicken Limb Morphogenesis

43

2 Computational Model
Activator concentration in the internal space of the limb obeys a set of reactiondiffusion PDEs (we use the Schnakenberg equations). With an appropriate choice of
parameters in the Schnakenberg reaction-diffusion equations Eq. (5), which includes
the space in which the reaction-diffusion mechanism operates, the activator concentration produces a sequence of arithmetically increasing numbers of vertical stripes,
roughly approximating the distribution of skeletal elements in a chicken limb, see
Figs. 3a–c. Cells that sense a threshold level of activator concentration locally begin to
produce SAM. This is modeled as a transition from a non-SAM producing mesenchymal cell state to a cell state capable of SAM production. Thus, we have three fields
of chemical concentration in our computations – for the activator, the inhibitor and
SAM. COMPUCELL allows definition of an arbitrary number of fields and state transition rules of interest. In our example, the first two fields evolve according to the
Schnakenberg equations, the SAM field depends on local secretion by cells and the
secretion rate itself obeys an ODE. Finally, the mesenchymal cells respond to elevated
SAM concentration by upregulating their cell-cell adhesion parameters, and by responding to the ‘gluing’ effect of SAM through the haptotaxis term in the CPM. The
secretion of SAM by cells reinforces condensation of mesenchymal cells in regions
which already had high SAM concentrations. We now describe the submodels.

.
(a) γ: 2 steps

(a) γ: 3 steps

(a) γ: 2 steps

Fig. 3. Solutions of Schnakenberg equations (5) illustrating periodicity of stripes in stable
solutions. Aspect ratio is 3:1. Figure is not to scale

2.1 The Cellular Potts Model (CPM)
CPM is an extension of the Ising model2. It can simulate condensation of cells based
on differential adhesion [9,10]. We extend the model by (i) Adding an extra term to

2

http://www.physics.cornell.edu/sethna/teaching/sss/ising/intro.htm

44

R. Chaturvedi et al.

model haptotaxis of cells to SAM, (ii) Allowing time variation in the adhesivity of
cells, and (iii) Allowing cell growth and division
Energy Minimization Formalism: CPM dynamics use an energy minimization formalism to simulate the spatially extended cells undergoing cytoskeletally driven fluctuations. Quantitative experiments show that the CPM successfully reproduces the
behavior of simple cell aggregates [15,16]. Fundamental entities in the model are
individual cells. An effective energy, E, and “fields” (e.g., local concentrations of
diffusants) describe cells’ interactions, motion, differentiation and division. Effective
energy mixes true energies, like cell-cell adhesion, and terms that mimic energies, e.g.,
response of a cell to a chemotactic gradient. Cells move to minimize their total effective energy. CPM superimposes a lattice on the cells, with an index (also called a spin)
associated with each lattice site (pixel). Value of the index at a lattice site is σ if the
site lies in cell σ. Domains (i.e., the collection of lattice sites with the same index) in
the lattice represent cells; probability that such domains are connected is high.
Cell Adhesion: The net interaction between two cell membranes is phenomenologically described by a binding energy per unit area, Jτ,τ‘, which depends on the types of
the interacting cells, τ and τ’. Binding energy incorporates both specific (e.g., integrins, cadherins) and nonspecific interactions (e.g., elastic effects due to cell deformations, [17]). In the CPM the cell-cell interaction energy is:

EContact =

∑ Jτ (σ ) τ (σ )(1 − δ(σ (i, j, k ), σ ′(i′, j′, k ′))),
, ′

(1)

′

( i , j , k ) ( i ', j ' , k ' )

where the Kronecker delta, δ(σ,σ’)=0 if σ≠σ’ and δ(σ,σ’)=1 if σ=σ’, ensures that
only surface sites between neighboring cells contribute to the cell adhesion energy.
Cell adhesion molecules may change both in quantity and identity, which we can
model as variations in cell-specific adhesivity.
Cell Volume, Cell Division, and Cell Death: At any time, t, a cell of type τ has a
volume v(σ,τ) and surface area s(σ,τ). Cell volume can fluctuate around a certain
(target) value, e.g., due to changes in osmotic pressure. In order to (phenomenologically) incorporate these behaviors into our model, we introduce two model parameters: volume elasticity, λ, and target volume, vtarget(σ,τ). Similarly, for surface area
fluctuations, we define a membrane elasticity, λ’, and a target surface area, starget(σ,τ). We incorporate these constraints in the energy minimization formalism of
CPM by introducing energy penalties for variations in v and s of a cell from their
target values, which we set to the average values for the particular cell types:

Evolume =

∑ λσ (v(σ ,τ ) − v

all − cells

(σ ,τ )) +
2

target

∑ λσ (s(σ ,τ ) − s
'

all − cells

target

(σ ,τ ))

2

(2)

We model cell growth by allowing the values of vtarget(σ,τ) and starget(σ,τ) to increase with time. Cell division occurs when the cell reaches a fixed, type-dependent
volume. For another form of cell division, see [17]. We model division by starting

Multi-model Simulations of Chicken Limb Morphogenesis

45

with a cell of average size, vtarget= vtarget,average; causing it to grow by gradually
increasing vtarget to 2vtarget,average; and splitting the dividing cell into two, each with a
new target volume: vtarget /2. One daughter cell assumes a new identity (unique value
of σ ). We can model cell death simply by setting the cell’s target volume to zero.
Extracellular Matrix (ECM): We model ECM, liquid medium and solid substrates
just like cells with a distinct index (spin). We must define the interaction energy between each cell type and the ECM.
Dynamics of Cell Evolution – Membrane Fluctuations: In mixtures of liquid droplets, thermal fluctuations of the droplet surfaces cause diffusion (Brownian motion)
leading to energy minimization. The simplest assumption is that an effective temperature, T, drives cell membrane fluctuations. Fluctuations are described statistically
using the Metropolis algorithm for Monte-Carlo Boltzmann dynamics; T defines the
size of the typical fluctuation. If a proposed change in configuration (i.e., a change in
the spins associated with the pixels of the lattice) produces a change in effective energy, ∆E, we accept it with probability:

P (∆E ) = 1, ∆E ≤ 0;

P(∆E ) = e − ∆E / kT , ∆E > 0

(3)

where k is a constant converting T into units of energy.
Chemotaxis and Haptotaxis: Chemotaxis requires additional fields to describe the
→

local concentrations C (x ) of the molecules in extracellular space. Equation(s) for the
field depend on the particular morphogen molecule. A reaction-diffusion model is
used for the activator, which triggers production of SAM by cells. Cells respond to the
SAM field by ‘sticking’ to it. An effective chemical potential, µ(σ) models chemotaxis
or haptotaxis. Equation 4 incorporates the effective chemical energy into the CPM
energy formalism. Thus, the cells execute a biased random walk averaging in the direction of the gradient. Experiments can measure µ(σ).

EChemical = µ (σ )C ( x )

(4)

2.2 Reaction-Diffusion Equations

The Schnakenberg equations we use are the following [18]:
∂u
= γ (a − u + u 2 v) + ∇ 2 u ,
∂t
∂v
= γ (b − u 2 v) + d∇ 2 v.
∂t

(5)

where u is the activator concentration at a location (x, y) at time t; v is the inhibitor
concentration. γ is a parameter that affects the period (wavelength) of the (activator)

46

R. Chaturvedi et al.

pattern. Solutions in Fig. 3 demonstrate how controlling γ values can generate an activator pattern resembling chondrogenesis.
2.3 State Transition Model

The behavior of a cell depends on its state. State change rules depend on several
chemical fields at the intra- and inter-cellular level. We assume all cells in the active
zones are in a mitosing (i.e., dividing) state. When a mitosing cell in the active zones
senses a threshold local concentration of activator, it enters the SAM producing state.
In this state, the cell also upregulates cell-cell adhesion (the parameter Jτ, τ’ (Jcell,cell)
in the CPM decreases). Cells that have not experienced local threshold levels of activator are in the mitosing and condensing state; they undergo the dynamics of CPM.
Such cells respond to local SAM concentration, but do not produce SAM on their
own. This model of genetic regulation captures the formal, qualitative aspects of regulatory interactions and also allows fitting to quantitative experiments.
2.4 Modeling of Zones

For computational efficiency and biological realism, we apply the various dynamics
(CPM, reaction-diffusion, state transitions) only in specific regions of growing limb
bud. This zonal organization is typical of multicellular development. We thus describe
zones, interfaces, and growth. The AER secretes signals that induce cell division in
the proximal region; we simply assume that cell division takes place everywhere in the
active zones. In the active zone, which allows for cell condensation and haptotaxis in
response to SAM production, cells respond to threshold activator concentration by
producing SAM and condensing into patterns governed by the activator pattern. In
addition, we have an active zone for reaction-diffusion, which is slightly larger than
the cells’ active zone. In the reaction-diffusion active zone, activator concentration
evolves to establish a pre-pattern for mesenchymal condensation. In the frozen zone,
condensation into cartilaginous patterns has already occurred; no further evolution
takes place here, saving on computation. In the absence of experimentally determined
governing rules for these zones and their interfaces, we assume ad hoc rules for the
motion of zones, based on the requirement that chemical concentration fields and cell
clustering mechanisms have enough time to form distinctive patterns.
2.5 Integration of Submodels

We must integrate the submodels, in particular the stochastic CPM and continuum
reaction-diffusion model to allow the various mechanisms to work in a coordinated
fashion and simulate the full system. We must:
1. Match the spatial grid for continuum and stochastic models.
2. Define relative number of iterations for reaction-diffusion & CPM evolvers.
The section on “Software” below describes integration in more detail.

Multi-model Simulations of Chicken Limb Morphogenesis

47

3 Software
COMPUCELL provides multiple user interfaces. A file-based input can be used to describe the parameters associated with simulation. Alternatively, the model to be simulated and the simulation can be controlled using BIOLOGO, a modeling language designed and implemented for COMPUCELL 3. The front end includes: (1) A file based
user interface for simulation parameters and (2) A graphical user interface for controlling the simulation and for presenting the results. Back end is split into two main engines that carry out the bulk of the number crunching: (1) A computational engine for
the biological model and (2) A visualization engine for graphics.
Computational engine has three modules: (1) CPM engine (stochastic, discrete), (2)
Reaction-diffusion engine (continuum, PDEs), and, (3) State transition model engine
(rule based state automaton). Reaction-diffusion engine uses an explicit solver based
on forward time marching. Results of these calculations are made available as objects
of a ‘Field’ class. A Field object is also present for SAM concentration. CPM uses a
field of pixels. For each of the fields an appropriate method for evolving it is used.
The decision on which field to evolve is based on the criteria specified for interfacing
the various grids and time scales. Grids are matched the using a simple interpolation;
for time scales we specify the number of iterations for the evolution of field “1” before
we update a field “2” that interacts with “1”. In the CPM, the spins associated with
pixels evolve according to the Metropolis algorithm. “State Transition Model” is used
for the evolver governing cell differentiation for the genetically determined response
of the cell.
Cell Division Algorithm: A cell capable of dividing splits after growing to twice its
original size. To ‘grow’ the cell, its target volume is gradually increased so that the
target volume doubles over a predetermined number of Metropolis steps (time). Assigning a new spin to half of the cell’s constituent pixels then splits the cell. A modified breadth-first search is used to select pixels to be assigned a new spin; the split is
approximately along the “diameter”. Visualization ToolKit (VTK), available as freeware for various operating systems from the source URL4, is used for visualization.

4 Discussion of Simulation Results for Chicken Limb Development
Figure 2 shows a simulation of the full model described above. Computational domain
corresponds to the real anteroposterior width of 1.4 mm; patterning begins at stage 20
of chicken embryo development. The proximodistal length of 4 mm at stage 28 is
about three times the width. A 100x300 grid covers the domain. Cells cluster subject
to differential cell adhesion. The genetically governed response of cells to high activator concentration is to begin secreting SAM. Cells respond to SAM in two ways: (1)
SAM causes cells to stick to the substrate; (2) SAM makes the cells more likely to
condense by upregulating cell-cell adhesion. The parameter γ in Schnakenberg reaction-diffusion equations determines the periodicity of the pattern. Activator concentra3
4

http://www.nd.edu/~lcls/compucell
http://public.kitware.com/VTK/get-software.php

48

R. Chaturvedi et al.

tion is shown at various times; formation of the pre-pattern directing later cell condensation into the chondrogenic pattern is clearly seen. Since cells exposed at some time
to high activator concentration begin and continue to secrete SAM, and SAM in turn
has the two effects described above, the pattern of SAM concentration resembles the
activator pre-pattern. Finally, cells condense into the bone pattern of 1+2+3 (where 3
corresponds to the three digits) of the chicken limb. Growth of the limb bud depends
on cell division rate and how fast cells move. New cells generated by cell division
push the limb tip upward, making the growth look more natural.
Table 1. Runtimes for different grid sizes and number of cells

Grid
150X150
300X300
600X600
150X150

Number
of Cells
100
900
900
325

Cell
Density
64%
64%
64%
52%

Total
iterations
700
700
700
700

Time, visualization
31 minutes
199 minutes
329 minutes
34 minutes

Time, no
visualization
2.5 minutes
6 minutes
18 minutes
3.5 minutes

Simulations ran on a Sun-Blade-1000 with a 900MHz CPU and 512 Megabytes of
memory. Table 1 presents data on runtimes for different grid sizes and numbers of
cells. With the same grid size, the number of cells does not much affect the speed,
demonstrating the scalability of our algorithms for quantities dependent on cell number. Visualizing the computed data is highly computation intensive and does not scale
as well as the computation.
Acknowledgements. Support from NSF Grants IBN-0083653 and ACI-0135195 is
acknowledged.

References
1.
2.

3.

4.
5.
6.

Mjolsness, E., Sharp, D. H. & Reinitz, J. (1991) A connectionist model of development. J.
Theor. Biol., 152, 429–453.
Davidson, E., Rast, J. P., Oliveri, P., Ransick, A., Calestani, C., Yuh, C., Minokawa, T.,
Amore, G., Hinman, V., C.Arenas-Mena, Otim, O., Brown, C., Livi, C., Lee, P., Revilla,
R., Rust, A., Pan, Z., Schilstra, M., Clarke, P., Arnone, M., Rowen, L., Cameron, R.,
McClay, D., Hood, L. & Bolouri, H. (2002) A genomic regulatory network for development. Science, 295, 1669.
Marée, F. M. & Hogeweg, P. (2001) How amoeboids self-organize into a fruiting body:
multicellular coordination in Dictyostelium discoideum. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 98,
3879-3883.
Newman, S. A. & Comper, W. (1990) Generic physical mechanisms of morphogenesis and
pattern formation. Development, 110, 1–18.
Lewis, J. (1975) Fate maps and the pattern of cell division: a calculation for the chick
wing-bud. J. Embryol. exp. Morph., 33 , 419–434.
Newman, S. A. (1996) Sticky fingers: Hox genes and cell adhesion in vertebrate limb
development. BioEssays, 18, 171–174.

Multi-model Simulations of Chicken Limb Morphogenesis
7.
8.
9.

10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.

49

Downie, S. & Newman, S. (1995) Different roles for fibronectin in the generation of fore
and hind limb precartilage condensations. Dev. Biol., 172, 519–530.
Oberlender, S. & Tuan, R. (1994) Expression and functional involvement of N-cadherin in
embryonic limb chondrogenesis. Development, 120, 177–187.
Steinberg, M. S. (1978). Specific cell ligands and the differential adhesion hypothesis:
How do they fit together? In Specificity of Embryological Interactions (D. R. Garrod, Ed.),
pp. 97–130. London: Chapman and Hall.
Graner, F. & Glazier, J. A. (1992) Simulation of biological cell sorting using a twodimensional extended Potts model. Phys. Rev. Lett., 69, 2013–2016.
Jong, H. D. (2002) Modeling and simulation of genetic regulatory systems: a literature
review. J. Comp. Biol., 9, 67–103.
Turing, A. (1952) The chemical basis of morphogenesis. Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. London, B
237, 37–72.
Newman, S. A. & Frisch, H. L. (1979) Dynamics of skeletal pattern formation in developing chick limb. Science, 205, 662–668.
Meinhardt, H., and Gierer, A. (2000) Pattern formation by local self-activation and lateral
inhibition. Bioessays 22, 753–760.
Mombach, J. & Glazier, J. (1996) Single cell motion in aggregates of embryonic cells.
Phys. Rev. Lett., 76, 3032–3035.
Marée, S. (2000) From Pattern Formation to Morphogenesis. PhD thesis, Utrecht University Netherlands.
Drasdo, D. & Forgacs, G. (2000) Interplay of generic and genetic mechanisms in early
development. Developmental Dynamics, 219, 182–191.
Murray, J. D. (1993) Mathematical Biology, Second Corrected Edition (Biomathematics
Vol. 19), Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 156, 376, 406, 472, 739.

