Anisotropic Convection Model for the Earth’s Mantle
3
ˇ
H.-B. M¨uhlhaus1,2 , M. Cada
, and L. Moresi4
1

4

The University of Queensland
St Lucia, QLD 4072, Australia
muhlhaus@quakes.uq.edu.au
2
CSIRO Division of Exploration and Mining
26 Dick Perry Ave., Kensington WA 6051, Australia
3
Ludwig-Maximilians University, Institute of Geophysics
Theresienstr. 41, 80333 Munich, Germany
miro.cada@addcom.de
School of Mathematical Sciences, Building 28, Monash University
Victoria 3800, Australia
louis.moresi@sci.monash.edu

Abstract. The paper presents a theory for modeling ﬂow in anisotropic, viscous
rock. This theory has originally been developed for the simulation of large deformation processes including the folding and kinking of multi-layered visco-elastic
rock (M¨uhlhaus et al. [1,2]). The orientation of slip planes in the context of crystallographic slip is determined by the normal vector – the director – of these surfaces.
The model is applied to simulate anisotropic mantle convection. We compare the
evolution of ﬂow patterns, Nusselt number and director orientations for isotropic
and anisotropic rheologies. In the simulations we utilize two different ﬁnite element methodologies: The Lagrangian Integration Point Method Moresi et al [8]
and an Eulerian formulation, which we implemented into the ﬁnite element based
pde solver Fastﬂo (www.cmis.csiro.au/Fastﬂo/). The reason for utilizing two different ﬁnite element codes was ﬁrstly to study the inﬂuence of an anisotropic power
law rheology which currently is not implemented into the Lagrangian Integration
point scheme [8]and secondly to study the numerical performance of Eulerian
(Fastﬂo)- and Lagrangian integration schemes [8]. It turned out that whereas in
the Lagrangian method the Nusselt number vs time plot reached only a quasi steady
state where the Nusselt number oscillates around a steady state value the Eulerian scheme reaches exact steady states and produces a high degree of alignment
(director orientation locally orthogonal to velocity vector almost everywhere in
the computational domain). In the simulations emergent anisotropy was strongest
in terms of modulus contrast in the up and down-welling plumes. Mechanisms
for anisotropic material behavior in the mantle dynamics context are discussed by
Christensen [3]. The dominant mineral phases in the mantle generally do not exhibit strong elastic anisotropy but they still may be oriented by the convective ﬂow.
Thus viscous anisotropy (the main focus of this paper) may or may not correlate
with elastic or seismic anisotropy.

1

Introduction

Layered rock structures typically exhibit spectacular deformation patterns, illustrations
of buckling phenomena on a massive scale. Layered or, more generally, transversely
P.M.A. Sloot et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2003, LNCS 2659, pp. 788–797, 2003.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

Anisotropic Convection Model for the Earth’s Mantle

789

isotropic materials are indeed ubiquitous in the lithosphere ("the plate"). There is also
mounting evidence (mainly from seismic measurements) that at least the upper part of
the mantle exhibits acoustic wave anisotropy. A model for a layered mantle was proposed
recently e.g. by Aki [5] and Takeuchi et al. [8]. Physical explanations for the presence of
material anisotropy in the mantle may be based on ﬂow alignment of the crystallographic
slip planes of olivine (the dominant mineral in the mantle). Indeed, laboratory studies
by Karato [6] in the context of ﬂow alignment and seismic anisotropy have revealed two
classes of anisotropy namely lattice preferred orientation and shape preferred orientation.
Hence the proper consideration of the spatial orientation of the dominant slip plane as
well as its kinematic and dynamic properties are crucial for the simulation of anisotropic
mantle convection.
So far direct simulations of anisotropic mantle ﬂows have been a highly specialized area (e.g. Christensen [3]; the paper also contains concise summary of possible
mechanisms for anisotropic behavior). A possible reason may be that conclusive seismic anisotropy data have became available only relatively recently. In the following we
give brief outlines of the constitutive theory [1,2] and the Lagrangian Integration Point
ﬁnite element scheme (LIP), which we used for the solution of the example problems.
Our LIP based code allows only linear strain rate dependency at present. In order to
study the inﬂuence of a power law rheology on the evolution of viscous anisotropy we
have implemented the governing equations into a ﬁnite element based partial differential equation solver package (Sect. 4). Results including comparisons of anisotropic and
isotropic natural convection in a unit cell are presented in the Sects. 3 and 4. The question
remains if there is a relationship between elastic (seismic) and viscous anisotropy. If the
anisotropy is due to an alternating sequence of mineralocically and mechanically distinct
constituents (Allegre and Turcotte, 1986) then the answer is yes; although the elastic
strength of the anisotropy in terms of moduli contrast may differ from the viscosity
contrast. If the seismic anisotropy is related to the elastic anisotropy in single crystals
then the question is whether the reorientation of the crystallographic lattice is described
sufﬁciently accurately by the evolution of the single director (normal vector) of the dominant slip system (Eq. (3)). In single slip and if elastic deformations are negligible this
should be the case.

2

Mathematical Formulation

In the case of a material with layering or preferred crystallographic slip directions, the
orientation of the director is normal to the layer or slip surfaces. Transverse-isotropic
relations are characterized by two effective viscosities. We designate normal viscosity as
η (σ11 = −p + 2ηD11 ) and ηs (σ12 = 2ηS D12 ) is the shear viscosity. In the following
simple model for a layered viscous material we correct the isotropic part 2ηDij of the
model by means of the Λijkl tensor (M¨uhlhaus et al. [1,2]) to consider the mechanical
effect of the layering; thus
σij = 2ηDij − 2(η − ηs )Λijlm Dlm − pδij

(1)

790

ˇ
H.-B. M¨uhlhaus, M. Cada,
and L. Moresi

where a prime designates the deviator of the respective quantity, p is the pressure, Dij
is the stretching, σij is the Cauchy or true stress and
Λijkl =

1
(ni nk δlj + nj nk δil + ni nl δkj + nj nl δik ) − 2ni nj nk nl .
2

(2)

is the anisotropy tensor. In (1) and (2) the vector ni is the unit orientation-vector of
the director Ni . In the present applications we assume that the director transforms as a
material surface element; in continuum mechanics theory the evolution of the director
of the layers can be derived through the time derivative of Nanson’s equation, which
relates the current director to the reference director:
N˙ i = Ni,t + vj Ni,j = −vj,i Nj

(3)

where vi is the velocity vector. In 2D it is plausible that the planes of anisotropy or
slip planes are aligned with the velocity vectors in steady states, which is equivalent to
normality of the directors to the velocity vectors.
2.1

Numerical Method

The Lagrangian Integration Point ﬁnite element method ellipsis uses a standard mesh
to discretize the domain into elements, and the shape functions interpolate node points
in the mesh in the usual fashion. Derivatives are computed on the mesh using the values
of nodal variables but material property variations like the “director” are measured by
the particles. The problem is formulated in a weak form to give an integral equation,
and the shape function expansion produces a discrete (matrix) equation. For the discretized problem, these integrals occur over sub-domains (elements) and are calculated
by summation over a ﬁnite number of sample points (tracers) within each element. For
example, in order to integrate the components of the element stiffness matrix KE over
the element domain Ω E :
KE =

ΩE

BT (x)C(x)B(x)dΩ

(4)

we replace the continuous integral by a summation
KE =
p

wp BTp (xp )Cp (xp )Bp (xp )

(5)

Here the matrix B consists of the appropriate gradients of interpolation functions which
transform nodal point velocity components to strain-rate pseudo-vectors at any points
in the element domain. C the constitutive operator corresponding to (1) is composed of
two parts C = Ciso + Caniso .
In standard ﬁnite elements, the positions of the sample points, xp , and the weighting, wp
are optimized in advance. In our scheme, the xp ’s correspond precisely to the Lagrangian
points embedded in the ﬂuid, and wp must be recalculated at the end of a time-step for
the new conﬁguration of particles. The Lagrangian points carry the history variables

Anisotropic Convection Model for the Earth’s Mantle

791

(in this case director orientation) which are therefore directly available for the element
integrals without the need to interpolate from nodal points to ﬁxed integration points.
Moresi et al. [9] give a full discussion of the implementation and integration scheme.
In the Fastﬂo based simulations (www.cmis.csiro.au/Fastﬂo/) the advection terms
in the heat equation and in the purely hyperbolic director evolution equation are stabilized using artiﬁcial diffusion terms a method which is also called tensor upwinding
(Zienkiewicz and Taylor, [10]). See Sect. 4 for more details.

3 Application
We have simulated a basally heated convection problem in a box of aspect ratio 2 × 1,
with free slip-boundary conditions where the temperature is ﬁxed at the top and bottom
and there is no heat ﬂux at the sides. We assume a Rayleigh-number of Ra = 5.64 × 105
and a constant ratio of ηηS = 10 (Fig. 1). Subsequently the inﬂuence of the viscosity ratio
on the time history of the Nusselt number is also investigated (Fig. 2). In the deﬁnition
of the Rayleigh number for anisotropic viscous materials we follow Christensen [3] and

Fig. 1. Time dependent convection in a 2 × 1 box. Ra = 5.6×105 . Time series plots of velocity and
Nusselt number isotropic convection (top left) and anisotropic convection, ηηS (top right). Dashed
lines and lines are the results of the 32 × 32 and 64 × 64 elements simulations respectively. The
initial state of alignment is shown in (a) and the initial thermal structure in (b), and after 4000
time-steps (t = 0.04) in (c) and (d)

792

ˇ
H.-B. M¨uhlhaus, M. Cada,
and L. Moresi

Fig. 2. Nusselt no. plots for different viscosity ratios: s = η/ηS

deﬁne:
Ra =

2αρ20 cp g∆T H 3
κ(η + ηs )

(6)

The results suggest that the boundary layers in anisotropic convection are somewhat
more stable than the equivalent isotropic boundary layers in medium to high Ra convection, leading to a reduced tendency for convection cells to break down and reform.
The isotropic simulation passes through different stages of convective evolution, displaying plumes of hot material raising and cold material descending into its core, until
two dominant convection cell emerge and persist in the steady state shown in Fig. 1. In
the orthotropic simulation the director evolution follows the induced shear, and director
alignment in rising plumes as well as director alignment in the boundary layers is visible in steady state. These aligned regions encircle a core of roughly randomly oriented
directors. This suggests that seismic anisotropy is likely to be mostly dominant in up
and down welling plumes and the hot and cold thermal boundary layers where shearstrain rates are high. This ﬁts the observational evidence that deep mantle anisotropy is
signiﬁcant smaller, than in the shallow lithosphere (upper boundary layer) or the 660
km discontinuity and even the D layer (Montagner and Kennett [7]). Nusselt number
histories for varying viscosity ratios are depicted in Fig. 2. It turns out that the graphs
don’t differ much for ηηS > 10 i.e. there is little difference between the histories for the
ratios 10, 100 and 1012 .

Anisotropic Convection Model for the Earth’s Mantle

4

793

Power Law Induced Anisotropy

In this section we investigate the inﬂuence of a power law rheology on the spatial
distribution of the strength of the anisotropy as expressed by the local value of the ratio
η/ηS . The behavior is locally isotropic if the viscosity ratio is equal to 1; the most
extreme case of anisotropy would correspond to a ratio of ∞ (see Fig. 2), where we
have plotted the Nusselt-number of different viscosities ratios). In the study we use the
simple relationship
1
η
= (1 + γ/
˙ γ˙ Y )1− n ,
ηS

(7)

where in general γ˙ is deﬁned as:
γ˙ =

Dij Λijkl Dkl

(8)

In 2D there is a simpler way to calculate γ:
˙ The shear strain vector on the N slip surface
is:
γ˙ i = Dij nj

(9)

Let m be a vector in the slip plane so that m · n = 0. In 2D the components of m read:
m=

n2
−n1

(10)

The magnitude of the shear stress on the n-surface is then deﬁned as:
γ˙ = |Dij nj mi | = |n1 n2 (D11 − D22 ) + D12 (n22 − n21 )|

(11)

The parameter γ˙ Y is a strain rate characterizing the transition from predominantly
linear creep to power law creep and the superscript n is the power law exponent. We ﬁnd
the following limit values for the viscosity ratio:
lim

γ→0
˙

lim

γ→∞
˙

η
)=1
ηS
η
)=∞
ηS

(12)
(13)

We consider a quadratic convection cell with ideal frictionless boundaries and zero
normal velocities. The temperature difference between the top and the bottom boundary
is ﬁxed and on the sides we assume periodic boundaries (zero temperature ﬂuxes). The
domain is discretized into 710 six noded triangular elements with element concentrations
along the sides of the model. Since the power law rheology is not yet implemented into
our material point advection code ELLIPSIS (Moresi et al., 2001 [9]) we have used the
ﬁnite element code Fastﬂo (see http://www.cmis.csiro.au/Fastﬂo/ for more information).
In Fastﬂo the user programs the mathematical model and algorithms by means of the
high level language Fastalk. In the Fastﬂo macro developed for this application the
momentum equilibrium equation based on the rheology (1) with the viscosity ratio as

794

ˇ
H.-B. M¨uhlhaus, M. Cada,
and L. Moresi

50
.
γ Y = 1000
.
γ Y = 4000

Nusselt number

40
30
20
10
0

0

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.04

time
Fig. 3. Nusselt-number vs. time for a power law exponent of n=5 and dimensionless strain rates γ˙ Y
= 1000 (dark) and 4000 (light) respectively with steady state values of 17.8 and 18.5 respectively

deﬁned by (7) is solved iteratively by successively substituting γ˙ for a given temperature
at each time step. An average of 4 iterations were required for four digit accuracy in the
r.m.s. of the nodal point velocity vector.
Subsequently the heat equation is solved using a backward Euler differencing scheme
and tensor upwinding. The latter amounts to the inclusion of an additional diffusion term
with the diffusivity tensor vi vj ∆t/2 (Zienkiewicz and Taylor, [10]). Finally the director
advection equation (3) is solved – again using an Euler backward scheme and tensor
upwinding. Tensor upwinding is very important here, because of the hyperbolic nature
of the director equation (see Fig. 5). The time-step is determined from the Courant
condition-like criterion
∆t = α

area/2 × num. of elem.
.
vmax

(14)

In the calculations we have assumed that α = 1/2; The factor 2 in the numerator
considers the fact that the elements are triangular. As in the other sections of this paper
we assume an isotropic Rayleigh number of Ra = 5.64 × 105 , an initial temperature
perturbation of
T = 1 − x2 +

1
cos(πx1 ) sin(πx2 ),
10

(15)

and an initial director orientation of nT = (0, 1) everywhere. Figure 3 shows the evolution of the Nusselt-number with time for a power law exponent of n=5 and dimensionless
strain rates γ˙ Y = 1000 and 4000 respectively. The steady state Nusselt numbers are 17.8

Anisotropic Convection Model for the Earth’s Mantle

795

1

Alignment

0.8
0.6
.
γ Y = 1000, with upwinding
.
γ Y = 4000, with upwinding
.
γ Y = 4000, no upwinding

0.4
0.2
0

0

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.04

time
Fig. 4. Alignment for γ˙ Y = 1000 (dark graph; with upwind) and γ˙ Y = 4000 (medium; no upwind
and light with upwind) respectively. The shear viscosity contrast and hence the anisotropy is largest
in the up and down welling plumes. A milder degree of anisotropy is also observed in the cold and
the hot boundary layers. The core of the convection cells is virtually isotropic

and 18.5 for γ˙ Y = 100 and 4000 respectively. In the calculations we have used the
deﬁnition
Nu = 1 +

1
Ra

V

σij Dij dV,

(16)

of the Nusselt number which is also valid during the transient phase of convection (see
eg. Christensen, 1984 [4]). In Eq. (16) all quantities are non dimensional.
A global measure for the degree of alignment of the director in dependency of the
time is represented in Fig. 4. For a quadratic domain of unit area the degree of alignment
is measured in terms of the sin of the mean value of the angle enclosed by the velocity
vector and the director:
V

| sin(α)|dV =

V

|v1 n2 − v2 n1 |
dV
|v||n|

(17)

If the velocity vector is everywhere orthogonal to the director (full alignment) then
sin(α) = 1. In the simulations we achieve an average alignment of 0.85 and 0.91
for γ˙ Y = 1000 and γ˙ Y = 4000 respectively with tensor upwinding. Also shown is the
alignment evolution for γ˙ Y = 1000 without upwinding (purpel graph in Fig. 4). In
this case alignment does not take place because of the numerical ill-posedness of the
unstabilised director equations.
Figure 5 (A) and (B) show the contours of the streamlines (determined in the usual
way from the velocity potential φ where v1 = φ,2 and v2 = −φ,1 ) and the isotherms
respectively; both plots are for γ˙ Y = 1000. The streamlines lines are more angular than

796

ˇ
H.-B. M¨uhlhaus, M. Cada,
and L. Moresi

Fig. 5. Streamlines (A), isotherms (B) n=5 and γ˙ Y = 1000 in (A) and (B). (C) and (D): pseudu
vectors (0, 1 − ηS /η); The arrows are normalized with respect to the maximum arrow length.
Actual max arrow length: 0.57 (C), 0.93 (D); Parameters: n=5, γ˙ Y = 4000 (C), n=5, γ˙ Y = 1000
(D)

in isotropic convection. Also characteristic for anisotropic convection is the spiral like
shape of the isotherms. An important measure for the spatial distribution of anisotropy
is the distribution of ratio of ηS /η; if ηS /η = 1 the material behaves locally isotropic;
˙ γ˙ Y → ∞. In Fig. 5 the
strong anisotropy is obtained for ηS /η = 0, i.e. in the limit γ/
viscosity ratio is represented for visualization purposes by means of the distribution of
the pseudo vector ﬁeld (0, 1 − ηS /η) anisotropy is strongest where the arrow is longest
and vice versa. In the plots the vector are normalized such that the magnitudes range
between 0 and 1. The actual magnitude ranges between 0.57 for γ˙ Y = 4000 and 0.93 for
γ˙ Y = 1000. The anisotropy is strongest in both cases in the hot and cold plumes on the
sides of the cell. The core of the convection cells are more or less isotropic however in
the case of the lower transition strain rate we observe signiﬁcant anisotropy (in terms of
the viscosity ratio) in the vicinity of the hot and cold thermal boundary layers as well.

Anisotropic Convection Model for the Earth’s Mantle

797

Acknowledgement. The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the supercomputing facilities of the Australian Earth System Simulator (ACcESS), a Major National
Research Facility.

References
1. M¨uhlhaus, H.-B., Dufour, F., Moresi, L., Hobbs, B., (2002) A director theory for viscoelastic
folding instabilities in multilayered rock, Int. J. Solids and Structures. Vol. 39; 3675–3691.
2. M¨uhlhaus, H.-B., Moresi. L., Hobbs. B., Dufour. F., (2002) Large Amplitude Folding in Finely
Layered Viscoelastic Rock Structures, Pure. Appl. Geophys., 159, 2311–2333
3. Christensen, U.C., (1987) Some geodynamical effects of anisotropic viscosity, Geophys.J.R.astr. Soc. 91;711-736.
4. U. Christensen (1984) Convection with pressure and temperature dependent non-Newtonian
rheology. Geophys. J.R. Astr. Soc.,77, 343–384
5. Aki, K., (1968) Seismological evidence for the existence of soft thin layers in the upper mantle
under Japan, J. Geophys. Res., 73, 585–596.
6. Karato, S.-I., (1998) Seismic Anisotropy in the Deep Mantle, Boundary Layers and the Geometry of Mantle Convection, Pure appl. geophys., 151, 565–587.
7. Montagner, J.-P., and Kennett, B.L.N., (1996) How to Reconcile Body-wave and Normal-mode
Reference Earth Model, Geophys. J.. Int. 125, 229–248.
8. Takeuchi, H., Y. Hamano, and Y. Hasegawa, (1968) Rayleigh- and Lowe-wave discrepancy
and the existence of magma pockets in the upper mantle, J. Geophys. Res., 73, 3349–3350.
9. Moresi, L., M¨uhlhaus, H.-B., Dufour, F., (2001) Particle-in-Cell Solutions for Creeping Viscous Flows with Internal Interfaces, Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on Bifurcation and Localisation (IWBL’99), Perth, H.-B. M¨uhlhaus,A. Dyskin, E. PasternakAustralia,
Balkema, Rotterdam.
10. O.C. Zienkiewicz and R.L. Taylor (2000), Finite Element Method: Volume 3, Fluid Dynamics;
ISBN 0750650508, Butterworth-Heinemann).
11. C.J. Allegre and D.L. Turcotte (1986) Implications of two component marble cake mantle.
Nature, 323, 123–127

