Grid Computing Environment Using Ontology
Based Service
Ana Marilza Pernas1 and Mario Dantas2
1

2

Department of Informatics, Federal University of Pelotas,
99010-900 Pelotas, Brazil
ampernas@ufpel.edu.br
Department of Informatics and Statistics, Federal University of Santa Catarina,
88040-900 Florianopolis, Brazil
mario@inf.ufsc.br

Abstract. Grid computing environments can share resources and services in a large-scale. These environments are being considered as an
eﬀective solution for many organizations to execute distributed applications to obtain high level of performance and availability. However,
the use of a grid environment can be a complex task for an ordinary
user, demanding a previous knowledge of the access requirements from
a virtual organization. In order to improve the search of resources and
its selection, in this paper we propose the use of ontology as alternative
approach to help the use of grid services. This paradigm can provide
a description of available resources, leading users to desire operations
and describing resources syntax and semantics that can form a common
domain vocabulary. Our experimental result indicates that our proposal
allows a better comprehension about available resources.

1

Introduction

A grid environment can be understood as a set of services, provided by institutions to be used from another. Its architecture may be viewed as service-oriented
[1], where two entities have a special importance: the producer and the consumer
of the service. In this vision, owners oﬀer services to be used, according to some
restrictions that must be satisﬁed before given access permission to consumer.
Because of these restrictions and rules of sharing, the service oriented grid architecture requires a scheme to support the interoperability between applications
from the users and a high level of access transparency for resources.
Considering a service oriented approach, in this article we propose the use of
ontology for the description of available resources in a grid computing environment. The motivation of this research is based on the clear advantages in using
ontology, as some projects have shown (e.g. [2, 3, 4]), to have a common domain
of concepts shared among ordinary users. The use of ontology for the semantics
description of a vocabulary can provide a clear understanding of characteristics
and properties of classes and relations.
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3516, pp. 858–861, 2005.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

Grid Computing Environment Using Ontology Based Service

859

The paper is organized as follows. The development of the proposed ontology
based service is described in section 2. In section 3, we present some related
works. In section 4 we present our conclusions and future work.

2

Ontology for Grid Resources Description

In this section we present the ontology created. In addition to the axioms, other
two structures help the ontology in the description of resources:
– Metadata reﬂects the information related to a data. In this research, metadata stores information about computational resources;
– Semantics View - stores information related to the present state of a resource. Thus, when a request comes, these structure returns information
about that moment.
Even not commonly used in other ontologies, these structures can improve the
ontology action, returning answers more quickly. The ontology was implemented
using the OWL Full language [5], and was edited using Prot´eg´e-2000 editor [6].
The ontology works in the directory of a grid conﬁguration. Fig. 1 (modiﬁed from [7]) shows that consumers’ queries come to the ontology. To obtain
information about computational resources, metadata receives information from
catalogs and data ﬁles, while semantic views communicates with the Metacomputing Directory Service (MDS), which provides a distributed access to the grid
structure and information related to system components.
2.1

Ontology Development

To probe how to describe the concepts related to grid computational resources,
we search for the vocabulary utilized by the following projects: NPACI [8], ESG
[9]; NASA’s Information Power Grid [10] and the Distributed ASCI Supercomputer Project 2 [11]. After our search we create the documentation required to

Fig. 1. Grid architecture using the ontology approach

860

A.M. Pernas and M. Dantas

Fig. 2. Axiom to access restriction

build the ontology, witch consists of all concepts, described in a formally way
and mapped in classes and instances, that will form the ontology.
Our next task was to reproduce this documentation to the OWL language,
using the Prot´eg´e editor. In the editor, we also created axioms, employing the
PAL (Prot´eg´e Axiom-Language). Fig. 2 shows an axiom to access restriction,
where is only possible to occur if the operating system from the resource is AIX,
disk space greater then 40 GB and memory greater then 128 GB. Metadata were
also created using Prot´eg´e and OWL language.
2.2

Ontology Based Service

To develop the grid service we created an application, using Java Language, to
allow the service to interact with the ontology. The application was designed
with three modules. The ﬁrst module provides a list of all classes and instances
deﬁned in the ontology. In the second module, consumers can probe for metadata
from any class listed by the ﬁrst module. The third module allows a search of any
computational resource, where a consumer can visualize the entire conﬁguration.
The service was deﬁned using the Globus toolkit [12] and it is characterized by
the application executing in a grid conﬁguration. The application was conﬁgured
to accept incoming connections from consumers of a grid. In this new environment, computational resources are presented using a more clear description, as
we veriﬁed with users from our Federal University conﬁguration.

3

Related Work

Concerning to the resources selection in a grid environment, is possible to ﬁnd
some research works (e.g. [3, 13]), where authors use the ontology to help the use
of a grid environment. Some research works are related to apply the ontology in
existing grid environments. One of theses eﬀorts is the Semantic Grid [1], a grid
infrastructure which has the goal to support applications related to e-Science.

4

Conclusion and Future Work

In this paper we presented a research work to provide access transparency to
users of grid conﬁgurations. Our approach was based on ontology. We ﬁrst presented some concepts of ontology and service oriented in grid conﬁgurations.

Grid Computing Environment Using Ontology Based Service

861

The environment of our prototype was described starting with the methodology used, followed by some characteristics of the development and ﬁnally how
the ontology base service works. The system has proved to be an eﬃcient and
friendly approach to provide grid resources to consumers. As a future research
work we are planning to enhance the system to allow some dynamic changes,
such as metadata or inclusion, on the application. Other work is to create an
ontology to agriculture ﬁeld and use the application on more wide and complex
grid environment.

References
1. De Roure, D., Jennings, N.R., Shadbolt N.R.: The Semantic Grid: A Future eScience Infrastructure. In: Grid Computing: Making The Global Infrastructure a
Reality, F. Berman, A.J.G. Hey and G. Fox (eds), Southern Gate, Chinchester,
England: John Wiley Sons, 1080p. (2003) 437-470.
2. Pernas, A. M.: Ontologias Aplicadas a Descrio de Recursos em Grids Computacionais. Dissertation (Master Degree), Federal University of Santa Catarina, Florianpolis, Brazil (2004).
3. Tangmunarunkit, H., Decker, S., Kesselman, C.: Ontology-based Resource Matching - The Grid meets the Semantic Web. 1th Workshop on Semantics in Peer-toPeer and Grid Computing (SemPGrid) at the 12th International World Wide Web
Conference, Budapest, May (2003).
4. Heine, F., Hovestadt, M., Kao, O.: Towards Ontology-Driven P2P Grid Resource
Discovery. 5th IEEE/ACM International Workshop on Grid Computing, Pittsburgh, USA,November(2004).
5. McGuinness, D., Van Harmelen, F.: Web Ontology Language Overview. (2004).
Available online http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-features/.
6. Noy, N., Fergerson, R., Musen, M.: The knowledge model of Protege-2000: Combining interoperability and ﬂexibility. 12th Int. Conference on Knowledge Engineering
and Knowledge Management(EKAW), French Riviera, October (2000) 2-6.
7. Goble, C., De Roure, D.: Semantic Web and Grid Computing. September (2002).
Available online: http://www.semanticgrid.org/documents/swgc/.
8. NPACI-National Partnership for Advanced Computational Infrastructure: Partnership Report. (2000). Available online: http://www.npaci.edu/.
9. Foster, I., Middleton, D., Williams, D.: The Earth System Grid II: Turning Climate
Model Datasets into Community Resources. January (2003). Available online:
https://www.earthsystemgrid.org/about/docs/ESGOverviewSciDACPINapa v8.
doc.
10. IPG, Information Power Grid - Nasa’s Computing and Data Grid: What is
the IPG? October (2002). Available online: http://www.ipg.nasa.gov/aboutipg/
what.html.
11. Verstoep, K.: The Distributed ASCI Supercomputer 2 (DAS-2). May (2000). Available online: http://www.cs.vu.nl/das2/.
12. Foster I., Kesselman, C.: The Globus Project: a Status Report. In: Proc. of 7th
Heterogeneous Computing Workshop (HCW 98), March (1998) 4-18.
13. Pouchard, L. et.al.: An Ontology for Scientiﬁc Information in a Grid Environment:
the Earth System Grid. In: Proc. of the 3th IEEE/ACM International Symposium
on Cluster Computing and the Grid, Japan, Tokyo, May (2003) p. 626.

