Artificial Immune System for Medical
Data Classification
Wiesław Wajs1, Piotr Wais2, Mariusz Święcicki3,
and Hubert Wojtowicz2
1
Institute of Automatics,
University of Mining and Metallurgy, Kraków, Poland
wwa@ia.agh.edu.pl
2
National Technical University in Krosno
waisp@poczta.onet.pl
hubwoj@pwsz.krosno.pl
3
Institute of Computer Modelling,
Cracow University of Technology, Kraków, Poland
mswiecic@uck.pk.edu.pl

Abstract. The article presents application of artificial immune algorithms in
classification of vectorized medical data sets. Artificial immune network was
created and trained for the purpose of arterial blood gasometry parameters (pH,
pCO2, pO2, HCO3) classification. Training data originates from the Infant
Intensive Care Unit of the Polish – American Institute of Pediatry, Collegium
Medicum, Jagiellonian University in Cracow.

1 Introduction
Biological phenomenons, and particularly organic processes are of a dynamic
character. Diagnosis and therapy are of the same character. In approaching diagnosis
and making therapeutic decision phenomenons happening in time are investigated.
Every doctor knows that it is rare to make a decision about diagnosis and treatment on
the basis of only one clinical observation. Usually it is based on several patient’s
examinations, regular analysis of many biophysical and biochemical parameters, or
imaging examination. On a particular level of these examinations preliminary
diagnosis is determined, and later a final one. Basing on determined diagnosis and on
the evaluation of the sickness process dynamics decision about the treatment is taken.
Initial stabilization of the infants state is a difficult task. To achieve it the doctor
analyses repeatedly many parameters related to the patient’s health condition. These
parameters are: birth anamnesis, physiological examinations (body’s weight, dieresis),
results of additional examinations (biochemical, micro biological, imaging) and
readings from the monitoring instruments (pulseximeter, cardio monitor, invasive
measurement of the arterial pressure, respiratory mechanics monitor). It isn’t rare
when doctor appraises simultaneously over fifty variables. Analysis of this amount of
data is hard and requires experience, all the more if the decision about the treatment
should be made quickly. In result of carried out analysis doctor makes decision about
the treatment expecting positive results, which are expressed by the desired changes
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3516, pp. 810 – 812, 2005.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

Artificial Immune System for Medical Data Classification

811

in the results of additional examinations, readings of the monitoring instruments and
physical examination. The whole process can be verified by comparing it to the model
of respiratory insufficiency progress carried out by the doctor. Creation of this model
is based on theoretical and empirical knowledge found in scientific literature and also
on the doctor’s experience. Intensification of gas exchange disorders are best reflected
by arterial blood gasometry parameters examined in the context of currently used
methods of ventilation support. For that reason as an output values four directly
measured parameters of arterial blood gasometry: pH, pCO2, pO2, HCO3 and oxygen
parameter (pO2/FiO2) were chosen. Alkalis deficiency and hemoglobin oxygen
saturation were omitted as derivatives of the four parameters mentioned above.

2 An Artificial Immune Network for Signal Analysis
Main goal of the system is a classification of signals and to achieve it several
problems had to be solved. First of them is connected with an algorithm of learning
the immune network. The next problem is related to the structures of data, which are
responsible for representation of signals.
The input signal for the system, is interpreted as an antibody (Ab) so the task of
immune network is to find an antigen Ag that will be suitable for Ab. The Ag-Ab
representation will partially determine which distance measure shall be used to
calculate their degree of interaction. Mathematically, the generalized shape of a
molecule (m), either an antibody (Ab) or an antigen (Ag), can be represented by a set
of real-valued coordinates m = <m1, m2, ..., mL>, which can be regarded as a point in
an L-dimensional real-valued space.
D =

∑ (ab i − ag i )
L

2

(1)

i =1

The affinity between an antigen and an antibody is related to their distance that can
be estimated via any distance measure between two vectors, for example the
Euclidean or the Manhattan distance. If the coordinates of an antibody are given by
<ab1, ab2, ..., abL> and the coordinates of an antigen are given by <ag1, ag2, ...,
agL>, then the distance (D) between them is presented in equation (1), which uses
real-valued coordinates. The measure distances are called Euclidean shape-spaces.
Algorithm used in the research is described in papers [1] [2] by de Castro and Von
Zuben. Modified version of immune net algorithm was adapted to signals
classification. The learning algorithm lets building of a set that recognizes and
represents the data structural organization. The more specific the antibodies, the less
parsimonious the network (low compression rate), whilst the more generalist the
antibodies, the more parsimonious the network with relation to the number of
antibodies. The suppression threshold controls the specificity level of the antibodies,
the clustering accuracy and network plasticity.
2.1 Overview and Analysis of the Research
Currently immune network performs unsupervised pattern recognition of the gathered
medical data. In the process of further research description of the data classes will be

812

W. Wajs et al.

added, which is prepared by an expert medicine doctor. The idea is to categorize
patients according to the hospitalization group they are initially assigned to by the
doctor. Next goal after creating a reliable classification system is to develop a time
series predicting system to help doctors in forecasting patient’s condition ahead in
time.
A major issue in the research is the scarcity of available data from hospitalization.
Efficient system of new data acquisition is one of the main concerns and to achieve it
in the future a creation of an agent system [3] is planned for gathering information
through the Internet from several hospitals and adding it to the database.

3 Multidimensional Medical Data Classification
In the given example use of the AIS is presented in the unsupervised pattern
recognition of the medical data. Using a database, functioning for the few years on the
Infant Intensive Care Ward of the Polish – American Institute of Pediatrics Collegium
Medicum Jagiellonian University of Cracow, a network was created, which final task
is going to be the classification of arterial blood gasometry parameters. In the process
of training previous values of gasometry, respirator settings and surfactant
administration were used as an input data. Training of the network consists of two
phases. First phase is a learning of the network. Training data set is comprised of
blood parameters values starting from the time (t) – time series are of the same length.
Second phase tests the network’s generalization abilities by presenting it input vectors
from the test dataset. Elements of the training dataset – time series are interpreted by
the network as antigens, which are stimulating particular antibody creating an
artificial immune network. Training dataset for the artificial immune network
comprises of pattern series, which are represented by the vectors. As a result of this
time series included in the dataset can be interpreted as a point coordinates in ndimensional space, which n-value is dependant on the pattern series length.

4 Summary
In the paper functioning of the artificial immune system and example of its
application in unsupervised pattern recognition of medical multidimensional data was
presented. Perspectives for creating a reliable classification and time series modeling
systems based on the artificial immune algorithm were discussed.

References
[1] De Castro, L. N., Von Zuben, F. J. (2000a), An Evolutionary Immune Network for Data
Clustering, Proc. of the IEEE SBRN, pp. 84-89.
[2] De Castro, L. N., Von Zuben, F. J. (2000b), The Clonal Selection Algorithm with
Engineering Applications, GECCO’00 – Workshop Proceedings, pp. 36-37.
[3] Wajs Wiesław, Wais Piotr, Autonomous Agent for Computer System and Computerized
System of Automatics, Some Analogy and Difference, International Workshop Control and
Information Technology, IWCIT 2001.

