A Data-Adaptive Approach to
cDNA Microarray Image Enhancement
Rastislav Lukac1 , Konstantinos N. Plataniotis1 ,
Bogdan Smolka2 , and Anastasios N. Venetsanopoulos1
1

The Edward S. Rogers Sr. Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of Toronto, 10 King’s College Road, Toronto, M5S 3G4, Canada
{lukacr, kostas, anv}@dsp.utoronto.ca
http://www.dsp.utoronto.ca/∼lukacr
2
Polish-Japanese Institute of Information Technology,
Koszykowa 86 Str, 02-008 Warsaw, Poland
bsmolka@ia.polsl.gliwice.pl

Abstract. A data-adaptive approach for cDNA microarray image enhancement is presented. Through the weighting coeﬃcients adaptively
determined from local microarray image statistics, the proposed technique tunes the overall ﬁlter’s detail-preserving and noise-attenuating
characteristics and uses both the spatial and spectral correlation of the
cDNA image during processing. Noise removal is performed by tuning a
membership function which utilizes the aggregated absolute diﬀerences
between the cDNA microarray inputs localized within a processing window sliding over the image.

1

Introduction

cDNA microarray technology [1, 2, 3] is an advanced tool used to analyze changes
in genome-wide patterns of gene expression in diﬀerent populations of cells.
Based on the widely used two-color Cy3/Cy5 system [4, 5], the control DNA
sequence is usually ﬂuor-tagged with green (Cy3), whereas the experimental
sequence of the patient is tagged with red (Cy5). The composed Red-Green
(RG) image (Fig.1) contains red, green and yellow spots which indicate that
a particular gene is expressed in the control channel, experimental channel or
both of them, respectively [5]. Each spot contains multiple copies of a single
DNA sequence. The spots occupy a small fraction of the image area and they
have to be individually located and isolated from the image background prior to
the estimation of its mean intensity [1, 2, 6].
Although recognition of spots in either control or experimental channels
seems to be straightforward, the task is complicated and challenging. Variation
in image background and image artifacts, as well as spot sizes and positions
This research has been supported by a grant No. PJ/B/01/2004 from the Polish
- Japanese Institute of Information Technology.
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3515, pp. 886–893, 2005.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

A Data-Adaptive Approach to cDNA Microarray Image Enhancement

887

Fig. 1. cDNA microarray images

represent the major sources of uncertainty in spot ﬁnding and gene expression determination [5, 7]. In particular, non-speciﬁcally bounded DNA or dye
molecules and the natural ﬂuorescence of the glass slide result to a substantial
noise ﬂoor in the microarray image. Since any errors or noise introduced usually
limit the performance of the essential analysis procedure, if not defeat it altogether, image processing is necessary in order to eliminate processing errors from
propagating further down the processing pipeline to the gene expression analysis
tasks [1, 2, 6, 8]. Due to thousands of spots, the microarray image enhancement
procedure, such as the one presented in this paper, should be fully automated.

2

Problem Formulation

Let us consider, a K1 × K2 image x : Z 2 → Z 2 representing a two-dimensional
matrix of two-component samples x(r,s) = [x(r,s)1 , x(r,s)2 ] with r = 1, 2, ..., K1
and s = 1, 2, ..., K2 denoting the image rows and columns, respectively. The component x(r,s)1 indicates the R channel while x(r,s)2 indicates the G channel. The
two channels are combined to form the cDNA vector x(r,s) in a two-dimensional
vector space [2, 5]. Thus, the microarray data form a two-channel, Red-Green
(RG) image [9, 10].
The cDNA microarray image suﬀers from high level of noise and edge uncertainty [7]. A number of noise sources mostly in the form of photon noise,
electronic noise, laser light reﬂection and dust on the slide contribute to impairments and defects [2]. These imperfections along with the background ﬂuorescence introduce into the image considerable variability in intensity both within
and between the individual spots, as shown in Fig.1. It has been observed that
changes of the pixel intensities from the foreground to the background can be
attributed to the Gaussian nature of noise [4]. Isolated discrete artifacts and

888

R. Lukac et al.

outliers present in the cDNA microarray image can be attributed to impulsive
noise [5]. In conventional image processing applications, noise corruption of this
nature is most often modelled through a mixture of additive Gaussian noise and
impulsive noise [11]. Therefore, the acquired cDNA signal x(r,s) = [x(r,s)1 , x(r,s)2 ]
can be expressed through an additive noise model as follows [5]:
x(r,s) = o(r,s) + v(r,s)

(1)

where (r, s) indicates the spatial position of the samples in the image array. The
vector o(r,s) = [o(r,s)1 , o(r,s)2 ] represents the original, noise-free cDNA signal,
while the vectorial samples v(r,s) = [v(r,s)1 , v(r,s)2 ] are considered random in
nature and are used to denote the various image impairments introduced during
processing.

3

Proposed Method

Since the noisy samples deviate from other samples in a given data population
[5, 11], we may consider uniformity in cDNA pixels inside a localized image
area as the objective for enhancing the cDNA microarray image. Due to the
various image impairments introduced during microarray image formation, there
is no method to objectively determine whether or not a cDNA sample is noisy.
Therefore, the proposed microarray image enhancement solution utilizes local
image statistics of the cDNA samples localized inside a processing window. The
window, deﬁned as Ψ(r,s) = {x(i,j) ; (i, j) ∈ ζ}, for p = 1, 2, ..., K1 and q =
1, 2, ..., K2 , slides over the entire image x placing, successively, every pixel at the
center of a local neighborhood denoted by ζ. The procedure replaces the cDNA
sample x(r,s) located at the window center (r, s) with the output y(r,s) = f (Ψ(r,s) )
of a ﬁlter function f (·) operating over the samples listed in Ψ(r,s) .
The ﬁlter function f (·) and the area of support ζ can have numerous forms,
such as those listed in [11]. Both f (·) and ζ determine the complexity and the
overall performance of the procedure. A 3 × 3 rectangular shape window with
ζ = {(r − 1, s − 1), (r − 1, s), ..., (r + 1, s + 1)} is commonly used in image processing. Due to its versatility and demonstrated good performance, the same window
shape is utilized throughout this paper. It has been proven that the conventional
approaches such as component-wise median ﬁlter (MF) [12] and vector median
ﬁlter (VMF) [13] produce robust estimates [5, 11]. However, noise and other
impairments present in the acquired cDNA microarrays usually prohibit to accurately recognize between noise and edge pixels. Therefore, we will enhance the
CDNA images using a fuzzy logic based smoothing approach (Fig.2) which is
capable of tuning the overall ﬁltering characteristics by employing a membership
function deﬁned over local image statistics [9].
To preserve the spectral characteristics of the cDNA microarray image, the
proposed method constitutes the Red/Green (R/G) ratios from the cDNA vectorial inputs. The color-ratio approach takes advantage of the expected relative
uniformity of the local R/G ratios. Due to the decreased high-frequency portion

A Data-Adaptive Approach to cDNA Microarray Image Enhancement

889

noise signal
v

o
original
signal

signals‘
interference

acquired signal
x

data-adaptive
filter

aggregated
statistics

normalization

y

filtered
signal

fuzzy
system

normalizing
vector

Fig. 2. Data-adaptive cDNA microarray image enahancer

of the signal, color-ratio based processing is able to preserve edges and structural
content of the cDNA image better than the conventional approaches operating in
the intensity domain. Each sample x(i,j) is used to produce the Red/Green color
ratio x(i,j)1 /x(i,j)2 . The produced ratio-values x(i,j)1 /x(i,j)2 , for (i, j) ∈ ζ, are
used to determine local image statistics, expressed here in the form of aggregated
absolute diﬀerences between color ratios [9]:
x(i,j)1 /x(i,j)2 − x(g,h)1 /x(g,h)2

D(i,j) =

(2)

(g,h)∈ζ

Following the processing pipeline depicted in Fig.2, the scalar values D(i,j) ,
for (i, j) ∈ ζ, are used to determine the fuzzy weights µ(i,j) using the popular
sigmoidal membership function [14] as follows:
µ(i,j) = β 1 + exp D(i,j)

−r

(3)

where r is used to tune the weighting eﬀect of the membership function and β
is a normalizing constant. Note that each fuzzy weight µ(i,j) , for (i, j) ∈ ζ, is
associated with the input cDNA sample x(i,j) .
Since the most commonly used method to decrease the level of random noise
present in the signal is smoothing, an averaging operation is required in order to
replace the noisy vector x(r,s) at the window center with a suitable vector representative for the local image area Ψ(r,s) . Using the color ratios x(i,j)1 /x(i,j)2 and
the defuzziﬁed weighting coeﬃcients w(i,j) = µ(i,j) / (g,h)∈ζ µ(g,h) , the output
vector y(r,s) = [y(r,s)1 , y(r,s)2 ] is obtained as follows [9]:
y(r,s)1 = x∗(r,s)2

{w(i,j) x(i,j)1 /x(i,j)2 }

(4)

(i,j)∈ζ

⎡
y(r,s)2 = x∗(r,s)1 ⎣
(i,j)∈ζ

⎤−1
{w(i,j) x(i,j)1 /x(i,j)2 }⎦

(5)

890

R. Lukac et al.

where x∗(r,s) = [x∗(r,s)1 , x∗(r,s)2 ] is a vector, whose components are used to normalize the output (smoothed) color-ratio value (i,j)∈ζ {w(i,j) x(i,j)1 /x(i,j)2 } to
the individual intensities y(i,j)1 and y(r,s)2 corresponding to the recovered R and
G color channels, respectively. The normalization vector x∗(r,s) can be considered as equivalent to a robust estimate which statistically represents the input
set Ψ(r,s) . Using robust order-statistics principle, a normalization factor x∗(r,s) is
deﬁned here as the component-wise MF [12]. Thus, the data-adaptive ﬁlter combines the fuzzy weighted average operations and the nonlinear median operations
to normalize the output of the proposed microarray image enhancer.

4

Experimental Results

A number of cDNA microarray images have been used to evaluate the proposed
ﬁltering framework. Examples are shown in Fig.3a and Fig.4a. These images have

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 3. Experimental results: (a) acquired image, (b) component-wise MF output, (c)
VMF output, (d) the proposed method output

A Data-Adaptive Approach to cDNA Microarray Image Enhancement

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

891

Fig. 4. Experimental results: (a) acquired image, (b) component-wise MF output, (c)
VMF output, (d) the proposed method output

been captured using laser microscope scanners. The images vary in complexity
and noise appearance. Note that all ﬁltering results presented in this paper were
obtained with a 3 × 3 square window.
The noise attenuation properties and detail-preserving capability of the proposed method are compared, in terms of performance, with the most popular
and robust image ﬁlters such as the component-wise median ﬁlter (MF) [12] and
the VMF technique [13].
Figs.3-4 show the acquired cDNA microarray images (a) and the denoised images (b-d) obtained using the ﬁltering techniques under consideration. The result
indicate that the proposed scheme achieves excellent balance between signaldetail preservation and noise attenuation. It can be seen that the well-known
MF and VMF schemes as well as the proposed method remove well foreground
noise such as the various impulses and other high-frequency image impairments.
However, only the proposed method is capable of removing strong varied background intensities introduced in course of cDNA microarray technology. Similar

892

R. Lukac et al.

conclusions can be drawn by visually inspecting the 3-D plots of cDNA microarray images shown in Fig.5. This suggests that the proposed method should be
used as a preprocessing tool for cDNA microarray spot localization.

(a)

(d)

(b)

(e)

(c)

(f)

Fig. 5. 3-D visualization of cDNA spots: (a,d) acquired image, (b,e) VMF output,
(c,f) the proposed method output

A Data-Adaptive Approach to cDNA Microarray Image Enhancement

5

893

Conclusion

A new cDNA microarray processing tool has been introduced. The proposed
method uses principles of fuzzy logic in conjunction with data-adaptive ﬁltering
concept deﬁned over cDNA image data. Experimental results indicate that the
proposed method is capable of removing noise in cDNA microarray images while
preserving required data features for subsequent processing tasks.

References
1. Zhang, X.Y., Chen, F., Zhang, Y.T., Agner, S.G., Akay, M., Lu, Z.H., Waye,
M.M.Y., Tsui, S.K.W.: Signal processing techniques in genomic engineering. Proceedings of the IEEE 90 (2002) 1822-1833
2. Lukac, R., Plataniotis, K.N.: cDNA microarray image segmentation using root
signals. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Computational Biology and Bioinformatics,
submitted (2004)
3. Eisen, M.B., Brown, P.O.: DNA arrays for analysis of gene expression. Methods in
Enzymology 303 (1999) 179–205
4. Nagarajan, R.: Intensity-based segmentation of microarrays images. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 22 (2003) 882–889.
5. Lukac, R., Plataniotis, K.N., Smolka, B., Venetsanopoulos, A.N.: A multichannel
order-statistic technique for cDNA microarray image processing. IEEE Transactions on Nanobioscience 3 (2004) 272–285
6. Arena, P., Bucolo, M., Fortuna, L., Occhipinty, L.: Cellular neural networks for
real-time DNA microarray analysis. IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology
21 (2002) 17–25
7. Wang, X.H., Istepian, R.S.H., Song, Y.H.: Microarray image enhancement using
stationary wavelet transform. IEEE Transactions on Nanobioscience 2 (2003) 184–
189
8. Dopazo, J.: Microarray data processing and analysis. In Microarray Data Analysis
II, ed. SM Lin and KF Johnson, Kluwer Academic (2002) 43–63
9. Lukac, R., Plataniotis, K.N., Smolka, B., Venetsanopoulos, A.N.: cDNA microarray
image processing using fuzzy vector ﬁltering framework. Journal of Fuzzy Sets and
Systems: Special Issue on Fuzzy Sets and Systems in Bioinformatics, to appear
(2005)
10. Whitchurch, A.K.: Gene expression microarrays. IEEE Potentials 21 (2002) 30–34
11. Lukac, R., Smolka, B., Martin, K., Plataniotis, K.N., Venetsanopulos, A.N.: Vector
ﬁltering for color imaging. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine; Special Issue on Color
Image Processing 22 (2005) 74–86
12. Pitas, I., Venetsanopoulos, A.N.: Order statistics in digital image processing. Proceedings of the IEEE 80 (1992) 1892–1919
13. Astola, J., Haavisto, P., Neuvo, Y.: Vector median ﬁlters. Proceedings of the IEEE
78 (1990) 678–689
14. Plataniotis, K.N., Androutsos, D., Venetsanopoulos, A.N.: Adaptive fuzzy systems
for multichannel signal processing. Proceedings of the IEEE 87 (1999) 1601–1622

