Simulation Embedded in Optimization – A Key
for the Eﬀective Learning Process in (About)
Complex, Dynamical Systems
El˙zbieta Kasperska and Elwira Mateja-Losa
Institute of Mathematics, Silesian University of Technology, Kaszubska 23,
44-100 Gliwice, Poland
{e.kasperska, e.mateja}@polsl.pl

Abstract. The purpose of this paper is to present some results of the
experiments of type simulation embedded in optimization (on model type
Systems Dynamics). They allow, not only, the so called, direct optimization, but extended sensitivity analysis of parameters and structures too.
Authors have used languages Cosmic and Cosmos to support the learning
process in (about) modelled dynamical system.

1

Introduction

We have problems understanding complex systems not only because they are
rich in feedbacks [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7], but because these complex systems are changing
their structure while we are trying to understand them using a ﬁxed structure
approach.
System Dynamics was developed in the late 1950’s and early 1960’s at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s Sloan School of Management by Jay W.
Forrester.
The classical concept of System Dynamics assumes, that, during the time
horizon of the model run or the simulation, the structure (given a-priori) will
remain constant.
During last couple of years, some ideas of structural evolution have occurred
in System Dynamics modelling and simulation. Firstly Prof. Coyle took the
problem of, so called, ”simulation during optimization”. The question was: how
to ”optimize” the structure in order to achieve the desired behaviour? He performed experiments, using simulation language COSMIC and COSMOS [1]. It is
a software tool that automatically links dynamics simulation model to an optimization package. This facility makes it possible to apply powerful optimization
techniques to:
–
–
–
–

ﬁne tuning of policies in the model (DIRECT OPTIMIZATION),
sensitivity analysis of the model (BASE VECTOR ANALYSIS),
simpliﬁcation of the structure of the model (SIMPLIFICATION),
exploring the eﬀects of forecasting and forward planning in the model
(PLANNING HORIZON).

V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3516, pp. 1040–1043, 2005.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

Simulation Embedded in Optimization

1041

In this paper some of such experiments are presented and on this background
the context of leaning process is considered.

2

Simulation Embedded in Optimization – Experiments
on Model DYNBALANCE(3–1–III)

The model named DYNBALANCE(3–1–III), created by Kasperska, was chosen
like the object of experiments type simulation embedded in optimization. The
ﬁgure 1 presents the general structure of this model. The graphical convention
is adapted from Forrester [4]. The main attention should be pay to the objective
functions: ”fob”, ”mmaxfo”, which model the deciders preferences about of the
behaviour of system, like the results of the inﬂuence of the decisions about the
production, storing and selling. Below authors present the main results of some
experiments, type simulation embedded in optimization.
Experiment 1
The objective function represents the proﬁt from selling minus the total cost of
production and the penalty factor connected with cost of the storage of product.

Fig. 1. Structure of model DYNBALANCE(3–1–III)

1042

E. Kasperska and E. Mateja-Losa

The demand for product has ”ramp” characteristic. Table 1 shows the results of
the experiment.
Table 1. The main results of experiment 1
Parameter Final value Original value Lower limit Upper limit
tchn1
tchn2
tchn3

0.000
11.332
39.984

20
10
20

Initial value of mmaxfo:
Final value of mmaxfo:
Final value of inventory:
Final value of cost of production:
Final value of price:
Final value of penalty (maxpen):

0
0
0

40
40
40

0.20233E + 07
0.47194E + 07
221
24.295E + 05
50
0.040792E + 07

The conclusion from analysing the results of experiment 1, are as follows:
– the zero value of parameter ”tchn1” implies the necessity of cutting oﬀ the
production from 1st raw material (it seems that ﬁrst technology is not economical, under the simulation condition about the price and the unit cost
and the supplying from raw materials,
– the value of parameter ”tchn2” is closed to its original value and ”tchn3”
is nearly equal to the upper limit - as can be seen the optimization process
select such values that suits the objective function in the whole horizon of
simulation,
– the ﬁnal value of penalty for ”mmaxfo” is rather small, comparing with the
ﬁnal value of proﬁt – it seems that taken politics of production was really
good.
Experiment 2
In this experiment the variable ”fob” was chosen, like the objective function
and we are looking for a minimum of it. Like the so called ”active parameters”
we have chosen: tchn1, tchn2, tchn3 and like the ”base-parameter candidate” –
parameters: tan, tasmo, ucpr1, ucpr2, ucpr3, ucr1,ucr2, ucr3.
The initial value of objective function ”fob” was: 0.29128E + 08, and the ﬁnal
value of ”fob” was: 0.25939E + 08. The conclusion from analysing the results of
experiment 1, are as follows:
– many of parameters (for example: tan, ucr2, ucr3, ucpr1, ucpr2, ucpr3,
tasmo) have kept their original value – that seems that their initial values
were chosen reasonably good,
– the parameters: tchn1, tchn2, tchn3 (which were active in optimization dialog) have changed their values considerably – it means that they are sensitive
parameters of model,

Simulation Embedded in Optimization

1043

– this type of experiment gives more information about which parameters have
more eﬀect on improving the objective function.

3

Final Remarks and Conclusions

The purpose of the paper was to present some results of experiments of type
simulation embedded in optimization on model type System Dynamics. These
results show how the process of learning, in (about) complex, dynamical system,
can become eﬀective and supportive for both: deciders and us as modelers, as
well. In ”narrow” concept we can treat the modelling like a element of the global
learning (see: three loops of learning by Radzicki, Sterman [6, 7]) but in the
other side modelling is a way of learning (specially, if we consider ”self – made
models”).
Final conclusions are as follows:
– simulation embedded in optimization can become the eﬀective, supportive
way of learning about complex, dynamical system,
– both sensitivity analysis (parameters and structures give us the key information about elements and theirs connections (which determine the dynamical
behaviour of system).

References
1. Coyle, R.G. (ed.): Cosmic and Cosmos. User manuals. The Cosmic Holding CO,
London (1994)
2. Coyle, R.G.: System Dynamics Modelling. A Practical Approach. Chapman & Hall,
London (1996)
3. Coyle, R.G.: Simulation by repeated optimisation. J. Operat. Res. Soc. 50 (1999)
429–438
4. Forrester, J.W.: Industrial Dynamics. MIT Press, Massachusetts (1961)
5. Kasperska, E., Mateja-Losa, E., Slota, D.: Some dynamic balance of production
via optimization and simulation within System Dynamics method. In: Hines, J.H.,
Diker, V.G. (eds.): Proc. 19th Int. Conf. of the System Dynamics Society. SDS,
Atlanta (2001) 1–18
6. Radzicki, H.J.: Mr Hamilton, Mr Forrester and the foundation for evolutionary
economics. In: Davidsen, P.I., Mollona, E. (eds.): Proc. 21st Int. Conf. of the System
Dynamics Society. SDS, New York (2003) 1–41
7. Sterman, J.D.: Business dynamics – system thinking and modeling for a complex
world. Mc Graw-Hill, Boston (2000)

