The Simulation of a PEMFC with an Interdigitated
Flow Field Design
S.M. Guo
Dept. Mechanical Engineering,
Louisiana State University,
Baton Rouge, LA 70803, USA
+1 225 578 7619
sguo2@lsu.edu

Abstract. This paper presents the simulations for a two-dimensional PEMFC
with an interdigitated flow channel design using FEMLAB. The multi-species
flow of O2, H2, H2O and inert N2 is examined over the entire fuel cell working
range. The transportations of these gases in the porous anode/cathode are
predicted using the Maxwell-Stefan transport equations and the Fick’s law; the
flow field is predicted using the Darcy’s law; and the electrical field is
simulated using a conductive media model. The standard current-voltage
performance curve, the species concentration of O2, H2, H2O and inert N2, mass
fluxes, electrical current and potential distributions have been obtained.

1 Introduction
Fuel cells are electrochemical devices, which utilize fuel and oxidant to produce
electricity and heat [1]. Because the fuel is converted chemically to electricity, fuel
cells may operate at higher efficiencies than conventional internal combustion
engines. Fuel cells are classified by the electrolytes. The common electrolyte of a
Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cell (PEMFC) is a thin layer of proton permeable
polymer membrane. In a PEMFC system, the coupled physical and electrochemical
processes take place. Transport resistances of the gaseous species in the feeding
channels and the porous electrodes lead to the so-called concentration over-potential;
the transportation of H+ in the electrolyte layer forms a large portion of ohmic loss;
the activation energy barriers for the electrochemical reactions are related to the
charge-transfer processes at the electrode-electrolyte interfaces. The theoretical
potential of a hydrogen/oxygen cell, operating under standard conditions of 1 bar and
25°C, is about 1.2 volt. However, due to losses, the voltage of a single cell is much
less than its theoretical value.
The PEMFC flow-field, including the feeding channels and the porous electrodes,
has a significant influence to the cell performance. The performance of a fuel cell is
often described by its current-voltage (I-E) relationship. Fuel, such as hydrogen, and
small amount of water vapor are supplied to the PEMFC anode side. Due to the
electrochemical reactions, steam forms at the cathode. For a typical planar PEMFC
design, feeding channels are provided by the bipolar plates with a typical serpentine
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3516, pp. 104 – 111, 2005.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

The Simulation of a PEMFC with an Interdigitated Flow Field Design

105

or parallel channel structure. Due to the long channels, serpentine flow-fields have
large pressure losses between the inlet and the outlet. Although straight parallel
design exhibits lower pressure differences, inhomogeneous reactant gas distribution
can easily occur. These flow channels must distribute fuel and air over the reaction
sites and remove the products. Recently, a number of novel flow channels have been
proposed for Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cells, in order to address the PEMFC
mass transport and water management problems. The most promising design is the
interdigitated flow field design [2,3,4]. Figure 1 shows the schematic drawing of this
design. The flow channels are dead-ended, forcing gas to flow through the porous
diffusion layer. Comparing to the flow in a conventional straight parallel flow field
design, the use of the interdigitated fuel/air distributors imposes a pressure gradient
between the inlet and the outlet channels, forcing the convective flow of the
fuel/oxidant through the porous electrodes. Thus the interdigitated design in effect
converts the transport of gases to/from the Triple Phase Boundary (TPB) active sites,
along the interface between the electrodes and electrolyte, from a diffusion dominated
mechanism to a forced convection dominated mechanism. The convective flow
through the porous electrode reduces the gas diffusion distance to and from the
reaction sites. By having fuel/oxidant flow over the shoulders of the gas distributor,
the electrode active area over the shoulder is used more effectively. The shear force of
the gas stream helps removing the water condensate, which is entrapped in the
electrode layer, thereby reducing the flooding problem. This design has been proven
to be very effective by some experimental studies. Wang et al. [3] presented an
experimental study of PEM fuel cells with interdigitated flow fields under different
operation parameters. Nguyen [4] presented a comparative experimental study of fuel
cells with interdigitated flow fields and parallel straight channel flow fields. They
reported that the interdigitated flow design could extend the PEMFC operable regime
to higher current densities and consequently, a 50-100% increase in the fuel-cell
performance could be obtained as a result of the use of interdigitated fuel/air
distributors. To study a fuel cell performance mathematically, especially for a design
with thick porous electrodes and a strong convective flow, a proper mass transport
model must be applied. At high current density, the losses are dominated by the
limitation of transport the fuel/oxidant to the reaction sites, the so-called
concentration or mass transport over-potential. Mass transport in the porous
electrodes depends on the structure of the porous electrodes, such as the porosity,
tortuosity and mean pore size. Washak et al. [5] and Suwanwarangku et al. [6]
conducted comparative studies using the Fick’s law and the Dusty Gas Model for a
Solid Oxide Fuel Cell. They found that the current density, the reactant concentration
and the pore size were the three key parameters for choosing a proper porous media
simulation model. The Dusty Gas Model works better for the H2–H2O and CO–CO2
systems, especially under high operating current densities, low reactant concentrations
and small pore sizes.
To perform a parametrical optimization for the flow field design, multiphysics
based numerical simulation offers many advantages comparing to the experimental
approach.
The aim of this paper is to study the effect of using different mass transport models
on the fuel cell performance simulation. Two models are examined in this paper. The
first one is the Fick’s model, and the second model applies the Stefan-Maxwell

106

S.M. Guo

diffusion equations to the mixture. The performance of a PEMFC with an
interdigitated flow channel design was simulated using FEMLAB. The simulation
includes the multi species transportation in the porous electrodes and the coupled
electrical current and potential distributions.

2 The Simulation Model
FEMLAB is a commercial Partial Differential Equation (PDE) solver, which can
solve coupled multi-physical problems. Partial differential equations are the
governing equations for most physical phenomena and provide the foundation for
modeling a wide range of scientific and engineering problems. There are three ways
of describing PDEs in FEMLAB, coefficient form, general form and the weak form.
The coefficient form is suitable for linear or nearly linear models and the rest two are
suitable for nonlinear models. FEMLAB runs finite element analysis to solve the
PDEs, together with adaptive meshing and error controls.
The simulation domain used in this paper is a 2-dimensional cross section of an
interdigitated PEMFC flow field, shown in Figure 1. The oxidation of hydrogen and
the reduction of oxygen take place at the anode and cathode side reaction boundaries
respectively. Electrons are transported to an outer circuit at the anode and received at
the cathode because only proton ions can pass through the electrolyte membrane.
H 2 → 2H + + 2e − at anode side reaction boundary

O2 + 4H + + 4e − → 2H 2 O at the cathode side reaction boundary

Air in

Anode
Fuel out

Cathode

Current
Collector

Fuel in

Air out
Electrolyte

Fig. 1. Interdigitated Flow Field Design

The thickness of the anode and cathode is set to be 0.25 mm and the height is set to
be 2 mm; the electrolyte layer has a thickness of 0.1 mm. Along the height direction,
current collectors of 1 mm in length are in contact with the outer surface of the anode
and cathode in a symmetrical manner, leaving the inlet and outlet ports a dimension of
0.5 mm. Hydrogen and an inert gas mixture is fed into the anode side inlet port while
oxygen, inert nitrogen and water are fed into the cathode side. The gas mixtures are
treated as incompressible due to the low flow velocities. In the simulation, the

The Simulation of a PEMFC with an Interdigitated Flow Field Design

107

hydrogen is oxidized along the electrode/electrolyte interface, which has a zero
thickness. The electrical potential of the PEMFC is specified as an input parameter
over the entire working range.
A set of PEMFC governing equations is specified in FEMLAB. Equation 1 is the
steady state continuity equation.
∇ • (CV ) = 0

(1)

Where C is the total gas mixture molar concentration; V is the velocity; CV is the
total molar flux. For continues gas phase flow in the porous electrodes, Darcy’s law,
Equation 2, is used.

V =−

kp

µ

∇P

(2)

Where, k p is the permeability of the medium, µ is the dynamic viscosity of the gas
mixture, ∇P gives the pressure gradient.
For the multi species mass transfer in the electrodes, both Fick’s law and the
Maxwell-Stefan diffusion and convection mass transfer models were tested. Using the
Fick’s law, the diffusion flux in the porous electrodes is calculated using equation 3.
N d = − D e ∇C

(3)

D e is the effective diffusivity of the gas, C is the concentration. By assuming
equal counter-current molar fluxes, according to Chan et al. [7], the composition
independent D e can be found in Eq. 4

D1e = (

1
1
+ e ) −1
e
D12 D1k

(4)

D12e is the effective binary bulk diffusion coefficient. D1ek is the effective Knudsen
diffusion coefficient, which depends on temperature and structure of the porous
material. For a convective flow in a porous medium, combining the diffusive and
convective fluxes, the flux equation can be written as equation 5.
N

= −(

X1 k pP
1
1 −1
+
)
∇
C
−
∇P
RT µ
D12e D1ek

(5)

For the simulation using the Maxwell-Stefan diffusion and convection model. The
Maxwell-Stefan multi-component diffusion is given in equation 6.
⎡
⎢
∂
ρωi + ∇ • ⎢ − ρωi
⎢
∂t
⎢
⎣⎢

⎧M ⎛
∇M
⎪ M ⎜ ∇ω j + ω j M
⎪ j⎝
Dij ⎨
⎪ + x − ω ∇P
j =1
j
j
⎪⎩
p
N

∑

(

)

⎤
⎞⎫
⎥
⎟⎪
⎠⎪
T ∇T ⎥
= Ri
⎬ + ωi ρ u + Di
T ⎥
⎪
⎥
⎪⎭
⎥⎦

(6)

108

S.M. Guo

where Dij is the diffusion coefficient (m2/s), P the pressure (Pa), T is the temperature
(K), u the velocity vector (m/s), x and ω are mole and mass fractions. The density, ρ
(kg/m3), is calculated based on the mole fractions and mole masses of gas species.
At inlet, pressure and the feeding gas mass fractions are specified. At the outlets, a
convective flux boundary condition is applied. The local current density is a function
of the local species concentration, physical structure of the electrodes and the
specified cell output electrical potential. For steady state calculations, due to the
conservation of current, the anode side current density is the same as the current
density at the cathode. At the anode and cathode reaction boundary, the species mass
ia
transfer is related to the local current density according to: −n • nH 2 = − 2 F at anode
iC
reaction boundary and −n • nO2 = 4 F at the cathode reaction boundary.
The potential difference between the cathode and anode current collectors
represents the cell voltage. In the simulation, the potential at the anode current
collector was arbitrarily chosen to be zero, while the cell voltage at the cathode
current collector is set as a fixed boundary condition. The potential distributions in the
anode, cathode and the electrolyte are modeled as conductive media using equation7.
∇ • ( − k ∇E ) = 0

(7)

where k is the effective conductivity (S/m) and E is the potentials in the calculation
domain. The rest of the boundaries were set as the electrical insulators or as a
symmetrical boundary. Normal to the reaction boundary, n • ( − k ∇E ) gives the
current density.

3 Results and Discussions
The I-E performance curve of a PEMFC has been obtained using two different mass
transfer models, Fick’s model and the Maxwell-Stefan model. Figure 2 shows a
typical fuel and oxidant distribution inside a PEMFC with an interdigitated flow field
design (see Fig.1 for feeding directions). A 60% H2 is fed to the anode side (left half)
and a 21% O2 is fed to the cathode (right half) inlet port.
As expected, the Fick’s model results show discrepancies to the Maxwell-Stefan
model results in the high current density region, see Fig. 3. Start at about 3000A/m2,
Fick’s law started to over-predict the current density at fixed cell output electrical
potentials. At the high current end, the difference between these two models is about
15%. This is mainly caused by the over prediction of the oxygen concentration at the
cathode side reaction boundary. The oxygen concentration at the inlet is 21%. Due to
the electrical chemical reactions along the cathode/electrolyte boundary, the oxygen
concentration at the reaction sites is far less than the inlet value, see Fig. 2. Figure 4
shows the predicted oxygen concentration average along the cathode reaction
boundary under different current densities using those two models. The difference
between the two models is obvious at the high current region, where the Fick’s model
predicts a higher O2 concentration. Figure 5 shows the production of water due to the

The Simulation of a PEMFC with an Interdigitated Flow Field Design

109

electrochemical reactions. The curve shows a strong linear relationship between the
water formation and the current density.
The definition of anode side H2 concentration is based on the hydrogen partial
pressure. Because of the electrochemical reactions, hydrogen depletes along the flow
direction. The mass transport process affects the local concentration of fuel. Hydrogen
concentration reduces almost linearly with the increase of current density. At about
6500 A/m2, the right end of the curve, the hydrogen mass transfer in the porous anode
reaches its limiting current density.
The commercial FEMLAB software has many built-in multi physics models.
However, the advantage of a general software package, which claims to solve “many”
physical problems, is also likely to be its weakness. The build-in models are generally

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

MS
Ficks

0.2
0.1
0
0

2000

4000

6000

8000

Current Density A/m2

Fig. 2. A typical H2 (left) and O2 (right)
concentration in the PEMFC

Fig. 3. PEMFC I-E curves predicted using the
Fick’s model and the Maxwell-Stefan model

0.25
H2O Concentration

O2 Concentration

0.2

0.2
0.15
0.1
MS

0.05

Ficks

0.15
0.1
0.05

0
0

5000
Current Density

10000
A/m2

Fig. 4. PEMFC cathode reaction boundary
O2 concentration predicted using the Fick’s
model and the Maxwell-Stefan model

0
0

2000

4000

6000

Current Density A/m2

Fig. 5. PEMFC cathode reaction boundary
H2O concentration as a function of cell current
density

S.M. Guo

H2 Concentration

110

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0

2000

4000

6000

8000

2

Current Density A/m

Fig. 6. PEMFC anode reaction boundary H2 concentration

to be the basic physical and mathematical models for a particular physical problem.
For example, because only Darcy’s law was used in the simulation to predict the fluid
flow in the porous electrodes, the accuracy near the reaction boundaries is not
expected to match the accuracy of a well-tuned CFD case, which uses Navier-Stokes
equations with proper turbulent models. To solve a real multi-physical problem, a
balanced approach must be carefully taken. The number of physical phenomena, to be
modelled in software, must be considered in conjunction with the expected overall
accuracy and the available computing power.

4 Conclusions
In the past two decades, due to the energy shortage and the environmental concerns,
great efforts have been put into fuel cell research. To improve the fuel cell
performance, multiphysics analysis could be employed. Using proper fuel cell
models, fuel cell simulations could provide detailed understanding and solutions on
how to reduce the losses and how to improve the operating efficiency. Comparing
with an experimental based approach, computational simulations are low cost and
could quickly provide the physical understandings to a particular fuel cell design. The
PEMFC flow-field, including feeding channels and porous electrodes, has significant
influence to the cell performance. The local concentration of fuel and oxidant is
affected by the mass transport processes, which include the mixing of multiple gases
in the porous anode/cathode, the reactions of fuel and oxygen and the transportation
of fuel and electrochemical products near the reaction sites. This paper presents the
numerical simulations of gas transport in the porous electrodes of a PEMFC with an
interdigitated flow channel design using FEMLAB. The simulation is a coupled fluid
dynamics and electrical potential field problem with multi species mass transfer and
chemical reactions. This complicated PEMFC problem has been solved using
FEMLAB over the entire working range. Two porous media mass transport models,
the Fick’s Model and the Maxwell-Stefan model were used in the simulations for
multi-species of O2, H2, H2O and inert N2. The standard current-voltage performance
curve and the detailed species concentration, mass fluxes, electrical current and

The Simulation of a PEMFC with an Interdigitated Flow Field Design

111

potential distributions have been obtained. The simple but less accurate Fick’s model
is validated against the Maxwell-Stefan model. Fick’s model was found to overpredict the oxygen concentration along the cathode side reaction boundary and thus
over-predict the cell performance in the high current density region.

References
1. Larminie, J., Dicks, A., Fuel cell systems explained, Wiley, ISBN: 047084857x, (2003)
2. Jung, S. Y., Nguyen, T.V., Multicomponent Transport in Porous Electrodes of Proton
Exchange Membrane Fuel Cells Using the Interdigitated Gas Distributors, Journal of The
Electrochemical Society, v 146, n1, 1999, p 38-45
3. Wang, L., Liu, H., Performance studies of PEM fuel cells with interdigitated flow fields,
Journal of Power Sources, 134, p185-196, (2004)
4. Nguyen, T.V., Gas distributor design for proton-exchange-membrane fuel cells, J.
Electrochem. Soc. 143, n 5, p L103-L105, (1996)
5. Washak, H., Guo, S.M., Turan, A., 2005, Gas Transport in Porous Electrodes of Solid
Oxide Fuel Cells, the Ninth International Symposium on Solid Oxide Fuel Cells (SOFC
IX), The 207th Meeting of The Electrochemical Society, Québec City Convention Centre,
May 15-20, 2005
6. Suwanwarangkul, R., Croiset, E., Fowler, M.W., Douglas, P.L., Entchev, E., Douglas,
M.A., Performance comparison of Fick’s, dusty-gas and Stefan–Maxwell models to predict
the concentration overpotential of a SOFC anode, Journal of Power Sources 122 9-18,
(2003)
7. Chan, S.H., Khor, K.A., Xia, Z.T., A complete polarization model of a solid oxide fuel cell
and its sensitivity to the change of cell component thickness, Journal of Power Sources, 93,
130-140, (2001)

