WDM: An Energy-Efficient Multi-hop Routing
Algorithm for Wireless Sensor Networks
Zheng Zengwei1,2, Wu Zhaohui1, Lin Huaizhong1, and Zheng Kougen1
1

College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University,
310027 Hangzhou, China
{Zhengzw, Wzh, Linhz, Zkg}@cs.zju.edu.cn
2
City College, Zhejiang University,
310015 Hangzhou, China
Zhengzw@zucc.edu.cn

Abstract. As a new technique, one characteristic of wireless sensor networks
(WSNs) is their limited system lifetime. Therefore, it is more important to save
energy and proportion energy consumption. This paper presents a weightdirected based multi-hop routing algorithm for WSNs. This algorithm can transfer data quickly to goal sensor node using the directional information and
RWVs (route weight value) of sensor nodes as well as balance energy consumption of all sensor nodes. Detailed simulations of sensor network environments indicate that this algorithm improves energy efficiency and proportions
energy consumption of all sensor nodes to extend network system lifetime, and
routes data quickly in comparison to the flooding algorithm.

1 Introduction
Recent advances in micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS) technology, wireless
communications, and digital electronics have enabled the development of wireless
sensor networks (WSNs) consisting of a large number of low-cost, low-power, multifunctional sensor nodes which are small in size and communicate untethered in short
distances. As a new technique of implementing ubiquitous computing [1][2], WSNs
can be used in many aspects in the coming future, such as military battlefield surveillance, patient health monitoring [3], bio-environment monitoring [4] and industrial
process control. Since the sensor nodes are often inaccessible in most applications and
supported by battery, the lifetime of a wireless sensor network depends on the lifetime
of the power resources of the sensor nodes. Hence, WSNs have one characteristic
different from traditional Ad Hoc networks, i.e. their system lifetime is limited.
The characteristic of limited lifetime indicates that energy is a very scarce resource
for the sensor systems and requires a new sensor network with low energy consumption in order to extend the lifetime of the sensors for the duration of a particular mission. Since the main goal in designing conventional Ad hoc networks is providing high
quality of service, conventional wireless network protocols for Ad Hoc networks are
not well suitable for WSNs. Furthermore, requirements of designing routing algorithm
for WSNs is different from those for traditional Ad Hoc networks, i.e. it needs more
energy savings. Therefore, it is significant to study new routing algorithms for WSNs.
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3515, pp. 461 – 467, 2005.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

462

Z. Zengwei et al.

As multi-hop routing shortens communication distance, short transmission range
will reduce packet collisions, enable channel reuse in different regions of a wireless
sensor network, lower energy consumption of sensor nodes, and prolong the lifetime
of sensor nodes. Hence, multi-hop routing idea is suitable for WSNs. Existing multihop routing algorithms, such as flooding, gossiping [7] and directed diffusion [5][6],
have several advantages and disadvantages. Flooding can perform simply, route data
quickly, and it does not require costly topology maintenance and complex route discovery algorithms. However, when it broadcasts packets to its neighbors, implosion
problem will be generated, and a large number of data flow and subsequently channel
congestion, and communication overheads may happen. Therefore, its energyefficiency is wondrously low. A derivation of flooding is gossiping [7] in which
nodes do not broadcast but send the incoming packets to a randomly selected
neighbor. Although the implosion phenomenon can be avoided by the copy of a message at any sensor node, it takes long time to propagate the message to goal sensor
node (sink node) because it does not use the directional information to route data
quickly to objective node. Directed diffusion [5][6] is a data-centric and applicationaware routing protocol. All sensor nodes in the directed diffusion-based network are
application-aware, which enables diffusion to achieve energy savings by selecting
empirically good paths and by caching and processing data in the network. The directional information is utilized in this paradigm, and this protocol is mainly used in the
observer-initiated application model [8]. However, it is necessary to design a routing
algorithm in the continuous application model [8]. Therefore, this paper proposes a
new multi-hop routing algorithm (WDM algorithm, Weight-Directed based Multi-hop
routing algorithm) to meet the requirements of the continuous application model [8].
This approach can transfer data quickly to goal sensor node, i.e. sink node (See Fig.
1), using the directional information and RWVs of sensor nodes (RWV definition
shown in Equation (2)), and balance energy consumption of all sensor nodes.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: The details of WDM algorithm are given in section 2. The simulation results of analyses are illustrated in section 3. Finally, conclusions are made and some suggestions for future work are proposed.

2 WDM Algorithm
WSN is presented as undirected graph G = (V, E), where V is the set of all sensor
nodes, i.e. V = {V1,V2, •••,Vn}, N = {1,2, •••,n}, and E is the set of edges in the network
defined as follows:

{

}

E = (Vi ,V j )|d (Vi ,V j ) ≤ R0 ,Vi ,V j ∈V ,i , j∈N ,i ≠ j

(1)

Where d (Vi, Vj) is the distance between the neighbor nodes Vi and Vj, R0 is described as one-hop transmission range.
A number of definitions related to Equation (1) are given as follows:
(1) Vi.hopmin is the minimal hops from sensor node Vi to sink node, Vi ∈ V.
(2) Vi.UP_Node is the neighbor node of Vi whose hopmin value is equal to Vi.hopmin–
1. A set composed of these nodes is named as Vi.UpNodeSet.

WDM: An Energy-Efficient Multi-hop Routing Algorithm for WSNs

463

(3) Vi.Par_Node is the neighbor node of Vi whose hopmin value is equal to Vi.hopmin.
A set made up of these nodes is marked as Vi.ParNodeSet.
(4) Vi.Down_Node is the neighbor node of Vi whose hopmin value is equal to
Vi.hopmin+1. A set composed of these nodes is named as Vi.DownNodeSet.
(5) Vi.NBNodeSet is the union set of the above three sets.
(6) After system initialization, sink node first broadcasts route query packet to all
sensor nodes. Then, each sensor node can gain route information, compute its
hopmin value, and save its each neighbor node’s hopmin and residual energy value
Er in its cache.
In the case of invariable topology, once a source senor node Vs senses a data
packet of a particular mission, if a sensor node Vi have gained the message and
Vs.hop min value from node Vs, it will first compute route weight value (RWV) of
its each neighbor nodes when choosing next hop node, which is defined as
follows:
α

⎛ V .hopmin ⎞ Vk .Er
Vi .RWV (Vk ) = ⎜ s
⎟
⎝ Vk .hop min ⎠ Vk .E0

(2)

Where α is the effect factor of route direction, Vi ∈ V, Vk ∈ Vi.NBNodeSet, Vk.E0
is the initial energy value of Vk. If each sensor node’s initial energy is assumed as
same value, Vk.E0 is abbreviated as E0.
Then, Vi selects the neighbor node Vk whose RWV is maximal, and also send the
message and Vs.hopmin value to node Vk. Subsequently, Vk chooses the next hop node
and transfers the packet to it until the message is sent to sink node.
When Vi node has sent data packet to the node Vk, Vi updates the remainder energy
of its neighbor Vk. Specific computational approach is defined as follows:

Vk .Er' = Vk .Er − Vk .Eex − Vk .Etx
Where

(3)

Vk .Er' is the new residual energy value of node Vk; Vk .Er is the old resid-

Vk .Eex is the energy consumption value when node Vk
receiving one data packet; Vk .Etx is the energy consumption value when node Vk

ual energy value of node Vk;

transferring one data packet.
At the same time, Vk also modifies the residual energy value of its neighbor Vi.
The estimate method is described as follows:

Vi .Er' = Vi .Er − Vi .Eex − Vi .Etx − Vi .Ec
Where

Vi .Ec is the energy consumption value of node Vi computing and selecting

next hop node; the meanings of
above.

(4)

Vi .Er' , Vi .Er , Vi .Eex , and Vi .Etx are the same as

464

Z. Zengwei et al.

3 Performance Evaluation
3.1 Simulation Environment and Testing Criterion
A square region of 100 × 100m2 has been generated and 160 sensor nodes are placed
in the network randomly (See Fig. 1). All nodes start with an initial energy of 10J.
The details of the sensor node’s energy consumption model are shown in [9][10][11].
Data packet size is 525bytes, α is equal to 1, the maximum distance of one hop is
15m. It is assumed that a random node can sense one data packet of a particular mission at intervals of 1ms, and each message is finally routed to sink node.

Fig. 1. Sensor nodes scattered in a wireless sensor network (sink node (100,50))

In order to analyze WDM algorithm performance, flooding algorithm is utilized to
compare with WDM algorithm, and the following performance metrics are used:
(A) Average hops per data packet routed from source node to sink node (AHPD): this
metric shows time delay of routing data and reflects whether it takes long time of
algorithm to transfer data to sink node. A method of computing the metric is shown as
follows:
t

AH PD

D ata _ hops ( x ) dx
= ∫0t
∫0 D ata _ num ( x ) dx

(5)

Where Data_hops(t) is a linear function of hops with respect to time variable t;
Data_num(t) is a linear function of data packet number about time variable t.

WDM: An Energy-Efficient Multi-hop Routing Algorithm for WSNs

465

Fig. 2. Comparison of time delay of routing data between WDM and Flooding

Fig. 3. Comparison of evenness of energy dissipated between WDM and Flooding

(B) Network energy quadratic mean deviation (EQMD): this metric indicates evenness of network energy dissipated of sensor nodes. A method of calculating this metric is listed as follows:
EQMD = ∑( ∑Vi .Er / All _ nodes _ Num−Vj .Er )2
j i

(6)

Where All_nodes_Num is the total number of sensor nodes in the network; Vi.Er is
defined as residual energy value of one sensor node at the time.
(C) Average energy dissipated per data packet routed from source node to sink node
(AEPD): this metric reflects energy costs of transferring data packets to sink node and
shows energy-efficiency of algorithm. Combined with metric (B), it indicates the

466

Z. Zengwei et al.

ability of algorithm extending system lifetime. A means of computing this metric is
shown as follows:

AEPD

=

∑ V i . E 0 − ∑ Vi . E r ( t )
i

(7)

i
t

∫0 D ata _ n um ( x ) dx

Where Vi.Er(t) is the remainder energy value of node Vi at one time t; the definitions of Vi.E0 and Data_num(t) are listed as above.

Fig. 4. Comparison of energy-efficiency between WDM and Flooding

3.2 Result Discussion
Firstly, in order to test time delay of routing data packets, simulation is performed
with metric (A) and the results are shown in Fig. 2. It is found that the WDM algorithm can also transfer data quickly to sink node though it is slightly slower than the
flooding algorithm because the latter is the quickest among all multi-hop routing
algorithms for sensor networks.
Then, the evenness of dissipated network energy is also conducted with metric (B),
as listed in Fig. 3. It is shown that two algorithms have the ability to balance energy
consumption of all sensor nodes and the WDM algorithm is the better one.
Finally, comparison is made between WDM algorithm and flooding algorithm with
metric (C) to test energy efficiency, and the results are shown in Fig. 4. It is found
that the flooding algorithm does pay much more energy costs to route one data packet
and the WDM algorithm can gain better energy efficiency at all time. The average
energy costs transferring one packet of the flooding algorithm is about 28.2 times of
the WDM algorithm.
Hence, the results of the analyses above indicate that the WDM algorithm can gain
quick data transmission, better evenness of dissipated network energy and energy
efficiency to effectively extend network lifetime.

WDM: An Energy-Efficient Multi-hop Routing Algorithm for WSNs

467

4 Conclusions
In this paper, advantages and deficiencies of existing multi-hop routing algorithms are
first analyzed. The WDM algorithm, an energy-efficient weight-directed based multihop algorithm, is proposed and described. The results of a series of simulations of
sensor network environments indicate that the WDM algorithm can have the ability to
transfer data quickly, balance network energy consumption of all sensor nodes, improve energy efficiency, and accordingly extend system lifetime. This algorithm is
well suitable for the continuous model of static distributed WSNs. In the future topological transformation for several nodes death will be conducted so as to improve the
algorithm to suit for dynamic distributed WSNs.

Acknowledgments
This work is supported by the National High-Tech Research and Development Plan of
China under Grant No. 2003AA1Z2080.

References
1. Weiser, M.: The Computer for the 21st Century. Sci. Amer., Sept. (1991)
2. Zengwei, Zheng and Zhaohui, Wu: A Survey on Pervasive Computing. Computer Science, Vol. 30, No. 4. Chongqing, China, Apr. (2003) 18-22, 29
3. Ogawa M., Tamura, T., Togawa, T.: Fully automated biosignal acquisition in daily routine
through 1 month. International Conference on IEEE-EMBS, Hong Kong, Oct. (1998)
4. Mainwaring, A., Polastre, J., Szewczyk, R. and Culler, D.: Wireless Sensor Networks for
Habitat Monitoring. ACM WSNA’02, Atlanta, Georgia, Sept. (2002)
5. Intanagonwiwat C., Govindan R., Estrin D.: Directed diffusion: a scalable and robust
communication paradigm for sensor networks. Proceedings of the ACM MobiCom’00,
Boston, MA, Aug. (2000)
6. Estrin D., Govindan R., Heidemann J., Kumar S.: Next Century Challenges: Scalable Coordination in Sensor Networks. Proceedings of the ACM MobiCom’99, Seattle, Washington, Aug. (1999)
7. Hedetniemi S., Liestman A.: A survey of gossiping and broadcasting in communication
networks. Networks, Vol. 18, No. 4, winter (1988) 319-349
8. Tilak S., Abu-Ghazaleh N., Heinzelman W.: A Taxonomy of Wireless Micro-Sensor Network Models. ACM Mobile Computing and Communications Review (MC2R), Vol. 6,
No. 2, Apr. (2002)
9. Zeng-wei Zheng, Zhao-hui Wu, Huai-zhong Lin: An Event-Driven Clustering Routing
Algorithm for Wireless Sensor Networks. 2004 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS 2004), Sendai, Japan, Sept. (2004)
10. Sinha A., Chandrakasan A. P.: Energy Aware Software. Proceedings Of the 13th International Conference on VLSI Design, Calcutta, India, Jan. (2000)
11. Min R., Bhardwaj M., Cho S., Sinha A., et al.: An Architecture for a Power-Aware Distributed Microsensor Node. IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems (SiPS ‘00)
Design and Implementation, Lafayette, USA, Oct. (2000)

