Simulating Wrinkles in Facial Expressions on an
Anatomy-Based Face
Yu Zhang, Terence Sim, and Chew Lim Tan
School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117543

Abstract. This paper presents a muscle-driven wrinkle model for simulating dynamic wrinkles that appear during facial expressions, which is geometric in nature. Wrinkles are generated on an anatomy-based face model that incorporates a
structure of skin, muscles and skull for physically-based animation. Corresponding to two types of facial muscles, a geometric model is developed to govern how
the wrinkle amplitude evolves locally upon skin deformation, taking into account
the properties of real wrinkles. During facial animation, wrinkles are generated
in the local regions influenced by muscle contraction, simulating resistance to
compression of tissues. Using our method, realistic wrinkles can be dynamically
rendered on the adaptively refined face mesh at interactive rates.

1

Introduction

Facial expressions exhibit not only facial feature motions, but also subtle changes in
skin appearance such as facial creases and wrinkles. These details, or expressive wrinkles, constitute major elements affecting the visual appearance of the face. Therefore,
realistic modeling of expressive wrinkles contributes significantly to the overall realism
of facial animation.
One class of methods to generate facial wrinkles is the texture mapping approaches
such as bump texture mapping and color texture mapping [2, 5, 6]. Although being efficient and giving acceptable visual results in simulating facial wrinkles formed due to
skin texture and age, this technique has some inherent limitations. First, it is difficult to
mimic the wrinkle dynamics during animation. Second, as the skin geometry remains
undeformed, the perceptible geometrical and structural changes can not be modeled.
Another class of techniques, known as physically-based methods [3, 7, 11, 12], attempt to model the dynamic wrinkling as the result of skin deformation by approximating the biomechanical properties of real skin. Results of the physically-based methods
are realistic, but the process is not real-time due to expensive computation of the underlying mass-spring or finite element system.
Geometric methods solve the difficulties associated with two classes of methods
mentioned above by simulating the perceptible geometrical deformation of skin for
rendering at a high simulation speed [1, 4, 8, 9]. Although these methods are efficient
to produce convincing results, they reveal the difficulties in intuitive control such as
adjusting size and position of wrinkles and involve painstaking tasks such as manually
drawing wrinkle patterns in textures. Since expressive wrinkles are formed due to compression of the skin surface as a result of muscle contraction, our goal is to easily model
wrinkles according to the influence of virtual facial muscles.
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3515, pp. 207–215, 2005.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

208

Y. Zhang, T. Sim, and C.L. Tan

In this paper, we present a muscle-driven wrinkle model from an anatomic point
of view for efficiently simulating expressive wrinkles. Our method generates wrinkles
on an anatomy-based face model. Corresponding to two types of facial muscles, a geometric model is developed to govern how the wrinkle amplitude evolves locally upon
skin deformation, taking into account the properties of real wrinkles. During facial
animation, wrinkles are generated in the local regions influenced by muscle contraction, simulating resistance to compression of tissues. Our method simulates wrinkles
that can be dynamically rendered on the adaptively refined face mesh at interactive
rates.

2
2.1

Muscle-Driven Modeling of Wrinkles
An Anatomy-Based Face Model

We have developed an anatomy-based face model for physically-based facial animation
[13]. The model encapsulates three structural layers: skin, muscles, and skull (see Fig.
1). The reader is referred to [13] for technical details.
Frontalis Inner (sheet)
Frontalis Major (sheet)
Frontalis Outer (sheet)
Corrugator Supercilliary (linear)
Nasalis (linear)
Zygomaticus Minor (linear)
Zygomaticus Major (linear)
Risorius (linear)
Depressor Anguli (linear)
Mentalis (linear)

Fig. 1. The anatomy-based face model. Left: face geometry. Right: multi-layer anatomic structure
of the skin, muscles and skull

Since expressive wrinkles are dynamically generated due to shrinking of the skin
surface as a result of muscle contraction, we propose a muscle-driven wrinkle model
to automatically simulate them. In our face model, we use two kinds of physicallybased facial muscle models that are based on Waters’ muscle model [10]: the linear
muscle for the majority of facial muscles, the sheet muscle for the forehead muscles
(Frontalis).
2.2

Modeling of Wrinkles Driven by the Linear Muscle

Muscle Model and Its Wrinkling Region. A linear muscle is defined by an insertion
point, the end of the muscle attached to skin; an attachment point, the end of the muscle fixed to bone; and the area of influence (AOI), the portion of the surface affected
by the muscle contraction. The effect of facial muscle contraction is to pull the facial
skin from the area of the muscle insertion point to the static muscle attachment point
on the bone. Fig. 2 illustrates the linear muscle model and its AOI with the following
definitions:

Simulating Wrinkles in Facial Expressions on an Anatomy-Based Face

xi
fi
mA
mI
φ
ϕi
R
li

:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:

209

arbitrary facial skin point
muscle force applied to xi
attachment point of linear muscle at the skull
insertion point of linear muscle at the facial skin
maximal angle of muscle influence
angle between the central muscle fiber mA mI and mA xi
maximal radius of influence
distance between xi and mA projected onto the central muscle fiber mA mI

Fig. 2. Linear muscle model

For an arbitrary vertex xi on the skin mesh, its distance from the muscle attachment
point projected onto the central muscle fiber mA mI is calculated as:
li = mA − xi cos(ϕi )

(1)

where · denotes the Euclidean norm. li and ϕi weight the influence of the linear
muscle at vertex xi separately for length factor λi and angular factor γi :
li
ϕi
γi =
(2)
λi = ,
R
φ
λi defines the normalized longitudinal distance of vertex xi to the muscle attachment
point. γi is defined in [0,1] and represents the distance between xi and the central muscle
fiber in the angular direction. The wrinkling region of the influenced skin surface is a
sub-area of muscle’s AOI. The set of vertices inside the wrinkling region is
Sw = {xi |λw ≤ λi ≤ 1 and

0 ≤ γi ≤ 1}

(3)

where λw is a user-specified factor defined in [0,1] to control the size of the wrinkling
region. The smaller λw , the larger the wrinkling region.
Geometric Wrinkle Model. The wrinkle amplitude is calculated for all vertices that
are originally (before activating the muscle contraction) inside the wrinkling region.
The wrinkle amplitude at a vertex xi is given as wrinkle amplitude function W (xi ):
W (xi ) = H(wi )A(εi )At(ϕi )

(4)

where H(wi ) is the shape function used to obtain natural wrinkle shape, anisotropic
function A(εi ) modulates the wrinkle amplitude to model irregularity of wrinkles, and
At(ϕi ) is the attenuation function.

210

Y. Zhang, T. Sim, and C.L. Tan

Wrinkle Shape
The cross sectional shape of the wrinkle is defined by the shape function H(wi ), a
height function of 3D position of the vertex:
H(wi ) =

k0 (1 + ( wiu−u )2 )α ( wiu−u ) + d 0 ≤ wi ≤ u
−k0 (1 + ( wiu−u )2 )α ( wiu−u ) + d u < wi ≤ 2u

(5)

The H(wi ) curve depicted in Fig. 3 illustrates how wrinkling amplitude evolves. In Eq.
5, u is the half cycling length. Given a predefined value to the number of wrinkles (nw )
generated by the contraction of the muscle, u is obtained as:
u=

(1 − λw )R
2nw

(6)

In Eq. 5

li − λ w R
)2u
(7)
2u
As int(·) truncates a real number to the biggest integer number that is smaller than it,
Eq. 7 periodically maps li into [0,2u] with a frequency of nw .
wi = li − λw R − int(

Fig. 3. The shape function with different parameter values (u=1.0)

Three intuitive parameters are introduced in the shape function to control wrinkle
characteristics. The parameter k0 controls the depth of the furrow in a wrinkle and
hence the name furrow depth factor, α is the shape modulation factor that controls the
modulation of the wrinkle shape, and d is the bulge height parameter that defines the
maximal height of the bulge in a wrinkle. By adjusting them, shape function H(wi ) can
be chosen to simulate the real wrinkle property: the furrow of a wrinkle is sharp and the
bulge is round. Moreover, the shape function should satisfy the following equation:
2u
0

H(w)dw = 0

(8)

This means that the volume depressed at the furrow goes to the side to make up the
bugle, which simulates the incompressibility of skin. Using Eq. 8, we can express
the bulge height parameter d as a function of k0 and α, which reduces the parameter
tuning.

Simulating Wrinkles in Facial Expressions on an Anatomy-Based Face

211

Modulation of Wrinkle Amplitude
Obviously, expressive wrinkles do not all react in the same way to skin deformation,
varying according to their alignment with the directionof skin compression. Ananisotropic function A(εi ) is introduced, which modulates wrinkle amplitude according to skin
surface deformation. Suppose a vertex xi is connected to one of its neighbors xj by an
edge with the rest length Lij (see Fig. 4). During animation, we compute at each time
step the edge shrinkage τij for the edge xi xj :
τij =

Lij − xi − xj
Lij

(9)

τij is the amount of shortening relative to the original length, which equals 0 in the
rest state. The skin is deformed in the direction of muscle contraction and wrinkles
become more pronounced when the skin surface shrinks perpendicularly to their directions. Therefore, the more the direction of an edge runs parallel to the direction of
muscle contraction, the more the wrinkle amplitude will react to variation in that edge’s
length. The compression rate εi at the vertex xi is defined as:
εi =

j∈Ωi

τij cos(θij )

j∈Ωi

cos(θij )

(10)

where Ωi denotes the set regrouping all neighboring vertices that are linked to xi , θij
is the angle between edge xi xj and the direction of muscle contraction xi mA (see Fig.
4). The weight cos(θij ) measures the direction similarity of the considered edge to the
muscle contraction direction.

Fig. 4. Shorting of an edge contributes to the
compression of the skin surface at a vertex

Fig. 5. Plot of the anisotropic function

The wrinkle amplitude varies from maximal amplitude for maximal compression
(εi = 1) to null for expansion. Negative value of εi means that stretching tends to make
the wrinkles disappear. We model it by defining the following anisotropic function:
A(εi ) =

cos( π2 (1 − εi )) 0 ≤ εi ≤ 1
0
εi < 0

The function curve is depicted in Fig. 5.

(11)

212

Y. Zhang, T. Sim, and C.L. Tan

Attenuation of Wrinkle Amplitude
The wrinkle amplitude is also scaled by the attenuation function At(ϕi ):
At(ϕi ) =

1
0 ≤ ϕ i ≤ ϕc
ϕi −ϕc 2 ϕi −ϕc
1
− 2 (1 + ( φ−ϕc ) )( φ−ϕc ) + 1 ϕc < ϕi ≤ φ

(12)

where ϕi is the angular distance of a vertex from the central muscle fiber mA mI . At(ϕi )
defines an attenuation profile which dictates the way the wrinkle height decreases and
then vanishes when wrinkles go away from the central muscle fiber. Parameter ϕc controls the angular distance from the central muscle fiber where the wrinkle amplitude
begins to decrease (see Fig. 6 (a)). Fig. 6 (b) shows the graph of At(ϕi ).

(a)

(b)

Fig. 6. (a) Attenuation area (gray area) in the wrinkling region of the linear muscle. (b) The
attenuation function

2.3

Modeling of Wrinkles Driven by the Sheet Muscle

Muscle Model and Its Wrinkling Region. A sheet muscle is a series of almostparallel fibers spread over a rectangular area and it contracts to a group of separated
muscle fiber nodes. The obvious example is the Frontalis, which lies on the forehead.
Fig. 7 illustrates the AOI of the sheet muscle model.
mA1

mI1
fi

mAc

li

xi
hi
mIc

Ws

mI2

mA2
Ls

Fig. 7. Sheet muscle model

Fig. 8. Attenuation area (gray area) in the wrinkling region of the sheet muscle

Two points mA1 and mA2 specify the attachment line of the sheet muscle. mAc
is the middle point of the attachment line. Similarly, the points mI1 and mI2 specify the insertion line of the sheet muscle, and mIc is the middle point of the insertion
line. Vector mAc mIc is the central muscle fiber. The denotations of other parameters
are
: arbitrary facial skin point
xi
: muscle force applied to xi
fi

Simulating Wrinkles in Facial Expressions on an Anatomy-Based Face

213

Ls and W s : length and width of sheet muscle’s AOI, respectively
: distance between xi and the muscle attachment line
li
: distance between xi and the central muscle fiber
hi
Similar to the linear muscle model, the length factor λi and width factor γi associated with a vertex xi are defined as:
li
2hi
,
γi =
(13)
Ls
Ws
The wrinkling region is a sub-area of sheet muscle’s AOI. The set of vertices inside the
wrinkling region is
λi =

Sw = {xi |λw ≤ λi ≤ 1 and

0 ≤ γi ≤ 1}

(14)

where λw in the range [0,1] controls the size of the wrinkling region.
Geometric Wrinkle Model. The wrinkle amplitude function defined in Eq. 4 is employed for wrinkle generation, after modification of a few parameters. For the shape
function H(wi ), parameter R in Eq. 6 and 7 is substituted by Ls, the length of sheet
muscle’s AOI. For the anisotropic function A(εi ), since the direction of muscle contraction is parallel to the central muscle fiber mAc mIc , θij in Eq. 10 becomes the angle
between the mesh edge and mAc mIc . The attenuation function is modified as:
At(hi ) =

1
0 ≤ hi ≤ hc
c
c
hi −h
2
c
i −h
− 12 (1 + ( Whs/2−h
c ) )( W s/2−hc ) + 1 h < hi ≤ W s/2

(15)

where hi is the distance between the vertex and the central muscle fiber, hc controls the
starting position of attenuation (see Fig. 8).

3

Experimental Results

Fig. 9 shows examples of some facial expressions simulated with and without wrinkles,
and compares them with the actual ones. Each expression is generated by activating a
group of muscles:
– Surprise: Contractions of pairs of Frontalis Major, Frontalis Inner, and Frontalis
Outer (sheet muscles) raise the eyebrows and cause wrinkles on the forehead.
– Frowning: Contractions of the pair of Corrugator Supercilliary (linear muscle) result in frowning of the eyebrows and large-scale wrinkles between the eyebrows.
– Fear: Frontalis Inner and Corrugator Supercilliary are activated to raise the inner
portion of eyebrows and to stretch eyebrows towards the face center, respectively.
Fig. 10 shows the snapshots of dynamic wrinkle generation within different expressions.
Results reveal that the generated expressive wrinkles satisfactorily enhance the realism
of facial animation, making the simulated expressions more convincing.

214

Y. Zhang, T. Sim, and C.L. Tan

(a) Surprise

(b) Frowning

(c) Fear
Fig. 9. Facial expressions simulated on the face model. Left to right: expression without wrinkles,
expression with wrinkles, actual expression generated by a subject (each example)

(a) Surprise

(b) Frowning

(c) Fear

Fig. 10. Dynamic simulation of the expressive wrinkles

Fig. 11. Adaptive refinement of the face mesh in dynamic wrinkle simulation

The original face mesh consists of about 4,500 triangles. In order to correctly capture
the wrinkle shapes, we implement our wrinkling process using a dynamically adaptive
refinement scheme of the original mesh. The adaptive refinement is based on a recursive

Simulating Wrinkles in Facial Expressions on an Anatomy-Based Face

215

quaternary subdivision that is applied on the fly where surface curvature (measured from
the vertex surface normals) of influenced triangles is too large. Fig. 11 shows a mesh
detail of the deformed forehead region during simulation of surprise.

4

Conclusion

This paper has presented a geometric muscle-driven model for simulation of expressive wrinkles. Expressive wrinkles are automatically defined according to facial muscle
anatomy. A geometric model governs evolution of wrinkle amplitude in the local deformed regions, taking into account the properties of real wrinkles. It provides intuitive
parameters for easy control over wrinkle characteristics and is adapted to two types of
facial muscles. Thanks to its geometric nature, our method simulates wrinkles that can
be dynamically rendered at interactive rates.
For future work we will introduce a collision detection procedure in our implementation to prevent neighboring folds from intersecting. We would also like to develop the
wrinkle model corresponding to the sphincter muscles that surround the eyes and mouth
for simulating more realistic and complex deformations.

References
1. Y. Bando, T. Kuratate, and T. Nishita. “A simple method for modeling wrinkles on human
skin”, Proc. Pacific Graphics 2002, pp. 166-175, 2002.
2. J. Blinn. “Simulation of wrinkled surface”, Proc. SIGGRAPH’78, pp. 286-292, 1978.
3. L. Boissieux, G. Kiss, N. M. Thalmann, and P. Kalra. “Simulation of skin aging and wrinkles
with cosmetics insight”, Proc. Eurographics Workshop on ComputerAnimation and Simulation 2000, pp. 15-27, 2000.
4. S. Hadap, E. Bangerter, P. Volino and N. M. Thalmann. “Animating wrinkles on clothes”,
Proc. IEEE Visualization’99, pp. 175-182, 1999.
5. G. Miller. “The motion dynamics of snakes and worms”, Proc. SIGGRAPH’88, vol.22, pp.
169-178, 1988.
6. M. Nahas, H. Huitric, M. Rioux, and J. Domey, “Facial image synthesis using skin texture
recording”, The Visual Computer, 6(6): 337-343, 1990.
7. D. Terzopoulus and K. Waters. “Physically-based facial modeling, analysis and animation”,
Journal of Visualization and Computer Animation, vol.1, pp. 73-80, 1990.
8. M. L. Viaud and H. Yahia. “Facial animation with wrinkles”, Proc. Eurographics Workshop
on Animation and Simulation’92, pp. 1-13, 1992.
9. P. Volino and N. M. Thalmann. “Fast geometrical wrinkles on animated surfaces”, Proc.
WSCG’99, 1999.
10. K. Waters. “A muscle model for animating three-dimensional facial expression”, Proc. SIGGRAPH’87, vol.21, pp. 17-24, July 1987.
11. Y. Wu, P. Kalra, L. Moccozet, and N. M. Thalmann. “Simulating wrinkles and skin aging”,
The Visual Computer, 15(4): 183-198, 1999.
12. Y. Wu, P. Kalra, and N. M. Thalmann. “Physically-based wrinkle simulation & skin rendering”, Proc. Eurographics Workshop on Animation and Simulation’97, pp. 69-79, 1997.
13. Y. Zhang, E. C. Prakash, and E. Sung. “Efficient modeling of an anatomy-based face and fast
3D facial expression synthesis.” Computer Graphics Forum, 22(2): 159-169, June 2003.

