A 3D User Interface for Visualizing Neuron Location
in Invertebrate Ganglia
Jason A. Pamplin1, Ying Zhu1, Paul S. Katz2, and Rajshekhar Sunderraman1
Departments of 1Computer Science and 2Biology,
Georgia State University,
Atlanta, Georgia, USA
jason@internetworkflow.com
{yzhu, pkatz, rsunderraman}@gsu.edu

Abstract. Invertebrate nervous systems serve as important models for neuroscience research because they are comprised of relatively small numbers of individually identified neurons. There is no universal means of documenting locations of individual neurons that allows variability between specimens and can
be generalized to different species. We present a new technique for visualizing
and documenting neuron location. First, we describe a 3D user interface that allows neuroscientists to directly mark neuron locations on a 3D deformable
model. A new mapping scheme is proposed that specifies the location of a neuron in a common coordinate system that accommodates the individual variability in size and shape of ganglia.

1 Introduction
Understanding brain function depends upon identifying neuronal elements and their
connections. Molluscan nervous systems have provided important models in studies
of learning, memory [1] and motor pattern generation[2] because they are comprised
of individually identifiable neurons. The brains of these animals contain about 600010,000 neurons clustered in ganglia. In contrast, the mammalian brain has about 1011
neurons, which fall into about 6000 classes. Therefore, the molluscan nervous system
can be used as a model for developing a database of neurons and connections if the
model includes a method of identifying and recording the location of each neuron’s
cell body.
In opisthobranch molluscs, such as Tritonia diomedea, which we are using as our
model system, the cell bodies of neurons lie on or near the surface of the ganglia. Two
mapping problems must be solved: (1) a 3-D UI must allow for individual shape and
size variations of Tritonia ganglia so neuroscientists can mark the locations of a neuron; and (2) coordinates must be transformed to a common coordinate system, independent of the specimen geometry, such that location information can be searchable.

2 Background
Neuron localization is the process of assigning each neuron a coordinate so that one
can recognize the same or similar neurons in different brain specimens. Neuron localV.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3515, pp. 347 – 350, 2005.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

348

J.A. Pamplin et al.

ization is difficult because (1) brains can be variable in shape; (2) different terms are
used to describe a given brain region in different species, and the same term is used to
describe different regions; and (3) boundaries of regions are sometimes ambiguously
defined [3].
Many research efforts
have addressed the neuron localization problem
[4][5][6][7]. The resulting method can be summarized as follows: (1) A
2D or 3D brain atlas is
created from brain cross
section images. The most
Fig. 1. Simple 3D model of Tritonia brain
notable example is the
Talairach-Tournoux brain
atlas [8]. (2) A coordinate system is defined based on certain features or landmarks on the brain atlas. (3) The atlas is then manipulated to match the features or
landmarks on the given target dataset, or vice versa. The manipulations range from
simple linear transformations to sophisticated physics based deformations[9][10]. (4)
After the atlas is fitted to the data set, the features are assigned coordinates. This
method, which depends on brain cross-section images, is used when important brain
structures reside on the interior of the brain. In molluscan brains, however, neurons
reside at or near the surface, allowing for a simpler approach.

3 3D User Interface for Neuron Location Identification
The user interface, while being easy to use, should also accurately represent neuron
location relative to a brain atlas. The brain atlas is created using a standard 3D graphics package -- Blender. Figure 1 shows a reference 3D model composed of 4 individual lobes that are generated separately and then placed together to form a complete
model of the Tritonia brain. Figure 2 shows a photo of a typical Tritonia brain.
The reference model must be adjusted (deformed) to visually match the actual
specimen. To help the user accurately deform the model, our interface will display a
photo of the specimen, overlaid
with the semi-transparent 3D
brain atlas. The user deforms
the atlas with global scaling, rotation, and translation, to approximate the photo. Then, local deformations can fine-tune
the match. A “Wire” deformation [11] algorithm is adopted
here, due to its simplicity, efficiency and good interactive control. To use the atlas, the user Fig. 2. Photo of typical Tritonia brain Scale bar is
marks a point that matches the 0.5mm

A 3D User Interface for Visualizing Neuron Location in Invertebrate Ganglia

349

location of the neuron under study. The location information can then be extracted by
the system and stored in the database. The interface also can be used in reverse, i.e.
upon selecting a location or a small region, information about neuron(s) at that location or within the region can be retrieved from the database and displayed to the user.

4 A Common Coordinate Space for Neuron Localization
An obvious solution to neuron localization is to keep a unique index of each vertex,
record the index of the selected vertex, and then retrieve the reference x, y, z coordinates from an index table. There are several problems with this approach: (1) excessive memory is required to store an index to reference vertex table; (2) changes in the
reference model that result in re-indexing will corrupt location information; and (3)
storage of the reference x, y, z will make marking of a deformed model computationally intensive.
We propose mapping the 3D atlas to a 2D image space with texture mapping. Each
vertex on the 3D atlas will have a corresponding texture coordinate, which is calculated with a standard parametric equation when the texture is applied to the model.
Thus, each vertex on the 3D atlas is mapped to a pixel on the texture image. Once the
initial correspondence is established, the texture coordinates are not recalculated during the deformation process described in section 3. Thus, for Tritonia neuron localization, the texture coordinate is stored instead of the x, y, z coordinates in 3D space.
The size and shape of the brain atlas may change, but the texture mapping remains
stable, since the same parametric equation was used to map the texture coordinates for
the vertices. As long as the texture is mapped completely onto the object, the relative
location of each pixel of the texture image will be in the same location within a small
margin of error. Thus the texture image provides a common coordinate space for
comparing neurons. This technique allows for the calculation of average location for a
series of observations and a statistical view of neuron location.

5 Results and Discussion
We have created a prototype Tritonia brain model (Figure 1) using an open source
modeling tool. We are designing and developing a simple interface that allows users
to mark neuron locations. The proposed solution has the following benefits: (1)
changes to the reference model will not alter the location information, even if the reference vertex locations change; (2) texture coordinate calculation is performed by the
modeling software with minimal computing cost; and (3) our neuron localization algorithm can be easily adapted to other species by simply creating a new 3D model.
Our solution also has it limitations: (1) this method works only for brain models
where neurons are on or close to the surface; (2) users may need practice to match the
atlas model to a specimen; and (3) the texture mapping may not be an exact one-toone mapping, which may lead to some inaccuracy in neuron mapping – this problem
can be reduced by matching the resolution of the 2D image with that of the 3D atlas.

350

J.A. Pamplin et al.

6 Conclusion and Future Work
We have discussed our 3D user interface for marking neuron locations directly onto a
3D brain atlas. The 3D interface and the deformable 3D brain atlas can also be used to
query the neuron database using positional information. We also discussed a new
method for mapping neuron locations by using a technique similar to texture mapping. As a result, the user is able to compare the same neuron on different brain
specimens in a common coordinate system. Although our algorithm is primarily designed for Tritonia brains, it can be easily adapted to other species by introducing a
new brain atlas and adjusting the mapping equations.

Acknowledgments
Many thanks to Georgia State University colleagues: Robert Calin-Jageman, Jim
Newcomb, Hao Tian, Christopher Gardner, and Lei Li; also thanks to the participants
of the Identified Neuron Database Workshop (Georgia State University, December
2004). This research is funded in part by a Georgia State University Brains & Behavior Program Seed Grant and a Georgia State University Research Initiation Grant.

References
1. Pittenger, C., Kandel, E.R., In Search of General Mechanisms for Long-lasting Plasticity:
Aplysia and the hippocampus. Philosophical Transactions of Royal Society of London, Series B: Biological Science. 358(1432), (2003) 757-63
2. Getting, P.A., A Network Oscillator Underlying Swimming in Tritonia. Neuronal and Cellular Oscillators. J.W. Jacklet, Editor. Marcel Dekker, Inc., New York. (1989) 215-236
3. Bjaalie, J.G., Localization in the Brain: New Solutions Emerging. Nature Reviews: Neuroscience. 3 (2002) 322-325
4. Davatzikos, C., Spatial Normalization of 3D Brain Images Using Deformable Models.
Journal of Computer Assisted Tomography, 20(4), (1996) 656-65
5. Gee J.C., Reivich, M., Bajcsy R., Elastically Deforming an Atlas to Match Anatomical
Brain Images. Journal of Computer Assisted Tomography, 17(2), (2003) 225-236.
6. Roland, P.E., Zilles, K., Brain Atlases - a New Research Tool. Trends in Neuroscience,
17(11), (1994) 458-67
7. Payne B.A., Toga A.W., Surface Mapping Brain Function on 3D Models. IEEE Computer
Graphics Applications, 10(5), (1990) 33-41.
8. Talairach, J., Tournoux, P., Co-planar Stereotaxic Atlas of the Human Brain. Thieme
Medical Publishers, New York. (1988)
9. Toga, A.W., Brain Warping. Academic Press, New York. (1998)
10. Thompson, P., Toga, A.W. A Surface-based Technique for Warping Three-dimensional
Images of the Brain. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 15(4), (1996) 402-417
11. Singh, K., Fiume, E., Wires: A Geometric Deformation Technique. Proceedings of the 25th
ACM Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques (SIGGRAPH), (1998) 405-414

