eMicrob: A Grid-Based Spatial Epidemiology
Application
Jianping Guo1, Yong Xue1,2,*, Chunxiang Cao1, Wuchun Cao3, Xiaowen Li1,
Jianqin Wang1, and Liqun Fang3
1

State Key Laboratory of Remote Sensing Science, Jointly Sponsored
by the Institute of Remote Sensing Applications of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
and Beijing Normal University, Institute of Remote Sensing Applications,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, P.O. Box 9718, Beijing 100101, China
2
Department of Computing, London Metropolitan University, 166-220 Holloway Road,
London N7 8DB, UK
3
Institute of Microbiology and Epidemiology, the Academy of Military Medical Sciences,
the Chinese PLA, Beijing 100071, PR China
gjpgis@163.com, y.xue@londonmet.ac.uk

Abstract. The use of Grid technologies allows us to make progress in the
prediction accuracy of epidemiological patterns, epidemiological modeling, risk
predictions of infectious diseases etc by combining the geo-information and
molecular simulation analysis methods. In this paper, we mainly design the
eMicrob, in particular, build up the e-Microbe miniGrid deployed in IRSA,
CAS and IME, the Chinese PLA. The architecture is as follows: Firstly we
review related grid applications that are motivating widespread interest in Grid
concepts within the scientific and engineering communities. Secondly we talk
about the key methodologies and strategies involved in the construction of
eMicrob. In the third section, the system design of the eMicrob, in particular
about the architecture of the eMicrob miniGrid is discussed. Finally, we draw
some conclusion in the process of the building of eMicrob and make some
discussion about the challenges. It has been proven that the methods based on
the Grid technologies are revolutionary and high efficient through the
experience of the establishment and deployment of the e-Microbe miniGrid.

1 Introduction
Epidemiologists study a diverse range of health conditions as well as the impact that
various exposures have on the manifestation of disease. However, we have done some
new researches in the epidemiology (science of the public health,
http://www.acepideiology2.org/aboutepid/whatis.asp) based on the new emerging
technology — Grid computing, integrated with geographical information system
(GIS) and remote sensing (RS), which will establish a virtual organization comprised
of scientists and engineers from many different fields and discipline. Grid computing,
as a new technology, is mainly concerned with “coordinated resource sharing and
*

Corresponding author.

V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3516, pp. 472–475, 2005.
©Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

eMicrob: A Grid-Based Spatial Epidemiology Application

473

problem solving in dynamic, multi-institutional virtual organizations.” (Foster et al.
2001). A principal objective in the development of Grid computing is to make such
resources available to users, regardless of their geographical location or institutional
affiliation. While this goal is some way from being achieved, we have developed
eMicrob miniGrid in the use of Grid tools, which allows us to make progress in the
prediction accuracy of epidemiological patterns, epidemiological modeling, risk
predictions of infectious diseases etc by combining the geo-information and
molecular simulation.
Now through the eMicrob project we know that patterns and risk predictions can
be made through GIS, by which we can study the dynamics of the epidemiological
diseases based on above-mentioned environment factors achieved from remote
sensing based on the grid platform. The undergoing eMicrob project benefits from
grid and spatial technologies in various ways.
In this paper, we firstly introduce the related Grid projects, as good paradigms,
which will help us to design the eMicrob system more precisely. The design of the
eMicrob miniGrid is outlined and the architecture of the eMicrob miniGrid is
discussed in details. At the end of this paper, we draw some conclusions and make
discussion about the challenges eMicrob is encountering.

2 Methodology and Strategy
The eMicrob aims at building up a Grid platform (eMicrob miniGrid) in the long run,
which will provide secure access to heterogeneous data and expensive resources in
different locations, facilitate the study of transmission pattern, spatial distribution
patterns, epidemiological trends, even advance the risk prediction precision about the
infectious diseases i.e. Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), schistosomiasis
(Savioli et al. 1997), avian influenza, malaria and cholera, etc.
We take advance of the following methodologies and strategies to design and
construct the eMicrob. First, we build up a science team comprising of 3 kinds of
technician, i.e. developer of code, epidemiologist and specialist from spatial domains.
Second,
we
build
our
different
database
based
on
the
SRB
(http://www.npaci.edu/DICE/SRB/) technology. Moreover, we deploy the miniGrid
on the platform – HIT-SIP developed by us .now we will expound on it. HIT-SIP
(Wang et. al., 2004) Grid platform in Institute of Remote Sensing Applications,
Chinese Academy of Science is an advanced High-Throughput Computing Grid
testbed using Condor developed by Department of Computer Sciences, University of
Wisconsin-Madison. Heterogeneous computing nodes include two sets of Linux
computers and WIN 2000 professional computers and one set of WIN XP computer
provide stable computing power. The Grid pool uses java universally to screen
heterogeneous characters. In general, users can use the heterogeneous Grid and share
its strong computing power to process remote sensing images with middlewares as if
in one supercomputer. Across the HIT-SIP platform, we can process and analyze the
remote sensed images, for example, supervised classification and unsupervised
classification and retrieval of various environment factors, which will be used in such
discipline as biology, public health, and other spatially related disciplines.

474

J. Guo et al.

3 Architecture of the eMicrob MiniGrid
To build the e-Microbe miniGrid, we deployed the miniGrid between IME Grid
center (8 nodes) and IRSA Grid center (10 nodes). Both centers are required to use
such universal grid platform as Globus, Condor or Condor-G as a starting point in
order to develop the web data portals and computing portals, moreover, the
epidemiologist and RS and GIS scientists can use them easily.
The framework consists of the following components:
•
•
•
•

eMicrob User Interface and Web Portal Service, including data portal
All kinds of databases and Model Pools
Data Cache
Application Modules

Customized Application

Command line (Linux Unix or
Dos )

Webpage (Internet or
Netscape) explorer

eMicrob miniGrid Portal
Networks
IRSA
Environmental
Factors
Reversing
Module

IMU
Disease Spatial
Analysis Module

Diseases
Transmission
Module

Diseases
Prediction
Module

Risk

Microbe
Molecular
Module

Globus, Condor, Condor-G , HIT-SIP
Cache

SRB

Remote
Sensing
Imagery

Socioeconomic
Database

Geoinformation
Database

……Gene
Database

SRB

Epidemiological Model
Database

Fig. 1. The architecture o the eMicrob miniGrid

Microbe
Database

eMicrob: A Grid-Based Spatial Epidemiology Application

475

Based on the above-mentioned database components and computer tools, the
architecture of the eMicrob miniGrid is given in Figure 1.

4 Conclusions and Results
The eMicrob miniGrid has provided a new platform of epidemiology investigation on
which we collect remotely sensed data and other related data. Then integrate them
into epidemiology applications researches, based on which analyses of microbe and/or
virus combined with the real-time experimental data, are made and visualization are
resulted in.
The science outcome based on the eMicrob miniGrid not only include the
outcomes of spatial domain, such as we can disclose potential links between remotely
sensed factors and specialized diseases (Beck et al. 2000), which has been proven
prevalent in the research of epidemiological diseases, but also include ones of
epidemiological disease such as disease controlling and prediction, and rules of the
microorganism variances, the character of hepatitis B virus or the coronavirus causing
SARS, taking it for example, can be analyzed on such eMicrob miniGrid platform.
We think that the scientist, both from spatial information and epidemiological
fields, will greatly promote their researches in the epidemiological disease and in the
end will provide more scientific information to the government officials to do correct
decision-making. Meanwhile, through the experience of the design of the eMicrob
and the implementation of the miniGrid, we recognize that the method based on the
eMicrob miniGrid has made the study of the epidemiological diseases change deeply
and will have a great potential impact for it can make the epidemiology and microbe
discipline to make great stride in the near future.

Acknowledgements
This publication is an output from the research projects “CAS Hundred Talents
Program” and “Innovation Program” funded by IRSA, CAS. The authors wish to
acknowledge related departments and individuals.

References
Foster I., Kesselman C., Tuecke S., 2001, “The Anatomy of the Grid: Enabling Scalable Virtual
Organizations”. International Journal of Super-computer Applications, 15(3),: 200-222.
Beck L. R., Bradley M, Lobitz Byron L. Wood, 2000, Remote Sensing and Human Health:
New Sensors and New Opportunities. Emerging Infectious Diseases, Vol. 6, No. 3, May–
June 2000:217-226.
Savioli, L., Renganathan, E., Montresor, A., Davis, A., Behbehani, K., 1997, Control of
schistosomiasis – a global picture. Parasitology Today, 11, 444-448.
Jianqin Wang, Xiaosong Sun, Yong Xue, Yanguang Wang, Ying Luo, Guoyin Cai, Shaobo
Zhong, and Jiakui Tang, 2004, Preliminary Study on Unsupervised Classification of
Remotely Sensed Images on the Grid. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 3039,
pp.995-1002.

