Scale-Free Networks: A Discrete Event
Simulation Approach
Rex K. Kincaid1 , and Natalia Alexandrov2
1

2

The College of William and Mary,
Department of Mathematics,
Williamsburg, VA 23187-8795
rrkinc@math.wm.edu
NASA Langley Research Center, Hampton, VA 23681-2199
n.alexandrov@nasa.gov

Abstract. This work is motivated by the need to reconsider the methods for the analysis and design of air transportation networks in order
to meet increasing demands in the face of the current hub-and-spoke
network near-saturation. In the late 1990s a number of researchers noticed that networks in biology, sociology, and telecommunications exhibited similar characteristics unlike traditional random networks. Three
properties—small-world, power law, and constant clustering coeﬃcient—
describe what are now most commonly referred to as scale-free networks.
How do scale-free networks form? It is well documented that a network
generated by adding nodes and edges preferentially will be scale-free.
Are there other mechanisms? Why do networks organize themselves in
this way? What causes a scale-free network to degrade? The focus of our
research is to understand what drives a collection of nodes to organize
as a scale-free network. Furthermore, once a network is scale-free what
disrupts this apparently natural structure. To answer these questions we
build a discrete-event simulation, nominally of an air transport system.
The simulation is written in C.

1

Introduction

The approaching saturation of the existing U.S. hub-and-spoke air transportation system is the source of growing interest in methods for the analysis and
design of transportation architectures. The ambitious goals for the development
of the next generation air transportation system set out by the Joint Planning
and Development Oﬃce1 require re-thinking about the nature of dynamic networks that have evolved over time rather than appeared through a centralized,
planned design activity. The hub-and-spoke air transportation system is a scalefree network of a certain kind [7, 6]; hence our interest in the nature of scale-free
networks.
1

The ﬁrst author gratefully acknowledges the support of the NASA-NFFP program.
http://www.jpdo.aero/site content/index.html

V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3514, pp. 1051–1058, 2005.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

1052

R.K. Kincaid and N. Alexandrov

How and why do scale-free networks form? What causes a scale-free network to
degrade? Part of the diﬃculty in answering these questions is limited understanding of the essential properties of scale-free networks. The relatively young literature (nearly all of the references are in the last seven years) on scale-free networks
has primarily focused on three properties—average shortest path lengths, cumulative degree distributions, and clustering coeﬃcients—to deﬁne these networks.
However, it is as yet unclear whether or not these are the necessary and suﬃcient
ingredients or are merely byproducts of some other unknown mechanisms.
Given the ubiquity of scale-free networks in nature and technology, as well
as their desirable and undesirable properties, one would like to know whether,
in some sense, this is the best possible structure a network can attain. If so,
this has profound implications for the present (nearly) scale-free structure of air
transportation networks: does the small number of hops between any pair of
airports and clustering that lead to high connectivity and robustness to random
attacks necessarily entail vulnerability to targeted attacks? Can one preserve the
desirable properties of scale-free networks without the drawbacks? How can one
increase the scalability of the current system in terms of its expandability? These
are just a few questions we are attempting to explore in simpliﬁed networks in
anticipation of dealing eventually with more realistic transportation systems.
Several books have been dedicated to the topic of scale-free networks, including the popular books Linked by Barab´
asi [4] and Six Degrees by Watts [14].
In addition, a number of excellent review articles exist including Newman [11],
Strogatz [13], Albert and Barab´
asi [1] and Dorogovtsev and Mendes [5]. These
review articles contain hundreds of references. We note, as have many other authors, that networks whose cumulative degree distributions follow a power law
are not new. One early example is Milgram’s [10] work with acquaintance networks in the United States which led to his conclusion there were six degrees of
separation among the individuals studied. However, the early references to networks following power laws are small in number when compared to the current
explosion in interest.
In the next section we describe key properties of scale-free networks as well
as computational mechanisms that can be used to generate two types of cumulative degree distributions observed in real networks. Section three examines
the structure of simulated networks for a generic air transport systems. Section
four provides results for a mechanism that degrades the power law of the degree
distribution for scale-free networks.

2

Properties of Scale-Free Networks

Table 1 provides a summary of essential characteristics of four real networks.
The interested reader is referred to Newman [11] for a more exhaustive table.
The column labeled C (1) records one type of clustering coeﬃcient—the number
distinct paths of length two in triangles (three times the number of triangles)
divided by the total number of distinct paths of length two in the network.
For random networks clustering coeﬃcients are known to approach zero as the

Scale-Free Networks: A Discrete Event Simulation Approach

1053

Table 1. Basic statistics for four published Networks
Networks
Nodes
Edges
AvgDeg AvgSPD C (1)
protein
2,115
2,240
2.12
6.80 0.072
Internet
10,697
31,992
5.98
3.31 0.035
ﬁlm actor 449,913
25,516,482 113.443 3.48
0.20
Altavista 203,549,046 2,130,000,000 10.46
16.18
—

number of nodes grows large. The expected C (1) value if the ﬁlm actor network
were randomly constructed is .000252. The Table 1 value of 0.20 is three orders
of magnitude larger. Column 5 lists the average shortest path lengths for the
networks in Table 1. The value of 16.18 for the Altavista world wide web network
means that Altavista web pages are on average 16 clicks away even though there
are potentially 2.1 billion edges to traverse. If the average shortest path length
scales logarithmically or slower with the number of nodes in the network then
it is called a small-world network (see Watts [14]). The natural logarithms of
the number of nodes for the networks listed in Table 1 are 7.66, 9.28, 13.02
and 19.13 respectively. Consequently, all networks listed in Table 1 exhibit the
small-world property. However, this property alone does not capture the essence
of scale-free networks as traditional random networks are also small-world. The
average degree of each network is recorded in column 4. The average degree can
be used to estimate the clustering coeﬃcient when the number of nodes is large.
The tail of the cumulative degree distributions for a scale-free network follows
a power law. This is easiest to see if P (k) versus k is plotted on a log-log scale.
If the tail follows a power law the graph of the tail will be a line on a log-log
scale and the slope of the line is the exponent of the power function. If instead
the tail follows an exponential law then a log-linear plot will be nearly linear.
Both types of behavior have been observed in real networks. Networks grown by
adding nodes and edges via preferential attachment are known to follow a power
law. Researchers [12] have noted, however, that preferential attachment does not
adequately explain large clustering coeﬃcients.
Why do the degree distributions of some networks follow an exponential law
rather than a power law? A network grown by adding nodes one at a time with
edges placed between the new node and existing nodes by selecting the nodes
closest, with respect to Euclidean distance, to the new node. Networks formed is
this way are shown in [9] to follow an exponential law. Consequently, one partial
answer to the above question is that the actual distances between nodes (not
just the number of edges) play a critical role in the formation of exponential
tails. A real network with an exponential tail is the power grid of the Western
United States (see [11] page 187).

3

Simulated Networks for an Air Transport System

Air transportation networks have been analyzed in [7] and [6]. These authors
show that the world-wide air transport system is a scale-free network although

1054

R.K. Kincaid and N. Alexandrov

the cumulative degree distribution follows a truncated power law. It is speculated
that the truncated eﬀects are due to capacity restrictions at the airports. The
network modeled in [7] and [6] consists of 3, 883 cities (airports in the same city
are aggregated) and 27, 051 distinct city pairs having non-stop connections. One
might have expected the cumulative degree distribution to have an exponential
tail as did the U.S. power grid since the distance traveled by aircraft would seem
to be a critical component. In fact, prior to the deregulation of the U.S. air
transport system in 1978 air fares were closely tied to the distance traveled (see
[3]). After deregulation fares for short-haul ﬂights increased while denser markets
for long-haul fares dramatically decreased. Consequently, distance traveled is no
longer the primary mover in the U.S. air transport network. In contrast, Amaral
et al. [2] analyze a network of world airports and conclude that the cumulative
degree distribution follows an exponential distribution. However, the authors of
[2] did not have access to the number of distinct ﬂights between cities but rather
the number of passengers in transit through each airport. The number of airports
examined in [2] is not given.
The goal of our discrete event simulation is to answer two questions. What
gross topological features trigger a set of nodes to organize as a scale-free network? What causes a scale-free network to degrade to some other network structure? We are not concerned with modeling the precise operational details of
aircraft routing and scheduling (see [8]) but rather the gross level network structure and how it arises.
Our simulation begins with a set of randomly generated points on a 5000
by 5000 unit square. Each point is assigned a weight generated from a statistical distribution. We think of the points as cities and the weights as relative
population measures. We consider the entities that drive the simulation to be
indistinguishable aircraft. The computational results reported here model 1000
cities and 2000 aircraft. Initially each aircraft selects one of the cities as an origination node (O) and one as a destination (D) node. If the Euclidean distance
between O and D is larger than some user speciﬁed threshold then the ﬂight
route must go through an intermediate city (H for hub). H is selected from a set
of candidate cities as the one with minimum total weighted travel distance (O
to H to D) for all combinations of H with O and D. Each plane is assigned a
normally distributed speed with mean 400 and a standard deviation of 20. The
travel time is the travel distance divided by the speed. In addition there is a
ﬁxed time parameter that can be set to add a constant to each route to reﬂect
time on the ground. When a simulated ﬂight is completed a new O/D pair is
selected. The simulation begins by scheduling an arrival for each of the 2000
planes.
During the simulation three pieces of data are collected. The number of times
a given city is selected as an O, H, or D (called the hit distribution) and the
number of times a ﬂight leg is traversed between each possible pair of cities. If
there are n cities then there n(n − 1)/2 possible ﬂight legs. Lastly, the number
of times each city is a part of a distinct ﬂight leg is recorded (called the degree
distribution). Upon completion of the simulation a log-log plot of both the cumu-

Scale-Free Networks: A Discrete Event Simulation Approach

1055

lative degree and hit distributions are plotted. If the tails of either (or both) are
roughly linear then there is evidence that the underlying network is scale-free.
If neither of the cumulative distributions follow a power law then there is no
need to compute the average hop length and clustering coeﬃcient. Statistics are
not collected until after an initial warmup period to avoid the transient startup
behavior.
Each simulation must specify the population distribution for the cities and
the placement of the cities on the square grid. We experimented with two grid
placements for the cities. The ﬁrst follows a uniform distribution and the second follows a beta distribution. Sampling from Beta(0.5, 0.5) for the x and y
coordinates of each city pushes the cities closer to the boundaries of the square
region imitating the clustering eﬀects of cities near coastal boundaries (see Figure 1a). Several diﬀerent population distributions were tested. For example, the
1000 cities were divided into three distinct population sizes–small, medium and
large. Fifty-six percent of the cities were small with populations drawn from a
normal distribution with a mean of 200 and a standard deviation of 5. Thirtytwo percent of the cities were medium with populations drawn from a normal
distribution with a mean of 600 and a standard deviation of 20. Lastly, twelve
percent of the cities were large with populations drawn from a normal distribution with a mean of 1800 and a standard deviation of 80. The simulation
selects origin and destination nodes preferentially based upon population size.
Once the origin is selected candidate nodes for the destination must meet a user
speciﬁed minimum distance threshold. Hubs were not part of these simulation
experiments. Consequently, all routes are point to point. We found no examples
in which the cumulative degree or hit distributions followed a power law. Further experimentation resulted in the assignment of a ﬁtness value to each city.
Initially all cities have a ﬁtness of 1.0. Each time a city is selected as O or D its
ﬁtness is increased by 10 percent. After a certain amount of simulated time the
ﬁtness values follow a power law.
Next, we began a new series of simulation experiments by assigning ﬁtness
values following a power to each city as part of the initialization procedure. In
addition the 100 most ﬁt cities (out of 1000) were identiﬁed and set aside as
potential hubs. During the simulation routes are selected point to point if the
distance between origin and destination is less than a user speciﬁed threshold
(recall that O/D pairs already must meet a minimum distance threshold). If the
O/D distance is larger than the threshold then the route must travel through
one of the 100 candidate hubs. The hub candidate list is further restricted by
removing any hub cities that are too close to either the origin or the destination.
Among the remaining hubs, the city that minimizes the O-H-D route distance
weighted by (1 + log (hub ﬁtness))−1 is selected. The origin is selected as before,
preferentially based on population, but the destination selection includes the
ﬁtness information. That is, destinations are selected preferentially based on
the ﬁtness weighted population values. For all population distributions tested
the resulting cumulative degree and hit distributions followed power laws. For
example, if the population of every city is normally distributed with a mean of

1056

R.K. Kincaid and N. Alexandrov

400 and a standard deviation of 20, the city locations are uniformly distributed,
and all routes are point to point (no hubs) then the resulting cumulative degree
distributions follows a truncated power law and the hit distribution follows a
power law.
As we add the more realistic small, medium and large population center distributions, the beta distributed city locations, and allow hubs to part of the
route structure both the cumulative degree distribution and hit distribution follow power laws. Clearly the power law distribution of the ﬁtness values is the key
to observing power law behavior for the cumulative degree and hit distributions.
There are a variety of interpretations of these ﬁtness values. For example, highly
ﬁt cities may be viewed as popular ﬁnal destinations, or popular jump oﬀ points
for cheaper fares to other locations.
The next two ﬁgures capture several key features of the simulated scale-free
network. Due to space limitations we provide only one example. Figures 1(a)
and 1(b) are associated with output from the simulation model in which the
power law ﬁtness values are input values. The x and y coordinates of the cities
are generated with Beta(0.5, 0.5) ∗ 5000.0 and the cities population values follow
the normally distributed small, medium and large values discussed earlier. Hubs
are allowed to form and roughly 72% of the routes chosen make use of a hub.
The remaining routes are point to point. Both hubs and destinations take into
account ﬁtness information in the selection process while the origins are selected
preferentially based on population. About 68, 000 ﬂight routes are simulated in
one run.
Figure 1(a) shows the geographical locations of each of the 1000 cities. Notice the clustering near the boundaries due to the beta distribution. The green
triangles are placed at cities whose degree values are small. The blue circles are
placed at cities whose degree values are average while the 15 red squares are
placed at cities whose degree values are quite large. The red square labeled with

Fig. 1. 1000 cities—(a) Spatial degree dist.; (b)cummulative degree dist

Scale-Free Networks: A Discrete Event Simulation Approach

1057

a 1 in ﬁgure 1(a) is the largest degree node while the red square labeled with an
8 has the eighth largest degree. If ﬁgure 1(a) were plotted for the hit distribution
the red square with an 8 would have a 2. That is, the eighth largest degree node
had the second largest number of ﬂights routed through it. This observation is
in the same spirit as found in [7] where it was observed that the highest degree
nodes were not necessarily the most critical for maintaining the network structure. Figure 1(b) displays the cumulative degree distribution on a log-log scale.
It is easy to see that the tail of the plot is ﬁt well by a linear function. The
log-log plot of the cumulative hit distribution follows a similar pattern.

4

Degradation of Power Laws

The last question we address is what causes the power laws associated with a
scale-free network to degrade. The authors of [7], [6] and [2] suggest that the
scale-free structure of air transport networks is curtailed, either by a truncation
of the power law or a switch to an exponential tail, when capacity restrictions
ensue. The capacity restrictions might take the form of fewer ﬂights along existing routes (changing the number of hits but not the degree) thereby forcing
overﬂow demand to be routed to other nearby cities, or by limiting the number of
routes that can be ﬂown into the airport. One approach to capture this eﬀect in
a simulation is to model each of the cities as a ﬁnite capacity queue and develop
rules for selecting hubs and destinations based on the status of the queues. In an
attempt to keep things as simple as possible in our simulation we have avoided
queues. Instead we allow each city to keep a short list (of length three in our

Fig. 2. Degree distribution: local capacity restrictions

1058

R.K. Kincaid and N. Alexandrov

example) of the most recent events (arrivals and departures). When considering
selection of hubs and destination nodes if the time between the last event time
on the city’s list and the current simulation time is too small then the node is
removed from consideration for selection. The cumulative degree distribution for
this simulation run is displayed in ﬁgure 2. The truncated eﬀect is easily seen
when compared to ﬁgure 1(b).

References
1. Albert, R. and A.-L. Barab´
asi, “Statistical Mechanics of Complex Networks,” Rev.
Modern Physics, 74:42-47 (2002).
2. Amaral, L.A.N., A. Scala, M. Barthelemy and H.E. Stanley, “Classes of small-world
networks,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 97:11149-11152 (2000).
3. Bailey, E.E., D.R. Graham, and D.P. Kaplan, Deregulating the Airlines, MIT
Press, 1985.
4. Barab´
asi, A.-L., Linked: The New Science of Networks, Perseus, Cambridge, MA,
2002
5. Dorogovtsev, S.N. and J.F.F. Mendes, “Evolution of Networks,” Advances in
Phys., 51:1079-1187 (2002).
6. Guimera, R., S. Mossa, A. Turtschi and L.A.N. Amaral, “Structure and Eﬃciency
of the World-Wide Airport Network,” Preprint 0312535 (2003) available from
http://arxiv.org/abs/cond-mat/.
7. Guimera, R. and L.A.N. Amaral, “Modeling the world-wide airport network,”
European Physical Journal B, 38, 381-385 (2004).
8. Johnson, E., J. Banks, L.H. Lee, H.C. Huang, C. Lee, E.P. Chew, W. Jaruphongsa,
Y.Y. Yong, Z. Liang, C.H. Leong, Y.P. Tan, and K. Namburi, “Discrete Event Simulation Model for Airline Operations: SIMAIR,” Proceedings of the 2003 Winter
Simulation Conference, S. Chick, P.J. Sanchez, D. Ferrin, and D.J. Morrice (editors), pp. 1656-1662.
9. Kincaid, R.K.,
“Scale-free Graphs for General Aviation Flight Schedules,” NASA technical memorandum (2003) November, NASA/CR-2003-212648.
(http://techreports.larc.nasa.gov/ltrs/ltrs.html)
10. Milgram, S., Psych. Today, 2:60 (1967).
11. Newman, M.E.J., “The Structure and Function of Complex Networks,” SIAM
Review, 45:167-256 (2003).
12. Sol´e, R.V., R. Ferrier-Cancho, J. Montoya and S. Valverde, “Selection, Tinkering
and Emergence in Complex Networks,” Complexity, 8:1-32 (2003).
13. Strogatz, S.H., “Exploring Complex Networks,” Nature, 410:268-276, March
(2001).
14. Watts, D.J., Six Degrees: The Science of a Connected Age, Norton, New York,
2003.

