A Courseware Development Methodology for
Establishing Practice-Based Network Course
Jahwan Koo1 and Seongjin Ahn2
1

School of Information and Communications Engineering, Sungkyunkwan Univ.
Chunchun-dong 300, Jangan-gu, Suwon, Kyounggi-do, Korea
jhkoo@songgang.skku.ac.kr
2
Department of Computer Education, Sungkyunkwan Univ.
Myeongnyun-dong 3-ga 53, Jongno-gu, Seoul, Korea
sjahn@comedu.skku.ac.kr

Abstract. In this paper, we present a practice-based courseware development methodology for establishing a senior undergraduate network
course for the computer-engineering department by reﬂecting on the
rapidly changing information and communication technologies, enforcing
practical education, and focusing on the existing and currently used curriculum models. Therefore, we have developed a special method, named
it STM (Segmenting, Targeting, and Mapping), and applied it to the
courseware development of a practice-based network course.

1

Introduction

Data communication and computer networks are major topics in the undergraduate computer-engineering curriculum. The goal of developing a courseware for
network practice is to provide in-depth and meaningful networking content to
teach senior undergraduate students. The ﬁrst goal of this course is to teach
the students how to comprehend and subsequently solve problems, speciﬁcally
grasping the concepts of whole systems within the ﬁelds of network and communication systems. This is accomplished through the design and implementation,
management, tuning and troubleshooting projects. The students can develop
leadership skills through team projects. The second is to educate professionals
in nationally competitive ﬁelds such as Internet, wired and wireless communication, home networking, and ubiquitous computing. The third is to diversify the
contents of the course and the methods of instruction taking into consideration
each student’s ability, aptitude, and career path.
The courseware development for network practice lasted 12 months from
March, 2003 to February, 2004. The objectives of this courseware are to educate
students about internetworking technologies and simultaneously assist them in
designing and building networks, and conﬁgure internetworking devices such as
hubs, switches, routers, and wireless access points. The courseware development
Dr. S. Ahn is the Corresponding Author.
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3516, pp. 1072–1075, 2005.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

A Courseware Development Methodology

1073

team was composed of a professor in charge of the development, ﬁve M.S. and
Ph. D’s with relevant expertise and teaching experience, and a Cisco certiﬁed
internetworking professional possessing the highest level of expertise.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces a method, called STM
(Segmenting, Targeting, and Mapping), which is used to design the courseware
for network practice. Finally, conclusion is drawn in Section 3.

2

STM(Segmenting, Targeting, and Mapping)
Methodology

At this point, there is an increasing need to prepare systematic procedures and
methods for migrating principle-based into practice-based courses. Therefore,
we have developed a special method referencing in [1] [2], named it STM, and
applied it to the coureware development of a practice-based network course.

Segmenting

Targeting

Mapping

3
Network Concepts

Design

Design

Network Components

1
Perspective
(= Activities)
Managem
ent

Internetworking
Internetworking Devices
OSI Reference Model

Implementation

Implementation
LAN Overview
LAN Types
IEEE 802 Standard

Importance
1

Designing Network Configuration
- Connecting Network Devices
- Network Configuration Design

2

Cabling Network Devices
- Connecting with LAN Cable
- Connecting with WAN Cable

LAN Devices

3

2

WAN Overview
WAN Types

1

WAN Switching

2

TCP/IP Protocol

Configuring Switch Devices
- Configuring Basic Switch Environment
- Optimizing Spanning Tree Protocol
- Configuring Virtual LANs

Difficulty

WAN Services
Configuring Wireless Access Point
- Configuring Wireless Access Point

IP Address
Subnetting

3

LAN Switching Overview

4

Switch Types
Switch Functions

5
3

Switch Operations

Management

Router Architecture
Router Environment
Routing Information Commands

View
(= Standard)

Routing Protocol
Wireless AP Functions
Wireless AP Operations

LAN Protocol

WAN Protocol

Network Layer
Data Link Layer
Physical Layer

Fig. 1. STM diagram

Analyzing Internetwork
- Port Monitoring
- System Logging Server
- Ping and Traceroute
- Debugging
- Displaying Resource Status

1074

J. Koo and S. Ahn

2.1

Processes

STM Methodology is divided greatly to 3 Processes: Segmenting, Targeting, and
Mapping. Segmenting is to categorize the various topics according to the degree
of the diﬃculty and the importance. For this process, we gathered categorized
approximately 30 books and publications written on the internetworking technologies according to topics. We also referred to related books published by the
Cisco Press, and e-learning materials by Cisco network academy program [3] [4]
[5] [6]. Notably, the categorized topics could be altered according to various perspectives and diﬀerent views. Figure 1 shows the case where a series of network
activities and computer communication protocols are used as perspectives and
views, respectively. The categorized topics were subsequently segmented by 5
levels of diﬃculty and 3 levels of importance, and were targeted in consideration
of the educational purpose, students’ ability, aptitude, and career choice. Next,
the segmented and targeted topics were mapped into the contents for network
practice by integrating single or multiple topics into inclusive contents.
2.2

Output Deﬁnition

Contents to be deduced in mapping process are inverted ultimately to the contents of the ﬁnal output, for example, a student workbook and a supplement
CD. The student workbook is the main textbook for both the instructors and
students; it is divided into 5 Parts including exercises, 3 appendixes, and a glossary. The concepts covered in this textbook enable students to develop practical
experience in skills related to conﬁguring LANs, virtual LANs, static or dynamic
routing protocols, and collecting and analyzing network traﬃc. In addition, this
textbook extends students’ practical experience with WANs, ISDN, PPP, Frame
Relay design, conﬁguration, and maintenance. In addition, this textbook is complemented by a supplement CD [7], which contains presentation slides for instructors, lab activity movies presented in a multimedia format, related references,
and authors’ e-mail addresses for students’ questions. There are 34 lab activity movies in the supplement CD to deliver accurate information and enhance
understanding about network activities performed in real world.
2.3

Infrastructure Preparation: Network Lab Conﬁguration

To deﬁne step-by-step exercises for network practice, the network lab conﬁguration diagram must be prepared. Such physical infrastructure is deﬁned beforehand necessarily and should be examined because it can inﬂuence considerably
content of teaching material or teaching material development costs. Figure 2
shows an example of the network lab conﬁguration diagram. The network laboratory holds about 20 students, which is modelled from the hierarchical internetworking architecture composed of one main center, two regional centers, and
four branch oﬃces. Each center and branch oﬃce are connected by T1 or 64
Kbps leased lines. Personal computers on each branch oﬃce are connected to a
10/100 Mbps workgroup switch or a 802.11b wireless access point.

A Courseware Development Methodology

1075

Main
Center
S0/0

S0/1

R1

10.1.2.0/24

10.1.1.0/24

Regional
Centers

S0/0

S0/0
10.1.3.0/24

S0/1
S1/1

R2

S1/0

10.1.4.0/24

Branch
Offices

S1/0

10.1.5.0/24

S0/0

R4
R5
10.1.6.0/24
F0/0
10.1.11.0/24 F0/0

S0/1

R7

10.1.9.0/24

10.1.13.0/24

SW3

PC2

NB1

S0/0

R6
F0/0

10.1.12.0/24

SW2

AP1

10.1.8.0/24

S0/1

10.1.10.0/24

PC1

S1/1

S0/0

S0/1

SW1

R3

10.1.7.0/24

S0/0
S0/1

S0/1

SW4

PC3

AP2

NB2

AP3

NB3

F0/0

PC4

AP4

NB4

Fig. 2. Network lab conﬁguration diagram

3

Conclusion

In this paper, we introduced the educational goals and development directions
according to the change of curricula at SKKU’s computer-engineering department. We presented the resources, people, time, and methods needed to develop
a new courseware. We present the networking course as a proof-of-concept application of the STM methodology. In the future, we will gradually use this
courseware in the network-centric courses.

References
1. J. T. Gorgone, G. B. Davis, J. S. Valacich, H. Topi, D. L. Feinstein, and H. E. Longenecker, ”IS 2002 - Model Curriculum and Guidelines for Undergraduate Degree
Programs in Information Systems,” Association for Information Systems, 2002.
2. Computing Curricula 2001 Computer Science Final Report, December, IEEE-CS
and ACM, 2001.
3. S. McQuerry, ”Interconnecting cisco network devices,” Cisco Systems, Inc, 2000.
4. Cisco networking academy program: ﬁrst-year companion guide, Cisco Systems, Inc,
2001.
5. Cisco networking academy program: second-year companion guide, Cisco Systems,
Inc, 2001.
6. Cisco networking academy program web site. [online] Available: http://cisco.
netacad.net
7. Network practice course web site. [online] Available: http://songgang.skku.ac.kr/
jhkoo/index1.htm

