Improved Fully Automatic Liver Segmentation Using
Histogram Tail Threshold Algorithms
Kyung-Sik Seo
Dept. of Electrical & Computer Engineering,
New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, NM, USA
nmsu2@hanmail.net

Abstract. In order to remove neighboring abdominal organs of the liver, we
propose an improved fully automatic liver segmentation using histogram tail
threshold (HTT) algorithms. A region of interest of the liver is first segmented.
A left HTT (LHTT) algorithm is performed to eliminate the pancreas, spleen,
and left kidney. After the right kidney is eliminated by the right HTT (RHTT)
algorithm, the robust liver structure is segmented. From the results of
experiments, the improved automatic liver segmentation using HTT algorithms
has strong similarity performance as manual segmentation by medical doctor.

1 Introduction
A computed tomography (CT) is currently a conventional and excellent tool for
diagnosis of the liver in medical imaging technology. Liver segmentation using the
CT has been performed often [1, 2]. As previous researches have depended on semiautomatic liver segmentation such as a seed point, a rand mark, a reference image,
and training data, fully automatic liver segmentation based on the spine was proposed
[3]. However, proposed liver segmentation has problems because of pixel similarity
of neighboring abdominal organs such as the spleen, pancreas, and kidneys.
In order to segment neighboring organs, we propose improved fully automatic liver
segmentation using histogram tail threshold (HTT) algorithms. The region of interest
(ROI) of the liver structure is first segmented. Then liver segmentation using HTT
algorithms are processed to eliminate neighboring abdominal organs.

2 Improved Liver Segmentation
As pre-processing, the ROI of the liver is extracted using multi-modal threshold [3-5],
C-class maximum a posteriori [6], and binary morphological (BM) filtering [7-9].
Figure 1 shows the ROI extraction of the liver.
The left HTT (LHTT) is presented to remove neighboring abdominal organs such
as the pancreas, spleen, and left kidney from the ROI. Let I ROI (m, n) be the gray-

level ROI and h ROI (k1 , k 2 ) be the histogram of I ROI with the range,
I LHTT be the LHTT image. Then the LHTT algorithm is proposed:
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3516, pp. 822 – 825, 2005.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

[k1 , k 2 ] . Let

Improved Fully Automatic Liver Segmentation Using HTT Algorithms

(a)

(b)

(c)

823

(d)

Fig. 1. ROI extraction of the liver: (a) CT image, (b) ROI after MMT, (c) ROI after C-class
MAP decision, (d) Gray-level ROI

•

Find

•

maximum value.
Calculate the left histogram tail interval

•
•

Find the left histogram tail threshold value.
Create the LHTT image I LHTT = {(m, n) | k1 ≤ I ROI (m, n) ≤ k LHTT } .

kmax where kmax is the gray-level value when h ROI (k ) is the
k LI = (k max − k1 ) .

Figure 2 shows an example of the LHTT algorithm.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 2. Left histogram tail threshold: (a) LHTT image, (b) Difference image between I ROI

and I LHTT , (c) Segmented liver structure by area estimation and C-class MAP decision, (d)
Robust liver segmentation by BM filtering and gray-level transformation

As the right kidney is adjacent to the lower liver part and has the same gray-level
values as liver vessels, this kidney creates problems in segmenting a liver structure.
The RHTT is presented for extracting and removing the right kidney from the liver
image. Let I RHTT be the RHTT image. Then the RHTT algorithm is proposed:
•
•

Find k max where k max is the gray-level value when h ROI (k ) is the
maximum value.
Calculate the right partial histogram interval k RI = ( 255 − k max ) .

824

K.-S. Seo

•

Find the right partial threshold value k RHTT = (k max + k RI / 8) .

•

Create the RHTT image I RHTT = {(m, n) | k RHTT ≤ I ROI (m, n) ≤ 255} .

Figure 3 shows an example of the RHTT algorithm.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 3. Example of right histogram tail threshold: (a) Sample image, (b) RHTT image, (c)
Extraction of right kidney after the area and angle estimation, (d) Elimination of the right
kidney

3 Experiments and Analysis
40 slices of eight patients were selected for testing the improved segmentation method
and one medical doctor in Chonnam National University Hospital segmented the liver
structure by the manual method. In order to evaluate performance of the improved
algorithm, three different segmentation methods were compared by using normalized
average area (NAA) with the image size and area error rate (AER) [3]. Figure 4(a)
shows NAA using error bars. Average NAAs of each method were 0.1972, 0.1593,
and 0.1644. Also, Figure 4(b) shows the comparison of average AER per each patient
based on manual segmentation to segmentation before and after HTT. The former is
4~40 % and the latter is 5~10 %. Total average AER for all patients is 23.9198 % for
the former and 7.4223 % for the latter. From the results of this comparison, automatic
segmentation using HTT algorithms matches the results of manual segmentation more
closely than segmentation without HTT algorithms.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 4. Results: (a) Normalized average area, (b) Average area error rate

Improved Fully Automatic Liver Segmentation Using HTT Algorithms

825

4 Conclusions
In this paper, we proposed the improved fully automatic liver segmentation using
histogram tail threshold (HTT) algorithms. 40 slices of eight patients were selected to
evaluate performance of the improved algorithm. From the results of experiments, the
improved automatic liver segmentation has strong similarity performance as manual
segmentation by medical doctor.

References
1. Bae, K. T., Giger, M. L., Chen, C. T., Kahn, Jr. C. E.: Automatic segmentation of liver
structure in CT images. Med. Phys.,Vol. 20. (1993) 71-78
2. Gao, L., Heath, D. G., Kuszyk, B. S., Fishman, E. K.: Automatic liver segmentation
technique for three-dimensional visualization of CT data. Radiology, Vol. 201. (1996)
359-364
3. 3.Seo, K., Ludeman, L. C., Park S., Park, J.: Efficient liver segmentation based on the spine.
LNCS, Vol. 3261. (2004) 400-409.
4. 4.Orfanidis, S. J.: Introduction to signal processing. Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River NJ
(1996)
5. 5.Schilling, R. J., Harris, S. L.: Applied numerical methods for engineers. Brooks/Cole
Publishing Com., Pacific Grove CA (2000)
6. Ludeman, L. C.: Random processes: filtering, estimation, and detection. Wiley & Sons Inc.,
Hoboken NJ (2003)
7. Gonzalez, R. C., Woods, R. E.: Digital image processing. Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River
NJ (2002)
8. Shapiro, L. G., Stockman, G. C.: Computer vision. Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River NJ
(2001)
9. Parker, J.R.: Algorithms for image processing and computer vision. Wiley Computer
Publishing, New York (1997)

