Total Energy Singular Vectors
for Atmospheric Chemical Transport Models
Wenyuan Liao and Adrian Sandu
Department of Computer Science,
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University,
Blacksburg, VA 24061
{liao, asandu}@cs.vt.edu

Abstract. The aim of this paper is to address computational aspects of
the total energy singular vector analysis of atmospheric chemical transport models. We discuss the symmetry of the tangent-linear/adjoint operator for stiﬀ systems. Results for a 3D simulation with real data reveal
that the total energy singular vectors depend on the target domain, simulation window, chemical reactions, and meteorological data.
Keywords: Adjoint models, sensitivity analysis, data assimilation, total
energy singular vectors.

1

Introduction

Improvements of air quality require accurate and timely predictions of atmospheric pollutant concentrations. A critical element for accurate simulations is
the use of observational data to constrain model predictions. Widely used data
assimilation techniques include 3D-Var, 4D-Var, Kalman ﬁlter and ensemble
nonlinear ﬁlters. Kalman ﬁlter techniques provide a stochastic approach to the
data assimilation problem. The ﬁlter theory is described by Jazwinski [8] and
the applicability to atmospheric modeling is discussed by Daley [4]. As explained
by Fisher [6], the Kalman ﬁlter is too expensive to be a practical assimilation
method for large-scale systems. The ensemble Kalman ﬁlter [7] is a feasible
approach which approximates the Kalman ﬁlter covariance matrix by a MonteCarlo-type technique.
In ensemble Kalman ﬁlters the random errors in the statistically-estimated
covariance decrease only with the square-root of the ensemble size. Furthermore,
the subspace spanned by the random vectors is not optimal for explaining the
forecast error. For good statistical approximations with small size ensembles
it is essential to properly place the initial ensemble to span the directions of
maximum error growth. These directions are the total energy singular vectors
as explained below. In this paper we study some of the challenges encountered
when computing singular vectors for large transport-chemistry models.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we introduce the total energy singular vectors in the context of data assimilation. Computational aspects
are discussed in Section 3, and numerical results are presented in Section 4.
Conclusions and future directions are given in Section 5.
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3515, pp. 806–813, 2005.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

Total Energy Singular Vectors for Atmospheric Chemical Transport Models

2

807

Ensembles and Singular Vectors

An atmospheric model propagates the model state (from xb (t0 ) to xf (T )) and
its covariance matrix (from Pb (t0 ) to Pf (T )) using:
xf = Mt0 →T (xb ) ,

Pf = Mt0 →T Pb MT∗ →t0 + Q .

(1)

Here xb and xf represent the background and the forecast state, while Pb , Pf ,
and Q represent the covariance matrices of the errors in the background state,
forecast state, and of the model errors respectively. The model solution operator
is denoted by Mt0 →T , Mt0 →T is the solution operator of the tangent linear
model and MT∗ →t0 the solution operator of its adjoint.
Consider a set of observables y (assumed, for simplicity, to be a linear function
of model state, y = Hx). The extended Kalman ﬁlter uses the forecast state and
its covariance (xf (T ), Pf (T )) and the observations and their covariance (y, R) to
produce an optimal (“analyzed”) estimation of the model state and its covariance
(xa (T ), Pa (T )):
xa = xf + Pf H T (R + HPf H T )−1 (y − Hxf )
Pa = Pf − Pf H T (R + HPf H T )−1 HPf

(2)

The computational expense of the Kalman ﬁlter (2) is extremely large because
one needs to invert the matrix R + HPf H T and apply the tangent linear model
to each column and the adjoint model to each row of the covariance matrix.
The commonly used method to reduce the computational cost is to propagate
(only) the projection of the covariance matrix onto a low-dimensional subspace
span{s1 , · · · , sk }. The subspace (at the analysis time T ) should contain the directions sk (T ) along which the error has the maximal growth.
Singular vector analysis was introduced in meteorology in the 60’s by Lorenz
[10] to compute the largest error growth rates. At the beginning of 90’s, adjoint technique was introduced by Molteni [13] and Mureau [14] to compute
singular vectors in meteorology problems, then singular vector analysis become
viable with sophisticated atmospheric general circulation models (see e.g., Navon
et. al. [15]).
We deﬁne the energy of an error vector at time t0 as the Euclidean inner
product sk (t0 ), Ask (t0 ) , and the energy at the ﬁnal time T as sk (T ), Bsk (T ) .
A is a symmetric positive deﬁnite matrice and B is a symmetric positive semidefinite matrice. The errors evolve in time according to the dynamics of the tangent
linear model, sk (T ) = Mt0 →T sk (t0 ). The ratio between error energies at t0 and
T oﬀers a measure of error growth:
λ=

sk (t0 ), MT∗ →t0 BMt0 →T sk (t0 )
sk (T ), Bsk (T )
=
sk (t0 ), Ask (t0 )
sk (t0 ), Ask (t0 )

(3)

The total energy singular vectors (TESV) are deﬁned as the directions of
maximal error growth, i.e. the vectors sk (t0 ) that maximize the ratio λ in Eq.(3).
These directions are the solutions of the generalized eigenvalue problem
MT∗ →t0 BMt0 →T sk (t0 ) = λAsk (t0 )

(4)

808

W. Liao and A. Sandu

Eq.(4) can be solved eﬃciently using software packages like ARPACK [9] (or its
parallel version PARPACK). The left side of Eq.(4) involves one integration with
the tangent linear model followed by one integration with the adjoint model.
A special set of energy norms is provided by the choice B = I and A = (Pb )−1 .
In this case the resulting “Hessian” singular vectors sk (t0 ) evolve into the leading
eigenvectors sk (T ) of the forecast error covariance matrix Pf (T ).

3

Computation of Chemical Singular Vectors

The numerical eigenvalue solver applied to (4) requires a symmetric matrix
M ∗ B M in order to successfully employ Lanczos iterations, and guarantee that
the numerical eigenvalues are real. The symmetry requirement imposes to use
the discrete adjoint M ∗ of the tangent linear operator M in (4). The computation of discrete adjoints for stiﬀ systems is a nontrivial task [17]. In addition,
computational errors (which can destroy symmetry) have to be small.
For a given model a symmetry indicator is constructed based on two random perturbation vectors u(t0 ) and v(t0 ) which are propagated forward in time,
u(τ ) = Mt0 →τ u(t0 ) and v(τ ) = Mt0 →τ v(t0 ). The symmetry residual is the diﬀerence r(τ ) = u(τ ), MT∗ →τ Mτ →T v(τ ) − v(τ ), MT∗ →τ Mτ →T u(τ ) . Clearly if M ∗
is exactly the discrete adjoint of M then r(τ ) = 0 for all τ . However, both M and
M ∗ are evaluated numerically and in practice we expect the symmetry residual
r(τ ) to have small (but nonzero) values.
As an example we consider the SAPRC-99 atmospheric gas-phase reaction
mechanism [2] with 93 species and 235 reactions. The forward, tangent linear,
and adjoint models are implemented using the automatic code generator KPP
[3, 5, 17]. Several numerical experiments revealed that the magnitude of the symmetry residual depends on the choice of numerical integrator. Among the Rosenbrock integrators available in KPP Rodas4 [17] performs best. The variation of
r(τ ) with time for Rodas4 is shown in Fig. 1 (solid line). Surprisingly, the symmetry is lost for a short transient at the beginning of the time integration interval,
where the symmetry residual jumps from 10−16 to 10−2 .
This behavior is due to the stiﬀness of the chemical terms. Consider a singular
perturbation model for the chemical system y = f (y, z), z = g(y, z). Here
1, y is the slow component, and z is the fast component. For → 0, the
perturbation vectors that are propagated through the tangent linear model are
of the form
(5)
δz = −gz−1 (y, z)gy (y, z)δy
During the numerical computation of the eigenvectors ARPACK (or any solver
package) generates vectors [δy, δz]T which do not satisfy Eq.(5).
To correct this we apply the tangent linear model on the initial perturbation
for a short time, which is equivalent to ’projecting’ the initial perturbation onto
the slow evolution manifold described by (5). The result is then used to initialize
the subsequent tangent linear model run. In order to preserve operator symmetry,

Total Energy Singular Vectors for Atmospheric Chemical Transport Models

809

another projection using the adjoint model needs to be performed at the end of
the adjoint integration. Consequently the operator is computed as
w = P ∗ MT∗ →t0 Mt0 →T P u ,

(6)

where P and P ∗ denote the projection operations performed with the tangent
linear and the adjoint models respectively. Numerical tests revealed that a small
number of projection steps (≤ 7) is suﬃcient in practice to substantially enhance
symmetry.
Fig.1 (dashed) presents the evolution of the symmetry residual when 6 projection steps are performed with the very small stepsize of 10−9 seconds. The
symmetry error during the transient is only 10−11 .

Fig. 1. Symmetry residual vs. time. Projection improves symmetry considerably

These results can be extended to 3D chemistry-transport models, which solve
the advection-diﬀusion-reaction equations in the atmosphere. A detailed description of such models and the corresponding tangent linear and adjoint models is
given in [16].

4

Numerical Results

The numerical tests use the state-of-the-art regional atmospheric chemical transport model STEM [1]. The simulation covers a region of 7200 Km × 4800 Km in
East Asia and uses a 30×20×18 computational grid with a horizontal resolution
of 240 Km × 240 Km. The chemical mechanism is SAPRC-99 [2] which considers the gas-phase atmospheric reactions of volatile organic and nitrogen oxides
in urban and regional settings. Both the forward and adjoint chemical models
are implemented using KPP [3, 5, 17]. The simulated conditions correspond to
March 2001. More details about the forward model simulation conditions and
comparison with observations are available in [1]. The forward and adjoint models are parallelized using PAQMSG [12]. PARPACK [9] was used to solve the
symmetric generalized eigenvalue problems.
To visualize the four-dimensional eigenvectors in (4) we consider separately
the vector sections corresponding to diﬀerent chemical species. Two-dimensional
top views are obtained by adding the values in each vertical column.

810

W. Liao and A. Sandu

Fig. 2. The dominant eigenvalues for 12h, 24h and 48h simulations

Fig. 3. Dominant eigenvectors for O3 and N O2 , the 24h simulation

The target is the ground level ozone concentration in a 720 Km × 960 Km
area covering Korea (the gray area in Fig. 3). The target (region, vertical level,
and chemical species) deﬁnes the matrix B in (4).
The largest 12 eigenvalues for 12h, 24h and 48h simulations started at 0
GMT, March 1st , 2001 are shown in Fig. 2. The rapid decrease of eigenvalue
magnitude indicates that one can capture the uncertainty in the target region
with only a few total energy singular vectors. The eigenvalues decrease faster for
longer simulation windows.
The O3 and N O2 sections of the ﬁrst two dominant eigenvectors are shown in
Fig. 3. The simulation interval for this test is 24 hours. We notice that the eigen-

Total Energy Singular Vectors for Atmospheric Chemical Transport Models

811

Fig. 4. Adjoint O3 and N O2 variables, the 24h simulation

Fig. 5. Dominant O3 eigenvectors for the 12h (a) and 48h (b) simulations

vectors are localized around the target area. The shapes of the second eigenvector
is diﬀerent from the ﬁrst, which illustrates the fact that diﬀerent eigenvectors
contain diﬀerent information. The shapes and the magnitudes of the O3 and
N O2 sections are also diﬀerent, illustrating the diﬀerent inﬂuences that these
species have on ground level O3 after 24h.
Total energy singular vectors versus adjoints. To illustrate the diﬀerence between the information conveyed by the total energy singular vectors and adjoint
variables we show the adjoints (for the total ground level O3 in the target area
after 24h) in Fig. 4. The adjoints cover a wider area following the ﬂow pattern,
while the singular vectors are more localized.
Influence of the simulation interval. The O3 sections of the dominant eigenvectors for 12h and 48h simulations starting at 0 GMT, March 1, 2001, are
shown in Fig. 5. The plots, together with Fig. 3, show the inﬂuence of the simulation interval on the singular vectors. For the 12h simulation the pattern is
more localized.
Influence of meteorological conditions. The O3 section of the dominant eigenvector for a 24h simulation started at 0GMT, March 26, 2001, is shown Fig. 6
(a). The shape of the TESV is diﬀerent than for March 1st .
Influence of the target region. The O3 section of the dominant eigenvector
for another 24h, March 1st simulation is shown in Fig. 6(b). The target is ground

812

W. Liao and A. Sandu

Fig. 6. Dominant eigenvectors (O3 section) for: (a) Korea, March 26, show the inﬂuence of diﬀerent meteorological conditions; and (b) China, March 1, show the eﬀect of
diﬀerent target region

level ozone in a region of same area, but located in South-East China. Additional
numerical tests revealed that the eigenvalues and eigenvectors are heavily eﬀected
by the size of target region. Speciﬁcally, the eigenvalues decrease is slower for larger
regions, and therefore, more eigenvectors are needed to capture the uncertainty.

5

Conclusions

In this work we study the computational aspects of total energy singular vector
analysis of chemical-transport models. Singular vectors span the directions of
maximal error growth in a ﬁnite time, as measured by speciﬁc energy norms.
The required symmetry of the tangent linear-adjoint operator implies the necessity of using discrete adjoints. A projection method is proposed to preserve
symmetry for stiﬀ systems associated with chemical models. Numerical results
are presented for a full 3D chemistry-transport model with real-life data. The
singular values/vectors depend on the simulation interval, meteorological data,
location of target region, the size of target region etc. Future work will focus
on computing Hessian singular vectors, and on using singular vectors within
nonlinear ensemble ﬁlters.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation through the awards
NSF CAREER ACI 0093139 and NSF ITR AP&IM 0205198. We would like to
thank Virginia Tech’s laboratory for Advanced Scientiﬁc Computing (LASCA)
for the use of the Anantham cluster.

References
1. Carmichael, G.R. et. al. “Regional-Scale Chemical Transport Modeling in Support
of the Analysis of Observations obtained During the Trace-P Experiment”. Journal
of Geophysical Research, 108(D21), Art. No. 8823, 2004.

Total Energy Singular Vectors for Atmospheric Chemical Transport Models

813

2. Carter, W.P.L. “Implementation of the SAPRC-99 chemical mechanism into the
models-3 framework”. Technical Report, United States Environmental Protection
Agency, 2000.
3. Daescu, D., A. Sandu, G.R. Carmichael. “Direct and Adjoint Sensitivity Analysis of
Chemical Kinetic Systems with KPP: II-Numerical Validation and Applications”.
Atmospheric Environment, 37(36), 5097-5114, 2002.
4. Daley, R. Atmospheric Data Analysis. Cambridge University Press, 1991.
5. Damian,V, A. Sandu, M. Damian, F. Potra, G.R. Carmichael. “The Kinetic preprocessor KPP - a software environment for solving chemical kinetics”. Computers
and Chemical Engineering, 26, 1567-1579, 2002.
6. Fisher, M. “Assimilation Techniques(5): Approximate Kalman ﬁlters and Singular
Vectors”, Meteorological Training Course Lecture Seires, 2001.
7. Houtekamer, P.L. and H.L. Mitchell. “A sequential Ensemble Kalman Filter for
atmospheric data assimilation”, Monthly Weather Review 129, No. 1, 123-137,
2000.
8. Jazwinski, A.H. Stochastic Processes and Filtering Theory. Academic Press, 1970.
9. Lehoucq, R., K. Maschhoﬀ, D. Sorensen, C. Yang, ARPACK Software(Parallel and
Serial), http://www.caam.rice.edu/software/ARPACK.
10. Lorenz, E.N. “A study of the predictability of a 28 variable atmospheric model”.
Tellus, 17, 321-333, 1965.
11. Menut L., R. Vautard, M. Beekmann, C. Honor. “Sensitivity of photochemical
pollution using the adjoint of a simpliﬁed chemistry-transport model”. Journal of
Geophysical Research - Atmospheres, 105-D12(15):15379-15402, 2000.
12. Miehe, P, A. Sandu, G.R. Carmichael, Y. Tang, D. Daescu. “A communication library for the parallelization of air quality models on structured grids”. Atmospheric
Environment, 36, 3917-3930, 2002.
13. Molteni, F. and T.N. Palmer. “Predictability and ﬁnite-time instability of the
northern winter circulation”. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society,
119, 269-298, 1993.
14. Mureau, R., F. Molteni, T.N. Palmer. “Ensemble prediction using dynamicallyconditioned perturbations”. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society,
119, 299-323, 1993.
15. Li, Z., I.M. Navon, M.Y. Hussaini. “Analysis of the singular vectors of the fullphysics FSU Global Spectral Model”. Tellus, in press, 2005.
16. Sandu,A, D. Daescu, G.R. Carmichael, T. Chai. “Adjoint Sensitivity Analysis of
Regional Air Quality Models”. Journal of Computational Physics, in press, 2005.
17. Sandu,A, D. Daescu, G.R. Carmichael. “Direct and Adjoint Sensitivity Analysis of
Chemical Kinetics Systems with KPP: I-Theory and Software Tools”. Atmospheric
Environment. 37(36), 5083-5096, 2003.

