Multiscale Modelling of Bubbly Systems Using
Wavelet-Based Mesh Adaptation
Tom Liu and Phil Schwarz
CSIRO Minerals, Clayton, VIC 3168, Australia
{Tom.Liu, Phil.Schwarz}@CSIRO.AU

Abstract. Since typical industrial-scale reactors may contain many millions of
bubbles, the extension of direct free-surface modelling techniques to resolve
every bubble in the vessel would require far more computational power than
will be available. A more immediate solution is to couple macro-scale reactor
models to micro-scale models of individual bubbles and collections of a small
number of bubbles. In this paper, a micro-scale modelling technique was presented and tested on the situation of a single rising bubble. The micro-scale
model was based on the Volume-of-Fluid (VOF) technique combined with a
dynamic mesh adaptation based on wavelet analysis to ensure a sufficient resolution at the gas-liquid interfaces. The method was based on a multi-block parallel scheme with mesh adaptivity facilitated by wavelet analysis embedded
into a commercial CFD package CFX. Examples of the performance of the
scheme for a bubble rising problem are given.

1 Introduction
Bubbly systems are used widely in the minerals and process industries to increase
agitation, supply reactants (e.g. oxygen), or to effect particle separations (as in froth
flotation). Effective two-fluid (or phase-averaged) modelling techniques have been
developed to simulate the multi-phase fluid flow, and heat and mass transfer in such
reactors, and are now widely used to assist vessel design [1,2]. These methods do not
seek to resolve each bubble, but are based volume-averaged equations in which the
physics of bubble-fluid interactions is modelled though constitutive terms analogous
to the Reynolds stresses that appear in the RANS equations for a single phase turbulent flow. This necessarily reduces the accuracy and predictive capability of such
models, and increases their dependence on empirical data and fitting parameters,
particularly in cases where bubble-bubble interactions such as coalescence are important. However, in practice, it is difficult to develop accurate constitutive relations for
complex systems valid over wide operating ranges using physical experiments.
A computationally efficient solution to improving the macro-scale multi-fluid models
is to couple them to micro-scale models of individual bubbles and collections of a small
number of bubbles. The strategy is to determine improved closure relationships for the
multi-fluid model through the analysis of the micro-scale models. Where phenomena
occur at widely differing scales, the numerical analysis may be employed to analyse
some particular processes at fine scales, for instance, the breakup of a single bubble,
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3516, pp. 112 – 119, 2005.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

Multiscale Modelling of Bubbly Systems Using Wavelet-Based Mesh Adaptation

113

coalescence of two or more bubbles, or bubble-particle interactions. The information
obtained at fine scales can be applied in macroscale CFD or other models.
This approach has advantages over the experimental determination of constitutive
relationships because physical information on the processes, e.g. shear rate dependency of the viscosity or stress field, can be obtained locally and analysed in detail.
The numerical simulations used in this way may be called numerical experiments [3],
though they should be viewed as the complementary to physical experiments, rather
than a substitute.
The fine scale simulations differ from traditional macroscale CFD simulations used
in reactor design in that more attention is paid to local information and a very fine
mesh must be used to resolve full detail of interactions between the flow and the
phase boundaries. If fixed meshes are employed in a traditional CFD simulation for
solving practical engineering problems, the full representations of fine scale phenomena are difficult or even impossible for the foreseeable future because of the overwhelming computational costs [4]. Therefore an alternative approach that is more
efficient must be developed.
Micro-scale modellings (or numerical experiments) for multiphase problems generally involve moving interfaces between immiscible fluids. The accurate simulation
of fluid flows with sharp fronts presents a problem with considerable difficulties [5].
Many types of interface tracking methods have been developed, but they generally
fall into two categories. In the first type, a deformable finite volume or finite element
mesh is used such that a particular mesh boundary moves so that it always coincides
with the interface [6]. The other strategy is to keep the mesh fixed and use a separate
procedure to describe the position of the interface. These methods are reviewed in [7].
The interface can be represented on a fixed grid in a variety of ways, either explicitly
or implicitly. The Volume of Fluid method (VOF) is one of the most popular implicit
interface tracking schemes [5]. Physical problems which are considered in practice
require three-dimensional calculations with surface tension, non-catastrophic breakage and reconnection of the interface. The VOF technique naturally allows for the
latter, and has been modified by various workers to include surface tension.
Commercial software packages such as CFX and FLUENT are usually employed
to model practical multiphase flows due to the complexities of the phenomena and the
geometries. Although mesh adaptation has been provided by the commercial CFD
packages, they generally do not allow for dynamic mesh adaptation [8]. If a mesh
sufficiently fine to resolve detail near the interface is applied on the whole geometry,
the computational requirements can be huge. Such a fine mesh is not necessary on
most of the geometry, but because of the movement of the interface, the localized
mesh refinement requires a dynamic mesh adaptation.
The largest difficulty with adaptive methods is to determine the mobility of grids.
Adaptive wavelet methods have been developed to solve Navier-Stokes equation at
high Reynolds numbers [9]. Wavelets have the ability to accurately and efficiently
represent strongly inhomogeneous piecewise continuous functions [10]. Using such
techniques, the numerical resolution can be naturally adapted to intermittent the structures of flows at fine scales with significant decrease of computational efforts and
memory requirements. However, efforts have been mainly made around using wavelets as an orthogonal and complete basis, spanning a space in which to seek approximate solutions satisfying the equation in a Galerkin or collocation sense [4, 9]. To

114

T. Liu and P. Schwarz

apply such methods however would require the development of a new program for
each particular flow-related problem, whereas general-purpose commercial CFD
packages are preferred.
Hestheven and Jameson [4] developed a different approach to utilise the unique
properties of wavelets, and this approach can be applied in a grid-based method utilized by CFD packages. In this method, wavelets were employed to detect the existence of high frequency information and supplied spatial locations of strongly inhomogeneous regions. Very fine grids were used only in these regions. In this method,
wavelets were used for grid generation and order selection only, whilst the scheme for
solving the partial differential equation was based on conventional finite difference/element schemes, albeit defined on variable grids. The method provides a possibility to embed the wavelet-based grid generation into current commercial CFD packages to reduce computational costs by using adaptive meshes.
In this paper, a multi-block (domain) parallel scheme with the adaptivity facilitated
by wavelet analysis was proposed and embedded into commercial CFD package CFX
to track moving free surfaces efficiently.

2 Wavelet Analysis and Wavelet-Based Grid Adaptation
Wavelet analysis is an emerging field of applied mathematics that provides tools and
algorithms suited to the type of problems encountered in multiphase process simulations. It allows one to represent a function in terms of a set of base functions, called
wavelets.
Wavelet transform involves representing general functions in terms of simple,
fixed building blocks at different scales and positions. These building blocks, which
are actually a family of wavelets, are generated from a single fixed function called the
“mother wavelet” by translation and dilation (scaling) operations. In contrast to the
traditional trigonometric basis functions which have an infinite support, wavelets have
a compact support. Therefore wavelets are able to approximate a function without
cancellation. In the basic work of Daubechies [10], a family of compactly supported
orthonormal wavelets is constructed. Each wavelet number is governed by a set of L
(an even integer) coefficients {p k : k = 0, 1, ! , L − 1} through the two-scale relation:

φ ( x) =

L −1

∑ p φ (2 x − k )
k

(1)

k =0

and the equation:

ψ ( x) =

1

∑ (−1)

k

p1− k φ (2 x − k )

(2)

k = 2− L

where functions φ (x) and ψ (x) are called scaling function and wavelet, respectively.
The fundamental support of the scaling function φ (x) is in the interval [0, L − 1]
while that of the corresponding wavelet ψ (x) is in the interval [1 − L / 2, L / 2] . The

Multiscale Modelling of Bubbly Systems Using Wavelet-Based Mesh Adaptation

115

coefficients pk appearing in the two-scale relation (1) are called wavelet filter coefficients. All wavelet properties are specified through these coefficients. For more details see Daubechies’ paper [10].
Interpolating functions are generated by the autocorrelation of the usual compactly
supported Daubechies scaling functions [11]. Such an autocorrelation function θ (⋅)
verifies trivially the equality θ (n) = δ 0 n , and generates a multi-resolution analysis.
The approximate solution of the problem u j (⋅) defined on interval [0, 1] is written in
terms of its values in the dyadic points:
u j ( x) =

∑ u (2

−j

j

n)θ (2 j x − n)

(3)

n

and such a function is exact at the dyadic points.
Consider the function:

θ ( x) =

∫

+∞
−∞

φ ( y )φ ( y − x ) dy

{

(4)

}

Denote V j the linear span of the set θ (2 j x − k ), k ∈ Z . It can be proven that

V j forms a multi-resolution analysis where θ (⋅) plays the role of a scaling function
(nonorthonormal). In this paper, a modified interpolating function was constructed in
order to achieve an interpolating operator on the interval with the same accuracy as
the counterpart on the line. Such functions were introduced by Bertoluzza and Nald
[11].
~

θ j0 =

0

∑θ

jk ,

k = − L +1

~

θ j ,2 j =

2 j + L +1

∑θ

jk

k =2 j

Consider I j u as the form:
~

I j u = u (0)θ j 0 +

2 j −1

∑ u( x )θ
k

k =1

jk

~
+ u (1)θ j 2 j

(5)

The sparse point representation (SPR) and the grid generation technique based on
Holmstorm’s work [12] were employed for grid adaptation. The SPR was based on
interpolating wavelet transform (IWT) on dyadic grids. A feature of the basis is the
one-to-one correspondence between point values and wavelet coefficients. The interpolating subdivision scheme recursively generated the function values on a fine grid
from the given values on a coarse grid. At each level, for odd-numbered grid points,
the differences between the known function values and the function values predicted
by the interpolation from the coarser grid were calculated. These differences were
termed as wavelet coefficients d kj , which gave the information about the irregularity
of the function: d kj = u ( x2jk+1+1 ) − I j u ( x2jk+1+1 ) .

116

T. Liu and P. Schwarz

3 Problem Definition and Method Formulation
Wavelet-based adaptive methods have been successfully applied to solve many problems [13, 9]. The grids were adapted based on the change of the solutions. Fine
meshes were assigned only on the regions where the solutions changed sharply. However, for current CFD commercial packages, e.g. CFX, there is a restriction to the
dynamic mesh adaptation: the topology of the mesh must remain fixed. Therefore, the
advantages of wavelet-based grid adaptation cannot be fully utilised at this stage. A
modified wavelet-based mesh adaptation methodology was proposed in this section.
Wavelet-based grid generation supposes a calculation which begins with evenly
spaced samples of a function. It has usually been applied to simple geometries and
structured grids [11]. To combine wavelet analysis with CFX commercial CFD package, a multi-block (domain) formulation was proposed. A moving cubic subdomain or
block with fine mesh was designed to track the free surface and combined the geometric flexibility and computational efficiency of a multi-block (domain) scheme with
the wavelet-based mesh adaptivity. The moving block was like a “microscope” - it
was used to track local information required. Coarse mesh was employed outside the
moving block (subdomain). Therefore the scheme was computationally efficient
without loss of accuracy.
To clearly describe the scheme, a simple case, a single rising bubble, was considered. Two algorithms were proposed as follows: wavelet-based adaptive structured
grid using junction box routines; wavelet-based adaptive unstructured grid using CFX
expression language and junction box routines
3.1 Problem Definition

A numerical experiment was designed by Krishna and Baten [14] to simulate the
single bubble rising process using CFX 4. A 2D rectangular column (25mm × 90mm)
involving 144000 grid cells was used. It took about two weeks using six R8000 processors for a simulation run.
In this paper, the same configuration was modelled using CFX 5.7. The only difference was that a wavelet-based mesh adaptation algorithm was embedded into the
CFX package so that a moving fine-mesh block was used to track the bubbles. This
technique used only 10% of the number of grid cells that would be required for a
uniform mesh to obtain similar accuracy.
The simulation was carried out in a rectangular column using 2D Cartesian coordinate grid. No-slip wall boundary condition was imposed, and the column was
modelled as an open system. The VOF model was employed to describe transient
motion of the gas and liquid phases using the Navier-Stokes equations. Surface tension was included. For the convective terms, high resolution differencing was used.
First order backward Euler differencing was used for time integration. The time step
used in the simulation was 0.00003s or smaller.
3.2 Wavelet-Based Adaptive Structured Grid Using Junction Box Routines

CFX-MESHBUILD was used to generate the initial structured mesh consisting of five
blocks. To utilise wavelet analysis, the proposed moving fine-mesh block must be

Multiscale Modelling of Bubbly Systems Using Wavelet-Based Mesh Adaptation

117

either a cube or a rectangle. The initial size and position of the block depends on those
of the bubble at initial time, see Table 1. Therefore the proposed mesh adaptation
method can be applied in a complex geometry. The mesh distribution of block B1 was
chosen as uniform grid (27+1) × (26+1) to apply wavelet analysis. Because the bubble
extended in x-direction significantly during the process, higher resolution was used in
this direction. The mesh distributions of other blocks can be different. For simplicity,
the same distributions were given for the shared edges and uniform grids were chosen, see Figure 1 and Table 2.
Table 1. Initial bubble/block size and position
Initial Bubble (Diameter) / Block
4mm / (6mm×6mm)
8mm / (10mm×10mm)

Initial Bubble / Block Positions (Centre)
(12mm, 4mm) / (12mm, 4mm)
(12.mm, 6mm) / (12mm, 6mm)

B4

B3
B1

B5

B2

Fig. 1. Geometry and blocks of the bubble rising Fig. 2. Snapshots of typical rising trajectorie
column
of bubbles of 4 and 8 mm diameter and B1
Table 2. Distributions of blocks
Distribution of B1

4mm bubble
8mm bubble

(27+1)× (26+1)
(27+1)× (26+1)

Distributions of B2 and
B4

27× 25
27× 25

Distributions of B3 and
B5

26× 25
26× 25

Ratio of adaptive mesh to full
mesh

0.08
0.08

Using CFX 5.7, the volume fractions on the vertices of each cell can be obtained.
Due to the limitation of CFX solver, the topology of the mesh must remain fixed.
Points cannot be added to or removed from the grid. Only the position of free interface was detected using IWT and wavelet coefficients. At each mesh adaptation time
step, the minimum distances between the interface and the boundaries of block B1

118

T. Liu and P. Schwarz

was calculated to decide if the position and size of B1 should be changed and a new
grid was generated. The algorithm is as follows:
Step 1. Calculate the wavelet coefficients of volume fraction of gas in x-direction
from the top and bottom rows of B1 to determine the nearest position between the
interface and the top or bottom boundaries of B1. The IWT and wavelet coefficients
are calculated from level 6 to level 7 on each row. If most of the wavelet coefficients
on one row are larger than the threshold ε , e.g. 80% of the total number on one row,
this means the interface is on or near the position.
Step 2. Calculate the wavelet coefficients of volume fraction of gas in y-direction
from the left and right columns of B1 to determine the nearest position between the
interface and the left or right boundaries of B1 using the same method in Step 1.
Step3. If all the distances between the interface and the boundaries of B1 are larger
than given minimum distance d p , the mesh remains fixed; Otherwise, move the
boundaries of B1 to the positions until the distances between the interface and the
boundaries are not less than d p .
Step 4. Set limits to the position of block B1 to avoid mesh folding. There should
be a given minimum distance between B1 and the boundaries of the column.
Step 5. Generate a new uniform mesh based on the new position of B1 for each
block using the same distribution as that of the initial mesh and pass the new grid to
CFX.
The block B1 was moved based on the wavelet analysis of the volume fraction
function of gas. Therefore, the bubble was always in B1. There is a correlation between the frequency of the grid adaptation and the tolerance distance between the
interfaces and the boundaries of B1 when the adaptation is performed. If the grid
adaptation is not done often enough, a larger tolerance distance must be given so that
the front does not move out of B1 between the adaptations. Conversely, more frequent
adaptations demand a small distance.
It is natural to define the parallel computation partitions based on five blocks. In
this work, three partitions were defined, partition 1 including B1, partition 2 including
B2 and B3, partition 3 including B3 and B4. Partition 1 was calculated on master
machine. The whole grid was determined based on partition1 and passed to slave
machines.
In practice, unstructured grids are often used in complex geometries. The proposed
method can also be applied to unstructured grids using CFX expression language and
junction box routines together. The method has been used for the same simulation as
described above.

4 Simulation Results
The simulations were run on a Linux system. Snapshots of typical bubble trajectories
are shown in Fig 2. They were similar to the results of Krishna and Baten [13]. Figure
2 clearly showed how the fine mesh moves with the bubble. It confirmed the ability to
use the wavelet analysis within a multi-block framework to achieve considerable
savings in computing time without loss of accuracy. The number of grid cells was

Multiscale Modelling of Bubbly Systems Using Wavelet-Based Mesh Adaptation

119

reduced by 90%. The CPU time of the adaptive mesh method was only 1/8 that of the
method using the fully fine mesh.

5 Conclusions
A wavelet-based adaptive mesh scheme was embedded into a commercial CFX package to track moving free surfaces. It significantly saves computational cost and memory requirements. The scheme was demonstrated in a single bubble rising simulation.
A moving “microscope” was designed to reveal details of local information with a
realistic computing time. The scheme provides the possibility to design some numerical experiments to analyse processes at a fine scale and utilise the local information
obtained in macroscale models. Further work to apply the method in such a scheme is
underway.

References
1. Lane, G.L, Schwarz, M.P., Evans, G.M.: Predicting gas-liquid flow in a mechanically
stirred tank. Applied Mathematical Modelling 26 (2002) 223-235
2. Schwarz, M.P.: Simulation of gas injection into liquid melts. Applied Mathematical Modelling 20 (1995) 41-51
3. Ohta, M., Iwasaki, E., Obata, E., Yoshida, Y.: A numerical study of the motion of a
spherical drop rising in shear-thinning fluid systems. Journal of Non-Newtonian Fluid Mechanics 116 (2003) 95-111
4. Hesthaven, J.S., Jameson, L.M.: A wavelet optimized adaptive multi-domain method.
ICASE Report No.97-52, NASA Langley Research Centre, Hampton, 1997
5. Unverdi, S.O., Tryggvason, G.: A front-tracking method for viscous, incompressible multifluid follows. Journal of Computational Physics 100 (1992) 125-137
6. Drew, D.A.: Mathematical modelling of two-phase flow. Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics 15 (1983) 261-271
7. Sethian, J.A.: Level Set Methods. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK 1996.
8. CFX User Guide. Release 5.7, 2004, ANSYS Canada Ltd, Waterloo, Canada
9. Vasilyev, O., Paolucci, S.: A fast adaptive wavelet collocation algorithm for multidimensional PDEs. Journal of Computational Physics 138 (1997) 16-56
10. Daubechies, I.: Orthonormal bases of compactly supported wavelets. Communication on
Pure and Applied Mathematics 41 (1988) 909-996
11. Bertoluzza, S., Naldi, G.: A wavelet collocation method for the numerical solution of partial differential equations. Applied and Computational Harmonic Analysis 3 (1996) 1-9
12. Holmstrom, M.: Solving hyperbolic PDEs using interpolating wavelets. SIAM Journal on
Scientific Computing 21 (1999) 405-420
13. Santos, P.C., Cruz, P., Magalhaes, F.D., Mendes, A.: 2-D wavelet-based adaptive-grid
method for the resolution of PDEs. AIChE Journal 49 (2003) 706-717
14. Krishna, R., Baten, J.M.: Rise characteristics of gas bubble in a 2D rectangular column:
VOF simulations vs experiments. Int. Commn. Heat Mass Transfer 26 (1999) 965-974

