On Algorithm for Estimation of Selecting Core
Youngjin Ahn1 , Moonseong Kim1 ,
Young-Cheol Bang2 , and Hyunseung Choo1
1
School of Information and Communication Engineering,
Sungkyunkwan University, 440-746, Suwon, Korea +82-31-290-7145
watchman@skku.edu
{moonseong, choo}@ece.skku.ac.kr
2
Department of Computer Engineering,
Korea Polytechnic University, 429-793, Gyeonggi-Do, Korea +82-31-496-8292
ybang@kpu.ac.kr

Abstract. With the development of the multicast technology, the realtime strategy among the group applications using the multicast routing
is getting more important. An essential factor of these real-time applications is to optimize the Delay- and delay Variation-Bounded Multicast
Tree (DVBMT) problem. In this paper, we propose Estimation of Selecting Core (ESC) algorithm for DVBMT solution. Furthermore, it is
expected that ESC algorithm results in the better any other DVBMT
solutions.

1

Introduction

For the QoS transmission, not only the tree cost as a measure of bandwidth
eﬃciency is one of the important factors, but also networks supporting real-time
traﬃc are required to receive messages from source node in a limited amount
of time. Therefore, we should consider the multicast end-to-end delay and delay
variation problem [2]. In this paper, we study the delay variation problem under
the upper bound on the multicast end-to-end delay. We propose an eﬃcient algorithm in comparison with the Delay and Delay Variation Constraint Algorithm
(DDVCA [3]), known as the best algorithm so far. Even if the time complexity
of our algorithm is same as the one of DDVCA, the proposed algorithm would
have the better performance than DDVCA has in terms of the multicast delay
variation. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we state the
network model for the multicast routing, and the problem formulation. Section
3 presents the details of the proposed algorithm. Finally, section 4 concludes this
paper.

2

Network Model for Multicasting and DVBMT

We consider that a computer network is represented by a directed graph G =
(V, E) with n nodes and l links or arcs, where V is a set of nodes and E is a set
This work was supported in parts by Brain Korea 21 and the Ministry of Information
and Communication in Republic of Korea. Dr. H. Choo is the corresponding author.
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3516, pp. 796–800, 2005.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

On Algorithm for Estimation of Selecting Core

797

of links, respectively. Each link e = (i, j) ∈ E is associated with delay d(e) ≥ 0.
The delay of a link, d(e), is the sum of the perceived queueing delay, transmission
delay, and propagation delay. We deﬁne a path as sequence of links such that
(u, i), (i, j), . . ., (k, v), belongs to E.
Let P (u, v) = {(u, i), (i, j), . . . , (k, v)} denote the path from node u to node
v. If all u, i, j, . . . , k, v are distinct, then we say that it is a simple directed
path. For a given source node s ∈ V and a destination node d ∈ V , (2s→d , ∞) is
the set of all possible paths from s to d.
(2s→d , ∞) = { Pk (s, d) | all possible paths from s to d,

∀

s, d ∈ V,

∀

k∈Λ}

where Λ is an index set. The path-delay of Pk is given by φD (Pk ) = e∈Pk d(e),
Pk ∈ (2s→d , ∞). (2s→d , ∆) is the set of paths from s to d for which the end-toend delay is bounded by ∆. Therefore (2s→d , ∆) ⊆ (2s→d , ∞).
For the multicast communications, messages need to be delivered to all receivers in the set M ⊆ V \ {s} which is called the multicast group, where
|M | = m. The path traversed by messages from the source s to a multicast
receiver, mi , is given by P (s, mi ). Thus multicast routing tree can be deﬁned
as T (s, M ) = mi ∈M P (s, mi ) and the messages are sent from s to M through
T (s, M ).
The multicast end-to-end delay constraint, ∆, represents an upper bound on
the acceptable end-to-end delay along any path from source node to a destination
node. The multicast delay variation, δ, is the maximum diﬀerence between the
end-to-end delays along the paths from the source to any two destination nodes.
∀

δ = max{ |φD (P (s, mi )) − φD (P (s, mj ))|,

∀

mi , mj ∈ M, i = j }

The issue deﬁned and discussed in [2], initially, is to minimize multicast delay
variation under multicast end-to-end delay constraint. The authors referred to
this problem as Delay- and delay Variation-Bounded Multicast Tree (DVBMT)
problem. The DVBMT problem is to ﬁnd the tree that satisﬁes
min{ δα |

∀

P (s, mi ) ∈ (2s→mi , ∆),

∀

P (s, mi ) ⊆ Tα ,

∀

mi ∈ M ∀ α ∈ Λ },

where Tα denotes any multicast tree spanning M ∪ {s}.

3

The Proposed ESC Algorithm

Description of ESC Algorithm: We designate the proposed algorithm as
Estimation of Selecting Core (ESC). ESC algorithm gives an explicit solution
about the DVBMT problem. We deﬁne the M ODE function, since the location
of the core node inﬂuences the multicast delay variation. In addition to the
M ODE function, we measure the delay variation for each mode, using the CM P
function. The M ODE and CM P functions are deployed as follows.

798

Y. Ahn et al.

⎧
I
⎪
⎪
⎪ II
⎨

if c = s
if ∃ m in P (s, c), where ∀ m ∈ M
M ODE(c) =
III if ∃ s in P (m, c), where ∀ m ∈ M ,
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩ IV if II and III
V otherwise
where s is source node.
CM P (x) =

|(dscore + max delay) − dsmk | if x = II or III or IV
,
otherwise
dvcore

where core = M ODE −1 (x), max delay = max{min{φD (P (core, m))} |
m ∈ M \{m∗ ∈ M | ∃ m∗ in P (s, core) ∃ s in P (m∗ , core)} }. dsvi and dvvi are
deﬁned in Fig. 1.

∀

Fig. 1. Pseudo Code of ESC Algorithm

In Fig. 1, Lines 9-21 gives an account of the process to search the suitable core
node. Giving a speciﬁcation, Line 9-15 picks out the minimum dvvi , comparing
the diﬀerence between the maximum delay variation and the minimum delay
variation for each node, and verifying the upper bound ∆. If there isn’t such a
core node, the algorithm will be terminated because the multicast tree cannot be
constructed within ∆. In Lines 16-18, ESC algorithm stores the candidate cores,
after looking for the node which has the same value as minimum dvvi . Lines
19-21 ﬁnds out the best core that has the minimum delay variation, using the
measure CM P for the 5 modes. These cases are described as follows. The total
time complexity of the proposed algorithm is O(mn2 ), being equal to DDVCA.

On Algorithm for Estimation of Selecting Core

799

Five-Mode Core Selection: As above functions M ODE and CM P , M ODE
I is that the core node corresponds to the source node. In this case, CM P keeps
dvcore . Otherwise, M ODEs II∼V are executed.
s

m1

Source Node
dsm1

dsc

dsm1

m1

s

max_delay

c

max_delay

Core Node

m2

c
Core Node

m3
(a) Case MODE II

Source Node

dsc

Destination Nodes :

m2

m3
(b) Case MODE III

Fig. 2. Main Idea of M ode Function

In the case of M ODE II [1], Fig. 2 (a) shows that there exists the destination
node from the source node to the core node. CM P which can be computed stores
the sum of the delay from the core node to the destination node and max delay.
The third case just satisﬁes M ODE III. In this case, ESC algorithm initially
adds the delay from the source node to the core node to max delay and subtracts
the delay from the source node to the adjacent destination node, and stores the
value with CM P . If the value is negative, CM P accepts the absolute value of
it. The fourth case, MODE which satisﬁes II and III should ﬁnd the factor to
determine CM P , having situation that the destination nodes exist around the
source node. The measure of the comparison is determined with the minimum
delay from the source to the associated destinations. We can decide this situation
because the shortest delay value from the source node aﬀects the delay variation
of the created tree. Therefore, ESC algorithm selects either M ODE II or III.
In M ODE V, if ESC algorithm doesn’t satisfy M ODEs I∼IV, CM P stores
dvcore .

4

Conclusion

In this paper, we consider the transmission of a message that guarantees certain bounds of the end-to-end delays as well as the multicast delay variations
computer network. The time complexity of ESC algorithm is O(mn2 ), which is
the same as that of DDVCA. Furthermore, it is expected that ESC algorithm
results in the better minimum multicast delay variation than DDVCA.

References
1. M. Kim, Y.-C. Bang, and H. Choo, “Eﬃcient Algorithm for Reducing Delay Variation on Bounded Multicast Trees,” Springer-Verlag Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, vol. 3090, pp. 440-450, September 2004.

800

Y. Ahn et al.

2. G. N. Rouskas and I. Baldine, “Multicast routing with end-to-end delay and delay
variation constraints,” IEEE JSAC, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 346-356, April 1997.
3. P.-R. Sheu and S.-T. Chen, “A fast and eﬃcient heuristic algorithm for the delayand delay variation bound multicast tree problem,” Information Networking, Proc.
ICOIN-15, pp. 611-618, January 2001.

