The Numerical Approach to Analysis of
Microchannel Cooling Systems
Ewa Raj, Zbigniew Lisik, Malgorzata Langer,
Grzegorz Tosik, and Janusz Wozny
Institute of Electronics, Technical University of Lodz,
223 Wolczanska Str, 90-924, Lodz, Poland
{ewaraj, lisikzby, malanger,
grzegorz.tosik, jwozny}@p.lodz.pl

Abstract. The paper deals with microchannel cooling where water is the
cooling liquid. ANSYS software and CFDRC-ACE one were used to analyse
the flows and the origin of large amount of heat that can be overtaken from the
chip when microchannels are applied. The concept of microscale heat transfer
coefficient is discussed. The phenomena taking place in microchannel flows are
simulated and some conclusions are introduced to explain the results met in
many references but still unexplained. In contrast to existing, standard methods,
the new approach describes the local phenomena and is used in the further
investigation of the cooling microstructure. An effect of its geometry on the
total overtaken heat flux is analysed with respect to optimal conditions as well
as to technological restrictions.

1 Introduction
The fast development of nowadays electronics induces the increase of heat dissipation
inside semiconductor structures. In case of power module, the total power can exceed
1kW [1, 2] and the heat flux that needs to be overtaken from the device reaches
several MW/m2. The greatest problem nowadays is not only the huge amount of heat
dissipation but mainly its density at the surface of the structure. Therefore, one has
revealed the challenging task: to design as effective heat exchanger as only possible
with regard to microelectronic dimensions restrictions.
A forced cooling system with the coolant characterised by the large enough heat
capacity and thermal conductivity could meet these demands only. For example, it
could be a liquid cooling system with water as a cooling medium, and such systems
already exist. Their effectiveness can be improved when one introduces the coolant
stream as close to the heat source as possible. This idea has been employed in a new
solution of a liquid cooling system that is based on microchannels formed in the
substrate of semiconductor device [3-5], or in cooling microstructure placed at the
chip directly [6, 7]. Unfortunately, such a huge heat transfer capacity has been
observed at very large inlet pressure, e.g. above 200kPa in [3], that is unacceptable
because of the reliability and the life of the electronic equipment.
Although the differences in the behaviour of liquid flow in the micro- and
macrostructures have been already reported [3-12], no coherent explanation of their
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3514, pp. 876 – 883, 2005.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

The Numerical Approach to Analysis of Microchannel Cooling Systems

877

origin exists. In [11], they have noticed that the flow character in microchannels
changes for much smaller values of Reynolds numbers. Others observed in [12] the
slip of water flowing in microchannels while there is no possibility to observe the
phenomenon in macrochannels under these particular conditions. It indicates that the
transition from the macroscale, corresponding to the typical liquid cooling systems, to
the microscale, when the considered thermal phenomena take place, is not the scaling
problem only but it creates quite new problems in heat and mass transport. The lack
of their satisfactory description as well as the contradictory opinions presented by
different authors encouraged us to analyse the problems from the microchannel
cooling efficiency aspect. Some of our results are presented in the paper.

2 Heat and Mass Transfer in Microchannels
The rise of turbulent flow should be described from the origin; when the fluid makes
contact with the surface, viscous effects become significant. As a result, boundary
layers develop with increasing distance from the inlet, until they merge at the
centreline. Then the flow is fully developed and the distance at which this condition is
achieved is called hydrodynamic entrance length. Within the fully developed region
one can distinguish a turbulent core and a laminar sublayer. In the first region the heat
is transferred by the mass transport whereas in the second one, the heat transport is
dominated by diffusion. In consequence, this area is responsible for heat exchange at
the solid-fluid border mainly.
2.1 One Channel Approach
At first, our interest has been devoted to analyse the heat overtaking process by the
water flow through a single channel. We have based it on simulations of water
cooling conducted with the aid of ANSYS and CFDRC-ACE software. The heat
transfer process has been investigated with use of the heat transfer coefficient that
represents the amount of heat overtaken by the coolant that flows along the cooled
walls with respect to assumed temperature difference between the wall temperature
and the reference ambient one. When one considers liquid heat exchange systems, the
heat transfer coefficient is commonly considered as the ratio of the heat flux
overtaken from the wall at some particular point and the difference of the point
temperature and some reference one that usually is the liquid inlet temperature, the
same for the whole heat exchange system [13]. Such an attitude to the analysis of heat
exchange problems can be called the macroscale one with the macroscale heat
transfer coefficient that refers the local thermal phenomena to one arbitrary, defined
temperature. This feature of the macroscale coefficient allows to treat the system as
the whole and to estimate the influence of the system design on the entire heat
exchange process. Its value does not, however, depend on the real heat exchange
ability at the particular point only and does not characterise the local heat exchange
phenomenon. It is evident when we consider the changes of the macroscale
coefficient along the channel shown in Fig.1. Its value decreases although no changes
in the mechanics of the heat exchange take place.

E. Raj et al.
6.00

2

heat transfer coefficient [W/cm K]

878

5.00
4.00
Micro

3.00

Macro

2.00
1.00
-

0.30

0.60

0.90

1.20

channel length [cm]

Fig. 1. Micro and macro heat transfer coefficient versus the channel length

The macroscale approach is not sufficient in case of microscale problems, like the
microchanel cooling. Therefore, another definition of the heat transfer coefficient,
called microscale one, has been proposed. It introduces a new reference temperature
connected directly with the local heat exchange process instead of the inlet
temperature. It seems that the temperature at the turbulent core – the laminar sublayer
border meets this demand the best. The efficiency of the heat overtaking process
depends on the heat diffusion that depends directly on the laminar sublayer thickness.
The thinner laminar sublayer the smaller difference between the wall temperature and
the temperature just on the border, and in consequence the better cooling abilities are.
The right of above argument has been confirmed by the results of single channel
simulations performed for homogeneous heat dissipation on one wall (Fig.1). While
the macroscale coefficient changes along the channel the microscale one remains
constant what is in agreement with the mechanics of the heat exchange phenomenon.
Its a little larger value at the inlet is obvious when we take into account the laminar
sublayer that starts to create itself at the inlet. At the beginning it is very narrow and
achieves the final thickness on some distance. At the inlet the laminar sublayer is
narrower what leads to more intensive heat exchange.
2.2 Multi-channel Approach
In Fig. 2, one can find the outline of the copper structure that has been investigated as
an example of multichannel cooler [8, 9]. It contains several microchannels, with the
dimensions wCHxh; separated by the walls (columns) of the thickness wCOL. Since the
heat exchange processes are homogeneous along the channel if the microscale heat
transfer coefficient is used, the 3D analysis can be simplified to the investigation of
2D model that is a crosscut in the direction perpendicular to the water flow.
Once again the incoherent reports [3,5,7] forced us to look for the optimal
geometry of the presented above structure. The series of numerical simulations lead
us to the conclusion that in the microstructure, one can find two competitive
phenomena: the enhancement and the chocking effect. The total heat removal
increases when the number and the height of channels increase since the larger area of
the water-heat sink contact is observed. On the other hand, the overtaken heat flux

The Numerical Approach to Analysis of Microchannel Cooling Systems

879

decreases when the column width decreases due to the chocking effect that results in
reduction of the temperature at the bottom wall of the channel.

h

wCOL

wCH

Fig. 2. The 3D multichannel structure

With the aid of numerical analysis, an influence of the channel width and height,
the column width as well as the heat transfer coefficient on total heat overtaken from
the structure have been examined. The considerations above are illustrated graphically
in Fig. 3. The chart presents two curves for the constant column and channel width
(2mm) and for two chosen heights, one twice as high as the other. The simulations
have been performed for the heat transfer coefficient equal to 10W/cm2K. This value
has been settled with the aid of one channel simulations. One can easily notice the
peaks in the curves that are created by the two phenomena. The most crucial
conclusion is that the optimal geometry of the structure from Fig. 2 exists. There are
certain ranges of parameters deviations from the most preferable values where
changes have no influence on the efficiency of the whole system.
690

chocking
effect

2

heat flux [W/cm ]

670

enhancement
effect

2h

650
630
h

610
590
570
550
-

0.50

1.00

1.50

2.00

w COL / w CH [-]

Fig. 3. Two competitive phenomena in the characteristic of heat flux versus the ratio of the
column and the channel

3 Inlet Elements
All the above considerations deal with the fully developed turbulent flow inside the
microchannel cooler. Its efficiency depends, however, on the flow velocity inside the

880

E. Raj et al.

channels and the input pressure that are strongly combined each with the other. Since
the pressure across the liquid cooling unit is limited in microelectronic applications
the pressure losses in inlet elements are of large importance for the final effectiveness
of the microchannel coolers. In addition, too high values of pressure and subpressure
can be very destructive, shorten the life and lower the reliability of the whole system.
Therefore, one must take into considerations the hydrodynamic entrance phenomena.
In this chapter some results of the numerical investigations of the inlet element
shape and its influence on the pressure distribution in a microchannel cooler are
reported. They present the 2D analysis that has been performed for the cross-section
of the cooling structure shown in Fig.3. It corresponds to the water flow path that
consists of the inlet chamber, the contraction and the microchannel section. In Fig. 3
two considered solutions of the cooling structure are depicted - the dotted line in the
contraction section shows the sharp edges structure, while the continuous one presents
the smooth structure. During the simulations, the contraction length, dk, has varied in
the range 5 ÷ 20mm. The other dimensions have been settled on the basis of the
design and technological restrictions as well as the results of earlier numerical
analysis. The simulations have been conducted with the aid of ANSYS software for
similar boundary conditions as the previous ones. The inlet pressure has been
assumed as equal to 40kPa and the outlet pressure has been kept at 0Pa. It has been
established on the basis of earlier considerations of mass flow resulting from the
pump efficiency and additional limits for allowable pressure in microstructures.
INLET CHAMBER
CONTRACTION
D

MICROCHANNEL

dk
Fig. 4. Outline of test structure

The results presented here concern simulations performed for the both types of
structures and for three contraction lengths 5, 10 and 20mm, respectively. They were
delivered by ANSYS in a form of maps presenting pressure distribution like the ones
in Fig. 5. The figure shows the pressure distribution in the both types of analyzed
structures for the contraction length dk = 10mm.
The basic data characterising the hydrodynamics processes in the considered inlet
elements, like the highest static subpressure pmin and the highest static pressure pmax,
have been extracted from the pressure maps and are collected in Table 1 together with
additional characteristic parameters discussed below.
Comparing the values of maximal and minimal pressure, one can notice a
surprising large magnitude of the subpressure in the sharp edge design contrary to the
smooth edge one, where the subpressure area almost does not exist.

The Numerical Approach to Analysis of Microchannel Cooling Systems

881

(a)

(b)
Fig. 5. Pressure distribution in the structures with dk = 10mm and with (a) sharp edges and
(b) smooth edges
Table 1. Characteristic parameters for various inlet structures

contraction length dk

pmin [kPa]

pmax [kPa] p3mm [kPa] dopt [mm]

sharp edge structures
5mm

- 47.4

40.09

4.05

6.50

10mm

- 41.1

40.09

5.39

3.00

20mm

- 20.2

40.09

5.86

1.50

smooth edge structures
5mm

- 1.8

40.11

5.92

1.40

10mm

0

40.10

5.96

1.20

20mm

0

40.09

5.82

1.00

It indicates that the additional efforts to get the smooth edge contraction are worth
to be undertaken. It can result in the higher reliability and the considerably longer
microstructure life. One can strengthen this result increasing the contraction length dk.
There are some natural limits arisen from the permissible length of the cooling
structure but they apply to sharp designs rather. In case of smooth inlets the
subpressure becomes negligible small at dk = 10 mm. The pressure gradients
generated in contraction segment penetrate the entrance of the microchannel
disrupting the pressure distribution in that region and changing the heat transfer
process inside the whole microstructure. Therefore, it is impossible to use an input
microchannel pressure to evaluate the microchannel cooling efficiency. One needs the

882

E. Raj et al.

input pressure independent on the local disturbance generated by the contraction
segment for this goal. One has assumed that this condition is met at the place where
the pressure starts to change linearly and the velocity profile is symmetrical. This
distance measured from the microchannel input is denoted as dopt, and its values for
considered structures are gathered in Table 1. They depend on the contraction shape
and dimensions. The smaller the value the lower turbulence and subpressure occur in
the microchannel entrance. In order to evaluate the influence of contraction segment
design on the phenomena in the microchannel cooling part, an optimal distance for
microchannel pressure determination for all the structures should be settled. It has
been chosen as equal to 3mm on the base of the dopt values. Such a value allows
comparing the pressures of all smooth and sharp edge structures. The average values
of the static pressure at 3mm are gathered in Table 1.
One can notice that the highest values of p3mm occur for smooth structures. It
means that in case of smooth structures one can observe lower pressure drop on inlet
element and higher in the microchannel. As a result, the water velocity is higher in
the microchannel, the turbulence is more intense and the heat overtaking efficiency is
better. On the other hand, the sharp edges introduce strong turbulent eddies at the
entrance to the channel that are suppressed at quite a long distance. This kind of
turbulences result in the high subpressure and can be very destructive for
microchannel structure what is an additional disadvantage of this design contrary to
the smooth one. The av. pressure at the 3mm from the inlet vs. contraction length for
the smooth structure is graphically presented in Fig. 3. The maximum pressure is
obtained for dk = 8mm. For the values of contraction length in the range from 5 to
10mm, the differences in pressure are lower than 1%. Hence one can choose an
arbitrary dk value from the given set. An area of low eddy turbulences (subpressure) is
created even for the smooth but too abrupt contraction. The elongation of dk causes
the shrinkage and finally diminishing of the subpressure region. It results in a peak at
the curve presented in Fig. 3.
6.00
5.95
p3mm [kPa]

5.90
5.85
5.80
5.75
5.70
5.65
5.60
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

dk [mm]

Fig. 6. The average pressure at the 3mm for smooth edge structures

4 Conclusions
The paper aims at the problem of microchannel liquid cooling system analysis. As an
necessary element of the analysis, a new method for heat transfer coefficient

The Numerical Approach to Analysis of Microchannel Cooling Systems

883

calculation that is dedicated for microscale analysis has been introduced. Contrary to
existing, standard methods, the new approach describes the local phenomena and is
used in the further investigation of the cooling microstructure. An effect of its
geometry on the total overtaken heat flux is analysed with respect to optimal
conditions as well as to technological restrictions. Furthermore, an influence of the
shape of the inlet element on pressure distribution in the structure is presented. It is
proven that the contraction length as well as the edge design is very essential for life
and reliability of the whole system and in consequence for thermal efficiency of the
microstructure. The main aims of the inlet element optimisation process are to
minimise maximum pressure and subpressure values, to reduce the subpressure area
and to decrease the pressure drop losses.

References
1. Capriz, C.: Trends in Cooling Technologies for Power Electronics. Power Electronics.
no 1/2 (1999) 22-24
2. Haque, S. et all: Thermal Management of High-Power Electronics Modules Packaged with
Interconnected Parallel Plates. SEMI-THERM, San Diego, USA, (1998) p. 111
3. Tuckerman, D.B., Pease, R.F.W.: High Performace Heat Sinking for VLSI. IEEE Electron
Devices Lett. EDL-2 (1981) 126-129
4. Goodson, K.: Electroosmotic Microchannel Cooling System for Microprocessor.
Electronics Cooling. Vol.8. (2002)
5. Harms, T.M., Kazimierczak, M.J., Gerner, F.M.: Developing Convective Heat Transfer in
Deep Rectangular Microchannels. Int. J. Heat Fluid Flow. Vol.20. (1999) 149-157
6. Sittig, R., Steiner, T.:Vision of Power Modules. Proc. Inter. Conf. CIPS 2000, Bermen,
Germany (2000) 134-139
7. Gillot, C.H., Bricard, A., Schaeffer, C.H.: Single and Two-phase heat exchangers for
Power Electronics. Int. J. Therm. Sci. Vol.39. (2000) 826-832
8. Raj, E., Langer, M., Lisik, Z.: Numerical Studies for Jet Liquid Cooling in Electronics.
Proc. Int. Conf. Thermic’2000. Zakopane, Poland (2000) 68-72
9. Langer, M., Lisik, Z., Raj, E.: Optimising of Microchannel Cooling. Proc. Int. Conf.
ICSES’2001. Łódź, Poland (2001) 383-387
10. Pfahler, J. et all: Liquid Transport in Micron and Submicron Channels. J. Sensors
Actuators. Vol.21. (1990) 431-434
11. Peng, X.F., Peterson, G.P.: Convective Heat Transfer and Flow Friction for Water in
Microchannel Structures. Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer . Vol.39. (1996) 2599-2608
12. Tretheway, D.C., Meinhart, C.D.: Apparent Fluid Slip at Hydrophobic Microchannel
Walls. Physics of Fluids. Vol.14. (2002)
13. Incropera, F.P., DeWitt, D.P.: Fundamentals of Heat and Mass Transfer. 3rd ed.
Wiley-Interscience, New York (1990)

