The Impact of Background Error on Incomplete
Observations for 4D-Var Data Assimilation with
the FSU GSM
I. Michael Navon1, Dacian N. Daescu2 , and Zhuo Liu1
1

2

School of Computational Science and Information Technology,
Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL
navon@csit.fsu.edu
Dept. of Mathematics and Statistics, Portland State University, Portland, OR

Abstract. To assess the impact of incomplete observations on the 4DVar data assimilation, twin experiments were carried out with the dynamical core of the new FSU GSM consisting of a T126L14 global spectral model in a MPI parallel environment. Results and qualitative aspects
are presented for incomplete data in the spatial dimension and for incomplete data in time, with and without inclusion of the background
term into the cost functional. The importance of the background estimate on the 4D-Var analysis in the presence of small Gaussian errors in
incomplete data is also investigated.
Keywords: Data assimilation, incomplete observations, background
error.

1

Introduction

A major issue in data assimilation is that the observing system providing full
coverage, i.e., satellites rely on tuning procedures based on the radiosonde observing network and therefore are not well tuned over regions where the radiosonde network is sparse. In the southern hemisphere and tropics where most
of the surface is covered by oceans, observations are sparse lacking density and
uniformity of conventional wind-proﬁle data coverage distribution available in
Northern hemisphere.
In this paper, a new MPI-based parallel version of FSU global spectral model
and its adjoint is used to study the impact of incomplete observations in space
and time dimension on variational data assimilation. The impact of inclusion
of a background error covariance term in the 4-D Var data assimilation cost
functional formulation is analyzed. It is crucial for the performance of the analysis system to include the background term to ensure that observations produce
statistically consistent increments for model variables that are both smooth and
balanced. When data sparse areas or data void areas are present, the background
propagates information from observations at earlier times into the data voids.
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3515, pp. 837–844, 2005.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

838

I.M. Navon, D.N. Daescu, and Z. Liu

This means that correlations in background error covariance matrix B will perform spatial spreading of information from observation points to a ﬁnite domain
surrounding them.
Measurement of background error covariances has been addressed in the work
of Hollingsworth and Lonnberg [2], Parrish and Derber [7], and Ingleby [3], to
name a few. Since the background error covariance matrix is of huge dimensions, eﬃcient ways to estimate it need to be derived. The inverse covariance
matrix of B is represented via control variable transforms in order to obtain a
simpliﬁcation. See for instance Lorenc et al. [6].
The structure of this paper is as follows. In section 2, we brieﬂy present a
basic description of the FSU Global Spectral Model and its implementation. The
formulation of the 4D variational data assimilation problem and the speciﬁcation
of the background error covariance matrix are discussed in section 3. In section
4 numerical results with incomplete observations in both spatial and temporal
domains are described in a twin experiments setup. Assimilation of sparse noisy
data is also discussed. Summary and conclusions are presented in section 5.

2

Short Description of the FSU GSM

The FSU GSM is a spectral global hydrostatic primitive equation model. The
prognostic variables are vorticity, divergence, virtual temperature, moisture and
logarithm of surface pressure. The model uses the spectral technique in the
horizontal direction, and second order ﬁnite diﬀerence in the vertical. For details
we refer to Krishnamurti et al. [4]. The wave number truncation used in the
numerical experiments is T126 for real time forecasts. Higher resolutions may be
used for research purposes. A σ coordinate system with 14 σ-levels is used in the
vertical. The model physics include long and shortwave radiation, boundary layer
processes, large scale precipitation and shallow and deep cumulus convection.

3

The Background Error in 4D-Var Data Assimilation

One of the important issues in variational data assimilation is the speciﬁcation
of the background error covariance matrix. In recent years, a number of research
eﬀorts were dedicated to the study of what is known as the background error
term denoted by Jb and usually included in the deﬁnition of the basic cost
function
1
Jb (X0 ) = (X0 − Xb )T B−1 (X0 − Xb ) .
2
In the equation above X0 − Xb represents the departures of the model variables at start of the analysis from the background ﬁeld Xb ; B is an approximation to the covariance matrix of background error.
In this case, the cost function J assumes the form
J(X0 ) = Jb (X0 ) + Jo (X0 )

(1)

The Impact of Background Error on Incomplete Observations

839

where Jo (X0 ) is the distance to observations of a forecast initiated from X0 .
With the inclusion of background error term, we can prove the uniqueness of the
solution of the minimization process with incomplete observations for the linear
case [8]. For the nonlinear case, uniqueness may be guaranteed under restricted
conditions only.
3.1

Formulation of the Background Error Covariance

The background error covariance matrix is of rather huge dimension , its typical
size being of 106 × 106 elements. This is not tractable either from viewpoint of
storage requirements or from that of available statistical information.
To avoid calculating the inverse of B, we decided to proceed with a simple
1
1
form of B−1 by taking B = D 2 CD 2 , where C was taken to vary only along the
horizontal dimensions and D is a diagonal matrix. We deﬁned
C−1 ≈ w0 I + w2 ∇2 ∇2

(2)

where w0 and w2 are chosen such that the power spectrum is similar to that of
the Gaussian correlation function (see Daley [1]):
1 xi − xj
−
l
Cij = e 2

2

(3)

where xi − xj is the distance between grid points and l is the correlation length
scale.
The variance matrix D was chosen to vary in the vertical such that its inverse
diminished in the upper levels (M. Zupanski, personal communication).
1

d 2 = αe−β((p−pref )/1000.)

2

1

where d 2 represents the square root of the diagonal element of D, which varies
only along the vertical coordinate, p is the pressure and pref is reference pressure
which taken the values from 100hPa to 250hPa according to diﬀerent variables, so
the the inverse of the variance will diminish around the upper reference pressure
1
level. α and β are used to adjust the distribution of d 2 along vertical coordinate.

4

Numerical Experiments with Incomplete Observations

Twin experiments were carried out using the dynamical core of the FSU GSM
with complete observations which served as the control run. The length of data
assimilation window was set to 6 hours from 06UTC Oct. 2, 2002 to 12UTC Oct.
2, 2002.
The observation data were generated by integrating the forward model 6
hours from an initialized ECMWF analysis at 06UTC Oct. 2, 2002 (thereafter
referred to as unperturbed initial data), and were available at every timestep
and at each Gaussian grid point. The initial guess of the initial condition was

840

I.M. Navon, D.N. Daescu, and Z. Liu

taken from the initialized ECMWF analysis at 00UTC Oct. 2, 2002 (thereafter
refer to perturbed initial data), which is 6 hours prior to the initial time level.
A suitable choice of the background state Xb is important, since it will
strongly aﬀect retrieved initial data. In our experiments, the data were generated by integrating the forward model 6 hours prior to the initial time 00UTC
Oct. 2, 2002, arriving at same initial time as the start time of the data assimilation window (06UTC Oct. 2, 2002). The limited-memory quasi-Newton method
of Liu and Nocedal [5] (L-BFGS) was used to carry out the unconstrained minimization process to obtain the optimal initial data. To simulate the case of
incomplete observations, we reduced the number of observations available in the
space dimension to every 2, 4 or 8 grid points, respectively. In order to investigate impact of incomplete observations over data void areas, we carried out an
experiment where observations over all grid points located over oceans of the
Southern hemisphere were missing. In another experiment we reduced the observations in the time dimension to be available only every 2, 4 or 8 timesteps,
respectively. The impact of the background term in the retrieval of initial conditions is further analyzed in experiments where small random, Gaussian, noise
is added to the incomplete observational data.
4.1

4D-Var Assimilation Experiments Without Background Term

Figure 1 provides the rms errors of height ﬁeld at 500 hPa, calculated between the
ﬁelds of model generated observations and the ﬁelds obtained by integrating the
optimized initial data with incomplete observation after 40 function evaluations
(left) and after 100 function evaluations (right). It shows that for incomplete observations in space dimension, the error reduction obtained by the minimization
process for incomplete observations depends on density of observations in space
dimension.
For observations available every 2 grid points, although the decrease rate of
the cost function is slowed down, it can still retrieve the initial data to a certain
degree, while for observations available only at every 4 or 8 grid points, the
errors increase to a higher degree. The sparser the density of the observations, the
larger the departure from observations obtained with minimization of incomplete
observations. This issue becomes evident for the data-void area experiment in
which case the retrieved initial data were erroneous ( i.e. rms diﬀerence was quite
large). For incomplete observations in the time dimension there were only minor
diﬀerences in the retrieved initial data for the diﬀerent cases considered.
4.2

Impact of the Background Error Term on 4D-Var

Since the background error term provides information related to the initial data,
we carried out a number of experiments with incomplete observations in the
space dimension with a background error term Jb included in the cost function.
The results show that the behavior of the minimization process when background
covariance term is included in the cost functional is quite diﬀerent from the one
without its inclusion. Figure 2 (left) shows the rms errors of height ﬁeld at 500

The Impact of Background Error on Incomplete Observations

841

Fig. 1. Time evolution of rms of the height ﬁeld at 500 hPa after 40 function evaluations (left) and after 100 function evaluations (right) for diﬀerent cases of incomplete
observations without inclusion of background error term, red( )–non-optimized, i.e. result obtained by integrating perturbed initial condition, aqua( , long dash)–optimized
by complete observations, dark purple(•, short dash)–optimized by incomplete observations available every 2 grid points, dark blue(♦, long dash short dash)–optimized by
incomplete observations available every 4 grid points, light green(x, dotted)–optimized
by incomplete observations available every 8 grid points, orange( , dot dot dash)–
optimized by incomplete observations that data missing over south hemisphere oceans,
magenta(◦, solid)–optimized by incomplete observations available every 2 timesteps,
light blue( , solid)–optimized by incomplete observations available every 4 timesteps,
yellow(x, solid)–optimized by incomplete observations available every 8 timesteps

hPa, calculated between the ﬁelds obtained by integrating the optimized initial
data with complete observations and the ﬁelds obtained by integrating optimized
initial data with incomplete observations after 40 function evaluations. It shows
that for incomplete observations in the space dimension, like for the case of exclusion of background error term, the error reduction obtained by the minimization
process with incomplete observations depends on the density of the observations
in space dimension. We observe that the rms curves after 40 function evaluations exhibit 6- hour oscillations for both incomplete observations in space (
observations available every 2-gridpoints) as well as for incomplete observations
in time. To assess whether this oscillation is due to the fact that inclusion of
background error term altered rate of convergence of the minimization, we carried out an experiment where the rms curves were calculated after 100 function
evaluations. The results are also shown in Fig. 2 (right) and we noticed that in
this case the abovementioned oscillations vanished which points strongly to the
fact that inclusion of background error term has altered structure of spectrum
of Hessian of cost functional, thus changing convergence rate characteristics of
the minimization.

842

I.M. Navon, D.N. Daescu, and Z. Liu

Fig. 2. Time evolution of rms of the height ﬁeld at 500 hPa after 40 function evaluations (left) and after 100 function evaluation (right) for diﬀerent cases of incomplete observations with inclusion of background error term, red( )–non-optimized, i.e.
result obtained by integrating the perturbed initial condition, dark purple(•, short
dash)–optimized by incomplete observations available every 2 grid points, dark blue(♦,
long dash short dash)–optimized by incomplete observations available every 4 grid
points, light green(x, dotted)–optimized by incomplete observations available every 8
grid points, orange( , dot dot dash)–optimized by incomplete observations where data
is missing over south hemisphere oceans, magenta(◦, solid)–optimized by incomplete
observations available every 2 timesteps, light blue( , solid)–optimized by incomplete
observations available every 4 timesteps, yellow(x, solid)–optimized by incomplete observations available every 8 timesteps

4.3

The Impact of the Background Term in the Presence of Errors
in Incomplete Observations

In this section numerical experiments are used to investigate the impact of the
background term on the retrieval of the initial conditions when a small Gaussian noise of up to 0.1% is added to the incomplete observations. For briefness,
we discuss only two representative cases: ﬁrst, perturbed observations are incomplete in space, available on a sparse subgrid at every 8 grid points for each
horizontal level; second, perturbed observations are incomplete in time, available
every 8 time steps (each hour since the integration time step is ∆t = 450s). For
each case two data assimilation experiments are set up: one without the background term and one with the background term included in the cost functional.
The ECMWF analysis at 06UTC Oct. 2, 2002 is used as reference initial state
in the qualitative analysis of the results. For computational considerations, we
restricted the minimization process to 25 iterations or 30 function evaluations,
whichever limit is reached ﬁrst.

The Impact of Background Error on Incomplete Observations

843

Incomplete Observations in Space. In a ﬁrst experiment, we consider the
assimilation of noisy data, sparse in the spatial dimension, in the absence of the
background term. The errors in the retrieved initial conditions for the 500hPa
height ﬁeld ranged from −8m to 10m and we noticed that the analysis errors
were distributed throughout the spatial domain with no particular structure
and with magnitude about twice as large as the errors in observations. When
the background term was included into the cost functional we noticed that the
distance to observations increases during the ﬁrst 24 iterations and the analysis
was signiﬁcantly closer to the background. Therefore we expect a slow assimilation process that may beneﬁt from a better scaling between Jb and Jo . The
errors in the retrieved initial conditions for the 500hPa height ﬁeld typically
ranged from −10m to 10m.
Incomplete Observations in Time. Assimilation of the noisy data, incomplete in time, and without background term provided improved results as compared to the noisy data, incomplete in space experiment. In this case, the errors
in the retrieved initial conditions for the 500hPa height ﬁeld ranged from −5m to
4m. The experiment with the background term included into the cost functional
provided an analysis closer to both background term and observations. Errors in
the retrieved initial conditions for the 500hPa height ﬁeld typically ranged from
−10m to 10m.

5

Summary and Conclusions

We analyzed the impact of inclusion of the background error term for incomplete
observations in either space or time in the framework of 4-D Var data assimilation
with the FSU GSM and its adjoint model. First we carried out the experiments
on the impact of incomplete observations in absence of the background error
term for 4-D Var data assimilation with the FSU GSM. Results show that for
incomplete observations in space dimension, the minimization process fails to
successfully retrieve the initial data, while for incomplete observations in time
dimension, the minimization process can retrieve the initial data. Then we carried out a series of experiments on the impact of background term on incomplete
observations for 4-D Var data assimilation with the FSU GSM. For the sake of
simpliﬁcation, we calculated the inverse of the background covariance matrix
B−1 directly by using a diﬀusion operator. This avoided the calculation of the
inverse of a huge dimension matrix.
Results obtained show that, inclusion of the background error term had a
positive impact on convergence of minimization for incomplete observations in
space dimension. The sparser the incomplete observations in space dimension,
the stronger was the impact of the background error term. However for the
case of a data void over the southern hemisphere oceans, the convergence of
minimization was observed to be slowed-down.
In contrast to the case of incomplete observations in the space dimension, the
background error term had a negative impact on the convergence of minimiza-

844

I.M. Navon, D.N. Daescu, and Z. Liu

tion for incomplete observations in time dimension. The sparser the incomplete
observations in time dimension, the larger the negative impact of the background
error term. The time evolution of the rms error of the height ﬁeld at 500 hPa
for a 72-hours forecast for diﬀerent cases of incomplete observations with and
without inclusion of the background error term were discussed.
Numerical experiments with small noise added to the incomplete observations
were also considered. In the absence of the background term, we noticed that errors in incomplete observations in space resulted in larger errors in the analysis estimate, whereas errors in incomplete observations in time resulted in errors of similar magnitude in the analysis estimate. When the background term was included,
assimilation of noisy incomplete data in space resulted into a slow optimization
process, with the analysis state close to the background estimate and further from
data. By contrast, the analysis state provided by the assimilation of incomplete
data in time provided an analysis closer to both background and observations.
These experiments also indicate that in the case of incomplete observations
the speciﬁcation of the background estimate becomes of crucial importance to the
analysis. Extension of this study to a full physics version with realistic observations should provide additional insight about the role played by the background
error in 4-D Var with incomplete observations.

Acknowledgements
This work was funded by NSF Grant ATM-0201808. The authors would like to
thank Dr. Linda Peng the grant manager. We would like to thank Dr. Milija Zupanski for his helpful and insightful advice and his generous sharing of his code.

References
1. Daley, R.: Atmospheric Data Analysis. Cambridge University Press, New York
(1991)
2. Hollingsworth, A. and L¨
onnberg, P.: The statistical structure of short-range forecast errors as determined from radiosonde data. Part I:the wind ﬁeld. Tellus 38A
(1986) 111–136.
3. Ingleby, N.B.: The statistical structure of forecast errors and its representation in
the Met Oﬃce global 3D variational data assimilation scheme,Q.J.R. Meteorol.
Soc. 127 (2001) 209–231.
4. Krishnamurti T.N., Bedi, H.S. and Hardiker, V.M.: An introduction to global spectral modeling, Oxford University Press (1998)
5. Liu, D.C., and Nocedal, J.: On the limited memory BFGS method for large scale
optimization. Math. Programm. 45 (1989) 503–528.
6. Lorenc, A.C. and Coauthors: The Met Oﬃce global 3D variational data assimilation scheme. Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc. 126 (2000) 2991–3012.
7. Parrish, D.F. and Derber, J.: The national meteorological center’s spectral
statistical-interpolation analysis system. Mon. Wea. Rev. 120 (1992) 1747–1763.
8. Zou, X., Navon, I.M. and Le-Dimet, F.X.: Incomplete observations and control of
gravity waves in variational data assimilation. Tellus 44A (1992) 273–296.

