ECVlab: A Web-Based Virtual Laboratory
System for Electronic Circuit Simulation
Ouyang Yang, Dong Yabo, Zhu Miaoliang,
Huang Yuewei, Mao Song, and Mao Yunjie
Lab of Networking Center, Collage of Computer Science and Technology
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, P.R.China
{lily, dongyb, zhum, yuewei, mason, myjesky}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract. In this paper, we describe the design and implementation of
a web-based electronic circuit simulation system named ECVlab. This
system combines technologies as rich client technology, XML, and circuit
simulation, and provides the user with vivid interface, convenient operation and powerful simulation capability. At the moment, ECVlab has
been implemented and successfully applied in an undergraduate course
in Zhejiang University and it was evaluated by undergraduate students.
Students made statistically signiﬁcant learning gains as a result of using
ECVlab, and rated them positively in terms of improving operation capability, enhancing interests for digital circuit and oﬀering opportunity
to inspire innovation and exploration.

1

Introduction

Nowadays, there is an increasing interest in web-based education for its prominent advantages of system opening and resources reusability. At universities,
electronic circuit experiment is a vital part of higher education since it is a
valuable method of learning which gives a learner the feeling of involvement. It
can practice students’ operation ability and also provide a good opportunity for
them to put into practice what they’ve learned in class. And the learning process
can be best facilitated if tools and models are freely and widely available, not
just in the dedicated laboratories. Web-based simulation environments, combining distance education, group training and real-time interaction, can serve as a
good approach.
Simulation is a process, during which experiments are conducted on a designed real system model for the purpose of understanding the behavior of the
system or evaluating various strategies for the operation of the system. The
power of simulation is the ability to model the dynamics of a real system and
to analyze the results [6]. Meanwhile, the availability and interactive nature of
web-based simulation serves as a good medium for students to experience the
complexity of collaborative work.
This paper is to present a web-based virtual laboratory system for electronic
circuit simulation (ECVlab). In this system, students can conduct experiment
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3514, pp. 1027–1034, 2005.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

1028

O. Yang et al.

through web browser using virtual apparatuses like multimeter and equipments
like resistance and tolerance.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we list some related
Web-based simulations. The design and structure of the vlab system is speciﬁed
in section 3. In section 4, we demonstrate an example of applying our system.
Later, an analysis of survey in undergraduate students is presented in section
5. Finally, in section 6, we draw conclusions of this work and point out some
directions of future work.

2

Related Works

Web-based simulation represents the combination of rapidly-developing internet
& multimedia technology and simulation science. The ability of web technologies
enhances the power of simulation in that web can service large simulation communities and allow developers to distribute models and simulations to end users.
Since Fishwick [4] started to explore Web-based simulation as a new research
area in the ﬁeld of simulation, many Web-based simulation models and support
systems have been developed.
Kuljis and Paul [2] introduced a variety of new technologies for discrete-event
Web-based simulation technologies and reviewed related environments and languages too. John C. Waller and Natalie Foster [1] designed a virtual GC-MS
(Gas Chromatography / Mass Spectrometry) by means of copying presentation of monitor to the screen. Students can operate this virtual instrument via
web and the real instrument can be used to take more valuable experiment.
Cheng K.W.E. et.al [3] demonstrated how a power electronics experiment is
programmed in a remotely controlled laboratory setup. Huang and Miller [5]
presented a prototype implementation of a Web-based federated simulation system using Jini and XML.
Some of the above simulation systems operate the experimental equipment
through remote control and monitor by web-based tools. Due to the involvement of real equipment, limitation of cooperation and risk of damaging certain
equipment still exist. The application of Java development tools and JavaBeans
technology are widely used in several simulation systems. However, the interface
developed by java applet is lack of intuitive and vivid expression. The major
contribution of our work is to design a rich client simulation system which is
totally independent of real experiment environment.

3
3.1

ECVlab System
Design Objectives

The ECVlab system is based on the project supported by a grant from the
National Key Technologies R & D Program of China. As an assistant experiment
education system which plays an important role in distance-learning, it should
be provided with characteristics such as relatively low requirement of system

ECVlab: A Web-Based Virtual Laboratory System

1029

resources, powerful collaboration capability between user and server, platform
ﬂexibility, high performance of transform and communication on internet and so
on. Furthermore, the system should provide students with real expression.
3.2

System Architecture

The ECVlab system uses an Browser/Server system architecture, which is shown
in ﬁgure 1.

Client: Web browser
( Flash Player plug in)

Server:
Apache+SPICE+MysQL

PHP Module
XML Socket
Users

Web Server
UN

IX

Application Server

OD

BC
Database Server

Simulator Engine

Fig. 1. ECVlab System Architecture

The server side runs on Linux system and can be divided into 3 parts: web
server, application server and database server. The web server is responsible for
user authentication, establishment of the virtual experiment framework, maintenance of user information; the application server manages the communication
with multiple online ﬂash client users, transfers parsed or encapsulated data to
the spice simulator and return the results to client side. In ECVlab, information
about user and experiments are stalled in database server, while the simulation
logic is contained in application server.
On the server side, simulator engine plays an important roll in the whole
system and we utilize SPICE (Simulation Program with Integrated Circuit Emphasis) to meet our simulation requirements. SPICE is a general-purpose circuit
simulation program for nonlinear dc, nonlinear transient, and linear ac analysis
which enables server to simulate analog circuit and print output in ASCII text.
The client side consists of the web browser and the embedded ﬂash. Flash is
a multimedia graphics program especially for use on the web. Compared with
Animated images and Java applets, which are often used to create dynamic
eﬀects on Web pages, the advantages of Flash are:
–
–
–
–

Flash loads much faster than animated images
Flash allows interactivity, whereas animated images do not
Flash can create a real scene , whereas Java applets can’t
Flash edition 2004 supports the object-oriented technology which enables us
to develop powerful interactive web animation

1030

O. Yang et al.

With these features, we use Flash to construct the virtual experiment environment. More detailed discussion about the interface will be shown in section
4. When a user starts an experiment, the client side ﬁrstly logins to the server
through web browser and after certiﬁcation, the user logins to the ECVlab system. After entering certain experiment, virtual experiment environment downloads automatically from the web browser and runs. During the experiment
process, the environment consistently communicates with the application server
to exchange data and display the simulation results.
3.3

Communication Protocol

An expandable and ﬂexible communication protocol between server and client
plays an important role in a well-designed web-based Vlab system. In our system,
the protocol is used to transport following information:
– 1) Information about experiment and user, such as user name and password,
experiment id and so on,
– 2) Parameters of components like value of resistance and apparatuses like
pace of oscillograph,
– 3) Simulation results returned from simulator engine.
We use XML to construct the communication protocol. XML is a markup
language for documents containing structured information and is designed to
describe data that allows the author to deﬁne his own tags document structure.
With this powerful data-exchange language, we can construct our own protocol
by deﬁning tags related to parameters of apparatus and simulation results. The
form of ECVlab communication protocol is shown in ﬁgure 2.
The communication model of the ECVlab is shown in ﬁgure 3. The ECVlab
system can be conveniently layered into four abstract levels. When the circuit

Experiment

Wires

Varouts

Outlets

Apparatuses

Wire

Wave

Voltage

Frequency

Outlet

Multimeter

Generator

Logpens

Lights

Input

Part

Leds

Parts

File

Massege

Requests

Time

Type

Files

Response

Request

Expmodel

Neighbours

Param

Pins

Param

Fig. 2. ECVlab Communication Protocol

ECVlab: A Web-Based Virtual Laboratory System

1031

Transport Tier
Interface Tier

C
L
I
E
T

Encapsulate
Experiment
Data
Analysis
Simulation
Data

Data Manage Tier

S
O
C
K
E
T

XML

XML

S
O
C
K
E
T

Analysis
Experiment
Data

Simulation Tier

Construct
CIR File
CIR

Encapsulate
Simulation
Data

SPICE
Simulator
Engine

Analysis
OUT File
OUT

Fig. 3. Communication Mechanism of ECVlab

began to simulate, the circuit description ﬁle which contained circuit parameters and control information was encapsulated in XML ﬁle and transferred from
interface layer to the data manage layer by socket. Later the submitted data
was transferred into the formatted data needed by simulator engine and created
a SPICE supported input ﬁle (.cir). After the simulator engine worked out the
results and stored them in a .out ﬁle, the data management layer was responsible for analyzing the output and encapsulating required information into XML
ﬁle similarly. Finally, the client converted the results into the form shown in
apparatus such as the waveform shown in oscillograph and the voltage value in
multimeter.

4

An Example of Using the ECVlab

We select one experiment of analog circuit in the undergraduate courses named
Operation Ampliﬁer (OPAMP). Through this experiment, students learn to use
operation ampliﬁer, resistance and capacitor to construct analog operation circuit and analyze the function of this circuit. In ﬁgure 4, the schematic diagram
of OPAMP is shown in a), and b) demonstrates the equivalent circuit built by
user in the virtual circuit environment.
Figure 5 shows a snapshot of the interface in ECVlab and demonstrates simulation results of the OPAMP. On the left hand, the system displays the tool
bar which contains buttons for diﬀerent operations. When a user starts to construct a circuit, he can add necessary components with appointed value to the
circuit from the tool bar. For example, in OPAMP, user can add one operation
ampliﬁer and several resistances. After that, user needs to connect lines between
these components. ECVlab enables the user to add or delete lines from this virtual circuit board freely and change the color of lines to diﬀerentiate between
each others. In order to modify the circuit parameters and obtain the results of
the experiment, user should use several apparatuses such as multimeter, oscillograph, and signal generator. In our system, the user can choose which of these
apparatuses to be displayed on screen, and can zoom out or zoom in or move
around at will. Furthermore, all these virtual apparatuses are highly similar to
the real ones and the user can operate the buttons on them to modify parame-

1032

O. Yang et al.

RF
100 K

US

+15V

R2

U0

A

20 K

+
-15V
R

6.2K

(a) Schematic Circuit Diagram

(b) Equivalent Virtual Circuit

Fig. 4. OPAMP Electronic Circuit

Fig. 5. Interface of ECVlab

ters of the circuit. On the right hand lists the guidance about this experiment,
the user can check it anytime during the process.
Once the circuit has been constructed, user can click the power button on
the left corner. The ongoing status and results sent back from server will be
displayed in related virtual apparatuses. As shown in ﬁgure 5, we can clearly
see the wave of the input signal and the ampliﬁed output signal on the screen
of oscillograph as a result of the OPAMP. If the user adjusts the parameters
of circuit or apparatus, for example, changes the signal frequency of the signal
generator, the displayed result will be refreshed in real time.
The ECVlab also provides the user with convenient load and save mechanism
to keep the status of the circuit which facilitates the experiment process a lot.

ECVlab: A Web-Based Virtual Laboratory System

5

1033

Implementation

Presently, the ECVlab has been implemented and successfully applied to the
students as an undergraduate course in Zhejiang University. In order to evaluate
the eﬀects, we conduct a survey among the students who have used the system
for a semester. According to the results, around 87% of the students think the
ECVlab is helpful to their study, concerning both theory and experiments. Figure
6 demonstrates the analysis of the survey about how does the ECVlab facilitate
in Electronic Circuit study.

How dose the ECVlab facilitate your study in
Electronic Circuit class

45.2%

D

67.7%

C

61.3%

B

59.7%

A

0.0%

20.0%

40.0%

60.0%

80.0%

Fig. 6. Analysis of the Questionnaire

From the histogram, we can see that around 45.2% students agree that the
ECVlab helps them to comprehend what they have learned from the class. Most
of them (67.7%) mention that by using the ECVlab, they can improve their capability of operation and experiment. While 61.3% students consider it as a good
way to improve their interests in digital circuit. Around 59.7% think the ECVlab
oﬀers them opportunity to inspire innovation and exploration. Altogether, up to
95% students hold positive attitude towards the ECVlab.

6

Conclusions and Future work

Web-based education is becoming more and more popular. In this paper, we described the design and implementation of a web-based Vlab system for Electronic
Circuit simulation. This ECVlab demonstrates not only a successful integration
of web servers, simulation servers, database servers, and ﬂash-based client, but
also a successful exportation to the great potential of web-based Vlab in webbased education. It can help the students to learn electronic circuit simulation
by using the following features:
– Real impression and easy operation of the experiment environment.
– Immediate execution of the simulation process and direct access to the results.

1034

O. Yang et al.

– Viewing and editing the circuit template through convenient saving and
loading mechanism
– No harm to the experimental equipment compared with conducting in laboratory.
The design and implementation of the ECVlab is open to improvement. The
virtual environment for digital circuit is under construction which is based on
the XSPICE simulator engine. The main diﬀerence between analog circuit and
digital circuit is the simulation mode. In digital circuit, the circuit state is in a
incessant mode and the simulator engine needs to continuously receive circuit
data and calculate the result, thus to design a arithmetic for incessant simulation
is essential to our future work. In the future we will also focus on developing the
performance of the system, to name a few:
– ECVlab management system including experiments management, online user
management and analysis of experiment results
– New load balancing algorithms based on load average, I/O statistics.
With rapid development of Grid computing and Web services in resent years,
we plan to add data grid and web services to the ECVlab in future.
Acknowledgement. The author would like to thank all the colleagues in this
project. The supported of this project by a grant from the National Key Technologies R & D Program of China is also gratefully acknowledged.

References
1. John C.Waller and Natalie Foster. Training via the web: A virtual instrument.
Computers& Education, pages 161–167, 2002.
2. Jasna Kuljis and Ray J.Paul. A review of web based simulation:whither we wander.
Proceedings of the 2000 Winter Simulation Conference, pages 1872–1881, 2000.
3. Cheng K.W.E and Chan C.L. Virtual laboratory development for teaching power
electronics. Power Electronics Specialists Conference ,IEEE 33rd Annual, pages 461
– 466, 2002.
4. P.Fishwick. Web based simulations: Some personal observations. Proceedings of the
1996 Winter Simulation Conference, pages 772–779, 1996.
5. X.Huang and J.Miller. Building a web based federated simulation system with jini
and xml. Proceedings 34th AnnualSimulation Symposium, pages 143–150, 2001.
6. Xiaorong Xiang Yingping Huang and Gregory Madey. A self manageable infrastructure for supporting web based simulation. Proceedings of the 37th Annual Simulation
Symoposium, pages 149–156, 2004.

