A Cellular Automata Model of Competition in
Technology Markets with Network Externalities
Judy Frels*, Debra Heisler+, James Reggia+, and Hans-Joachim Schuetze*
*

Robert H. Smith School of Business and + Dept. of Computer Science,
University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742 USA

Abstract. In network markets, the utility a consumer gains from a product increases with the number of other consumers adopting that product. We examine
the evolution of such markets using stochastic cellular automata (CA) models to
simulate consumer adoption and pricing strategy decisions. Two firms, which
lie outside of and interact with the CA model, sponsor incompatible technologies and compete for market dominance using various penetration pricing
strategies. We study markets where the two technologies are equal in capability
and where they have asymmetric capabilities. We find that the importance of
the network to the consumer is critical in determining the financial success of
enacting pricing strategies: penetration pricing in a market where network externalities are only moderately important to the consumer can be disastrous.
We also find that while an inferior technology may gain substantial market
share by price-cutting, it is not likely to gain financial rewards. Finally, we find
that if a penetration pricing strategy is to be enacted, more aggressive strategies
with larger price cuts lead to greater success.

1 Technology Markets with Network Externalities
Expanding the scientific understanding of collective human behavior and decision
making is of interest in many fields, including psychology, sociology, economics, and
business management. Cellular automata (CA) models provide a potentially powerful
framework for investigating the collective behavior of people, in part due to their explicit representation of space, and their focus on concurrent local computations that
lead to self-organization and “emergent behaviors”. Limited past work has used CAs
to examine such issues as spatial segregation of human populations [1], sales patterns
in marketing [2], dissemination of culture [3], evolution of cooperative behavior [4,
5], traffic flow [6], and urban growth patterns [7]. Closely related multi-agent models
using simple local interactions in cellular grids have examined issues such as the distribution of wealth [8] and the emergence of communication [9, 10].
In this paper we describe our research using a CA model to investigate human decision making during the adoption of new technology. In many markets, particularly
information technology markets, consumers gain benefits from doing what other consumers do, i.e., from adopting compatible products. Such markets are called network
markets [11, 12] because the value that a consumer gets from a product depends on
the network of other consumers associated with that product. For example, teleV.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3515, pp. 378 – 385, 2005.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

A Cellular Automata Model of Competition in Technology Markets

379

phones and fax machines are valuable only when other people (a “network”) have
purchased such products. Network markets tend to be “tippy” or “winner-take-all,”
meaning that as one product gets ahead, it becomes more attractive to the next adopter
who, upon adopting it, makes it even more attractive to the next adopter (e.g., VHS
vs. Betamax video recorders). Thus, one characteristic of such markets is that often
only one technical standard is likely to prevail, and because the value the network
provides can overwhelm the value provided by the technology itself, it is possible that
the prevailing standard will not be the most technologically advanced.
In such markets, management may adopt strategies to ensure the market tips in
their direction rather than their competitor’s. Strategies appropriate in network markets often run counter to recommended strategies in non-network markets because it
can be critical for a firm to gain an early lead in adoption [11]. Thus, in such a market, it may be worthwhile to pursue strategies that are not immediately revenue enhancing under the assumption that greater revenue can be captured once the market
has tipped in the firm’s direction. Examples of strategies suggested to managers of
network markets include penetration pricing, signaling, product improvements, preannouncements, licensing of the technology, and support for development of complementary products [11, 13]. In this research, we examine the efficacy of a selection
of penetration pricing strategies.

2 Methods
We study a CA model of human decision-making in network markets. Our primary
goal is to better understand the effects of different pricing strategies that a business
can take to promote adoption of its technology where decisions by one consumer affect those of others. Another goal is to assess the effectiveness of CA models as an
investigative method for answering real-world questions involving complex socioeconomic systems. Our research is conducted in an artificial world we call StandardScape, where active cells are viewed as agents representing adopters (individual consumers or firms) who choose between two incompatible technological products (A or
B) and whose goal is to maximize their utility. We also model technology sponsors
representing firms competing to achieve a dominant market share and then recoup
their investment in this CA-simulated market. The technology sponsors are external to
but interact with and influence the CA model. Each technology sponsor firm has a
cost of goods sold, and we track the revenue each firm obtains from the agents adopting its products. If, through the various strategies enacted, the technology sponsors
deplete their capital, they go out of business. Their strategy is based on penetration
pricing, as follows. When a firm has a market share it does not deem sustainable, it
lowers its price to gain further market share. When a firm has a market share that it
deems “dominant” and overall market penetration by all providers is significant, it
raises its price to recoup earlier revenue foregone by price cutting and to take advantage of its near monopolistic situation [14].
The current set of simulations was done in a 60x60 cellular space having 600 randomly located cells designated to be agents/consumers (see Fig. 1). Agent cells have
multi-attribute states, i.e., states composed of multiple fields [15]. For example, one
field is Product-Adopted and can take on values N (neither product), A (product A

380

J. Frels et al.

adopted) or B (B adopted). All non-agent cells are permanently quiescent. Each
agent/consumer cell updates its state based on the state of just those agents (about 18
on average) in its local 11x11 neighborhood. In each time period (conceptualized as a
month in this setting), agents seek to adopt a product (A or B) that maximizes their
utility. Adopting a product creates network externalities (as well as switching costs)
that then influence agents’ future decisions. We model a multi-period adoption scenario because repeated adoption is common in business settings [12]; agents may revert from A or B to neither.

Fig. 1. A portion of the CA space, where quiescent cells are white, and agents adopting product
A, B, or neither are shaded cells. The agent labeled “A” here can only observe the state of
other agents within its neighborhood (dashed lines)

Cell state changes are determined by a consumer/agent’s utility function that is
based on a multi-attribute model [16] reflecting the stand-alone technological value of
the product, the price of the product, the network of users associated with the product,
the consumer’s expectations of the future size of the network [11], and the agents’
switching costs [17]. In the equation below, p designates a particular product, i designates an individual consumer agent, and weights w1i—w5i are positive and sum to
100. Agent i’s utility Upi is:
Upi = w1i(Techp) - w2i(Pricep) + w3i(Networkpi) + w4i(Expectpi) + w5i(Investmentpi)
where Techp represents the performance rating of each of the technologies A and B,
Pricep represents the price of each technology (initially $100 for each), Networkpi is
calculated as ln(number of neighbors who have bought product p) / ln(total number of
neighbors), Expectpi represents agent-specific expectations about the future size of the
user network for products A and B [11], and Investmentpi represents the investments
an agent has made in product A or B to date or their switching costs.
At each time tick, each simulated consumer agent attempts to purchase the technology with the greatest utility provided that the consumer agent has sufficient capital, and that the utility of the chosen product is greater than the reservation utility of
Threshold (the amount of utility above and beyond the price that a product must provide in order for the consumer to purchase a product rather than choosing “no choice”
as a preferred option). Each time period consumer agents are endowed with an incre-

A Cellular Automata Model of Competition in Technology Markets

381

ment of capital ($100) that they are able to spend on technology A or B or save for future spending, depending on their utility function. If they purchase a product, an
amount of capital equal to the price of the product (set by the technology sponsor
agents) is transferred to the technology sponsor agent as payment. The technology
sponsor agents amass capital by a simple calculation of revenue (payments) minus the
cost of goods sold ($25 for each item). Summarizing, the state of each agent cell i
consists of the values of Product-Adoptedi, ExpectAi, ExpectBi, InvestmentAi, InvestmentBi, and Capitali, all of which vary during a simulation. Each agent also has fixed
weights w1i – w5i indicating the relative importance of the factors in its utility function. To provide reasonable estimates for these weight values, we collected data from
141 subjects on cell phone feature adoptions that allowed us to estimate their subjective weights using conjoint analysis (space limitations prevent describing this study
here). The weights and thresholds used for each of the 600 agent cells in our simulations were randomly sampled, with replacement, from these 141 actual consumers.
Our model is stochastic for several reasons. First, agents are randomly placed. Second, when the product that maximizes the consumer’s utility is determined, that product is adopted only with 85% probability to account for events outside the model [18].
Third, expectations regarding the future size of the product networks (Expectpi) are
randomly assigned to each agent. These values are updated through the duration of
the run to reflect the market’s evolution. Upon creation, each agent is set to change
its expectation every 1 to 12 time ticks. This number is randomly generated and fixed
for that agent throughout the run. When it is time for an agent to change its expectation, it will update it based on which technology the majority of its neighbors bought
during the last time tick. The expectations are modified by a random number between
0 and 1. The expectation for the technology with the larger market share goes up by
the fraction, while the expectation for its competitor goes down by the fraction. The
expectations have a minimum of 0 and a maximum of 100.
The two technology sponsors/firms for products A and B are able to take action
simultaneously every three time periods (i.e., once per quarter) and react to the market
penetration they observe. Each technology sponsor agent has two internal variables:
MktShareTrigger which describes the market share this sponsor agent wants to
achieve once at least 80% of the market has been penetrated; and PricingFactor
which describes the percentage by which the sponsor will raise or lower the price of
the technology. Firms can observe the market share they and their competitors have
achieved, as well as overall market penetration. When the market penetration is less
than 80%, considered low market penetration, the technology sponsor will lower its
price by the PricingFactor in order to attract more buyers. If the market penetration is
high (over 80%) the technology sponsor will do one of three things based on its current market share and its MktShareTrigger. When the sponsor’s market share is between 20% and its desired market share (MktShareTrigger), the technology sponsor
will lower its price by the PricingFactor. When the sponsor’s market share is above
its desired market share, the technology sponsor will raise its price by the PricingFactor to recoup its earlier investment in obtaining this market share. When the sponsor’s
market share falls below 20%, the technology sponsor will do nothing in order to retain its loyal customers. Sponsor agents accumulate capital as long as they sell at a
price above their costs. Sponsor agents may sell below their cost, but can only operate for 36 time periods (i.e., 36 months, three years, or 12 quarters) with negative

382

J. Frels et al.

capital. After 36 time periods with negative capital, technology sponsor agents will
exit the market (i.e., go out of business.)
Simulations were run in a 5 (pricing strategies) x 2 (importance of network) experimental design. We developed a menu of pricing strategies (MktShareTrigger and
PricingFactor) to be enacted by the inferior technology. In all cases except the most
basic runs (described below), the inferior technology enacts one of the strategies and
the superior technology enacts the least aggressive strategy. We then examine the effectiveness of these strategies in market share and income gained. Market share triggers for price cuts were either 20% or 65%, and penetration pricing factors either 20%
or 50%. In the “Most Aggressive” strategy, the technology sponsor will cut price by
50% when its market share drops below 65%. In the “Least Aggressive” strategy, the
technology sponsor agent cuts price by 20% when its market share drops below 20%.
In the “Itchy but Weak Trigger Finger” (IWTF) strategy, the technology sponsor is
quick to cut prices (below 65% market share) but does so by a modest amount (20%).
In the “Desperation” strategy, the technology sponsor waits to cut prices until the
market share has dropped below 20%, but at that point, cuts them significantly (50%).
Each simulation reported below was run 30 times for each experimental condition, so
each table entry in the Results that follow is the mean over those 30 runs.

3 Results
The first two rows of Table 1 summarize the results after 5 years when two equal
technologies (TechA = TechB = 70) compete in an environment where network externalities are important. Differences in left-to-right-adjacent table entries are statistically significant (p < .05) unless marked with an asterisk. As seen here, a more aggressive penetration pricing strategy by technology A leads to larger numbers of
adopters and also to greater income. Even when met with meager price-cutting by the
competition, this most-aggressive penetration pricing strategy proves successful both
financially and from a market share standpoint. This can be contrasted with the outcomes when the network is less important in the consumer agents’ utility function
(Table 1, last two rows). In these cases, the aggressive network development strategy
is somewhat successful from an adoption standpoint, but is always disastrous from a
financial standpoint. Further, when the most aggressive strategy is countered by even
the smaller price cutting strategy on the competitor’s part, both firms lose money.
Thus, while A’s aggressive pricing strategy consistently gave it a larger market share,
it only profited financially when network externalities were important.
Table 1. Equal Technologies, Firm A Implements Most Aggressive Strategy (N=30)

B’s
Strategy
No Action
Least Agr.
No Action
Least Aggr

Network
Importance

A’s
Income

B’s
Income

Agents
Adopting A

Agents
Adopting B

High
High
Low
Low

176,690
171,085
-21,307
-16,880*

87,245
61,056
121,205
-40,261*

477.2
422.9
444.7
290.5

9.6
61.5
20.1
170.6

A Cellular Automata Model of Competition in Technology Markets

383

What if, instead of two equal technologies, one is technically inferior to the other?
Table 2 shows the results after 5 years when the firm with the inferior technology
(Tech = 56) pursues different pricing strategies while the superior technology firm
(Tech = 70) follows a least-aggressive strategy. The superior technology usually
gained a larger market share in all situations except when the inferior technology firm
used a most aggressive pricing strategy in a high-importance network market; even
then the inferior technology only obtained a marginal market share victory at the expense of a net negative income. The same pattern of results was found when simulations were allowed to continue for over 16 years (data not shown). Thus, our results
provide no clear support for believing that inferior technologies can use penetrationpricing strategies effectively to capture the largest market share when agents see only
their local neighborhood.
Table 2. Unequal Technologies, Superior Tech. Firm Uses Least Aggressive Strategy

Inf. Tech.
Strategy

Network
Importance

Base
Least Aggr.
Desperation
IWTF
Most Aggr.
Base
Least Aggr.
Desperation
IWTF
Most Aggr.

High
High
High
High
High
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low

Inf. Tech.
Income

Sup. Tech.
Income

210,290
18,021
24,227
-3,389
-3,040
207,500
-8,402
12,748
-6,116
15,566

904,935
207,037
166,148
254,383
180,200
518,640
-69,052
-85,833
-79,691
-81,373

Agents
Adopting
Inf. Tech.
47.4
74.1
194.3
92.4
272.7*
45.8
89.3
68.4
77.5
36.8

Agents
Adopting
Sup. Tech.
216.6
405.0
289.1
391.1
207.6*
121.0
375.5
384.7
389.3
416.0

Table 2 also indicates that whenever the inferior technology firm undertakes any
penetration pricing strategy and the network importance is low, the inferior technology will, on average, receive as much or more income than the superior technology.
In contrast, when the network is more important, the superior technology always
dominates the inferior in terms of income achieved. The same pattern of results is
found when we allow the simulations to run for more than 16 years. Thus, the importance of network externalities to consumers in a market had a major impact on income
received.
Finally, we compared the success of strategies enacted by the inferior technology
against a superior technology that consistently applied the least aggressive strategy.
We found in these and other simulations (data not shown) that both technology sponsors are most financially successful when the inferior technology pursues no penetration pricing at all. On average, the superior technology (enacting a least aggressive
strategy) achieves greater income in the base case of no penetration pricing by the inferior technology (mean $711,788) than with any pricing strategy as does the inferior
(mean $208,895). Further, the superior technology sees significantly fewer agents
adopting in the base scenario compared to all other strategies, an average of 168.8.

384

J. Frels et al.

The inferior technology see the fewest adopters under the base strategy with an average of 46.6, but this is not significantly lower than in the IWTF (mean 85.0) or Least
Aggressive strategies (81.7). The inferior technology obtains the greatest number of
agents adopting by using the Most Aggressive strategy (154.8) or Desperation strategy (131.4). The superior technology gains the most agents when the inferior technology employs the Least Aggressive (mean 390.3) or IWTF (mean 390.2) strategy.
By the end of year 5, the superior technology sponsor never goes out of business. The
inferior technology sponsor agent does go out of business twice when using the Desperation strategy and three times when using the Most Aggressive strategy, both when
the network is less important. When we allow simulations to continue for over 16
years, we see much greater frequency of sponsors going out of business. The Least
Aggressive and the IWTF (Itchy but Weak Trigger Finger) strategies were most prone
to putting the inferior technology sponsor out of business. Both of these strategies involve price cuts of only 20%. In contrast, the superior technology appears to be most
likely to go out of business when the inferior technology sponsor adopts the Desperation or Most Aggressive penetration pricing strategy. Both of these strategies involve
price cuts of 50%

4 Discussion
Our simulations produced a number of interesting results from a business management perspective. First, the importance of the network to consumers was found to be
crucial in determining the success of penetration pricing strategies. A dramatic difference in results occurred when the network was more heavily weighted in the consumer’s utility function versus when it was not. Thus, misinterpreting the relevance
of network externalities to a firm’s potential market, although it may lead to successful market share development, may also lead to disastrous financial results. Also,
when technologies are symmetric and when a firm has “lost” the market share battle,
little was to be gained by even mild price-cutting. Second, when technologies are
asymmetric, an inferior technology sponsor enacting a penetration pricing strategy
may occasionally achieve market share success but that success is not necessarily tied
to financial success. Finally, we observed that no penetration pricing at all brings the
greatest financial reward to the sponsor agents, although it achieves very low market
penetration. It is possible that this just reflects the manner in which we implemented
the pricing rule; it is probably more reasonable to compare outcomes of different
strategies to one another given that they are all implemented with the same biases.
Within the strategies, we found that strategies with larger price reductions led to the
largest number of adopters for the inferior technology. These same strategies, enacted
by the inferior technology sponsor, are also most damaging to the superior technology’s financial and market share position. Despite the market share results achieved
with the Desperation and Most Aggressive strategies, such price cuts did not necessarily lead to better or worse financial success for the inferior technology. However, in
terms of punishing a competitor with a superior technology our results suggest the
value of true penetration pricing rather than modest price cuts in a network market.

A Cellular Automata Model of Competition in Technology Markets

385

Acknowledgement. Supported by Marketing Science Institute research grant #4-1235
and by the Robert H. Smith School of Business Summer Research Fund; JR was supported by NSF award IIS-0325098.

References
1. Schelling T. Models of Segregation, American Economic Review, 59, 1969, 488-493.
2. Goldenberg J., Libai B. and Muller E. Riding the Saddle: How Cross-Market Communications can Create a Major Slump in Sales, Journal of Marketing, 66, 2002, 1 - 16.
3. Axelrod, R. (1997), The Dissemination of Culture, Journal of Conflict Resolution, 41,
203-226.
4. Nowak M. and May R. (1992) Evolutionary Games and Spatial Chaos, Nature, 359, 826829.
5. Hauert C. and Doebeli M. (2004), Spatial Structure Often Inhibits the Evolution of Cooperation in the Snowdrift Game, Nature, 428, 643-646.
6. Gaylord R. and Nishidate K. (1996), Modeling Nature, Springer, pp. 25-35.
7. Back T., et al. (1996), Modeling Urban Growth by Cellular Automata, Parallel Problem
Solving from Nature IV, Springer, 636-645.
8. Epstein J. and Axtell R. Growing Artificial Societies, MIT Press, 1996.
9. Reggia, J., Schulz R., Wilkinson G., and Uriagereka J. (2001), Conditions Enabling the
Evolution of Inter-Agent Signaling in an Artificial World, Artificial Life, 7, 3-32.
10. Wagner K., Reggia J., Uriagereka J .and Wilkinson G. Progress in the Simulation of
Emergent Communication and Language, Adaptive Behavior, 11, 2003, 37-69.
11. Besen, S. and Farrell J. (1994), Choosing How to Compete: Strategies and Tactics in
Standardization, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 8(2), 117-131.
12. Frels, J,, Shervani T., and Srivastava R. (2003), The Integrated Networks Model: Explaining Resource Allocations in Network Markets, Journal of Marketing, 67(1), 29-45.
13. Hill, C. (1997), Establishing a Standard: Competitive Strategy and Technological Standards in Winner-Take-All Industries, Academy of Management Exec. 11, 1997, 7-25.
14. Farrell, J. and Saloner G (1986), Installed Base and Compatibility: Innovation, Product
Preannouncements, and Predation, The American Economic Review, 76(5), 940-955.
15. Chou H. & Reggia J (1997). Emergence of Self-replicating Structures in a Cellular Automata Space, Physica D, 110, 252-276.
16. Fishbein, M. and Icek A. (1975), Belief, Attitude, Intention, and Behavior: An Introduction to Theory and Research, Reading, Mass. : Addison-Wesley Pub. Co.
17. Burnham, T. Frels J., Mahajan V. (2003), Consumer Switching Costs Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 109-126.
18. Arthur, W. (1989), Competing Technologies, Increasing Returns, and Lock-in by Historical Events, The Economic Journal, 99 (March), 116-131.

