Modeling of Communication Delays Aiming at the Design
of Networked Supervisory and Control Systems.
A First Approach
Karina Cantillo1, Rodolfo E. Haber1, Angel Alique1, and Ramón Galán2
1

Instituto de Automática Industrial – CSIC, Campo Real km 0.200,
Arganda del Rey, Madrid 28500
{cantillo, rhaber, a.alique}@iai.csic.es
2
Escuela Técnica Superior de Ingenieros Industriales. Universidad Politécnica de Madrid,
Calle José Gutiérrez Abascal, nº 2, Madrid 28006
rgalan@etsii.upm.es

Abstract. This paper presents a first approach to model the communication
delays with the aim of improving the design of networked supervisory and
control systems (NSCS). Network delays affect the performance of NSCS.
Therefore, it is necessary a complete analysis, modeling and simulation of the
communication delays upon the connection technology in use (e.g., Ethernet
networks). A statistical model is proposed on the basis of autocorrelation of
LRD that is imposed by the bursty behavior of the network traffic.

1

Introduction

Nowadays, data networks (i.e., Ethernet networks) have become in a low-cost
connection media for networked supervisory and control systems (NSCS) [1], due
mainly to the improvement concerning with the speed of communication and the
bandwidth. It is evident the need to perform the analysis, modeling and simulation of
the communication delays in the framework of NSCS. A suitable and reliable model
of communication delays allows assessing the network behavior, the overall influence
of the delays on the deterioration of the NSCS performance and the sufficient
conditions for closed-loop stability.
In the next section is detailed the developed framework to measure communication
delays. The developed model is shown in section 3. In subsection 3.2 is presented the
communication delays simulator. Finally, some conclusions and remarks are given.

2 Communication Delays Measurement over the Propose Work
Environment
The case of study consists of two applications based on RT-CORBA for measuring
delays samples. Applications are executed using TCP/IP protocol over an Ethernet
network with 110 stations and 10 Mbs of bandwidth. Real-Time CORBA defines
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3516, pp. 1056 – 1059, 2005.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

Modeling of Communication Delays Aiming at the Design of NSCS

1057

mechanisms and policies to control processor, communication and memory resources.
The ACE ORB, unlike the most of CORBA implementations, shares a minimum part
of ORB resources, reducing substantially the synchronization costs and the priority
inversion between the process threads, offering a predictable behavior [2]. The
communication interface defined for the applications is depicted below.
interface delaysTCPIP{
void delaymonitor(in double tclient, out double
tserv, out v1, out v2, out v3, out double proctserv);};

3 Data Network Delays Models: The Use of Statistical Techniques
Some network traffic models well-described in the literature are inspired in statistics
method such as Poisson Processes, Markov chain, time series, heavy-tailed models,
self-similar process and others. These models can be considered as black box tools
able to link cause-effect and emulate network traffic behavior with a high accuracy.
The bursty behavior of the Ethernet technology in network traffic imposed the
inclusion of the autocorrelation concept in the model to be defined. Poisson processes
can be used for modeling the delay between continuous packets with the Exponential
Distribution Function (EDF). The drawback is that these processes do not take into
account the auto-correlation concept due to the independence hypothesis in data,
leading erroneous simulations and analysis. In order to verify these constraints, a
statistic analysis of data was performed with Quantile-Quantile graphic and the
validation methods Chi-Square Test, Anderson-Darling Test. The results showed that
EDF is not adequate to represent the samples of delay included in the measured data.
The introduction of the auto-correlation concepts in the model was then required.
Initials solutions were simple chain Markov models, adjusted to a correlation of shortrange dependence (SRD), characterizing just in a minimal proportion the bursty
behavior. In order to reach a whole representation, auto-correlation of long-range
dependence (LRD) must be considered. In order to represent the LRD autocorrelation
indices the self-similar processes are used, because the LRD can be characterized only
with a simple parameter, the Hurst coefficient (H).
3.1 Inclusion of Self-similar Processes in the Proposed Model
Self-similarity processes consist of repeated patterns in multiples scales. The literature
shows that the network traffic is self-similar [3]. There are different methods for the
Hurst coefficient estimation. The R/S method was chosen because it is easy to
implement and it is very useful in other research fields. Initially, the developed
program in Matlab makes use of a sample taken in a time-period with low network
load. The estimated H was 0.6535. Subsequently, a sample taken in presence of
higher network load was assessed, obtaining an estimated of H=0.7232. The results
show how H can be used as a reliable measure parameter of the bursty behavior in the
network traffic.

1058

K. Cantillo et al.

In order to complete the representation, a distribution function that fits the LRD
characteristics must be chosen as the empiric distribution indicated by the samples.
One solution is the use of processes with infinite variance called heavy-tail processes.
The distribution functions Pareto, Weibull, Exponencial, Gamma, and Lognormal,
were analyzed and compared using the central limit theorem and the infinite variance
concept. Figure 1 shows the Log-Log plot of each one. The graphic shows that Pareto
is the distribution function that better fits data behavior. A residual variance analysis
was performed supporting previous result. Additionally, the Pareto distribution
function is heavy-tail type that is recommended to depict the network delays.

Fig. 1. Comparative Analysis: Empiric Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF) and Studied
Cumulative Distribution Functions (Pareto, Exponential, Weibull, Gamma, Log-Normal)

3.2 Communication Delays Generator
The method Fractional Gaussian Noise (FGN) was chosen to generate pure fractal
signals based on the Hurst parameter, due to its implementation easiness [4]. The
developed simulator initially calculates the Hurst coefficient, based in the R/S
method. This coefficient is used to generate the self-similar sample. The sample is
mapped to the Pareto distribution function and then formatted to obtain a simulation
close to the reality. Before the formatted procedure, the equation used
⎛
⎞
a×b
⎟⎟ . Fn is the normal cumulative distribution function, a is the
is Yi = ⎜⎜
−
Log
(
1
F
(
X
)
)
n
i ⎠
⎝

shape parameter, b is the minimum value of the analyzed sample and Xi is the datum
obtained by FGN method. Figure 2 shows a comparison in a log-log plot between the
empiric cumulative distribution of the analyzed sample and the empiric cumulative
distribution of the sample obtained from the simulator.
In order to validate the results a residual variance analysis, between the sample
generated by the simulator and a sample derived from a Poisson model, was
accomplished. The developed simulator achieved the best representation. Although
the defined model does not represent all the properties of networks traffic, as SRD
behavior, this model is essential to assess the influence of the network delays in
reliability and feasibility of NSCS design.

Modeling of Communication Delays Aiming at the Design of NSCS

1059

Fig. 2. Comparative Analysis: Real Sample and Simulated Sample

4 Conclusions
This paper proposes a statistical model. The bursty behavior of the network traffic
imposed the use of self-similar processes using the Hurst coefficient. The results show
how H can be used as a performance index of the bursty behavior in the network
traffic. Likewise, Pareto distribution function shows the best performance in
representing the empiric distribution function derived from samples measured in realtime. On the other hand, this paper proposes a communication delays simulator using
Fractional Gaussian Noise method. Both model and simulator are very useful to
design networked supervisory and control systems although they do not take into
account the autocorrelation of SRD in the case study.

References
1. Branicky, M.S., Phillips, S.M., Zhang, W.: Stability of Networked Control System: Explicit
Analysis of Delay. Proceedings of the American Control Conference (2000) 2352-2357
2. Schmidt, D.C., Mungee, S., Gaitan, S.F, Gokhale, A.: Software Architectures for Reducing
Priority Inversion and Non-determinism in Real-time Object Request Brokers. Journal of
Real-time Systems, Vol. 21, 1-2, (2001) 77-125
3. Leland, W.E., Taqqu, M.S., Willinger, W., Wilson, D.V.: On the self-similar nature of
Ethernet traffic. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, Vol. 2 (1994) 1-15
4. Paxson, V.: Fast, Approximate Synthesis of Fractional Gaussian Noise for Generating SelfSimilar Network Traffic. ACM SIGCOMM CCR, Vol. 27 (1997) 5-18
5. Cantillo, K., Haber, R.E., Alique, A., Galan, R.: CORBA-Based open platform for
processes monitoring. An application to a complex electromechanical process. In: Bubak
M., Albada G.D., Sloot P.M.A., Dongarra J. (eds.). Computational Science ICCS2004,
Lecture Notes in Computer Science 3036 (2004) 531-535

