A Data-Driven Multi-field Analysis of
Nanocomposites for Hydrogen Storage
John Michopoulos, Nick Tran, and Sam Lambrakos
Materials Science and Component Technology Directorate,
U.S. Naval Research Laboratory,
Washington DC, 20375,U.S.A
{john.michopoulos, nick.tran, sam.lambrakos}@nrl.navy.mil

Abstract. This paper focuses on computational parameter identiﬁcation associated with heat and mass diﬀusion macro-behavioral models
of hydrogen storage systems from a continuum multiphysics perspective.
A single wall nanotube (SWNT) based composite pellet is considered as
our representative ﬁnite continuum system. The corresponding partial
diﬀerential equations (PDEs) governing the spatio-temporal distribution
of temperature and hydrogen concentration are formulated. Analytical
solutions of the system of coupled PDEs are constructed and utilized
in the context of inverse analysis. The corresponding non-linear optimization problem is formulated in order to determine the unknown parameters of the model, based on an objective function and constraints
consistent with experimentally acquired data along with the physical and
utilization requirements of the problem. Behavioral simulation results are
presented in an eﬀort to demonstrate the applicability of the methodology. Finally, we indicate potential extensions of this methodology to
multi-scale and manufacturing process optimization.

1

Introduction

The activities described herein are a part of a larger eﬀort associated with
the development of a data-driven environment for multiphysics applications
(DDEMA) [1, 2, 3, 4]. The analytical methodology for approaching system identiﬁcation problems is based on establishing a corresponding inverse problem that
can be solved by means of global optimization as shown earlier [5, 6, 7] for various problems ranging from material nonlinear constitutive response to welding
characterizations.
The recent utilization of SWNTs as an essential component for nanocomposites for hydrogen storage has lead to the direct need for modeling the behavioral
characteristics of such systems during both the hydriding and dehydriding stages.
The desire for manufacturing highly eﬃcient, inexpensive and long lasting hydrogen storage systems underscores our motivation for modeling such system as
a special case of our general eﬀort.
In order to achieve these goals, we proceeded with the modeling of a nanocomposite pellet’s hydriding and dehydriding response coupled with heat conduction
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3516, pp. 80–87, 2005.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

Data-Driven Multi-ﬁeld Analysis of Nanocomposites for Hydrogen Storage

81

and chemical reactivity under the framework of an inverse problem setting applied to preliminary experiments that generated the data to drive our modeling.
Continuum multi-ﬁeld modeling eﬀorts have been based on continuum thermodynamics and conservation theorems [8, 9, 10]. Here we present the results of our
multi-ﬁeld modeling eﬀort [5] for the problem at hand along with a description
of the associated solutions.

2

Behavioral Modeling of Hydrogen Storage Pellet

Consider a medium with isotropic and homogeneous aggregate properties at the
macro-length scale. Furthermore, consider that this medium is exposed to temperature and multi-species concentration boundary conditions. As heat diﬀusion proceeds in the medium so does multi-species mass diﬀusion. The species may or may
not be chemically reactive with the host medium or with each other. A medium
under such a multi-ﬁeld excitation includes as a special case the SWNT-enhanced
materials considered for hydrogen storage. The general procedure for deriving the
continuum multiphysics model for this system is analogous to the one followed
for hygrothermoelastic composites elsewhere [10]. The resulting general system
of PDEs [11] describes all open continuum systems under the inﬂuence of temperature, and multi-species diﬀusion with chemical reactions among the species.
However, for the case of the hydrogen storage continua of the type used here we
do not have cross-species reactivity since hydrogen is the only species involved.
The diﬀused hydrogen only reacts with the matrix and the embedded SWNTs of
the composite. This process can be abstracted as an absorption/desorption diﬀusion. Therefore, as a ﬁrst approximation we will assume a single component system
(i.e. we will consider the concentration of hydrogen C as our mass concentration
variable) with no chemical reaction involved and T as our temperature ﬁeld state
variable. In this case the following pair of coupled PDEs is valid:
∂C
= Dm ∇2 C + λDh ∇2 T,
∂t

(1a)

∂T
= νDm ∇2 C + Dh ∇2 T.
(1b)
∂t
Here, Dm and Dh are the mass and heat diﬀusivities, respectively, and λ, ν are
both coupling coeﬃcients. This heat-mass diﬀusion system is completed by the
generalized boundary conditions (of the third kind),
T (x, t) +

kh (x) ∂T (x, t)
= φT (x, t), x ∈ S
hT
∂n

(2a)

km (x) ∂C(x, t)
= φC (x, t), x ∈ S
(2b)
hC
∂n
where S represents the boundary, x and n the position and outward normal
vectors on the boundary, respectively, kh , km are the heat and mass conductivities, respectively, hT , hC are the heat and mass transfer coeﬃcients respectively,
C(x, t) +

82

J. Michopoulos, N. Tran, and S. Lambrakos

and ﬁnally φT (x, t), φC (x, t) are the prescribed distributions of temperature and
mass concentration on the boundary, respectively. Boundary conditions of the
ﬁrst and second kinds can be produced by appropriate omission of the second
terms (ﬁrst kind) and the ﬁrst terms (second kind) of these equations. The
cylindrical symmetry of the SWNT composite pellet suggests transforming the
governing equations from the cartesian coordinate system to a cylindrical frame
of reference ( {x, y, z, t} → {r, ϑ, z, t} ). In addition, the axisymmetric character
of the applied boundary conditions further simplify the system of Eqs. (1) by
coordinate transformation of the nabla operators. It has been shown elsewhere
[10] that it is possible to uncouple the system of Eqs. (1) by using the solutions of
the uncoupled PDEs if λ, ν are constants via the method of normal coordinates.
One form of the uncoupled solution is given by
T = T0 + (Tf − T0 )F1 (r/ro , z/lo , Dh t/ro2 , Dh t/lo2 , ud )
+νud (Cf − C0 )F2 (r/ro , z/lo , Dm t/ro2 , Dm t/lo2 , 1/ud )

(3a)

C = C0 + (Cf − C0 )F1 (r/ro , z/lo , Dm t/ro2 , Dm t/lo2 , 1/ud )
+λ(Tf − T0 )F2 (r/ro , z/lo , Dh t/ro2 , Dh t/lo2 , ud )

(3b)

where Tf , Cf are the ﬁnal values of the temperature and hydrogen concentrations, respectively, that are applied on the boundary and reached by the continuum at equilibrium conditions and where,
Fi (r, z, τr , τz , u) = Ψic (r, τr , u)Ψis (z, τz , u).

(4)

The solutions Fi for the ﬁnite cylinder geometry have been constructed here as
the product of the two one dimensional solutions corresponding to an inﬁnite
cylinder of radius ro and an inﬁnite slab of thickness 2lo with appropriate scaling
of time via usage of τr and τz , respectively. The functions Ψij with j = c, s and
i = 1, 2 are deﬁned by
Ψ1j (xj , τj , u) = [1 − H1j (u)]Ψ j (xj , D2 (u)τj ) + H1j (u)Ψ j (xj , D1 (u)τj )
Ψ2j (xj , τj , u) = H2j (u)[Ψ j (xj , D2 (u)τj ) − Ψ j (xj , D1 (u)τj )],

(5a)
(5b)

where we have used the contractions,
H1 (ud ) =

1
[1 − (1 − ud )H2 (ud )
2

(6a)

D1 D2
,
(D2 − D1 )ud

(6b)

H2 (ud ) =
where ud = Dm /Dh and
D1 = 2ud /[1 + ud +

(1 − ud )2 − 4ud (1 − λν)]

(7a)

D2 = 2ud /[1 + ud −

(1 − ud )2 − 4ud (1 − λν)].

(7b)

Data-Driven Multi-ﬁeld Analysis of Nanocomposites for Hydrogen Storage

83

Functions Ψ j are the solutions of the normalized one-dimensional problems for
the cylinder m = 0 and the slab m = 1/2 and are deﬁned by
∞

Ψ j (x, τ ) = 1 − 2
i=1

µi
1
J−m (µi x) −µ2i τ
2m
+ ( )2 ]−1 xm
e
[1 +
,
µi
Bi
Bi
J1−m (µi )

(8)

in terms of the Bessel functions Ji . The coeﬃcients µi are the roots of the
transcendental equation
BiJ−m (µ) − µJ1−m = 0.

3

(9)

Inverse Problem Setup

The set of diﬀusivities (Dh , Dm ), the coupling constants (λ, ν) and the four instances of the Biot number Bi ((Bi)cT = hT ro /kh , (Bi)cC = hC ro /km , (Bi)sT =
hT lo /kh , (Bi)sC = hC lo /km ) determine the behavioral model completely when the
geometry and initial and boundary conditions are known. Determination of these
constants from experimental data constitutes the inverse problem formulation.
3.1

Experimental Setup and Associated Data (NT)

The pellet samples for the hydridingdehydriding study were made by uniaxially
cold pressing the Mgx wt.% Mm powder. The details of manufacturing and
processing the pellets are given elsewhere [12, 13]. Figure (1) shows the pellet
and the experimental setup for hydriding and dehydriding the pellet. Hydriding
and dehydriding of Mgx wt.% Mm pellets were carried out inside a dual reactor
made of seamless inconel tubes. Two thermocouples were attached to the outside
of each tube and were calibrated to reﬂect the temperature of the reaction zone.
All data from the hydriding and dehydriding process were digitally captured by

Fig. 1. Hydrorgen storage pellet (a) and experimental setup schematic for hydriding
and dehydriding of the pellet (b)

84

J. Michopoulos, N. Tran, and S. Lambrakos

a data acquisition board, which was controlled by our custom code [13]. The
hydrogen uptake or release of the Mgx wt.% Mm pellets was determined by
measuring the pressure changes in the reaction chamber before and after each
hydriding or dehydriding treatment.
3.2

Nonlinear Optimization

The general outline of using design optimization for parameter identiﬁcation
is a well established discipline. It usually involves the usage of an optimization module that utilizes behavioral data from the actual physical system (collected experimentally) as well as simulated data from a potential model. The
design variables to be identiﬁed are the constants of the model. Ultimately, the
simulated behavior has to reproduce the experimentally observed behavior and
therefore an objective function must be minimized. For an objective function
f = f (X) with X being the resultant vector deﬁned by the design variable
component vectors such as x1 i1 , . . . , xn in ∈ Xn , where Xn is the vector space
spanned by the basis vectors i1 , . . . , in . For this general case the optimization
problem can be expressed by
min[f (x1 , . . . , xn )]xi ∈
ceq
j (x1 , . . . , xn )

=

0, cineq
(x1 , . . . , xn )
i

n

≥ 0, j = 1, . . . , p

(10a)
(10b)

Relations (10b) express the equality and inequality constraints.
In our analysis the behavior of the system is described by the time evolutions
of the total temperature and hydrogen absorption. The stimulation of the system
is expressed by the multi-ﬁeld boundary conditions that deﬁne the temperature
and hydrogen mass concentration on the boundary. We deﬁne Tisim (ti ), Cisim (ti )
and Tiexp (ti ), Ciexp (ti ) to be the simulated and experimental values, respectively,
of the temperature and hydrogen concentration at a discrete evaluation point
i = 1. . . . , p where p is the total number of evaluations. We can now form the
objective function as the sum of the squares of their diﬀerences in the least
square sense, as follows:
p

[Tiexp (ti ) − Tisim (x1 , . . . , xn , ti )]2 +

f (x1 , . . . , xn ) =
i=1

p

[Ciexp (ti ) − Cisim (x1 , . . . , xn , ti )]2

+

(11)

i=1

We set the simulated values to be the average values of the solutions of the PDEs
along the edge of the pellet for the temperature and over the entire volume for
the hydrogen concentration according to
Tisim (x1 , . . . , xn , ti ) =
Cisim (x1 , . . . , xn , ti ) = 2π

r0
0

l0
−l0

T (r0 , z, ti ; x1 , . . . , x8 )dz

(12a)

C(r, z, ti ; x1 , . . . , x8 )drdz.

(12b)

l0
−l0

Data-Driven Multi-ﬁeld Analysis of Nanocomposites for Hydrogen Storage

85

The integrands in these relations are the ones deﬁned in Eqs. (5) with the special one-to-one substitution {x1 , . . . , x8 } → {Dh , Dm , λ, ν, (Bi)cT , (Bi)sT , (Bi)cC ,
(Bi)sC }.

4

Preliminary Results

The implementation of the optimization procedure was formulated in Mathematica [14] with various global nonlinear optimization algorithms encoded in
the package Global Optimization “GO-5.0” [15]. The function “GlobalSearch”
that yielded the quickest results utilizes a generalized hill climbing technique
that is based on Newton’s method but uses a generalized gradient rather than a
derivative, and allows for analytic linear or nonlinear constraints. Multiple starts
are used to test for the existence of multiple solutions. The multiple starts are
generated randomly from the region deﬁned by the range of parameter values
input by the user. Feasible starting regions are not needed, but it is assumed
that objective function values in this region are Real.
The initial and boundary conditions for the computation of the solutions of
the PDEs governing the system as required by the simulated values within the
objective function, were chosen to correspond to the experimental procedure.
Speciﬁcally they were T0 = 27o C, Tf = 200o C, C0 = 0 and Cf = 1.1.
Dehydriding data were also considered along with the hydriding data but
have not eﬀected the identiﬁed parameters.
Figure (2) shows the hydriding time evolution observed experimentally along
with the one computed after parameter identiﬁcation took place. The identiﬁed
model ﬁts the hydriding experimental data very well and similar performance is
observed (but not included here) for the dehydriding data. Therefore, the model
may be adopted as a “calibrated” model for simulation of the behavior of similar
systems in many other situations and applications, where the shape of specimen
varies but the nanocomposite material remains the same.

Fig. 2. Experimental (dots) and simulated (continuous line) after the parameter identiﬁcation has been conducted, for the time evolution of the temperature (a) and Hydrogen
concentration (b) time evolutions during the hydriding process

86

5

J. Michopoulos, N. Tran, and S. Lambrakos

Potential Extensions

Careful consideration of the identiﬁed parameters implies two distinct correlations. The subset {Dh , Dm , λ, ν} is related to the characteristic behavior of
the nanocomposite system and the macroscopic length scale, while the subset {(Bi)cT , (Bi)sT , (Bi)cC , (Bi)sC } is related to the characteristic behavior of the
reactor-nanocomposite system owing to the fact that Biot numbers are functions
of the heat and mass transfer coeﬃcients that in turn depend on the ﬂuid properties of the gas (hydrogen) according to the Dittus-Boelter equation. These are
controllable by the reactor/furnace setup. This suggests that the above referenced optimization procedure is capable of identifying all parameters of interest
to the technology practitioner. Therefore, a natural extension of this technique
could include any parameters that participate in a given utility (eﬃciency of
performance), aging, or economic model of the system. This extension is well
posed as long as the parameters of these models are related to any of the behavioral parameters of the system and an appropriate objective function can be
constructed.
In addition to optimizing the usability aspects of such a system one can
also optimize the condition of manufacturing related to desirable performance
(from eﬃciency, economic, aging, etc perspectives) by establishing the process
control models associated with the manufacturing of such systems, with the lower
length scale behavioral models that may be derived from ab initio modeling
methodologies among many others.

6

Conclusions

We have utilized general coupled mass and heat diﬀusion, to construct a PDE
model to capture the hydrogen storage behavior of a nanocomposite pellet system. We have formulated the inverse problem approach for utilizing data to
create a procedure for the data-driven identiﬁcation of the free parameters participating in the behavior model. We implemented the computational equivalent
of the procedure and performed the identiﬁcation based on experimental data
collected for the hydriding cycle of the nanocomposite pellet system. Comparison of the identiﬁed system to the experimental data, demonstrated how well
the identiﬁcation has performed. Finally, two speciﬁc motivating extensions were
discussed to deﬁne the context of our future intensions.

Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the support by the National Science Foundation under grant ITR-0205663. In addition, the authors would like to extend their special thanks to Dr. F. Darema for her constant availability and encouragement
throughout this eﬀort.

Data-Driven Multi-ﬁeld Analysis of Nanocomposites for Hydrogen Storage

87

References
1. Michopoulos, J., Tsompanopoulou, P., Houstis, E., Rice, J., Farhat, C., Lesoinne,
M., Lechenault, F., DDEMA: A Data Driven Environment for Multiphysics Applications,in: Proceedings of International Conference of Computational Science
- ICCS’03, Sloot, P.M.A., et al. (Eds.), LNCS 2660, Part IV, Springer-Verlag,
Haidelberg, (2003) 309-318.
2. Michopoulos, J., Tsompanopoulou, P., Houstis, E., Rice, J., Farhat, C., Lesoinne,
M., Lechenault, F., Design Architecture of a Data Driven Environment for Multiphysics Applications, in: Proceedings of DETC’03, Paper No DETC2003/CIE48268, (2003).
3. Michopoulos, J., Tsompanopoulou, P., Houstis, E., Farhat, C., Lesoinne, M., Rice,
J., Joshi, A., On a Data Driven Environment for Multiphysics Applications, Future
Generation Computer Systems, in-print (2005).
4. Michopoulos,J., Tsompanopoulou, P., Houstis, E., Joshi A., Agent-based Simulation of Data-Driven Fire Propagation Dynamics, in: Proceedings of International
Conference of Computational Science - ICCS’04, Bubak, M., et al. (Eds.), LNCS
3038, Part III, Springer-Verlag, Haidelberg, (2004) 732-739.
5. Michopoulos, J., Computational Modeling of Multi-Field Ionic Continuum Systems, in: Proceedings of International Conference of Computational Science ICCS’04, Bubak, M., et al. (Eds., LNCS 3039, Part IV, Springer-Verlag, Haidelberg, (2004) 621-628.
6. Michopoulos, J., Automated Characterization of Material Constitutive Response,
in: Proceedings of Sixth World Congress of Computational Mechanics (WCCM-VI
2004), Tsinghua University Press & Springer-Verlag, Haidelberg, (2004) 486-491.
7. Lambrakos, S.G., Milewski, J.O., Analysis of Processes Involving Heat Deposition
Using Constrained Optimization, Sci. and Tech. of Weldong and Joining, 7(3),
(2002), 137.
8. Truesdell, C., Toupin, R., 1960, “The Classical Field Theories”, in Handbuch der
Physik ( Herausgegeben con S. Flugge) III/1, Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
9. Green, A. E., Naghdi, P. M., 1995, ”A uniﬁed procedure for construction of theories
of deformable media. I. Classical continuum physics”, Proc. Roy. Soc. London Ser.
A 448 (1934), pp. 335-356.
10. Sih, G.C., Michopoulos, J.G., Chou S.C., “Hygrothermoelasticity”, Martinus Nijhoﬀ Publishers (now Kluwer Academic), Dordrecht, (1986).
11. Michopoulos, J.,Lambrakos, S.G., Tran, N. E., Multi-Field Characterization of
Single Wall Nano-Tube Composites for Hydrogen Storage, ASME-CIE conference,
Long Beach, CA, September 24-28, 2005, To appear, (2005).
12. Tran, N. E. , Imam, M. A., Feng, C. R., Evaluation of Hydrogen Storage Characteristics of Magnesium-misch Metal Alloys. J Alloys Comp ,359, (2003), 225-229.
13. Tran, N. E., Lambrakos, S.G., Puriﬁcation and Defects Elimination of SingleWalled Carbon Nanotubes by Thermal Reduction Technique. To appear.
14. Wolfram, S., The Mathematica Book,Wolfram Media, (2004).
15. Loehle Enterprises, Global Optimization 5.0 for Mathematica, Loehle Enterprises,
(2004).

