Application of Activity-Based Costing in a
Manufacturing Company: A Comparison with
Traditional Costing
Gonca Tuncel, Derya Eren Akyol, Gunhan Mirac Bayhan, and Utku Koker
Department of Industrial Engineering, University of Dokuz Eylul,
35100 Bornova-Izmir, Turkey
{gonca.tuncel, derya.eren, mirac.bayhan}@deu.edu.tr

Abstract. Activity-Based Costing (ABC) represents an alternative
paradigm to traditional cost accounting system and has received extensive attention during the past decade. Rather than distorting the cost
information by using traditional overhead allocation methods, it traces
the cost via activities performed on the cost objects (production or service activities) giving more accurate and traceable cost information. In
this paper, the implementation of ABC in a manufacturing system is presented, and a comparison with the traditional cost based system in terms
of the eﬀects on the product costs is carried out to highlight the diﬀerence
between two costing methodologies. The results of the application reveal
the weak points of traditional costing methods and an S-Curve which
exposes the undercosted and overcosted products is used to improve the
product pricing policy of the ﬁrm.

1

Introduction

The customer driven environment of today’s manufacturing systems and the
competitive pressure of the global economy force manufacturing services and
organizations to become more ﬂexible, integrated and highly automated in order
to increase their productivity at reduced costs. But it is impossible to sustain
competitiveness without an accurate cost calculation mechanism [1]. Proposed
by [2], as an alternative method to traditional cost accounting methods, ABC
assigns costs to activities using multiple cost drivers, then allocates costs to
products based on each product’s use of these activities [3], [4]. Using multiple
activities as cost drivers, it reduces the risk of distortion and provides accurate
cost information [3].
In an ABC system, the total cost of a product equals the cost of the raw
materials plus the sum of the cost of all value adding activities to produce
it [4]. In other words, the ABC method models the usage of the organization
resources by the activities performed and links the cost of these activities to
outputs, such as products, customers, and services [5]. Each product requires
a number of activities such as design, engineering, purchasing, production and
quality control. Each activity consumes resources of diﬀerent categories such as
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3516, pp. 562–569, 2005.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

Application of ABC in a Manufacturing Company

563

the working time of the manager. Cost drivers are often measures of the activities
performed such as number of units produced, labor hours, hours of equipment
time, number of orders received.
In traditional cost accounting systems, direct materials and labor are the only
costs that can be traced directly to the product. By using the ABC system, activities can be classiﬁed as value-added and non-value-added activities. In order
to improve the performance of the system, non-value-added can be eliminated.
Despite the advantages of providing accurate costs, it requires additional
eﬀort and expense in obtaining the information needed for the analysis [6]. However, a proper design tool can help to reduce time used for modeling and overcome the diﬃculties present in designing a cost model.
The primary objective of this paper is to develop an ABC system for a
sanitary-ware company and to compare the results of ABC with traditional costing methods. In other words, the aim of ABC analysis is to guide improvement
eﬀorts of management in the right direction by providing accurate information
about activities.
The organization of the paper is as follows: In section 2, the methodology
of ABC is explained. A case study is presented in section 3 to illustrate the
application of ABC in a company. Finally, in section 4, the conclusions and the
future research directions are given. Some suggestions are oﬀered to improve the
performance of the company.

2

Activity-Based Costing (ABC)

ABC is an economic model that identiﬁes the cost pools or activity centers in
an organization and assigns costs to cost drivers based on the number of each
activity used. Since the cost drivers are related to the activities, they occur on
several levels:
1. Unit level drivers which assume the increase of the inputs for every unit that
is being produced.
2. Batch level drivers which assume the variation of the inputs for every batch
that is being produced.
3. Product level drivers which assume the necessity of the inputs to support
the production of each diﬀerent type of product.
4. Facility level drivers are the drivers which are related to the facility’s manufacturing process. Users of the ABC system will need to identify the activities
which generate cost and then match the activities to the level bases used to
assign costs to the products.
While using the ABC system, the activities which generate cost must be
determined and then should be matched to the level drivers used to assign costs
to the products.
The implementation of the ABC system has the following steps:
1. Identifying the activities such as engineering, machining, inspectionetc.
2. Determining the activity costs

564

G. Tuncel et al.

3. Determining the cost drivers such as machining hours, number of setups and
engineering hours.
4. Collecting the activity data
5. Computing the product cost

3

Implementation of the ABC Method: A Case Study

The implementation study presented here took place in one of the leading sanitaryware companies in Turkey [7]. It has a production capacity of 6.8 thousand
tons. Like many sanitaryware manufacturers, the company includes some common processes. First stage of the processes is done in the bulk-preparement department which is in charge of preparing the essential quantities of bulk bearing.
Recipes are prepared for each production run and according to these ingredient
recipes, the bulks are prepared by the electronically controlled tanks. After the
bulk is ready, it can be sent to two diﬀerent departments, pressured and classical
casting departments.
In pressured casting department, the bulk is given shape by the pressured
casting process. The process uses automated machines and has shorter cycle
times when compared to classical casting department. However, the bulk used
in this department must have the characteristics of strength and endurance. The
output of this department is sent to glazing department.
Classical casting is the second alternative to produce sanitaryware products.
In this department, most of the operations are performed by direct labor. The
cycle times of the products are longer than the pressured casting department.
The output of this department is ”shaped and casted” bulk and sent to the
glazing department, too.
In glazing department, shaped bulk is glazed. This stage can be deﬁned as
polishing the products with a protective material from external eﬀects. The
output of this department is sent to tunnel oven.
In tunnel oven, the products are heated over 1200 degrees Celsius. After
staying in theses ovens for a period of time, the products are inspected by the
workers. However, some of the output may have some undesired characteristics
like the scratches, etc. In this case, these products are sent to the second heat
treatment where they are reworked and heated again. The proper output is sent
to packaging while the defected ones are sent to waste.
Finally, in packaging department, products are packaged and shrunken.
Company has been using a process costing logic for obtaining the proper
costing of its products. Process costing is also a widely used costing tool for
many companies. This method recognizes the following cost pools:
– Direct Labor: All workers taking place in the production are recognized as
direct labor and this pool is the most common pool used in every stage.
– LPG-Electricity hot water: These items are important costing element in
casting departments.
– Packaging: This cost is observed in the ﬁnal stage of the ﬁrm called ﬁnal
packaging. It includes packaging and shrinking of the products.

Application of ABC in a Manufacturing Company

565

– Overheads: This is also common cost pool for all the stages in the ﬁrm.
It includes depreciation, rents, indirect labor, materials, and miscellaneous
costs.
In order to perform ABC calculations, process costing sheets are used. Because process costing aggregates the cost in the case of more than one product, it
is diﬃcult to obtain the correct results. The correct results with process costing
can only be achieved when there is a single homogenous product. After analyzing
the output of bulk preparement department, it is seen that bulk prepared for
the two departments are the same which brings an opportunity for the analysis.
Firstly, time sheets are prepared to learn how much of the labor time is
used to perform the relevant activities. Workers ﬁlled the time sheet and as a
result, the activity knowledge of the processes and related percentage times are
obtained. The time sheets are edited and necessary corrections are made. While
some of the activities are merged, some of them are discarded. After this stage,
the wage data is requested from the accounting department and labor cost of
the activities are determined.
If the amount of the activities that each product consumes can be learnt, the
product costing can be calculated by taking the sum of the costs of the activities
consumed by these products. Observations and necessary examinations are done
to reach this knowledge and the conversion costs are loaded onto the activities.
Cost of rent is loaded according to the space required for each activity and
similarly, the power, depreciation and other conversion costs are loaded on the
activities according to the activities’ consumption of the resources. If activity a
uses 2/5 and activity b covers 1/5, while activity c covers 2/5 of the department
space, then activity a is given 2/5, b is given 1/5 and c is given 2/5 of rent. All
the conversion costs are distributed by using the same logic.
The activities performed during classical casting are: molding, drilling assembly holes, rework, equipment clean-up, drilling function holes and carrying. The
activity driver for molding is the processing time, for drilling assembly holes is
the number of holes, for rework is the number of outputs, for equipment cleanup is the total processing time, for drilling function holes is the total number of
function holes and for carrying are the number of processed units in this department, unit area the product allocates on the carrier and the total area of carried
goods.
The activities performed during pressured casting are: molding, drilling lateral holes, setup, cutting excess materials from the products, general rework,
carrying WIP, drilling assembly holes, ring preparation, drilling some subcomponents washbasins, washbasin drilling, rework of back of the products, Xpatch control, bringing the WIP, helping to other departments, ﬁlling forms,
mold check-up, WIP control, equipment and personnel control, drilling water
holes. The activity driver for molding is the number molds used, for drilling
lateral holes is the number of output, for setup are the incoming units, setup
hour, setup for other products, setup for basins, setup for other products, for
cutting excess materials from the products is the incoming units, for general
rework is also the incoming units, for carrying WIP is the number of output,

566

G. Tuncel et al.

for drilling assembly hole and for ring preparation is the number of output, for
drilling some sub-components washbasins is the number of subcomponents, for
washbasin drilling is the number of washbasins, rework of back of the products
and X-patch control is the number of output, for bringing the WIP is the incoming WIP, for helping to other departments is the number of reservoirs, for ﬁlling
forms, mold check-up, WIP control, equipment and personnel control, drilling
water holes is the incoming units.
The activities performed during glazing are maintenance, glazing with hand,
WIP transfer, rework, closet shaking, planning, routine controls and prism data
entry. The activity driver for maintenance is the number of reworked parts, for
glazing with hand is the weight of parts to be glazed, for WIP transfer and
rework is the number of reworked parts, for closet shaking is the number of
closets, for planning, routine controls and prism data entry is the planned units.
The activities performed in the tunnel oven department are tunnel oven activity, transfer to oven, transfer from oven, heat control, oven security control,
planning, routine controls, prism data entry, taking records, second heat treatment activity, WIP feeding to the oven, rework of heat processed units and
special treatment. The activity driver for tunnel oven activity, transfer to oven,
transfer from oven, heat control and oven security control is the total area covered by the heated units, for planning, routine controls, prism data entry and
taking records is the total sum of outputs, for second heat treatment activity
and WIP feeding to the oven is total area covered by all units, for rework of heat
processed units and special treatment is the total area covered by outputs.
The activities performed in the packaging department are packaging, shrinking, clean-up, organizing the ﬁnished products, maligning, and product function control and transferring the outputs. The activity driver for packaging,
and shrinking is the packaged volume, for clean-up is the total number of units
cleaned, for organizing the ﬁnished products, maligning, product function control
and transferring the outputs is the total number of outputs.
After ﬁnding the product costs of the ﬁrm, the costs obtained by process
costing methodology and the ABC results of the product costs are compared.
From the results, it is seen that there are signiﬁcant diﬀerences between some of
the product costs obtained by the two methods.

4

Conclusions

ABC utilizes the activity concept and by using the activities, ABC can successfully link the product costs to production knowledge. How a product is produced,
how much time is needed to perform an activity and ﬁnally how much money is
absorbed by performing this task are answered by the help of ABC studies.
An S-Curve will exist after the comparison of the traditional and ABC costs
[8]. The following notation is used for the comparison of the two product cost
values. % Bias of ABC from traditional costing is found for each product.
% bias = (ABC cost/traditional cost)*100.
Product costs under ABC and traditional costing views can be used to design
a table (Table 1) which illustrates %bias of ABC and traditional costs.

Application of ABC in a Manufacturing Company

567

Table 1. Comparison of the two product cost values
Products
Product 70
Product 23
Product 64
Product 12
Product 59
Product 47
Product 62
Product 31
Product 1
Product 37
Product 3
Product 22
Product 30
Product 42
Product 19
Product 58
Product 36
Product 20
Product 26
Product 24
Product 55

% Bias
10.415
54.796
60.439
65.043
69.485
71.071
75.279
77.736
78.621
78.953
79.965
80.527
80.731
83.265
84.533
89.282
89.531
96.504
96.688
100.077
100.521

Products
Product 28
Product 56
Product 48
Product 4
Product 63
Product 53
Product 46
Product 11
Product 54
Product 50
Product 8
Product 6
Product 44
Product 7
Product 14
Product 29
Product 5
Product 15
Product 39
Product 32

% Bias
102.938
103.417
105.092
108.269
108.905
109.488
112.454
114.009
117.228
124.241
124.84
133.134
134.926
162.302
164.557
169.465
219.781
317.231
584.387
1198.251

Note that the table includes only the products that are sold. Products that
are not sold but left as semi products are not involved.
The results show 3 signiﬁcant regions:
1. Products undercosted by traditional costing:
The costs of these products are higher than the ”process-costing” and when
plotted are greater than the value 100 at y axis. Before the ABC study was
implemented, ﬁrm was not aware of this hidden loss of money for each of
these products. By the help of the ABC study, people noticed this ”hidden
loss” and pricing decisions are examined.
2. Products overcosted by the traditional methods:
These products are the ones which have smaller values than the value 100 of
y-axis. By the help of the ABC, ﬁrm realized that, the costs of these products are lower than the costs obtained by process costing. A ”hidden proﬁt
zone” occurs for these products. Without any intention, a hidden beneﬁt
is gained from these products by traditional costing. But noticing the real
ABC costs of these products, the ﬁrm can re-price these outputs and can
gain a competitive advantage.
3. Products which are costed almost the same:
These are the products whose costs result nearly the same by using the two
methods. A narrow band of 20 percentage (%80-%120) can be accepted for
this region.

568

G. Tuncel et al.

Fig. 1. S-Curve

From the ABC analysis, it is seen that while some of the products are undercosted, and overcosted, some of them give nearly the same results.
In the analysis, the cost calculations of the bulk preparement department are
performed using traditional costing method. When the outputs of the processes
are identical or nearly identical, then ABC must be avoided to implement. Because ABC consumes lots of time, data and eﬀorts, implementation of it has also
a cost. For identical outputs, both ABC and traditional give the same results,
so it is not logical to implement ABC.
By the help of this analysis, product-pricing decisions gain importance. Pricing decisions can be done under the scope of these hidden losses and proﬁts.
According to the ABC results, the company will probably increase or decrease
some of its product costs to gain more competitive advantage.
The costing process of the company highlighted some weaknesses of the information system, too. These problems are also expected to be ﬁxed in the future.
As it is seen in this application, ABC is capable of monitoring the hidden
losses and proﬁts of the traditional costing methods. The existence of S-Curve
shows which ones of the products are under or overcosted. As a further work,
in the company, performance analysis are expected to be done and especially
Balanced Score Card (BSC) implementations can be performed. The existence
of the ABC database is an advantage for BSC applications since its ﬁnancial
phase recommends an ABC implementation. Kaizen applications and BSC can
give the ﬁrm great advantages in the short and long run under the scope of ABC.

Application of ABC in a Manufacturing Company

569

The studies in literature promote that ABC is a promising method to support
pricing, product mix, and make or buy decisions in manufacturing companies.
ABC is a fruitful area for researchers and has high potential for novel applications
such as the hybridization of ABC with meta-heuristics methods as Artiﬁcial
Neural Networks, Genetic Algorithms, and Simulated Annealing.

References
1. Ozbayrak, M., Akgun, M., and Turker, A.K.: Activity-based cost estimation in a
push/pull advanced manufacturing system. Int. J. of Production Economics, vol. 87
(2004) 49-65.
2. Cooper, R. and Kaplan, R. S.: How cost accounting distorts product costs. Management Accounting, vol.69 (1988) 20-27.
3. Kim, G., Park, C. S., and Kaiser, M. J.: Pricing investment and production activities
for an advanced manufacturing system, Engineering Economist, vol. 42, no. 4 (1997)
303-324.
4. Gunasekaran, A., and Sarhadi, M.: Implementation of activity-based costing in manufacturing. Int. J. of Production Economics, vol.56-57 (1998) 231-242.
5. Ben-Arieh, D. and Qian L.: Activity-based cost management for design and development stage. Int. J. of Production Economics, vol.83 (2003) 169-183.
6. Lewis, R. J.: Activity-based models for cost management systems. Quorum Books,
West-port, CT (1995).
7. Koker, U.: Activity-based costing: Implementation in a sanitaryware company.
M.Sc. Thesis, Department of Industrial Engineering, University of Dokuz Eylul
(2003).
8. Cokins, G.: Activity-based cost management making it works. McGraw-Hill. Inc.
(1997).

