Nonlinear Finite Element Analysis of Structures
Strengthened with Carbon Fibre Reinforced
Polymer: A Comparison Study
X.S. Yang, J.M. Lees, and C.T. Morley
Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge
Trumpington Street, Cambridge CB2 1PZ, UK
xy227@eng.cam.ac.uk
Abstract. Modelling crack propagation in fracture mechanics is a very
challenging task. Diﬀerent methods are usually robust under diﬀerent
conditions and there is no universally eﬃcient numerical method for dynamic fracture simulations. Most available methods are computationally extensive and usually require frequent remeshing. This comparison
study focuses on three major methods: the discrete element method, the
adaptive ﬁxed crack method and the element-free Galerkin method. By
implementing these methods to study a 2D concrete beam with reinforcement of carbon-ﬁbre reinforced polymer straps, we have shown that for
simulations of a limited number of cracks, ﬁxed crack method gives the
best results. For multiple crossover cracks, the discrete element method
is more suitable, while for moderate number of elements, the element-free
Galerkin method are superior. However, for large number of elements,
ﬁxed crack method is most eﬃcient. Comparisons will be given in details. In addition, new algorithms are still highly needed for the eﬃcient
simulations of dynamic crack propagations.

1

Introduction

The technique of strengthening reinforced concrete structure using carbon ﬁbrereinforced polymer (CFRP) is promising and can have important applications
in many areas. However, an understanding of the behaviour and inﬂuence of the
FRP composite system is crucial for the proper design of structural reinforcement
strategies in infrastructure such as bridges and buildings [6, 7]. The computer
simulation is an cost-eﬀective way of improving such an understanding.
In simulating the fracture and crack growth, there are three major paradigms:
discrete element methods, smeared crack methods and element-free Galerkin
methods. The discrete element method has the advantage of tracing each individual crack with an irregular geometry. In order to do this, substantial remeshing is required to accommodate the arbitrary geometry and boundaries along the
newly created cracks and thus extensive computation is required which is usually
time-consuming even with the modern fast computers. The adaptive ﬁxed crack
concept or smeared crack model is very eﬃcient in computation but cannot directly deal with the crack propagation, especially in the case of multiple cracks.
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3514, pp. 751–756, 2005.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

752

X.S. Yang, J.M. Lees, and C.T. Morley

This method uses the equivalent material properties to simulate the eﬀect of the
cracks in the context of continuum-based ﬁnite element analysis [4, 5]. On the
other hand, the new promising element-free Galerkin method has the ability of
dealing with an arbitrary geometry but it is still computationally extensive compared with the conventional ﬁnite element methods, especially in the interface
regions and crack zones [1, 10, 11]).
In this paper, we will compare diﬀerent numerical approaches to the nonlinear
ﬁnite element simulations of concrete structures with CFRP reinforcement and
analyse the appropriate conditions in detail. The main focus is to ﬁnd an appropriate way to simulate the nonlinear behaviour of concrete beams strengthened
with CRFP straps. In addition, we will also discuss the implication of simulation
paradigms in engineering applications.

2

Models and Their Formulations

In order to compare diﬀerent numerical methods, we ﬁrst outline their formulations brieﬂy, and then we implement them to simulate the same 2D concrete
beam with CFRP reinforcement.
2.1

Discrete Element Method

The discrete element method for rigid granular materials was developed by Cundall and Strack [3] and this method was later incorporated into a combined
ﬁnite-discrete element method [9]. There are some variations of this method,
and the main procedure takes the whole domain as a multibody system and
each domain is considered as a ﬁnite element continuum where the usual ﬁnite
element analysis applies. The total strain increment εij consists of the elastic
strain εeij and the inelastic strain εpij , or
εij = εeij + εpij .

(1)

The general stress-strain relation and strain energy density U are
σij = Cijkl εkl ,

U=

1
Cijkl εij εkl ,
2

(2)

where the elastic constants satisfy certain symmetry conditions such as Cijkl =
Cklij = Cijlk and i, j = 1, 2, 3. The interactions between diﬀerent domains will
be computed using Hertz kinetics.
2.2

Smeared Crack Model

In the smeared crack model, the total strain increment is decomposed into a
concrete strain increment dεco and a crack/fracture strain increment dεf , in a
similar fashion as the decomposition of the total strain into an elastic strain
increment and a plastic strain increment in elasto-plastic formulation. One can

Nonlinear Finite Element Analysis of Structures Strengthened

753

further decompose the concrete strain increment into an elastic part dεe and a
plastic part dεp . Thus, the decomposition becomes
dεij = dεeij + dεpij + dεfij .

(3)

The transformation is necessary from the local coordinate system de which
is aligned with the crack to the global coordinate system (dε). We use the same
conventional notation as de Borst [4] and Kesse [8] where the subscript n means
normal to the local crack plane and t means tangent to the crack plane. After
some tedious but straightforward calculations, we have
dσ = [I − N(Dcr + NT DN)−1 NT ]Ddε.
cr

The matrix D can be considered as a normal crack stiﬀness
crack stiﬀness Dcr
t , i.e.,
cr
Dcr = Dcr
n + Dt ,

(4)
Dcr
n

and a shear
(5)

where
kc 0
knn knt
,
Dcr
,
(6)
t =
ktn ktt
0 0
where kc , knn etc are the constants determined from experiments. It is worth
pointing out that the choice of the values for these parameters is relatively
arbitrary and detailed studies are highly needed.
Dcr
n =

2.3

Element-Free Galerkin Method

The element-free Galerkin method was developed by Belytschko and his colleagues [1, 2], and a coupled ﬁnite element-element-free Galerkin (EFG) method
was applied by Sukumar et al to simulate a fracture problem [10]. The main
advantage of an EFG method is that it requires only nodal data for constructing
approximate functions and no element structure is necessary. In this sense, it
is not a method based on interpolants but a method using moving least square
approximations. The moving least square approximations are constructed in the
following manner. Let the m−term approximation be
u
ˆ(x) ≡ pT (x)a(x) =

m

pj (x)aj (x),

(7)

j=1

where pj (x) are basis functions. The associated coeﬃcients aj (x) in the approximation are determined by minimizing the quadratic form Φ(x)
n

Φ(x) =

wi (x)[pT (x)a(x) − ui ]2 ,

wI (x) = w(x − xi ) ≥ 0,

(8)

i

where wI is a weighting function and ui is a nodal parameter. This is equivalent
to deﬁne a EFG shape function
m

φi (x) =

pj (x)[Q]ji ,

(9)

j

where Q is a matrix function of wi (x) and p(xi ). It is worth pointing out that
ˆ(xi ) as u
ˆ(x) is only an approximant.
ui = u

754

3

X.S. Yang, J.M. Lees, and C.T. Morley

Simulations and Results

By implementing these three major numerical methods, we can now start to
simulate crack propagation for various structures with CFRP reinforcement. For
simplicity of comparison, we use the same fundamental structure of a 2D concrete
beam for all simulations.
3.1

Discrete Element Method: Fracture of Concrete Beam

In order to demonstrate the simulation capability of the discrete element method,
we ﬁrst show the fracturing of a concrete beam due to an impact of an elastic
block moving downward with an initial velocity 5m/s. The dimensions for the
beam are 2200mm (length), 200mm (width) and 100mm (thickness). Figure 1
shows the diﬀerent stages of the fracture patterns. The visualization has been
carried out using Abaqus. The values used are E = 22 GPa, ν = 0.2, σY =
3.36 MPa, and ρ = 2400kg/m3 . We can see that discrete element method is
very powerful in fracture simulations and diﬀerent fragments are computed in a
realistic manner. Fracture patterns are traced as the crack propagates in each
time step with local remeshing.

Fig. 1. The impact of a drop load on a 2D concrete beam and the fracture pattern at
t = 0.1 s and t = 0.5 s

3.2

Adaptive Fixed Crack Model

We now proceed to investigate the four-point bending of the same 2D concrete
beam in the plane strain condition. The loading is applied as a linear function
of time with a peak value of f = 100kN, and the maximum time step t = 10, 000
(pseudo time). We can see from Figure 2 that the vertical cracks start to form
and grow gradually as the loading force increases, and shear cracks start to

Fig. 2. The crack pattern for a 2D concrete beam with four-point bending conditions.
Crack pattern are mainly vertical in the ﬂexural section that is consistent with experimental results

Nonlinear Finite Element Analysis of Structures Strengthened

755

appear once the loading force reaches 40kN. However, the crack pattern is just
an indication and does not correspond to the real fracture although the overall
patterns of the fracture are similar to that derived from experiments.
3.3

Element-Free Galerkin Method

A typical distribution of nodal points for the analysis of a 2D beam is shown in
Figure 3. As no elements are requried in the element-free Galerkin method, only
adaptive points are shown. The location of these points can be distributed in an
adaptive manner where the density of the points varies with the potential density
of cracks. The stress distribution σxx at time t = 10, 000 s is also shown. Red color
corresponds to high shear stress and light green corresponds to compression.
However, although the crack geometry are still limited by the density of meshless
points, this method is much eﬃcient compared to the discrete element method.

Fig. 3. Random points or locations for the EFG analysis, stress σxx and the crack
patterns at t = 10, 000 s and f = 50 kN

4

Conclusion

By implementing three major numerical methods for simulating crack formation
in a concrete beam, we have carried out a comparison study. A comprehensive
comparison of three major methods for modelling the nonlinear behaviours of
structures shows that for a limited number of cracks (less than 40) and elements
(< 2000), the smeared crack model gives the best results. For multiple cracks
(up to 100 cracks), the discrete element give the best results, while for moderate
large number of elements with arbitrary geometry, the element- free Galerkin
method seems superior. However, the number of cracks may be limited in this
case. Simulations also suggest that for the choice of numerical methods shall
take the type of problem into consideration even though material properties are
the same. In order to get a sharp crack indication or trace multiple cracks, ﬁne
or dense meshes are recommended for all methods. In addition, the development
of new eﬃcient algorithms for fracture analysis is still highly needed.

Acknowledgement
The authors thank the ﬁnancial support by EPSRC.

756

X.S. Yang, J.M. Lees, and C.T. Morley

References
1. T Belytschko, Y Y Lu, L Gu, Element-free Galerkin method, Int. J. Num. Meth.
Eng., 37 (1994) 229-256.
2. T Belytschko, L Gu and Y Y Lu, Fracture and crack growth by element free
Galerkin methods, Modelling Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng., 2 (1994) 519-534.
3. P A Cundall and O D L Strack, A discrete element model for granular assemblies,
Geotechnique, 29, 47-65 (1979).
4. R de Borst, Smeared cracking, plastity, creep and thermal loading - a uniﬁed
approach, Comp. Meth. Appl. Mech. Eng., 62 (1987) 89-110.
5. R de Borst and A H van den Boogaard, Finite element modeling of deformation and
cracking in elary-age concrete, J. Eng. Mech. Div., ASCE 120 (1994) 2519-2534.
6. J M Lees, A U Winistoerfer and U Meier, External prestressed CFRP straps for the
shear enhancement of concrete, ASCE J Composites for Construction, 6 (2002).
7. N A Hoult and J M Lees, Shear retroﬁtting of reinfoced concrete beams using
CFRP straps, Proc. Advanced Composite Materials in Bridges and Structures, 2023 July, Calgary, (2004).
8. G Kesse, Concrete beams with external prestressed carbon FRP shear reinforcement,
PhD Thesis, Cambridge University, (2003).
9. A Munjiza, D R J Owen, and N Bicanic, A combined ﬁnite-discrete element method
in transient dynamics of fracturing solids, Engineering Computation, 12, 145-174
(1995).
10. N Sukumar, B Moran, T. Black, T Belytschko, An element-free Galerkin method
for three-dimensional fracture mechanics, Computaional Mech., 20 (1997) 170-175.
11. Zienkiewicz O. C. and Taylor R. L., The Finite Element Method, Vol. I/II, McGrawHill, 4th Edition, 1991.

