Detection Algorithms Based on Chip-Level
Processing for DS/CDMA Code Acquisition
in Fast Fading Channels
Seokho Yoon1 , Jee-Hyong Lee1 , and Sun Yong Kim2
1

School of Information and Communication Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University,
300 Chunchun-dong, Jangan-gu, Suwon, Kyunggi-do, 440-746, Korea
{syoon,jhlee@ece.skku.ac.kr}
2
Department of Electronics Engineering, Konkuk University,
1 Hwayang-dong, Gwangjin-gu, Seoul 143-701, Korea
kimsy@konkuk.ac.kr

Abstract. In this paper, we propose various novel detection algorithms
based on chip-level processing for direct sequence code-division multiple
access (DS/CDMA) pseudo noise (PN) code acquisition in fast fading
channels, wherein the fading process changes rapidly within the accumulation interval of the correlation samples between the locally generated
and received PN codes. By applying the maximum-likelihood (ML) and
locally optimal (LO) detection criteria to the correlation samples obtained on a chip-by-chip basis, both optimal and LO detection algorithms
are derived. Both of these algorithms are found to include the conventional algorithm as a special case. Simpler suboptimal algorithms are also
derived. Finally, numerical results show that the proposed algorithms can
oﬀer a substantial improvement over the conventional algorithm in fast
fading channels.

1

Introduction

In direct sequence code-division multiple access (DS/CDMA) systems, rapid
code acquisition is crucial, because data demodulation is possible only after
code acquisition is performed. The basic unit in an acquisition system is a detector whose task is to identify, with a high degree reliability, the presence or
not of alignment between the locally generated and received pseudo noise (PN)
codes. The conventional detector which has been employed for code acquisition
incorporates a detection algorithm based on the accumulation of the correlation
samples between the locally generated and received PN codes. The accumulation of these samples is performed over an N (usually, N
1) chips interval
called the dwell time. Recently, with the allocation of higher frequency bands
This work was supported by grant No. R01-2004-000-10690-0 from the Basic Research Program of the Korea Science & Engineering Foundation. Dr. S.Y. Kim is
the corresponding author.
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3515, pp. 543–550, 2005.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

544

S. Yoon, J.-H. Lee, and S.Y. Kim

for mobile communications and/or the increasing relative velocity of user terminals with respect to either a base station or a satellite, some mobile channels
(e.g., CDMA based mobile satellite channels) exhibit very fast fading such that
the fading process may exhibit rapid changes within the dwell time [1]. In such
a scenario, the fading ﬂuctuations among the correlation samples become very
signiﬁcant and, consequently, the eﬀective accumulation of the correlation samples cannot be achieved even when the locally generated and received PN codes
are synchronized. Needless to say, this seriously deteriorates the performance of
the acquisition systems. In [2] and [3], it was shown that the performance of
acquisition systems employing the conventional detector in such a fast fading
scenario can be improved by using a parallel search strategy and antenna arrays, as compared with that obtained using a serial search strategy and a single
antenna, respectively. However, the performance is very sensitive to the fading
rate and degrades substantially as the fading becomes faster, as a result of the
conventional detector being employed. In this paper, novel detection algorithms
which alleviate the fast fading eﬀect are proposed for code acquisition. In the
proposed algorithms, the correlation samples are eﬃciently processed at the chip
level before their accumulation so that the fading ﬂuctuations among the correlation samples can be alleviated and, consequently, the eﬀective accumulation
of the correlation samples over the dwell time can be achieved.

2

Observation Model

The typical structure of the PN code acquisition system is shown in Fig. 1. In
the correlator, the received signal r(t) is ﬁrst down converted to baseband and
then is correlated with the locally generated PN code. The complex baseband
equivalent signal rl (t) of r(t) may be expressed as
√
rl (t) = P α(t)ej2πf0 t d(t − τ Tc )c(t − τ Tc ) + w(t).
(1)
In (1), P is the transmitted signal power; α(t) is the (complex-valued) fading
process; fo is the frequency oﬀset between the transmitter and receiver; d(t) is
the data waveform; Tc is the chip duration; c(t) is the PN code waveform with
a period of L chips; τ is the code phase normalized to Tc ; and w(t) is a zeromean complex additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) with one-sided power

Fig. 1. Structure of PN code acquisition systems

Detection Algorithms Based on Chip-Level Processing

545

spectral density N0 . The noise process w(t) represents noise plus multiple access
interference and is independent of α(t). In this paper, the fading process α(t) is
assumed to have a Rayleigh fading envelope and a uniformly distributed phase,
and to be wide-sense stationary. Then, α(t) can be modeled as a zero-mean
complex Gaussian random process with the autocorrelation function given as
φ (∆t) = E {α(t)α∗ (t + ∆t)}, where E{·} and ∗ denote the statistical expectation and the complex conjugate, respectively, and φ(0) = 1 due to normalization
[4]. It is also assumed that there is a preamble for acquisition, so that no data
modulation is present during acquisition, i.e., d(t) = 1. The baseband signal
rl (t) is now correlated with the locally generated PN code and then sampled on
a chip-by-chip basis during the dwell time of N chips. For simplicity, we assume
that the system is chip synchronous and that the fading process α(t) is constant
over one chip duration. Let hypotheses K and H correspond to in-phase and outof-phase alignments, respectively, between the locally generated and received PN
codes. Then, the kth correlation sample xk , for k = 1, 2, · · · , N , is given by
xk =
=

1
Tc
√

kTc

rl (t)c(t − τˆTc )dt

(k−1)Tc

P αk ejπ
wk ,

(2k−1) sin(π )
π

+ wk , under K
under H,

(2)

where τˆ is the code phase (normalized to the chip duration Tc ) of the locally
generated PN code, is the frequency oﬀset normalized to the chip rate Tc−1 ,
N
{αk }k=1 are zero-mean complex Gaussian random variables with autocorrelation
N
function φ (|m − n|Tc ) = E {αm αn∗ }, and {wk }k=1 are zero-mean independent
and identically distributed (i.i.d.) complex Gaussian random variables with variN
2
= N0 Tc−1 . From (2), it is easy to see that {xk }k=1 are jointly complex
ance σw
Gaussian distributed and, thus, the pdf, fx (x), of the correlation sample vector,
x = (x1 , x2 , · · · , xN )T , with (·)T denoting the transpose, is given by
fx (x) =

1
π N det(Γ K )
1
π N det(Γ H )

exp −xH Γ −1
K x ,

under K

exp −x

under H,

H

Γ −1
H x

,

(3)

where det(·) and (·)H denote the determinant of a matrix and the Hermitian
transpose, respectively. The elements located at row m and column n of the
covariance matrices Γ K = E xxH |K and Γ H = E xxH |H are given by
2

2
2
P φ(|m − n|Tc )ej2π (m−n) sinπ2(π2 ) + σw
δ(m − n) and σw
δ(m − n), respectively,
where δ(·) denotes the Kronecker delta function. Finally, a detection algorithm
Λ(·) is performed with the correlation sample vector x, and then its outcome is
compared with a threshold. The conventional detection algorithm, denoted by

ΛC (x), is given by ΛC (x) = xH 1N ×N x =

N

2

xk , where 1N ×N denotes an

k=1

all-one matrix with size N × N . It should be noted that in ΛC (x) no processing
is performed on the correlation samples before accumulation.

546

3
3.1

S. Yoon, J.-H. Lee, and S.Y. Kim

Optimal and Locally Optimal Detection Algorithms
Chip-Level Optimal (CLO) Detection Algorithm

A chip-level optimal (CLO) detection algorithm is derived using the maximum
likelihood (ML) detection criterion. Using (3), the log likelihood ratio test can be
fx (x|K)
fx (x|H)

written as follows: ln

= ln

det(Γ H )
det(Γ K )

−1
+ xH Γ −1
H − Γ K x, in which

det(Γ H )
, does not depend on x. Thus, the CLO detection
the ﬁrst term, ln det(Γ
K)
algorithm, denoted by ΛCLO (x), may be obtained as
−1
H
−2
2
σw
IN − (σw
IN + γ 2 Rs )−1 x,
ΛCLO (x) = xH Γ −1
H − ΓK x = x

(4)

√
)
where IN denotes the identity matrix of size N , γ = P sin(π
, and Rs =
π
H
jπ
j3π
j(2N −1)π T
with s = (α1 e , α2 e
, · · · , αN e
) . Under the assumpE ss
tion that the fading remains constant during the dwell time of N chips and
that there is no frequency oﬀset, Rs can be simpliﬁed to 1N ×N . Then, apply2
IN + γ 2 Rs )−1
ing the Sherman-Morrison-Woodbury formula [5] to the term (σw
γ2
2
−2
in (4) gives (σw
IN + γ 2 1N ×N )−1 = σw
IN − C1N ×N , where C = σ4 +N
2 .
γ 2 σw
w
Substituting this result into (4), we ﬁnd that ΛCLO (x) can be expressed as
xH 1N ×N x =

2

N

xk , which is the conventional detection algorithm, ΛC (x),

k=1

mentioned in the previous section. This means that ΛCLO (x) includes ΛC (x) as
a special case, wherein the fading remains constant during the dwell time and
there is no frequency oﬀset.
3.2

Chip-Level Locally Optimal (CLLO) Detection Algorithm

As shown in (4), ΛCLO (x) requires the inversion of the N × N matrix. To derive
an algorithm which is simple compared with ΛCLO (x), we use the locally optimal
(LO) detection criterion, which leads to the LO detection algorithm in signal detection theory. The LO detection algorithm is usually much easier to implement
than the optimal detection algorithms, and yields the maximum outcome value
when the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) approaches zero [6]. From the generalized
Neyman-Pearson’s fundamental lemma [6] and (3), we can obtain the chip-level
locally optimal (CLLO) detection algorithm as
ΛCLLO (x) =

dν fx (x|K)
1
fx (x|H)
dµν

µ=0

= xH Rs x,

(5)

√
)
)
where µ is a signal strength parameter (in this paper, we set µ = γ = P sin(π
π
and ν is the order of the ﬁrst nonzero derivative of fx (x|K) at µ = 0. It is
noteworthy that, in contrast to ΛCLO (x), ΛCLLO (x) does not require matrix inversion. When the fading remains constant during the dwell time of N chips and
there is no frequency oﬀset, Rs can be simpliﬁed to 1N ×N and, thus, ΛCLLO (x)
becomes ΛC (x), from which we ﬁnd that, as well as ΛCLO (x), ΛCLLO (x) also

Detection Algorithms Based on Chip-Level Processing

547

includes ΛC (x) as a special case. It should be noted that ΛCLO (x) and ΛCLLO (x)
need only the statistical description of the fading process, and not the actual realizations of the fading process, in compensating for the fast fading eﬀect before
combining the correlation samples. Such a requirement, however, may limit their
implementation. Thus, in the next section, suboptimal detection algorithms are
discussed, which obviate the need for any information on the fading statistics
(and the frequency oﬀset).

4
4.1

Suboptimal Detection Algorithms
Chip-Level Noncoherent (CLN) Detection Algorithm

From (4) and (5), we can observe that ΛCLO (x) and ΛCLLO (x) form a weighted
N
−1
sum of {x∗k xl }k,l=1 through (Γ −1
H − Γ K ) and Rs , respectively. ΛCLLO (x), for
example, can be rewritten as
N

N

N

φ (|k − l| Tc ) ej2π

2

|xk | +

ΛCLLO (x) =
k=1

(k−l) ∗
xk xl .

(6)

k=1l=1,l=k

In (6), it can be seen that ΛCLLO (x) compensates for the combined eﬀects of fadN
ing and frequency oﬀset on {x∗k xl }k,l=1 through the weighting factor φ (|k − l| Tc )
N

are added
·ej2π (k−l) , and it is also observed that the components |xk |
k=1
with equal weights regardless of fading time variation and frequency oﬀset. From
this observation, we propose to use the following algorithm as a suboptimal detection algorithm, which does not require any channel information:
2

N
2

|xk | ,

ΛCLN (x) =

(7)

k=1

where CLN is an abbreviation for ”chip-level noncoherent”, which originates
2
from the fact that |xk | can be considered as noncoherent processing performed
at the chip level. In fact, ΛCLN (x) becomes optimal and locally optimal for a fast
fading channel such that all of the elements of x are uncorrelated: speciﬁcally,
−2
γ 2 σw
−1
in such an environment, (Γ −1
H − Γ K ) and Rs can be simpliﬁed to σ 2 +γ 2 IN and
γ 2 σ −2

w

H
w
IN , respectively, and thus ΛCLO (x) and ΛCLLO (x) become σ2 +γ
2 x IN x and
w
xH IN x, respectively, which are equivalent to ΛCLN (x) given in (7).

4.2

Chip-Level Diﬀerential (CLD) Detection Algorithm

Now, it should be observed that the second term of (6) can be considered
as the sum of the components diﬀerentially processed at the chip level, with
weights that depend on channel information. Using (2), the signal components
N
N
of {x∗k xl }k,l=1,k=l can be expressed as γ 2 αk∗ αl e−j2π (k−l) k,l=1,k=l . If the phase

548

S. Yoon, J.-H. Lee, and S.Y. Kim

ﬂuctuation due to fading between two successive correlation samples is not
N −1
very signiﬁcant, the signal components γ 2 αk∗ αk+1 ej2π k=1 (corresponding
N

N −1

to {x∗k xk+1 }k=1 ) from among γ 2 αk∗ αl e−j2π (k−l) k,l=1,k=l would be approximately phase aligned. Moreover, they are of equal average strength. As a result,
N

N −1

, the components {x∗k xk+1 }k=1 can
just as was done in the case of |xk |
k=1
be added with equal weights to form an algorithm: yet, it should be pointed
2

N −1

out that the signal component of
parts, in contrast to that of

N
k=1

k=1

x∗k xk+1 is divided into real and imaginary

2

|xk | . Hence, we take the envelope of

N −1
k=1

x∗k xk+1

to combine the divided signal parts, and thus obtain a suboptimal detection
algorithm such that
N −1

ΛCLD (x) =

x∗k xk+1 ,

(8)

k=1

where CLD is an abbreviation for ”chip-level diﬀerential”. ΛCLD (x) is expected
to be more sensitive to the fading rate than ΛCLN (x), since the degree of phase
N −1
coherence among the signal components of {x∗k xk+1 }k=1 depends on the fading
rate.

5

Simulation Results and Discussion

We compare the detection performance of the conventional and proposed detection algorithms. In evaluating the performance, we consider the following
parameters: the PN code of L = 1023 chips, the dwell time length N = 256
chips, and the false alarm probability PF = 10−2 . The SNR/chip is deﬁned as
P Tc /N0 . The autocorrelation function, φ(∆t), of the fading process is taken as
ρ∆t/Tc [2], [3], where 0 ≤ ρ ≤ 1 is the parameter that characterizes the fading
rate, such that the smaller the value of ρ, the faster the fading.
Fig. 2 shows the detection probabilities of the conventional and proposed detection algorithms for ρ = 0.97 and 0.95 in the absence of frequency oﬀset. As
expected, the performance of the conventional algorithm degrades substantially
as ρ becomes smaller, i.e., the fading becomes faster, whereas the performance
of the proposed algorithms improves as the fading becomes faster; however, an
opposite trend occurs at relatively low SNR/chip values. This can be explained
as follows. As the fading becomes faster, the chip-level processed components become more uncorrelated, and thus the diversity gain obtained through the combining of the components increases, resulting in better detection performance.
However, the increased fading rate enhances the phase misalignments among the
diﬀerentially processed components and makes the noncoherent combining loss
[4] for the noncoherently processed components more pronounced. Eventually,
at low SNR/chip values, such eﬀects become more signiﬁcant than the diversity
eﬀect, resulting in worse detection performance.

Detection Algorithms Based on Chip-Level Processing

549

Fig. 2. Detection probability of the conventional and proposed detection algorithms
for ρ = 0.97 and 0.95 when = 0

Fig. 3. Detection probability of the conventional and proposed detection algorithms
for ρ = 0.9, 0.8, 0.5, and 0.1 with = 0.001

550

S. Yoon, J.-H. Lee, and S.Y. Kim

Fig. 3 shows the detection probabilities of the conventional and proposed
detection algorithms for ρ = 0.9, 0.8, 0.5, and 0.1 with = 0.001. From this
ﬁgure, we can observe that the performance of the conventional algorithm degrades severely due to fading and frequency oﬀset. Unlike in Fig. 2, as the fading
becomes faster, the performances of ΛCLO (x), ΛCLLO (x), and ΛCLD (x) are observed to degrade for the whole range of SNR/chip values shown. This is due to
the fact that, as the fading becomes faster, the extent of the phase misalignments
among the diﬀerentially processed components increases and its eﬀect becomes
predominant over the diversity gain eﬀect regardless of the SNR/chip value. On
the other hand, the performance of ΛCLN (x) follows the same trend as that
shown in Fig. 2. Finally, the performance of ΛCLN (x) is found to be quite robust
to variations in the value of ρ and to approach that of ΛCLO (x) and ΛCLLO (x)
as the fading becomes faster, as stated in Subsection 4.1.

6

Conclusion

In this paper, various detection algorithms were proposed based on chip-level
processing for DS/CDMA code acquisition in fast fading channels, wherein the
fading process changes rapidly within the dwell time. First, we derived the joint
pdf of the correlation samples obtained on a chip-by-chip basis during the dwell
time. Based on this pdf and on the ML and LO detection criteria, chip-level
optimal and chip-level LO detection algorithms were proposed, which require
the statistics, but do not need the realization of the fading parameters. Both
algorithms were found to include the conventional algorithm as a special case,
wherein the fading process remains constant during the dwell time and there
is no frequency oﬀset. Two suboptimal detection algorithms were also derived.
The proposed detection algorithms were shown to dramatically outperform the
conventional detection algorithm as the fading becomes faster.

References
1. T.K. Sarkar, Z. Ji, K. Kim, A. Medouri, and M. Salazar-palma, ”A survey of various
propagation models for mobile communication,” IEEE Anten. Propag. Mag., vol.
45, pp. 51-82, June 2003.
2. E.A. Sourour and S.C. Gupta, ”Direct-sequence spread-spectrum parallel acquisition in a fading mobile channel,” IEEE Trans. Comm., vol. 38, pp. 992-998, July
1990.
3. W.H. Ryu, M.K. Park, and S.K. Oh, ”Code acquisition schemes using antenna arrays
for DS-SS systems and their performance in spatially correlated fading channels,”
IEEE Trans. Comm., vol. 50, pp. 1337-1347, Aug. 2002.
4. J.G. Proakis, Digital Communications, NY: McGraw-Hill, 2001.
5. G.H. Golub and C.F. van Loan, Matrix Computations, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996.
6. S.A. Kassam, Signal Detection in Non-Gaussian Noise, NY: Springer-Verlag, 1987.

