Forwarding Scheme Extension for Fast and
Secure Handoﬀ in Hierarchical MIPv6
Hoseong Jeon1 , Jungmuk Lim1 , Hyunseung Choo1 ,
and Gyung-Leen Park2
1

School of Information and Communication Engineering,
Sungkyunkwan University,
440-746, Suwon, Korea
{liard, izeye, choo}@ece.skku.ac.kr
2
Computer Science and Statistics Department,
College of Natual Science, Cheju National University,
glpark@cheju.ac.kr

Abstract. Quality of service (QoS) and security in Mobile IP networks
are becoming signiﬁcant issues due to an increasing number of wireless
devices [1]. For this reason, the Hierarchical Mobile IPv6 (HMIPv6) protocol [2] and the Authentication, Authorization, and Accounting (AAA)
protocol [3] are proposed. However this protocol has ineﬃcient authenticating and binding update procedures that limit its QoS. In this paper,
we propose a forwarding scheme extension for fast and secure handoﬀ
that can reduce a handoﬀ delay while maintaining a security level by a
forwarding and session key exchange mechanism. The performance results show that the proposed mechanism reduces the handoﬀ latency up
to 10% and the handoﬀ failure rate up to 25% compared to the previous
mechanism.

1

Introduction

Based on mobility as the essential characteristic for mobile networks, the Mobile IP standard solution for use with the wireless Internet was developed by
the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) [4]. However, Mobile IP does not
extend well to highly mobile users. When a mobile node (MN) moves from one
subnet to another one, it must send a location update to its home agent (HA)
even though the MN does not communicate with others. These location updates
incur the latency of messages traveling to the possibly distant home network [5].
Moreover, the term mobility implies higher security risks than static operation
in ﬁxed networks, since the traﬃc may at times take unexpected network paths
with unknown or unpredictable security characteristics. Hence, there is a need
to develop technologies that simultaneously enable IP security and mobility over
wireless links.
This work was supported in parts by Brain Korea 21 and the Ministry of Information
and Communication in Republic of Korea. Dr. H. Choo is the corresponding author.
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3515, pp. 468–476, 2005.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

Forwarding Scheme Extension for Fast and Secure Handoﬀ

469

For this reason, the IETF suggests that the Hierarchical Mobile IPv6
(HMIPv6) and the Authentication, Authorization, and Accounting (AAA) protocol be employed. HMIPv6 adds hierarchy, built on MIPv6, which separates
local from global mobility. In the HMIPv6, inter-handoﬀ (global mobility) is
managed by the MIPv6 protocols, while intra-handoﬀ (local mobility) is managed locally.
In the basic AAA protocol, AAA server distributes the session keys to the
MN and agents to guarantee security during data transmission. Yet, while an
MN roams in foreign networks, a continuous exchange of control messages is
required with the AAA server in the home network. Thus, the standard AAA
handoﬀ mechanism has ineﬃcient authenticating procedures limiting its QoS. To
resolve such problems, the forwarding scheme [6] and the session key exchange
mechanism [7] are proposed.
The forwarding scheme is the proposed solution to the complications when
the MN is required to send a binding update (BU) message to the HA during
inter-handoﬀ. In this scheme, the MN sends BU messages to a previous Mobility
Anchor Point (MAP), subsequently the previous MAP forwards packets to a
new MAP. The session key exchange mechanism essentially reuses the previously
assigned session keys. This mechanism is important as it can drastically reduce
the handoﬀ delay. However, this mechanism requires that a trusted third party
support the key exchange between the Access Routers (AR). For this reason, it
uses only the intra-handoﬀ within the same domain.
In this paper, we propose a modiﬁed session key exchange mechanism combined with a forwarding scheme. In Section 2, an overview of the HMIPv6 and
AAA protocol is presented and the session key exchange mechanism and the
forwarding scheme are given. Our proposed mechanism is discussed in Section
3. Performance evaluation for the proposed and previous methods follows in
Section 4. Finally we conclude the paper in Section 5.

2

Preliminaries

In HMIPv6, global (between-site) mobility is managed by the MIPv6 protocol,
while local (within-site) handoﬀs are managed locally. A new node in HMIPv6,
termed the MAP serves as a local entity to aid in mobile handoﬀs. The MAP,
which replaces MIPv4’s foreign agent, can be located anywhere within a hierarchy of routers. In contrast to the foreign agent (FA), there is no requirement for
a MAP to reside on each subnet. The MAP helps to decrease handoﬀ-related
latency since a local MAP can be updated faster than a HA of the MN.
Using MIPv6, a mobile node sends location updates to any node it corresponds with each time it changes its location, and at intermittent intervals
otherwise. This involves a lot of signaling and processing, and requiring a lot of
resources. Furthermore, although it is not necessary for external hosts to be updated when a mobile node moves locally, these updates occur for both inter and
intra-handoﬀs. By separating inter and intra-handoﬀ, HMIPv6 makes it possible
to deal with either situation appropriately [2].

470

H. Jeon et al.

In this scheme, the MN moves around in a local domain based primarily
on HMIPv6 as follows. The MN entering a MAP domain will receive a router
advertisement message containing the information for one of several local ARs.
It binds its current location with an address on the subnet of the MAP (RCoA).
Acting as a local HA, the MAP will receive all packets on behalf of the MN
and will encapsulate and forward them directly to the MN’s current address.
If the MN changes its current address within the local MAP domain (LCoA),
it only needs to register the new address with the MAP. Hence, only in the
beginning does the RCoA need to be registered with CNs and the HA. The RCoA
remains constant as long as the MN moves around within the MAP domain.
This makes the MN’s mobility transparent to the CNs it is communicating with.
Nevertheless, this protocol is restricted to apply only to the intra-handoﬀ cases.
The Forwarding Scheme: The forwarding scheme improves the global mobility of HMIPv6. This scheme operates as follows. If the MN enters an initial
regional network, and then the MAP0 in its subnet will function as the MAP.
When the MN enters a MAP1 domain, it sends the BU message to the MAP1 ,
and the MAP1 sends it back to the MAP0 . When the MAP0 receives its message, it compares it to the MAP list and ﬁnds the MN’s ﬁeld. It then updates the
current MAP address of the MN. After that, the MAP0 relays the packet to the
MAP1 without the binding update through the HA. Fig. 1 shows the mechanism
of the forwarding scheme [6].
HA

CN
Public Network

FA
FA

FA

MAP0

MAP2
FA

FA

FA

MAP1
MN

FA
FA

MN
FA
MN’s movement
BU message flow

MN

Data packet flow

Fig. 1. The forwarding scheme

AAA Protocol: The IETF AAA Working Group has worked for several years
to establish a general model for: Authentication, Authorization, and Accounting.
AAA in a mobile environment is based on a set of clients and servers (AAAF
and AAAH) located in the diﬀerent domains. AAA protocol operates based on
the security associations (SAs : SA1 , SA2 , SA3 , and SA4 ) as shown in Fig. 2.

Forwarding Scheme Extension for Fast and Secure Handoﬀ

AAAF
(K1 ,K3)

AAAH
(K2,K3)

SA3

SA4
K3

SA2

SA1

FA (K1,K3) K
1

471

HA (K2 ,K3)

K2

MN (K1 ,K2)

Fig. 2. AAA security associations

For the support regarding the secure communication, MN requires dynamic security associations. They are deﬁned by sharing the session keys such as K1 , K2 ,
and K3 between MN and HA, between HA and FA, and between FA and MN,
respectively. Once the session keys have been established and propagated, the
mobile devices can securely exchange data [8].
Session Key Exchange Mechanism: The Diﬃe-Hellman key agreement protocol depends on the discrete logarithm using two system parameters p and
g. This scheme is based on a variant of Diﬃe-Hellman key agreement protocol
instead of public key cryptography. Fig. 3 shows the session key exchange procedures. In fast operations, this scheme reuses the previously assigned session keys:
the session keys for FA ( SM N −F A and SF A−HA ). To ensure the conﬁdentiality
and integrity of the session keys, it uses the encryption and decryption under
a short lived secret key, KoF A−nF A , between oFA and nFA. The key is dynamically shared between them and can be created by only two entities. However,
there is a signiﬁcant defect only applicable to intra-handoﬀ [7].

MN

oFA
Madv,gb’old ,pold,gold

nFA

GFA

Madv,gbnew,pnew,gnew

MRRQ ,gb new,gb’old,pnew ,gnew
a=<gbnew ,gb’old>SFA-HA
E={SMN-FA,SFA-HA}KoFA-nFA
M RRQ,gbnew ,gb’old,E
MRRQ,gbnew ,gb’old,pnew ,gnew
MRRP ,ganew

M RRP

Decrypt E
=SMN-FA,SFA-HA
MRRP
MRRP

Fig. 3. Session key exchange mechanism

472

3

H. Jeon et al.

Proposed Mechanism

In this section, we describe the forwarding scheme for fast and secure handoﬀ
based on session key reuse. In this mechanism, the following assumptions are
made:
– To prevent eavesdropping, all messages should be encrypted and exchanged
in a secure process
– FAs related to the intra-handoﬀ are trusted, that is, MAP authenticates
them. Thus impersonating attack is not considered
– For the fast and secure inter-handoﬀ, the AAA server can exchange session
keys between FAs
The proposed mechanism improves the shortage of the previous authentication
and binding update. The proposed scheme is divided into two parts according to
the handoﬀ type: 1) In the intra-handoﬀ, our proposed scheme uses the session
key reuse scheme by MAP and the micro-mobility management of HMIPv6. 2)
In the inter-handoﬀ, it uses the session key reuse scheme by AAA server and the
forwarding mechanism.
MN

oFA

nFA

MAP

1. Adv
2. Pre-Auth Req

3. {SMN-FA,SFA-HA}KoFA-MAP
6. Pre-Auth Rep

7. RRQ

5. Pre-Auth Rep

4. Store
Session Keys

8. RRQ
9. RRP||{SMN-FA,SFA-HA}KnFA-MAP
10. Acquire Session Keys
11. RRP
Secure Binding Update

* Adv: Agent Advertisement Message for Handoff Preparation
* Pre-Auth Req/Pre-Auth Rep: Pre-Authentication Request Message/PreAuthentication Reply Message for using Session Key Reuse
* SA-B: Shared Session Key between A and B
* {M}K: Encryption of Message M using Key K
* KoFA-MAP, KnFA-MAP: Pre-Shared Secret Key Between oFA and MAP, and
nFA and MAP
* RRQ/RRP: Registration Request/Registration Reply Message
* A||B: Concatenation of A and B

Fig. 4. The message procedure at intra-handoﬀ

Fig. 4 shows the message procedure during intra-handoﬀ. When the MN
receives the agent advertisement message of nFA, it requests to the oFA for the
reuse of the session key by sending Pre-Auth Req. After that, the oFA encrypts
the session keys of itself by KoF A−M AP and then delivers them to the MAP. The
MAP stores these session keys until it receives the registration request from the
MN for the intra-handoﬀ. If the MAP receives a RRQ message from the nFA, it
sends a RRP message with {SM N −F A , SF A−HA }KnF A−M AP . Finally, the nFA
acquires these session keys and then sends a RRP message to the MN. Hence,
the MN can send a binding update message in a secure fashion.

Forwarding Scheme Extension for Fast and Secure Handoﬀ
MN

oFA

oAAAF

nAAAF

473

nFA
1. Adv

2. Pre-Auth Req

3. {SMN-FA,SFA-HA}SoFA-oAAAF
4. {SMN-FA,SFA-HA}SoAAAF-nAAAF
5. Store Session Key
6. Pre-Auth Rep
7. Pre-Auth Rep

8. RRQ
9. RRQ
10. RRP||{SMN-FA ,SFA-HA}SnFA-nAAAF
11. Acquire
12. RRP Session Key
Secure Forwarding Scheme

Fig. 5. The message procedure at inter-handoﬀ

Fig. 5 shows the message procedure during inter-handoﬀ. When the MN
moves towards the region of nFA, it receives an agent advertisement message.
Now the MN sends a pre-authentication request message. The oFA encrypts
its session keys by the security association between the oFA and the oAAAF
server, subsequently delivering it to the oAAAF server. The oAAAF server delivers it to the nAAAF server. The nAAAF server stores these session keys
until it receives the registration request from the MN for the inter-handoﬀ.
If the nAAAF server receives a RRQ message from the nFA, it sends a RRP
message with {SM N −F A , SF A−HA }SnF A−nAAAF . Finally, the MN reduces the
binding update time by using forwarding scheme while maintaining the
security.

4
4.1

Performance Evaluation
Modeling

In order to evaluate the performance of our proposed algorithm, we make the
following notations:
– TM N −AR /TAR−M AP /THA−M AP /TM AP −M AP /TM AP −AAA /TAAA−AAA :
The transmisson time between the MN and AR/the AR and MAP/the HA
and MAP/MAPs/the MAP and AAA server/AAA servers, respectively.
– PAR /PHA /PM AP /PAAA : The processing time at the AR/the MAP/the HA/
the AAA server, respectively.
– TH /TR : The registration time of the home registration time/the regional
registration time, respectively.
– TM : The time to establish a link between MAPs
– AH /AR /AM : The authentication time based on the basic AAA protocol/the
session key reuse scheme by MAP/the session key reuse scheme by AAA
server, respectively.

474

H. Jeon et al.

We calculate times required for the performance evaluation using the following
equations as above notations. First of all, the HMIPv6 binding update time (BU)
is represented as:
HM IP v6
BUIntra
= 2TM N −AR + 2TAR−M AP + 2PAR + 2PM AP
HM IP v6
BUInter

(1)

= 2TM NA R +2TAR−M AP +2TM AP −HA +2PAR +2PM AP +PHA (2)

In the proposed scheme, we assume that the MN moves between the MAPs,
and thus the binding update time is calculated as:
BU P roposed = 2TM N −AR + 2TAR−M AP + 2TM AP −M AP + 2PAR + 3PM AP (3)
The total authentication time (AT) in the standard AAA protocol is acquired
as follows:
AT Std = 2TM N −AR + 2TAR−M AP + 2TM AP −AAA + 2TAAA−AAA +
AS + 2TM AP −AAA + 2TM AP −HA + 2PAR + 4PM AP + 2PHA

(4)

Finally, the total authentication time in the proposed scheme is calculated
as shown below.
P roposed
ATIntra
= 2TM N −AR + 2TAR−M AP + 2PAR + 2PM AP

P roposed
ATInter
= 2TM N −AR + 2TAR−M AP + 2TM AP −AAA
+2TAAA−AAA + 2PAR + 4PM AP + 2PAAA

(5)

(6)

The probability (Pf ) in which the MN leaves the boundary cell before the
required time Treq is represented as P rob(T < Treq ), where we assume T is
exponentially distributed. Thus, the handoﬀ failure rate as follows: Pf = 1−exp(λ·Treq ). λ is the arrival rate of MN into the boundary cell and its movement
direction is uniformly distributed on the interval [0, 2π). Thus λ is calculated
by the equation λ = V ·L / π·S [10]. Here V is the velocity for MN and L is
the length of the boundary and S is the area of boundary. Hence we obtain the
handoﬀ failure rate by Treq and λ.
4.2

Analytical Results

Using above equations and the system parameters in Table 1 [5, 9, 10], we compute the cumulative handoﬀ delay and the handoﬀ failure rate. As shown in
Fig. 6, our proposed scheme does not limit the number of forwardings as it
always shows the better performance in the cumulative handoﬀ latency. Consequently, our proposed scheme is limited by the freshness of the session key.
We perform an analysis of the handoﬀ procedure to obtain the handoﬀ failure
rate according to each handoﬀ mechanism. The handoﬀ failure rate is inﬂuenced
by few factors: the velocity of MN and the radius of a cell. Fig. 7 shows the
result of the handoﬀ failure rate. The proposed scheme consistently shows the
better handoﬀ failure rate in comparison with previous mechanisms.

Forwarding Scheme Extension for Fast and Secure Handoﬀ

475

Table 1. System parameters

2000

1500

Probability of Handoff Failure

cumulative handoff latency(msec)

Basic
Proposed

1000

500

0

0

1

2

3

4
5
6
numbers of Inter-handoff

7

8

9

10

Fig. 6. The cumulative handoﬀ latecny

5

100

Probability of Handoff Failure

2500

100

Probability of Handoff Failure

Processing time
MN/AR/MAP/AAA
3DES
MAC (Message Authentication Code)
AS (Authentication time in server)

Probability of Handoff Failure

Bit rates
Wire/Wireless 100/2 M bps
Propagation time
Wire/Wireless
0.5/2 msec
Data size
Message size
256 bytes

-1

10

Basic
Proposed
-2

10

v = 1km/h
0

50
Cell Radius(m)

-1

10

v = 10km/h
0

50
Cell Radius(m)

0.5
0.5
0.5
6.0

msec
msec
msec
msec

-1

10

-2

10

v = 5km/h
0

50
Cell Radius(m)

100

-1

10

v = 20km/h
0

50
Cell Radius(m)

100

Fig. 7. The handoﬀ failure rate

Conclusions

In this paper, we have proposed the forwarding scheme extension for fast and
secure handoﬀ employing a forwarding scheme and session key exchange mechanism in order to provide reduced handoﬀ latency while maintaining the previous
mechanism’s security level. The performance comparison results show that the
proposed mechanism is superior to the previous ones in terms of handoﬀ latency
while maintaining the security level. We are currently conducting an analysis of
the threshold of the session key freshness.

References
1. C. Perkins, “IP Mobility Support,” IETF RFC 2002.
2. H. Soliman, “Hierarchical Mobile IPv6 mobility management (HMIPv6)”, IETF,
October 2004.
3. C. Perkins, “Mobile IP Joins Forces with AAA,” IEEE Personal Communications,
vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 59–61, August 2000.
4. D. Johnson, “Mobility Support in IPv6”, RFC 3775, IETF, June, 2004.
5. J. Vollbrecht, P. Calhoun, S. Farrell, L. Gommans, G. Gross, B. debruijn, C.de
Laat, M. Holdrege, and D. Spence, “AAA Authorization Application Examples,”
IETF RFC 2905.

476

H. Jeon et al.

6. D. Choi, H. Choo, J. Park, “Cost Eﬀective Location Management Scheme Based
on Hierarchical Mobile IPv6,” Springer-Verlag Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
vol. 2668, pp. 144–154, May, 2003.
7. H. Kim, D. Choi, and D. Kim, “Secure Session Key Exchange for Mobile IP Low
Latency Handoﬀs,” Springer-Verlag Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 2668,
pp. 230–238, January 2003.
8. C. de Laat, “Generic AAA Architecture,” RFC 2903, IETF, August, 2000.
9. H. Jeon, H. Choo, and J. Oh, “IDentiﬁcation Key Based AAA Mechanism in Mobile
IP Networks,” ICCSA 2004 vol. 1, pp. 765–775, May 2004.
10. J. McNair, I.F. Akyildiz, and M.D Bender, “An inter-system handoﬀ technique for
the IMT-2000 system,” INFOCOM 2000, vol. 1, pp. 203–216, March 2000.

