Simulation of Nonlinear Thermomechanical
Waves with an Empirical Low Dimensional
Model
Linxiang Wang1 and Roderick V.N. Melnik2
1

2

MCI, Faculty of Science and Engineering,
University of Southern Denmark,
Sonderborg, DK-6400, Denmark
Centre for Coupled Dynamics & Complex Systems,
Wilfrid Laurier University,
75 University Avenue West,
Waterloo, ON, Canada, N2L 3C5

Abstract. In this paper we analyse the performance of a low dimensional model for the nonlinear thermo-mechanical waves. The model has
been obtained by using proper orthogonal decomposition methods combined with a Galerkin projection. First, we analyse the original PDE
model in order to obtain the system states at many time instances.
Then, by using an empirical orthogonal basis extracted from our numerical results, we construct an empirical low dimensional model. Finally,
we compare the results obtained with the original PDE model and those
obtained with our low-dimensional model. These comparisons are carried
out for mechanically induced phase transformations in a shape-memory
alloy rod.
Keywords: Nonlinear waves, thermo-mechanical dynamics, proper orthogonal decompositions, Galerkin projections.

1

Introduction

The ﬁeld of smart material systems is rapidly developing. Due to their unique
properties, the smart materials have attracted an increasing attention from
mathematicians, physicists, control theorists, and engineers. Smart materials
such as piezoelectrics, shape memory alloys, and magnetostrictive materials can
sense and respond to external stimuli. They can also be used as actuators. Ultimately, one would like to achieve a certain degree of control over phenomena
associated with the complex behaviour of these materials ([17, 6] and references
therein). As a result, there is an increasing number of eﬀorts to construct simple
and robust mathematical models describing the dynamics of smart materials and
such that would be relatively easy to amend to control.
Control strategies for many dynamic systems described by nonlinear ODEs
are well developed, in particular in those cases where the dimension of the conV.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3514, pp. 884–891, 2005.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

Simulation of Nonlinear Thermomechanical Waves

885

trolled system is not large [2, 13]. At the same time, existing mathematical models for the dynamical behaviour of smart materials are typically based on a set of
coupled nonlinear PDEs. For example, the mathematical models for the shape
memory alloys are formulated as a system of PDEs that couples thermal and
elastic ﬁelds, while the models for the piezoelectric materials are formulated as
a system of PDEs that couples electric and elastic ﬁelds [11, 19]. All such models are inﬁnite dimensional and one of the ways to deal with such models is to
discretize them in space and apply the method of lines to the result. However,
due to the coupling between multi-physics ﬁelds and system nonlinearities, the
number of nodes for the spatial discretization needs to be suﬃciently large. This
leads to computational diﬃculties due to the fact that the resultant large system of ODEs is usually stiﬀ. Even in the case of linear PDEs, control issues of
the resulting models are highly non-trivial [18, 14, 4, 9]. Hence, it seems natural
to try to approximate PDE systems such as those arising in the description of
smart material systems by a lower dimensional ODE systems. One way to do
that is to use the Proper Orthogonal Decomposition (POD). This is a very efﬁcient tool for this purpose as soon as a collection of system states is available.
This idea has been applied to many active control problems involving ﬂuid ﬂows
(see [1, 14, 5, 15] and references therein). In its essence, the POD methodology is
analogous to the principal component analysis, techniques based on the singular
value decomposition, or the Karhunen-Loeve decomposition [8, 5, 15].
In what follows, we propose a low dimensional model for the nonlinear thermomechanical waves, describing the dynamics of shape memory alloys. The model
is constructed on the basis of the numerical results obtained from the original
system of coupled nonlinear PDEs. The dynamical behavior of the considered
system is simulated by the empirical low dimensional model, and the performance of the low dimensional model is compared to the original PDE model.
It is shown that the empirical low dimensional captures all the characteristic
features of the material.

2

The Original PDE Model

Many smart materials encountered in applications have been extensively investigated by both experimentalists and theoreticians. Today, mathematical models
for the 1D shape memory alloys rods (or wires) are well established on the basis
of the modiﬁed Ginzburg-Landau theory. The well known Falk model has been
constructed on the basis of conservation laws for linear momentum and energy,
and thermo-dynamical consistency. To model the coupled thermo-mechanical
wave interactions and the ﬁrst order phase transitions in the shape memory
alloys, we use the following 1D mathematical model [3, 11, 19]:
∂
∂u
∂u
∂u
∂2u
− k2 ( )3 + k3 ( )5
=
k1 (θ − θ1 )
2
∂t
∂x
∂x
∂x
∂x
∂θ
∂2θ
∂u ∂v
= k 2 + k1 θ
+ G,
cv
∂t
∂x
∂x ∂x

ρ

+ F,
(1)

886

L. Wang and R.V.N. Melnik

where u is the displacement, θ is the temperature, ρ is the density, k1 , k2 , k3 , cv
and k are re-normalized material-speciﬁc constants, θ1 is the reference temperature for 1D martensitic transformations, and F and G are distributed mechanical
and thermal loadings.
It is well known that even in this one-dimensional case, the analysis of the system is far from trivial due to the strong nonlinear coupling between thermal and
elastic ﬁelds. Thermal and mechanical hysteresis eﬀects and complicated phase
transformations are the phenomena that need to be dealt with. Following our
previous works [10, 11, 19], we re-write our original system in a way convenient
for computational implementation:
∂θ
∂2θ
∂
∂v
∂v
= k 2 + k1 θ
+ G,
=
cv
∂t
∂x
∂x
∂t
∂x
∂
∂v
=
k1 (θ − θ1 ) − k2 3 + k3 5 + F,
ρ
∂t
∂x
where

3
3.1

(2)

= ∂u/∂x, v = ∂u/∂t.

The Construction of a Low Dimensional Model
Orthogonal Basis

The ﬁrst step in constructing a low dimensional model is to construct an eﬀective
basis for the approximation of the system states. This step is equivalent to the
one described in [12] where Eq.(2) is rewritten in a general dynamical system
form
∂U(x, t)
= F(U(x, t)),
(3)
∂t
and U(x, t) is the sought-for vector function with components , v and θ. This
function depends on the spatial position continuously in a given domain Ω and
F is a nonlinear function of U, and the ﬁrst, second order derivatives of U. At
this stage, loadings are not included in the above model.
The POD is concerned with the possibility to ﬁnd a set of orthonormal basis
functions φj (x), j = 1, . . . , P which are optimal in the sense that the P dimensional approximation
P

UP (x, t) =

ai (t)φi (x)

(4)

i=1

gives the best approximation to the function U(x, t) among all those P dimensional approximations, in the least square sense [8, 5, 16]. As usual, here ai are
the general Fourier coeﬃcients for φ, that are functions of time. In other words,
the idea of POD applied here is based on a choice of the basis functions φ to
maximize the mean projection of the function U(x, t) on φ
E | U, φ |2
φ 2
φ∈L2 (Ω)
max

(5)

Simulation of Nonlinear Thermomechanical Waves

887

where E(·) denotes the mean value functional, and · is the inner product [5, 16].
Finally, the maximization problem leads to the following eigenvalue problem

Ω

E(U(x)U(x ))φ(x )dx = λφ(x),

(6)

whose kernel K = E(U(x)U(x )) can be interpreted as the auto-covariance function of the two points x and x (see [5, 16] and references therein).
In practice, the states of the above system could be obtained by either experimental measurements or numerical simulation with suitable initial and boundary
conditions, so U(x, t) will be a discrete function in both time and space. If we
assume that the system states are available at N diﬀerent time instances, we
will call the system state at the ith time instance U i as the ith snapshot. In the
discrete form, each snapshot can be written as a column vector with M entries,
where M is the number of nodes for spatial discretization.
In order to construct the orthonormal basis, all the snapshots need to be
collected in one matrix U = {U i , i = 1, . . . , N }, and we can put each snapshot
as one column in the collection matrix so that the collection U will be a M × N
matrix. Then, the orthonormal basis for the given collection U can be calculated
by the singular value decomposition as follows
U = LSRT

(7)

where L is M × M orthonormal matrix, R is a N × N orthonormal matrix, S
is a M × N matrix with all elements zero except along the diagonal and those
non-zero elements are arranged in a decreasing order along the diagonal (the
singular values of U with associated eigenvectors in L and R).
If we let SRT = QT in the singular value decomposition, then U = LQT .
Let then φk be the k th column of L and ak be the k th row of Q, so that the
matrix U ’s singular value decomposition can be rewritten as
m

U=

ak φk

(8)

k=1

where m = min(N, M ) is the rank of the collection matrix U . This approximation
is what we are looking for in Eq.(4). Following [7, 5], we note that the lower dimensional approximation of the matrix U can be easily obtained by just keeping
the ﬁrst few largest singular values and their associated eigenvectors in L and Q,
and the number of eigenvectors should be determined by compromising between
the dimension number of the resultant system and the approximation accuracy.
Furthermore, the basis vectors obtained from the singular value decomposition
are orthonormal, which gives us the following relations
φi , φj =

1
0

if i = j
if i = j

(9)

and the general Fourier coeﬃcients in this case could be calculated as
ak = U k , φk .

(10)

888

L. Wang and R.V.N. Melnik

3.2

Galerkin Projection

The idea of constructing a lower dimensional dynamic system from a given higher
dimensional system is to replace the dynamics of the given system by a lower
dimensional subspace of the origin state space [7, 5, 12]. Following the standard
procedure, we substitute the approximation Eq.(4) into the given dynamic system Eq.(3), with the basis vectors extracted from the collection matrix U , and
write it in the residual form
r(x, t) =

∂U(x, t)
− F(U(x, t)) =
∂t

M
k=1

∂ak
φk − F(
∂t

M

ak φk ).

(11)

k=1

Then, we use a Galerkin projection so that we approximate the system by a
lower dimensional subspace approximation, and set the residual, induced by this
approximation, to be orthogonal to all the basis functions
(r, φk ) =

Ω

r(x)φ(x)dx = 0.

(12)

In the discrete case, we set the inner product between the residual vector and
all the basis vectors to zero, so that for the given dynamic system, it is easy to
get that
M
k=1

∂ak
φk , φj = F(
∂t

M

ak φk ), φj .

(13)

k=1

Since the φj produces a set of orthonormal basis vectors, the system can be
re-cast into the following set of ODEs
∂aj
= F(
∂t

M

ak φk ), φj ,

k, j = 1, . . . , M.

(14)

k=1

Since the basis vectors are extracted from the snapshots, all the boundary conditions are “embedded” into the basis vectors which help avoid a stiﬀ system of
equations. The resulting system of ODEs is integrated given the initial conditions
projected into the orthonormal basis, and the loadings are applied.

4

Numerical Results

In what follows we demonstrate the technique described above on the empirical
low dimensional model by simulating the dynamical behavior of a SMA rod. The
dynamical behavior of the SMA rod is strongly nonlinear with coupling eﬀects
between the elastic and thermal ﬁelds, ﬁrst order martensitic transformations,
and hysteresis [3, 11, 10, 19]. The simulation is performed for a Au23 Cu30 Zn47 rod
of length L = 1cm based on Eq.(1). All the physical parameters for this speciﬁc
material are taken here the same as in [11]. We use the following procedure.

Simulation of Nonlinear Thermomechanical Waves

889

Fig. 1. Comparison of the nonlinear thermo-mechanical behavior of a SMA rod: the
full PDE model (left) and the empirical low dimensional model (right)

890

L. Wang and R.V.N. Melnik

First, we perform the numerical simulation using Eq.(1) with a representative
mechanical load. As a result, the collection matrix will be constructed and the
empirical orthonormal basis vectors can be extracted. Then, we simulate the
dynamics using Eq.(14) with diﬀerent mechanical loads. By comparing the numerical results from Eq.(14) with those from Eq.(1), we analyse the performance
of the low dimensional model in reproducing the main features of the dynamics.
The initial conditions for all simulations are set the same. In particular,
θ(x, 0) = 260o K and (x, 0) = v(x, t) = 0. Boundary conditions for Eq.(1)
are taken as mechanically pinned-end and thermally insulated. The distributed
mechanical loading for collecting snapshots is as follows (for one period)
⎧
0 ≤ t ≤ 3,
⎨ t/3,
F = 7000 (6 − t)/3, 3 ≤ t ≤ 9,
(15)
⎩
(t − 12)/3, 9 ≤ t ≤ 12.
We follow here ideas reported in [11, 10, 19]. There are 18 nodes used for and
θ discretization and 19 nodes used for v. Two periods of loadings are performed
(t ∈ [0, 24]) and totally 201 evenly distributed snapshots are sampled.
After the POD is applied, there are 9 basis vectors that are kept for , 9 for
v, and 8 basis vectors for θ. By substituting the approximation
9

9
i φi ,

u=
i=1

8

vi φvi ,

v=
i=1

θi φθi

θ=

(16)

i=1

into Eq.(1), the system will be converted into a system of ODEs with dimension
of 26 (9 for , 9 for v, and 8 for θ). Then, a standard ODE integrator (ode23 in
Matlab) is applied to simulate the state evolution, without changing any physical
parameters, except the mechanical loadings that is now F = 6000 sin(πt/6)3 .
The numerical results obtained with the low dimensional model are presented
in the right column of Fig.1. The displacements (displacement is calculated by
integrating along x after simulation), temperature and strain distributions
in the entire rod are plotted as functions of time. For comparison purposes,
the behavior of the SMA rod with exactly the same physical parameters and
mechanical loading is also simulated using Eq.(1), and the numerical results for
displacement, temperature and strain are presented in the left column of Fig.1,
in a similar way. The validation of the numerical results obtained with Eq.(1)
has been previously discussed in [19, 11]. By analysing Fig. 1, we conclude that
all the characteristic features of the material are captured by the constructed
here lower dimensional model.

References
1. Atwell,J.A., Borggard,J.T., King,B.B.: Reduced Order Controller for Burgers’
Equation With a Nonlinear Observer. Int.J.Appl.Math.Comput.Sci. 6 11 (2001)
1311-1330.
2. Beeler,S.C., Tran.H.T., Banks.H.T.: Feedback control methodologies for nonlinear
systems, Journal of Optimization Theory and Application, 1 107 (2000) 1-33

Simulation of Nonlinear Thermomechanical Waves

891

3. Falk, F., Konopka, p.: Three-dimensional Landau theory describing the martensitic
phase transformation of shape memory alloys. J.Phys.:Condens.Matter 2 (1990)
61-77.
4. Fattorini,H.O.: Inﬁnite Dimensional Optimization and Control Theory. Cambridge
University Press, (1999) Cambridge.
5. Holmes,P., Lumley,J.L., Berkooz,G.: Turbulence, Coherent Structures, Dynamical
systems and Symmetry. Cambridge University Press, (1996) Cambridge.
6. Hu,M, Du,H.J., Ling,S.F., Zhou,Z.Y., Li,Y.: Motion Control of Electrostrictive
Actuator. Mechatronics, 2 14 (2004) 153-161
7. Kerschen,G., Colinval,J.C.: Physical Interpretation of the Proper Orthogonal
Modes Using the Singular Value Decomposition. Journal of Sound and Vibration.
5 249 (2002) 849-865.
8. Liang,Y.C., Lee,H.P., Lim,S.P., Lin,W.Z., Lee,K.H., Wu,C.G.: Proper Orthogonal
Decomposition And Its Applications-Part I:Theory. Journal of Sound and Vibration, 3 252 (2002)527-544.
9. Lurie,K.A., Applied Optimal Control Theory of Distributed Systems. Plenum
Press, (1993) New York.
10. Melnik, R., Roberts, A., Thomas, K.: Coupled thermomechanical dynamics of
phase transitions in shape memory alloys and related hysteresis phenomena. Mechanics Research Communications 28 6 (2001) 637-651.
11. Melnik, R., Roberts, A., Thomas, K.: Phase transitions in shape memory alloys
with hyperbolic heat conduction and diﬀerential algebraic models. Computational
Mechanics 29 (1) (2002) 16-26.
12. Melnik, R.V.N. and Roberts, A.J., Modelling nonlinear dynamics of shape-memory
alloys with approximate models of coupled thermoeleasticity. ZAMM: Zeitschrift
fur Angewandte Mathematik Mechanik 83 (2) (2003) 93–104.
13. Meyer,M., Matthies,H.G.:Eﬃcient Model Reduction in Nonlinear Dynamics Using
the Karhunen-Loeve Expansion and Dual-Weighted Residual Methods. Computational Mechanics 31 (2003) 179-191
14. OR,A.C., Kelly,R.E.: Feedback Control of Weakly Nonlinear Rayleigh Bernard
Marangoni Convection. J.Fluid.Mech., 440 (2001) p27-47.
15. Rowley,C.W, Colonius,T., Murray,R.M.: Model Reduction for Compressible Flows
Using POD and Galerkin Projection. Physic D 189 (2004) 115-129.
16. Rowley,C.W., Marsden,J.E.: Reconstruction Equations and Karhunen-Loeve Expansions for Systems with Symmetry. Physica.D 142 (2000) 1-19.
17. Sood,D.K, Lawes,R.A., Varadan,V.V (Eds): Smart Structures and Devices, Proceedings of SPIE, December 2000, Melbourne, Australia.
18. Teman,R.: Inﬁnite Dimensional Dynamical Systems in Mechanics and Physics.
Springer-Verlag (1998) New York
19. Wang, L., Melnik, R.: Nonlinear coupled thermomechanical waves modelling shear
type phase transformation in shape memory alloys. in Mathematical and Numerical
Aspects of Wave Propagation, Eds.G.C.Cohen, et al,Springer,723-728 (2003).

