Automatic Categorization of Traditional Chinese
Painting Images with Statistical Gabor Feature
and Color Feature
Xiaohui Guan, Gang Pan, and Zhaohui Wu
Dept. of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
{hxgy, gpan, wzh}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract. This paper presents an automatic statistical approach to categorize traditional Chinese painting (TCP) images according to subject
matter into three major classes: ﬁgure paintings, landscapes, and ﬂowerand-bird paintings. A simple statistical Gabor feature is presented to
describe the local spatial conﬁguration of the image, which is then integrated with color histogram that represents the global visual characteristic to build the feature subspace. A relative-distance based voting rule
is proposed for ﬁnal classiﬁcation decision. The eﬀectiveness of the proposed scheme is demonstrated by the comparable experimental results.

1

Introduction

Traditional Chinese painting (TCP) is highly regarded throughout the world for
its theory, expression, and techniques. As an important part of Chinese cultural
heritage, the traditional Chinese painting is distinguished from Western art in
that it is executed on xuan paper (or silk) with the Chinese brush, Chinese ink
and mineral and vegetable pigments. Currently more and more museums and
artists like to present the paintings on the Web. This paper addresses the automatic categorization of the traditional Chinese painting images. The potential
applications include Web searching and browsing, digital art libraries etc.
Traditional Chinese painting can be divided according to subject matter into
three major categories [15]: landscape paintings, ﬂower-and-bird paintings and
ﬁgure paintings. Landscape paintings mainly depict the natural scenery of mountains and rivers. Flower-and-bird paintings concentrate on the plants and small
animals. Figure paintings mainly portray humans and their activities, generally
along with the plant, small animal and scenery. Although the categorization is
usually an easy task for humans, it is an extremely diﬃcult problem for machines. The major diﬃculties lie in its wide variation in subject’s shape, color,
and painting style. The subjects’ appearance in TCP is usually highly abstracted
from the real word.
There are many researchers made eﬀorts for image classiﬁcation and indexing. As one of the simplest representations of digital images, color histogram [1]
has been widely used for various image categorization problems. Color histogram
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3514, pp. 743–750, 2005.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

744

X. Guan, G. Pan, and Z. Wu

is insensitive to image resolution and rigid transform. Pass [2] presents color coherence vector (CCV) as image index. CCV is the statistical pixels’ convergence
measurement in space. Stricker and Orengo think that the color information
centralizes in the low rank color moments, so they use the statistical moment
to characterize the color [3]. The above methods attempt to capture the global
color features and discard the spatial conﬁguration. The reference [4] utilizes
spatial information to improve the histogram method.
Besides histogram, a number of block-based methods have been proposed to
employ local and spatial properties by dividing an image into rectangular subimages. [5] exploits the wavelet coeﬃcients in high frequency bands for classiﬁcation. Ma and Manjunath evaluate various wavelet forms to reach a conclusion
that Gabor wavelet transforms get the best results in texture retrieval methods
[6]. Yu [7] uses 1D HMM to classify indoor and outdoor scene. Carson et al [8]
utilizes EM algorithm to segment the image into several ”blobworld” which are
coherent in color and texture. Huang [9] relies on the banded color correlogram
as image features and then hierarchical classiﬁcation tree is construct to classify new image. Jiang [10] presents a scheme to classify the TCP images from
non-TCP images.
This paper proposes a statistical method to automatically classify the traditional Chinese paintings according to subject matter into three major categories:
landscape paintings, ﬂower-and-bird paintings and ﬁgure paintings. We use a statistical Gabor feature as the representation of local texture of TCP, and color
histogram as the global representation of color information.

2

Statistical Feature Representation

In our method, we present a statistical feature integrating local texture and color
information. Firstly, the TCP image is ﬁltered using a bank of Gabor functions
with multiple scales v and orientations u. Secondly, with the ﬁltered image, we
construct a statistical Gabor feature such as average, variance. And then, we
combine the Gabor feature with the color histogram of the TCP.
2.1

Statistical Gabor Feature

Gabor wavelets are biologically motivated because they model the response properties of human cortical cells. They have been widely adopted to extract features
in image retrieval, face recognition, texture classiﬁcation [11, 12] and got wonderful results. Basically, Gabor ﬁlters are a group of wavelets, with each wavelet
capturing the variation at a speciﬁc frequency and direction. It has been shown
to correspond to human visual system.
Gabor ﬁlter family is similar to the simple visual perceptive cells, which
are characterized as localized orientation selective and frequency selective. The
kernel is the product of a Gaussian envelope and a wave function, as shown in
2
Equ (1), where the term exp(− δ2 ) is subtracted to make the ﬁlter insensitive to
the overall level of illumination.

Automatic Categorization of Traditional Chinese Painting Images

745

→
−
−
→
−
δ2
x
kj
kj • →
→−
−
→
→
)[exp(i
k
x
)
−
exp(−
)]
Φj (−
x ) = 2 exp(−
j
→
−
x
δ
2

(1)

Where

−
→
x = I(x, y)

kν cos ϕµ
−
→
kj = [
]
kν sin ϕµ

1
Π
Π
∗ ν ϕµ = µ
ν = 0 · · · 3, µ = 0 · · · 5
2 2
6
On basis of [13], the parameters setting of Gabor ﬁlter are 4 scales, 6 orientations, and ﬁlter mask size is 13 × 13. So we get 24 functions determined by
the parameters ν, µ. This bank of ﬁlters is applied to the TCP image, shown in
Equ (2). This means Gabor wavelet transformation, that is, every input image
is convoluted with the 24 Gabor ﬁlters.
kv =

→
x)=
Gνµ (−

→
→
→
→
y
I(−
y )Φνµ (−
x −−
y )d2 −

(2)

The resulted Gabor coeﬃcient has two parts: real part Re(Gνµ ) and imaginary part Im(Gνµ ). From the ﬁltered image, we could compute the average νµ
and variance σνµ of the magnitude Re(Gνµ )2 + Im(Gνµ )2 , then obtain the
statistical Gabor feature, a 48-dimensional vector:
−
→
g ={
2.2

00 , σ00 , 01 , σ01 ... νµ σνµ |ν

= 3, µ = 5}

(3)

Statistical Color Feature

Color is the most intuitive characteristic of human vision. Every kind of subjects
has its diﬀerent intrinsic color. We employ the color histogram [1] as our statistical feature for color information, which has been used in the image retrieval
and indexing. It is invariant to translation and rotation around the viewing axis
and varies slowly with changes of view angle, scale and occlusion.
Assume colors in an image are mapped into a discrete color space containing n
colors, a color histogram of image I is n-dimensional vector, where each element
represents the number of pixels with color index j. Each element of a histogram
is normalized so that the histogram represents the image without regarding to
the image size. The element of the normalized color histogram h(I) is deﬁned
as:
n

hj (I) = Hj (I)/

Hi (I)

(4)

i=1

Where Hi (I), Hj (I) is the number of pixels with color i,j in image I. In our
experiment, we select 8 ×8×8 RGB color space. So we get a color feature vector:
→
−
h = {hj (I)|j = 1 · · · 512}

(5)

→
−
→
We combine the color histogram h with the Gabor feature −
g into a longer
→
−
→
vector{−
g | h } , which together characterizes the texture and color of TCP image.

746

3
3.1

X. Guan, G. Pan, and Z. Wu

Categorization
Voting with Relative-Distance in Feature Space

To classify a new input image I in a feature space, we exploit voting with sample
images. In many articles, Euclidean distance is used. However, for the traditional
Chinese painting images, works in diﬀerent style may have diﬀerent dispersibility.
The Euclidean distance in the feature space is often not enough, since the scatter
information of the same class should be taken into account.
Here we take the intra-class variance into consideration. Suppose that X =
{x1 , x2 ···xN }, Ymk = {y1 , y2 ···yN } , where X is the feature vector of the input
image I, Ymk is kth sample feature vector of class m. Km is the total number
of training images of class m. We use the Equ (6) to determine the distance
between the input image and the class m.
Km

dm =

Km

dmk /Km

vm =

i=1

(dmk − dm )2 /Km

(6)

k=1

And ﬁnally the relative-distance between the input image I and the k th
sample is:
N

Rdmk = dmk /vm

dmk = d(X, Ymk ) =

(xi − yi )2

(7)

n=1

We make the relative distance to decide whether to cast a vote of a certain
class to the input image. In most cases the relative distance performs better than
the common Euclidean measure.
The voting policy is according to the following rule:
Km

Vm =

Vmk
k=1

Vmk =

1
0

if Rdmk < T hreshold
otherwise

(8)

Vm is the total number of votes received by the class m. Assuming Cm is the
total samples of the class m. Thus, maximum Vm /Cm determines the pattern of
test image.
3.2

Sample Selection

In order to reﬁne the training samples and also to improve the classiﬁcation
accuracy, sample selection procedure is implemented. The selection of training
samples may aﬀect completely the categorization results, because images to classify need be compared with all the training samples in the reference database.
F ig.1.(a) shows two classes of traditional Chinese painting image, where blue
star denotes the ﬂower-and-bird paintings and red point denotes ﬁgure paintings.
Each painting is represented by a point in the feature space.
We use the k-nearest neighbor editing algorithm [14] to select the registered
samples from a set of reference samples. The algorithm is as follows:

Automatic Categorization of Traditional Chinese Painting Images

747

1. Divide randomly reference sample set into several subsets, suppose: Θ =
{S0 , S1 · · · Sn−1 }, n ≥ 3 ,
2. With S(i+1)mod(n) as reference samples, Use K-nearest classiﬁcation method
to classify Si samples, which i = 0, 1 · · · n − 1 .
3. Discard classiﬁed falsely samples, the residual samples constitute new sample
set ΘN .
4. If there are no samples to be discarded, stop. Otherwise, go to: 1.

Fig. 1. The illustration of sample selection: (a) before and (b) after sample selection.
Where x-axis: of ν = 0, µ = 1 and y-axis: of v=3, u=5

F ig.1.(b) shows the result of F ig.1.(a) by the editing algorithm. From this
ﬁgure we can see that the intersectional points are discarded. This decreases the
aﬀect of ambiguous samples for voting procedure. In the next section, we will
show that after sample selection the categorization accuracy has been improved
to a certain extent.

4

Experimental Results

In our experiment, we use a database with 392 traditional Chinese painting images, which includes 132 ﬂower-and-bird paintings, 127 ﬁgure paintings and 133
landscapes. These images are painted by diﬀerent painters in diﬀerent dynasty.
Some works by modern painters are also included. The image size varied from
200 × 200 to 500 × 500. Some samples are shown in Fig.2.
We use the leave-one-out rule of cross validation to test our approach. Every
time we select one as the test image and the others are as reference samples.
This process repeats throughout the whole experimental data. During relativedistance based voting, we need to determine the threshold for voting. The threshold will decide whether the sample casts a vote of class m to the test image. We
compute average dispersivity of the selected training samples as the threshold, i.e.
T hreshold = d/v
(9)

748

X. Guan, G. Pan, and Z. Wu

Fig. 2. Some samples of the experimental data

Where d and v are for the average mutual distance and variance of samples
feature vectors.
The comparison with diﬀerent features is carried out. The categorization
results are shown in T able.1. presented in the confusion matrix form. In the
class confusion matrix A = (aij ) , aij means the samples number of class i
that predicted into class j. The diagonal elements are the correct classiﬁcation
numbers. The non-diagonal elements are the numbers of false categorization.
T able.1. demonstrates that the scheme combining the statistical Gabor feature
and color feature (GC) has improved the categorization accuracy comparing
with the single feature (G or C). The sample selection (GC+) farther enhances
the classiﬁcation result.

5

Conclusion

In this paper, we present an automatic classiﬁcation scheme. The statistical Gabor feature and color histogram are combined to classify the traditional Chinese
painting images. And we use relative-distance based voting rule to ﬁnally categorize the images. The Gabor feature, description of local texture information
of image, is compensated with the absence of spatial information, the drawback

Automatic Categorization of Traditional Chinese Painting Images

749

Table 1. The confusion matrix of landscape, ﬁgure and ﬂower-and-bird paintings using
various features. C: color histogram; G: Gabor feature; GC: combining Gabor
feature and color histogram without sample selection; GC+: combining Gabor and
color histogram after sample selection
Feature Used
C
Landscape
G
GC
GC+
C
Figure
G
GC
GC+
C
Flower-and-bird G
GC
GC+

Landscape
110
111
119
124
1
4
1
0
1
3
3
1

Figure
23
21
14
9
92
92
100
106
36
35
24
19

Flower-and-bird
0
1
0
0
34
31
26
21
95
94
105
112

of global color histogram. The preliminary experimental results have shown the
superiority of our method.

References
1. M. Swain, D.Ballard. Color indexing. International Journal of Computer Vision,
7(1): 11-32, 1991.
2. G.Pass, R.Zabih, J.Miller. Comparing images using color coherence vectors. ACM
Multimedia. Boston, MA, 1996.
3. M.Striker, M.Orengo. Similarity of color images, SPIE proceedings, 1995.
4. Y.L.Ho, K.L.Ho, H.H.Yeong. Spatial color descriptor for image retrieval and video
segmentation. IEEE Transaction on multimedia. 5(3), 2003.
5. J.Z.Wang, J.Li, G.Wiederhold. SIMPLIcity: Semantics-sensitive integrated matching for picture libraries. IEEE PAMI, 23(9):947-963, 2001.
6. W.Y.Ma, B.S.Manjunath. Texture features and learning similarity. IEEE CVPR,
1996.
7. H.Yu, W.Wolf. Scenic classiﬁcation methods for image and video databases. SPIE
Proceeding, vol.2606, 363-371, October 1995.
8. S.Belongie, C.Carson, H.Greenspan, J.Malik. Color and texture-based image segmentation using EM and its application to content-based image retrieval. IEEE
ICCV. pp.675-682, Jan. 1998.
9. J.Huang, S.Ravikumar, R.Xabih. An automatic hierarchical image classiﬁcation
scheme. Proc. ACM multimedia, Sep. 1998.
10. S.Jiang, W.Gao, W.Wang. Classifying traditional Chinese painting images. IEEE
PCM, pp.1816-1820, Dec. 2003.
11. C.Liu, H.Wechsler. Gabor feature based classiﬁcation using the enhanced ﬁsher
linear discriminant model for face recognition. IEEE Trans. IP, 11(4):467-476, 2002.
12. G.M.Haley, B.S.Manjunath. Rotation-invariant texture classiﬁcation using modiﬁed Gabor ﬁlters. Proceedings of the International Conference on Image Processing. Vol.1, 1995.

750

X. Guan, G. Pan, and Z. Wu

13. L.Chen, G.Lu, D.Zhang. Eﬀects of diﬀerent gabor ﬁlter parameters on image retrieval by texture. Proc. 10th Int’l Conf. Multimedia Modeling, 2004.
14. R.O.Duda, P.E.Hart, D.G.Stork, Pattern classiﬁcation, Wiley, October 2000.
15. W. Liu ed. Traditional Chinese paintings thesaurus, pp.392-399, Huawen publisher,
1990 (in Chinese).

