Dynamic Data Driven Applications Systems: New
Capabilities for Application Simulations and
Measurements
Frederica Darema
National Science Foundation, Arlington VA 22230, USA
darema@nsf.gov

Abstract. The Dynamic Data Driven Application Systems (DDDAS) concept
entails the ability to incorporate dynamically data into an executing application
simulation, and in reverse, the ability of applications to dynamically steer
measurement processes. Such dynamic data inputs can be acquired in real-time
on-line or they can be archival data. DDDAS offers the promise of improving
modeling methods, augmenting the analysis and prediction capabilities of
application simulations, improving the efficiency of simulations and the
effectiveness of measurement systems.
In the recent years grid computing technologies provide advanced
computational capabilities for applications and application simulations At the
same time measurement infrastructures, from instruments to sensor systems, to
data storage technologies and remote data access have also matured. The DDDAS
concept dynamically integrates computational and measurement aspects of an
application, and in that respect the “platform” supporting the application becomes
a unified computational and measurement infrastructure. Enabling the synergistic
feedback and control-loop between application simulations and measurements
requires novel application modeling approaches and interfaces to measurement
systems, mathematical and statistical algorithms tolerant to perturbations from
dynamic data inputs, and systems software to support the dynamic resource
requirements of such applications. This and the rest of the papers in the
proceedings of this workshop provide examples of ongoing research developing
DDDAS technologies, both in terms of new capabilities in applications,
measurement methods and in related systems software technologies.

1 Introduction
The Dynamic Data Driven Application Systems (DDDAS) [1,2] concept entails the
ability to incorporate dynamically data into an executing application simulation, and
in reverse, the ability of applications to dynamically steer measurement processes.
Such dynamic data inputs can be acquired in real-time on-line or they can be archival
data. The DDDAS concept offers the promise of improving modeling methods,
augmenting the analysis and prediction capabilities of application simulations,
improving the efficiency of simulations and the effectiveness of measurement
systems.
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3515, pp. 610 – 615, 2005.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

DDDAS: New Capabilities for Application Simulations and Measurements

611

Traditional applications and systems simulations, thought fairly complex, are still
lacking the ability to accurately describe such systems. This situation is accentuated
in cases where real-time dynamic conditions exist. Application simulations that can
dynamically incorporate at runtime new data, archival or from on-line measurements
of the actual systems, offer the promise of more accurate analysis, more accurate
predictions, more precise controls, and more reliable outcomes. These capabilities are
fostered with the DDDAS concept. DDDAS can be viewed as a methodology to
counterbalance incompleteness in model and capability to enhance the application
models by imparting additional information into the model as at runtime additional
data are used to selectively enhance or refine the original model. It can also be used
to reduce the time to derive the simulation results, an important capability in many
simulations, including simulations of real-time events.
In addition the ability of an application simulation to control and guide the
measurement processes, creates more effective measurement processes. Such
capabilities are highly desirable in cases where measurements are difficult to perform,
time-critical, or expensive, in that can reduce collection time, cost, improve the
quality of data collected.
Thus the concept of DDDAS goes beyond the current notions of “systems of
systems” which primarily refer to multi-modal computational aspects of an
application. DDDAS extends the concept of the “systems of systems’ to also include
the “measurement” as one of the systems.
In the recent years technologies to support the computational aspects of applications
and application simulations have considerably advanced, as exemplified by the advent
of grid computing technologies and computational grid infrastructures. At the same
time measurement infrastructures, from instruments to sensor systems, to data storage
technologies and remote data access have also matured. More systematic
infrastructures for computing platforms and for measurement systems have been also
recently called for [4]. The DDDAS concept dynamically integrates computational and
measurement aspects of an application, and in that respect the “platform” supporting
the application becomes the unified computational and measurement infrastructure.
This kind of integrated, unified infrastructure goes beyond the current notions of
computational grids; one could call it the “extended grid” or the integral grid.
To enable the DDDAS paradigm requires synergistic multidisciplinary research
projects. Research in such projects needs to address in an integral way application
modeling and simulation methods, mathematical and statistical algorithms,
measurement methods, and systems software to support DDDAS environments.
Opportunities in enabling DDDAS and challenges in creating DDDAS capabilities,
have been discussed in [1,2,3] and elsewhere. A brief list of such challenges includes:
advances at the applications level for enabling this kind of dynamic feedback and
coupling with measurements; advances in complex, multi-modal models, and ability
to combine dynamically such models as is dictated by the injected data, advances in
the applications algorithms for the algorithms to be amenable to perturbations by the
dynamic data inputs and enhanced capabilities for handling uncertainties in input
data; new technology in the computer software systems areas to support such
environments where the applications requirements are dynamic, depending on the
dynamic data inputs.
Furthermore the DDDAS concept by integrating the
computational and measurement aspects of an application, goes beyond the notions of

612

F. Darema

cyber-infrastructure. Thus many aspects such as reliability, security, fault tolerance,
system recovery extend beyond the technologies developed for computational grids,
to accommodate the support not only of computational grids but also of systems like
sensor networks and other measurement instruments.
The efforts presented here provide examples of technologies and capabilities that
are being developed based on the DDDAS concept and supporting DDDAS
environments. This workshop is a third of a series of workshops of the DDDAS
topic that have been organized as part of ICCS, starting with ICCS’03.

2 Overview of Selected Research Efforts Presented in This
Workshop
The rest of the papers presented in this workshop represent ongoing research projects
each addressing a number of aspects along the technical challenges mentioned above.
With the exception of project [16], all other projects [6-15, 17-19] are predominantly
funded by NSF ITR program [5]. Several papers address application simulations
whose capabilities are enhanced by dynamic data inputs into the executing
application/simulation. While many of the papers are developing new capabilities at
the application and algorithm levels, several of the papers focus in the underlying
software technology to support the development of the complex DDDAS applications,
their dynamic runtime support requirements and interfaces to control measurement
systems. Several papers provide examples of simulation controlled measurement
processes. Most of the work on mathematical algorithms tolerant and stable to
dynamically streamed data is done in the context and together with the development
of the application models. In all cases the mathematical algorithms and systems
software development is done in the context of specific applications driving and
validating the developed technologies.
The projects discussed in [6-11, 21] enable improved analysis and prediction
capabilities of application simulations and/or speeding up the computation times
together with improved quality of simulations, and in a feedback loop the simulations
control of measurements, sensors and other instruments. The applications range from
structural analysis, environmental and natural resource management, and crisismanagement. In [6] the project employs sensor originating data-driven pre-computed
solutions synthesis to speedup simulation time and fidelity of result for applications
that have real-time constraints such as supersonic platforms and fire dynamics
simulations. In [7] employs dense networks of high resolution phased array and
doppler radars to adaptively respond to weather patterns and produce better-than-realtime predictions of tornadoes and other ”meso-scale” weather events by simulations
and measurements continually steering by new data, optimizing data collection,
steering remote observing and selectively changing configuration of measurement
instruments. The paper in [8] develops capabilities for short-range forecasting of
wildfire behavior from real-time weather data, thermal imaging, and thermal sensor
data streams. In [9] algorithms to incorporate measurements in algorithms for
underground contaminant simulations, and in [10] efficient algorithms to dynamically
integrate observational data with models for improved forward and backward
(adjoint) atmospheric chemical transport modeling. The project in [11] discusses

DDDAS: New Capabilities for Application Simulations and Measurements

613

development of application models and algorithms, as well as a systems software
infrastructure for optimization of the process of secondary oil recovery. The project
in [21] has developed high-fidelity simulations of large structures, subject to
mechanical and thermal stesses.
Applications in [12-14] are in the areas of medical and biological sciences. The
project in [12] uses the DDDAS concept to enable real-time intra-operative image guided
neurosurgery, by developing applications and the underlying infrastructure to support
such environments. In [13] spectroscopic data are dynamically input into protein
dynamics computations speeding-up and improving the fidelity of the computations.
[14] develops models to simulate the air flow around bat wings during flight.
The projects in [15-17] develop multimodal simulation models and integration of
such multimodal models. The project in [15] develops simulations for decision support
systems, such as case scenario for evacuation of a building in case of fire and structural
damage to a building due to an explosion. In such “system of systems” simulation
scenario, numerical PDE and FEM models simulating fire dynamics and structural
aspects of the building are integrated w agent based models that simulate behavior of
people in a panic situation, evacuation policies, and other factors. The models are
coupled and also driven by dynamic data inputs from sensors monitoring smoke and
temperature increases due to the fire, sensors monitoring air flow, and feeding all such
data into the fire model, to other sensors monitoring structural integrity aspects, and
feeding that to the structural analysis program, and in turn such models coupled with the
agent based evacuation simulation models. Under the same project simulations are
developed when not only a building but a section of a city is affected. The project in
[16] is using the DDDAS concept, to develop a decision support system for emergency
medical services. One can envision the scenario, where the capabilities in [15] are
further coupled with those in [16] to develop an end-to-end decision support system of
how to evacuate and optimize medical services in case of an adverse attack to a building
or a city section. Projects [15] and [16] coupled with [21,] which is simulating the crash
of an aircraft onto a building, could be used to fully simulate the scenario of a crisis
situation caused by such an adverse event. The project in [17] uses the DDDAS concept
to couple continuous and discrete modeling methods for 3D tracking, and overcoming
the shortcomings of each of these two methods when applied individually.
Improvements in such methods can enable computer-based sign-language analysis, and
other human-computer interaction applications such, human-identification and
computer-based recognition of human deception.
The projects in [18-20] address systems issues and other fundamental aspects of
DDDAS systems, such as: ability to invoke dynamically application modalities as
dictated by the dynamic data inputs [18], runtime environments to support the faulttolerant underlying infrastructure required by DDDAS systems [19], and aspects of
how such “systems-of-systems” environments, where dynamic multimodal models
and measurement systems are integrated can be validated.

3 Summary
The DDDAS concept opens new capabilities in applications and measurements.
Through efforts that have started developing DDDAS systems, that promise begins to

614

F. Darema

materialize. While we are far from having fully and robustly developed these
capabilities and the underlying technologies, we are in a steady path towards
accomplishing that objective. The path is long, and the progress made is exemplified
by the projects presented in the ICCS/DDDAS workshops, including the present one.

References
1. NSF Workshop, March 2000; www.cise.nsf.gov/dddas
2. F. Darema, Dynamic Data Driven Applications Systems: A New Paradigm for
Application Simulations and Measurements, ICCS’04

3. F. Darema, Grid Computing and Beyond: The Context of Dynamic Data Driven
4.
5.
6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.
16.

Applications Systems, Proceedings of the IEEE, Special Issue on Grid Computing (in
3/05)
Cyberinfrastructure Report http://www.communitytechnology.org/nsf_ci_report
NSF Information Technology Research (ITR) Program (1999-2004)
J. Michopoulos, C. Farhat, E. Houstis, P. Tsompanopoulou, H. Zhang, and T. Gullaud,
Dynamic Data Driven Methodologies for Multiphysics System Modeling and Simulation;
Proceedings ICCS’05
Beth Plale, Dennis Gannon, Dan Reed, Sara Graves, Kelvin Droegemeier, Bob
Wilhelmson, and Mohan Ramamurthy, Towards Dynamically Adaptive Weather Analysis
and Forecasting in EAD; Proceedings ICCS’05
Jan Mandel, Lynn S. Bennethum, Mingshi Chen, Leopoldo P. Franca, Craig J. Johns,
Janice L. Coen, Craig C. Douglas, Minjeong Kim, Andrew V. Knyazev, Robert Kremens,
Vaibhav Kulkarni, Guan Qin, Anthony Vodacek, Jianjia Wu, Wei Zhao and Adam
Zornes, Towards a Dynamic Data Driven Application System for Wildfire Simulation;
Proceedings ICCS’05
Craig C. Douglas, Yalchin Efendiev, Richard Ewing, Victor Ginting, Raytcho Lazarov,
Martin J. Cole, Greg Jones and Chris R. Johnson, Multiscale Interpolation, Backward in
Time Error Analysis for Data-Driven Contaminant Simulation; Proceedings ICCS’05
Adrian Sandu, Emil M. Constantinescu, Wenyuan Liao, Gregory R. Carmichael, Tianfeng
Chai, John H. Seinfeld, and Dacian Daescu, Ensemble-Based Data Assimilation for
Atmospheric Chemical Transport Models; Proceedings ICCS’05
Manish Parashar, Vincent Matossian, Wofgang Bangerth, Hector Klie, Benjamin Rutt,
Tahsin Kurc, Umit Catalyurek, Joel Saltz, and Mary F. Wheeler, Towards Dynamic DataDriven Optimization of Oil well Placement; Proceedings ICCS’05
Amit Majumdar, Adam Birnbaum, Dong Ju Choi, Abhishek Trivedi, Simon K. Warfield,
Kim Baldridge, and Petr Krysl, A Dynamic Data Driven Grid System for Intra-operative
Image Guided Neurosurgery; Proceedings ICCS’05
Dimitrios Morikis, Christodoulos A. Floudas, and John D. Lambris, Structure-based
Integrative Computation and Experimental Approach for the Optimization of Drug
Design; Proceedings ICCS’05
I.V. Pivkin, E. Hueso, R. Weinstein, D. H. Laidlaw, S. Swartz, and G. E. Karniadakis,
Simulation and Visualization of Air Flow Around Bat Wings During Flight; Proceedings
ICCS’05
R. Chaturvedi, S. A. Filatyev, J.P. Gore, A. Hanna, J. Means, and A.K. Mellema,,
Integrating Fire, Structure and Agent Models; Proceedings ICCS’05
Mark Gaynor, Margo Seltzer, Steve Moulton, and Jim Freedman,, A Dynamic, DataDriven, Decision Support System for Emergency Medical Services; Proceedings ICCS’05

DDDAS: New Capabilities for Application Simulations and Measurements

615

17. Dimitris Metaxas and Gabriel Tsechpenakis, Dynamic data Driven Coupling of
Continuous and Discrete Methods in 3D Tracking; Proceedings ICCS’05
18. David Brogan, Paul Reynolds, Robert Bartholet, Joseph Carnahan, and Yannick Loitiere,,
Semi-Automated Simulation Transformation for DDDAS; Proceedings ICCS’05
19. Andrew Grimsahw, Marty Humphrey, John C. Knight, Anh Nguyen-Tuong, Jonathan
Rowanhill, Glenn Wasson, and Jim Basney, The Development of Dependable and
Survivable Grids; Proceedings ICCS’05
20. J. Michopoulos and Sam Lambrakos, On the Fundamental Tautology of

Validating Data-Driven Models and Simulations; Proceedings ICCS’05
21. Christoph Hoffman, Ahmed Sameh, Ananth Grama, High-Fidelity Simulation of Large
Scale Structures; Proceedings ICCS’05

