Fuzzy System Analysis of Beach Litter Components
Can Elmar Balas
Gazi University, Faculty of Engineering and Architecture
Civil Engineering Department, 06570 Ankara, Turkey
cbalas@gazi.edu.tr

Abstract. Tourist beaches on the southern coast of Turkey are surveyed in
order to facilitate a standardised fuzzy approach to be used in litter prediction
and to assess the aesthetic state of the coastal environment for monitoring
programs. During these surveys the number of litter items on beaches were
counted and recorded in different categories. The main source of litter on
beaches was determined as “beach users”. A fuzzy system was developed to
predict the classification of the beaches, since uncertainty was generally
inherent in beach work due to the high variability of beach characteristics and
the sources of litter categories. This resulted in effective utilization of “the
judgment and knowledge of beach users” in the evaluation of beach gradings.

1

Introduction

Marine litter is defined as the solid materials of human origin that are discarded at sea
or reaches the sea through waterways or domestic or industrial outfall [1]. Litter in the
marine environment leads to numerous problems adversely affecting coastal
development sectors. Prevention at source is one of the most important strategies in
enabling the reduction of litter pollution, and for this aim to be achieved strong links
between measurement and management need to be realized. Five beaches on the south
coast of Turkey are studied with regards to type and amount of litter on each beach.
The surveys were carried out at over 100 m wide transects of the beaches.
Four site investigations were performed, first being on 20-29 October 2000, second
on 10-19 November 2000, third on 15-26 March 2001 and the last on 2-13 June 2001.
Field litter studies were conducted on some of the most attractive tourist beaches of
the Turkish Riviera (Antalya) coast, namely Cirali, Konyaalti, Kemer, Side and
Belek. For a 100m stretch of beach located on the normal access points, all litter items
were enumerated and placed in their respective categories/grades [2]. Litter amounts
collected ranged from 18 to 743-items/100 m stretch of beach. Litter items were
graded from the best (Grade A) to worst case (Grade D) as shown in Table 1.

2 Litter Prediction by Fuzzy System
Field measurements indicated that the main beach litter item (the most abundant in
terms of quantity) was the general litter category. The number of litter items in other
categories was low and oil pollution was not observed. Konyaaltı beach was rated to
V.S. Sunderam et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2005, LNCS 3516, pp. 1108 – 1111, 2005.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005

Fuzzy System Analysis of Beach Litter Components

1109

be in bad conditions on the first three site surveys. The reasons were its nearness to
the city center, the demolished refreshment kiosks due to the implementation of the
municipality plan of Antalya and the difficulty in controlling the pollution on its
seven-kilometer long beach. However on the last survey, the grading of Konyaaltı
beach increased from “D” to “B”, due to the improvement in tourism facilities
implemented by the municipality of Antalya. This indicated a sharp decline in the
amount of litter items on the beach with the beginning of the tourism season.
Table 1. Categories for grading of beaches

Category
1

2
3
4
5
6
7

Type

A

B

C

D

General

0

1-5

6-14

>15

Cotton
Buds

0-9

10-49

50-99

>100

Gross Litter

0

1-5

6-14

>15

General Litter

0-49

500-999

>1000

0

50499
1-5

6-24

>25

0

1-4

5-9

>10

Oil

Absent

Trace

Noticeable

Objectionable

Faeces

0

1-5

6-24

>25

Sewage
Related Debris

Harmful Litter
Accumulations

Broken
Glass
Number

The Moonlight beach and the public beach of Kemer were in good condition with a
beach grading of “B”. With the beginning of tourism season, these beaches were
regularly cleaned. Çıralı and Belek are the selected coastal sites for ‘Coastal
Management and Tourism Project’. World Wide Fund is conducting the project with
World Bank funding. Çıralı beach was in good condition with a beach grading of “B”.
There were less tourism facilities when compared to other beaches studied, hence the
grade of the beach did not change with the tourism season. Side beach obtained a low
degree of grading in surveys, mostly due to faeces observed. With the beginning of
tourism season, the beach was regularly cleaned and the overall grade of Side beach
increased to “B”. The variation can be attributed to national holidays, stormy wheather
conditions, demolition and construction of beach facilities and the tourism season.
A fuzzy system of artificial intelligence [3] was developed in this paper, which had
input parameters of general litter and sewage related debris, and an output parameter
of the grading of litter categories. In the fuzzification process of the system inputs,
which were the number of general litter and sewage related debris items, the grading
criteria was utilized.

1110

C.E. Balas

Fig. 1. Fuzzy input sets and the membership functions of the grading system for the category of
general litter

Fig. 2. Comparison of beach grades of the field study with the predicted grades of fuzzy system

The fuzzy input sets and membership functions of these variables were obtained
for the grading of A, B, C, D, from the best to worst case depending on the number of

Fuzzy System Analysis of Beach Litter Components

1111

litter items measured on beaches (Figure 1). Fuzzy output sets for the grading of litter
categories (A: excellent, B: good, C: average and D: worst) were coded as 1,2, 3 and
4, respectively. The fuzzy rule based system was established by the Cartesian product
(product space) of fuzzy input sets, which resulted the in the logical base of 16 fuzzy
rules. The fuzzy sets of grades were slightly modified to assess the uncertainties
inherent in other litter categories by including supplementary adjectives of “very good
(B+), to some extend good (B-), above average (C+), below average (C-) and bad
(D+)”, i.e. the maximum number of litter items, greater than a certain limiting value in
related categories will decrease a half grade in the input fuzzy subset of rules.
Therefore, potentially harmful litter, gross litter and accumulations of litter exceeding
their limits given in Table 1, will decrease the grading definition in fuzzy rules for
general litter, a half grade. Similar interactions for the general litter definitions of
rules are available, if there is a trace of oil pollution on the beach. Likewise, the
occurrence of faeces of non-human origin affects the rules in the input fuzzy set for
sewage related debris. At the testing stage, the litter measurements of the field study
were compared with the predictions of the fuzzy system, as illustrated in Figure 2.

3 Conclusions
Tourist beaches near Antalya region were surveyed in order to develop a standardized
fuzzy system approach to be used in litter prediction. The main source of litter on
Turkish Mediterranean beaches was determined as “beach users”. The main
advantage in using fuzzy systems was that they could consider the linguistic
definitions/notes of beach users and field study teams during measurements.
Therefore, they make effective use of “additional information” such as the knowledge
and experience of team members. As a result, additional information inherent in the
linguistic comments/refinements and judgment of study teams and beach users could
be included in the grading system. Specific issues related to beach characteristics,
litter assessment methodology and definition of oil pollution, which could not be
included in standard procedures and/or could be easily lost in mathematical
expressions/evaluations, were incorporated by using this artificial intelligence system.

References
1. Balas, C.E., Williams, A.T., Simmons, S.L and A Ergin. A Statistical Riverine Litter
Propagation Model, Marine Pollution Bulletin, 42(11), 1169-1176 (2001).
2. EA/NALG, Assessment of Aesthetic Quality of Coastal and Bathing Beaches, Monitoring
Protocol and Classification Scheme, Environmental Agency, Bristol, UK (2000).
3. Zadeh, L. A. Fuzzy Logic and the Calculi of Fuzzy Rules, Fuzzy Graphs, and Fuzzy
Probabilities, Computer and Mathematics with Applications, Vol. 37, 35 (1999).

