Spread-of-Disease Modeling in a Microbiology Course
George W. Shiflet and Angela B. Shiflet
Wofford College, Spartanburg, South Carolina, USA
{shifletgw,shifletab}@wofford.edu
http://www.wofford.edu/ecs/

Abstract. Microbiology is the study of microorganisms. Most college courses
in microbiology emphasize the biology of bacteria and viruses, including those
that are human pathogens. One challenging aspect of the course is to introduce
students to epidemiology, which considers the causes, dispersal, and control of
disease. Although disease transmission models have helped develop successful
strategies for managing epidemics, most science students are unaware of their
advantages and complexities. To address this challenge, the microbiology
course at Wofford College has incorporated a sequence of three or four laboratories on modeling the spread of disease. Emphasis in Computational Science
students who have studied modeling and simulation in depth serve as laboratory
assistants and mentors. Evidence from test scores and self-assessment support
the hypothesis that the sequence of laboratories has improved student understanding of human disease dynamics and demonstrated the utility of computational models.
Keywords: computational science, education, modeling, microbiology, spread
of disease.

1 Introduction
Many institutions of higher education offer a junior/senior level microbiology course
to study of the biology bacteria, fungi and viruses. Although these microorganisms
are important part of various ecosystems, many can cause devastating, infectious diseases. Thus, in a course that emphasizes human disease, having epidemiology as a
component of the course is essential. Epidemiology is the study of the causes, dispersal, and control of disease.
Computational models of disease transmission have been instrumental in designing
successful strategies for managing epidemics for a number of diseases. For example,
Marc Lipsitch in collaboration with others developed a model for the spread of Severe
Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) and used the model to make predictions on the
impact of public health efforts to reduce disease transmission [1]. As another example, using data and mathematical models, the Dutch Ministry of Health, Welfare and
Sports developed "a national plan to minimize effects of pandemic influenza" [2].
Recognizing the benefits of modeling the spread of disease, the National Institute of
General Medical Sciences, one of the National Institutes of Health, has a collaborative
effort, Models of Infectious Disease Agent Study (MIDAS), to develop computational
G. Allen et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2009, Part II, LNCS 5545, pp. 44–52, 2009.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

Spread-of-Disease Modeling in a Microbiology Course

45

models for use by "policymakers, public health workers, and other researchers who
want to better understand and respond to emerging infectious diseases" [3].
To help students appreciate some of the techniques, challenges, and benefits of
computational spread-of-disease models, for three years biologist George Shiflet
has incorporated a sequence of laboratories into Microbiology, a class with 30 to 40
students, at Wofford College [4]. After a tutorial on using a systems dynamics software tool, students in pairs investigate various diseases, develop models
of the spread of those diseases, present their work, and write an analysis of the
results.

2 Tutorial in Laboratory 1
System dynamics models provide global views of major systems that change with
time. Thus, such models are appropriate for studying the spread of disease. Fortunately, several easy-to-use systems dynamics tools, such as STELLA®, Vensim®,
or Berkeley Madonna®, are available to create pictorial representations of models,
establish relationships, run simulations, and generate graphs and tables of the
results.
In the first week's laboratory in the sequence on modeling, students have an introduction to the fundamental ideas with a predator-prey model using the systems
dynamics modeling tool STELLA. The concept of rate of change, or derivative, is
crucial to systems dynamics modeling. Even students who have not had calculus or
who have not taken mathematics in several years quickly grasp the concept and derivative notation. In the tutorial, they learn that in unconstrained growth, such as for
the prey in an environment of unlimited resources and no predator, the rate of change
of prey is proportional to the number of prey, or d(prey_population)/dt = growth_rate
* prey_population, where growth_rate is a constant. Figure 1 shows a model diagram
of the prey in such a circumstance. Using systems dynamics software, the user double-clicks each component and enters the initial prey population, constant of proportionality, and differential equation for growth, namely growth_rate *
prey_population, in the flow into prey_population. Then, he or she can instruct the
tool to generate a table and graph, such as in Table 1 and Figure 2.
growth

prey population

growth rate

Fig. 1. Unconstrained growth diagram [5]

46

G.W. Shiflet and A.B. Shiflet
Table 1. Partial unconstrained growth table
Time
.00
.25
.50
.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00

prey population
100.00
102.50
105.06
107.69
110.38
113.14
115.97
118.87
121.84

1: prey population
1:

5198

1:

2649
1

1
1:

1

100 1
0.00

10.00

Page 1

20.00
Time

30.00
40.00
10:20 PM Sun, Dec 7, 2008

Unconstrained Growth

Fig. 2. Unconstrained growth graph

With the introduction of a predator, the model must consider the interaction between predators and prey. The Lotka-Volterra model has the simplifying assumptions
that the particular predator only hunts the specific prey and that no other animal eats
that prey. Figure 3 shows a systems dynamics diagram for this model.
prey births

prey population

prey deaths

prey birth fraction

predator births

predator birth fraction

prey death
proportionality constant
predator population

predator deaths

predator death
proportionality constant

Fig. 3. Predator-prey diagram

Spread-of-Disease Modeling in a Microbiology Course

47

Students quickly grasp that prey births and predator deaths follow the unconstrained growth/decay model. However, this prey's population is reduced by an
amount proportional to the product of the number of predators and the prey,
prey_death_proportionality_constant * predator_population * prey_population.
One interpretation considers the product predator_population * prey_population,
which is maximum number of distinct interactions between predators and prey. The
decrease in the number of prey is proportional to this product, where the constant of
proportionality is related to the hunting ability of the predators and the survival ability
of the prey. A second interpretation is that the size of the prey population decreases in
proportion to the size of the predator population.
While the prey population decreases with more contacts, the predator population
increases. Thus, predator_births is predator_birth_fraction * predator_population *
prey_population. Thus, the resulting system of differential equations for the
Lotka-Volterra model is as follows, where p is the number of prey, h is the number of
predators, and k1, k2, k3, and k4 are constants:
dp
= k1 p − k 2 hp
dt
dh
= k3 ph − k4 h
dt
After considering a predator-prey model, students develop a simple SIR (susceptibles-infecteds-recovereds) model of the spread of disease using a systems dynamics
tool, such as STELLA. Figure 4 displays an SIR model diagram. With the analogy of
unconstrained growth/decay for prey births and predator deaths, students quickly understand the rate recover to be proportional to infecteds, so that recovery_rate * infecteds is the formula in the recover flow. Moreover, just as interactions hurt prey
and help predators, interactions between susceptibles and infecteds result in illness.
Thus, the flow from susceptibles to infecteds gets the formula infection_constant *
susceptibles * infecteds. Figure 5 presents a typical graph of the number of susceptibles, infecteds, and recovereds for the SIR model.
susceptibles

get sick

infecteds

infection constant

recover

recovereds

recovery rate
Fig. 4. SIR diagram

During this first lab, a hat is passed around the class for each student to pick a disease. With each disease listed twice, student pairs are formed to investigate their disease before the next laboratory. Between the first and second laboratories, the student
pairs ascertain as much as possible about the nature of their assigned diseases, including data, such as rates of change.

48

G.W. Shiflet and A.B. Shiflet

1: susceptibles
1:
2:
3:

762

2: infecteds

3: recovereds

1
1

3

3
1:
2:
3:

381

2
1

1:
2:
3:

2
2

0
0.00

Page 1

3

1

2

3
3.50

7.00
Days

10.50
14.00
10:46 PM Sun, Dec 7, 2008

SIR Model

Fig. 5. Graphs for SIR model

3 Model Development in Laboratories 2 and 3
In the next two weeks' laboratories with additional time outside of class, each pair
develops a model of the spread of their disease using the system dynamics modeling
tool. The professor and students obtaining the Emphasis in Computational Science
mentor the teams during the laboratory times and outside of class (see Figure 6) [6].

Fig. 6. Student teams

Spread-of-Disease Modeling in a Microbiology Course

49

For example, one pair developed the Chagas disease model whose diagram is in
Figure 7. Chagas disease is caused by the protozoa Trypanosomiasis cruzi (T. cruzi),
which is usually transmitted by the feces of blood-sucking insect vectors, the "kissing
bug". The disease has four main stages in a human: incubation (7-10 days), acute
(3-8 weeks), indeterminate, and chronic. The only know drug must be used in the
acute phase. This deadly disease infects about 14-million people worldwide, including 20% of the Bolivian population [7].
treated

chronic to death rate

dead

recieve
treatment

acute to
chronic rate

chronic

treatment rate
susceptible

chronic to death

acute to chronic
getting infected

acutely infected

total infected people

acute to indeterminate

acute to indeterminate rate

bite rate



indeterminate
indeterminate
to chronic rate
to chronic
asymptomatic
to death
indeterminate

indeterminate to
asymptomatic asymptomatic

infection on
bite rate

susceptible mosquitoes

indeterminate to
asymptomatic rate

asymptomatic
to death rate

infected mosquitoes
mosquito
births

birth constant

mosquito becoming
infected

susceptible
mosquito
deaths

infected
mosquito
deaths

death constant

Fig. 7. Diagram model of Chagas disease by student team Lansing Yarborough and Lizzie
Dilworth

4 Presentations in Laboratory 4
In the final week of the lab sequence, each team makes a 10-to-15 minute presentation on
their disease and model to the class. The oral report include the following components:
• General description of the disease, including pertinent details about the agent, how
it is spread, factors that affect its spread, signs, symptoms, human impact, general
course, treatments, etc.
• General description of your model, including how it functions and what the team
considered when designing it
• Demonstration of how the model works

50

G.W. Shiflet and A.B. Shiflet

• Weaknesses and strengths of the model
• Modifications that could be made to improve the model
• Applications of the model

5 Final Report
Independently, each student writes a report on his or her team's model and what they
learned from the experience. These reports should include the following aspects:
• General description of the disease, which includes the basic biology of the disease
(type of organism, symptoms/signs, typical treatments, etc.), a description of what
is known about its transmission, and known statistics or rates
• Printout of the model along with a description of the model and how it works, the
most important features and the reasons for including them, and simplifying assumptions
• Printout of execution of the model including graphs and tables of several runs of
with documentation and justification for the parameters on each run
• Conclusions: What does the model show? What factors does it take into account?
What factors seem to be most important to the spread of this disease? What factors
does it not take into account and why? How could the model be improved? What
applications might be made of the model?
• References for learning about the disease and developing the model along with a
briefly critique for utility and quality of each reference
• Self-assessment: How does the individual think he or she performed as a modeler?
Did developing the model help the student to understand about the disease and its
transmission? How? If not, why was it not helpful?
One or two computational science students help in evaluation of the models and the
reports.

6 Evaluations
The assessment portions of the final reports reveal a deeper understanding of the
spread of their diseases, the modeling process, and the utility of models. The following comments are representative:
• "If I had not already chosen a profession such a long time ago, this [computational
biology] would certainly be a possibility. I feel that by designing a model I gained
a more comprehensive understanding of Chagas Disease than I would have if I
simply had to do a PowerPoint presentation on the subject. The model almost allowed an 'inside-look' at the mechanics of the disease."
• "Developing the model helped me to appreciate the inter-connectedness of all of
the factors that influence a disease and helped me to visualize why the disease becomes endemic. I enjoyed the victory of understanding something that initially
made little sense to me and frustrated me."

Spread-of-Disease Modeling in a Microbiology Course

51

• "The model definitely helped me to understand more of pneumocystis and its transmission. Only so much of a disease can be understood from a textbook, especially
of its complexities. Software as dynamic as Stella makes learning about the way
pneumocystis is transmitted so much clearer and more comprehensible. I wasn't
only seeing numbers as I would on a page, but literally watching the rates and progress of transmission change before my eyes."
• "Developing this model was very useful in learning about the spread of Lassa Fever.
Through research, I was able to learn about this disease while at the same time applying what I learned to the model. Having to make a model based on what you learn
makes you very conscious of all the factors that influence the spread of the disease."
• "I did enjoy constructing the model and would definitely enjoy taking on the challenge of developing a model for a much more complicated disease. Developing the
model did help me understand the disease and its transmission….I feel that this exercise has been a beneficial experience for me and is an excellent tool for studying
disease and epidemiology."
Although evaluations by the students are almost unanimously favorable, improved
performance by the students is difficult to quantify. However, on the microbiology
final exam, the professor asks questions about disease risks and preventative measures
when traveling abroad, and the answers now include in-depth considerations of vector
control, water purification, and the other less obvious complicating factors. Before
starting the modeling component of the course, students just gave a list of diseases
with avoidance behavior suggestions. Moreover, in a subsequent medical case studies
class, students present much more comprehensive suggestions to management and
prevention issues than previously provided. Thus, the sequence of modeling laboratories appears to accomplish the goals of improving students' understanding of human
disease dynamics and the utility of computational models.

7 Conclusion
Modeling the spread of disease in a sequence of microbiology laboratories has been
beneficial in a number of ways. Students gain an understanding of fundamental concepts, such as rate of change, unconstrained growth, and interactions. Through model
development, testing, and refinement, they utilize and improve critical thinking and
problem-solving skills. By working with a partner, the students experience teamwork, which is so important to science. Through project oral presentations and written reports, they can improve their communication skills. Moreover, we have found
that this interactive learning experience enhances the students' appreciation and understanding of modeling and computational science.

References
1. Lipsitch, M., et al.: Transmission Dynamics and Control of Sever Acute Respiratory Syndrome. Sciencexpress Report, May 23 (2003), http://www.sciencexpress.org/
23May2003/Page1/10.1126/science.1086616
2. van Genugten, M.L.L., Heijnen, M.A., Jager, J.C.: Pandemic Influenza and Healthcare Demand
in the Netherlands: Scenario Analysis. Emerging Infectious Diseases 9(5), 531–538 (2003)

52

G.W. Shiflet and A.B. Shiflet

3. Models of Infectious Disease Agent Study - National Institute of General Medical Sciences,
http://www.nigms.nih.gov/Initiatives/MIDAS/
4. Wofford College, http://www.wofford.edu
5. Shiflet, A., Shiflet, G.: Introduction to Computational Science: Modeling and Simulation for
the Sciences. Princeton University Press, Princeton (2006)
6. Computational Science, http://www.wofford.edu/ecs/
7. Chagas Disease (American Trypanosomiasis): Overview - eMedicine,
http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/214581-overview

