Building Excitement, Experience and Expertise
in Computational Science
among Middle and High School Students
Patricia Jacobs
Shodor SUCCEED Apprenticeship Program
{patricia.jacobs}@shodor.org
http://www.shodor.org/succeed/apprenticeships

Abstract. Three of the most important skills for advancing modern
mathematics and science are quantitative reasoning, computational
thinking, and multi-scale modeling. The SUCCEED Apprenticeship program gives students the opportunity of exploring all three of these areas.
The SUCCEED Apprenticeship program uses innovative approaches to
get students excited about computational science. The overall goal of
this program is to provide middle and high school students with authentic experiences in the techniques and tools of information technology
with a particular focus on computational science. The program combines
appropriate structure (classroom-style training and project-based work
experience) with meaningful work content, giving students a wide variety of technical and communication skills. The program provides middle
and high students from ethnically and economically diverse backgrounds
with training and authentic experiences in using computational science.
Keywords: Computational Science,
Engineering, Modeling, Interactive.

1

Math, Science,

Technology,

Introduction

Shodor, a national resource for computational science in Durham, N.C. is dedicated to the improvement of science and mathematics education by promoting the eﬀective use of computer modeling and simulation technologies. The
SUCCEED Apprenticeship program is one of a wide range of programs provided
by Shodor. The overall goal of the SUCCEED Apprenticeship program is to provide activities and support mechanisms, and mentoring to move students from
an excitement for computational science and Information Technology (IT) to becoming an expert in one or more areas of computational science and associated
IT components
The SUCCEED Apprenticeship program provides students with authentic and
appropriate experiences in the use of computational science and advanced technologies and techniques to study scientiﬁc events within the context of science,
mathematics and engineering and to produce evidence that students become
proﬁcient in these skills. In addition to the computational and technical skills,
G. Allen et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2009, Part II, LNCS 5545, pp. 15–24, 2009.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

16

P. Jacobs

the program also enable student apprentices to acquire a set of problem solving,
collaboration and communication skills identiﬁed as valuable for 21st century
workforce.
Signiﬁcant work has proceeded during the program to develop and evaluate
the project methodology of bridging the excitement-expert gap opportunities for
upper middle and high school students in the local area.

2

Program Overview

The SUCCEED Apprenticeship program, which began in January 2006, builds
on Shodors SUCCEED (Stimulating Understanding of Computational science
through Collaboration, Exploration, Experiment and Discovery) program which
provides workshops to introduce middle and high school students to technologies,
techniques and tools of computational science. Once students have shown that
excitement for math and science, they have the opportunity to participate in
the SUCCEED Apprenticeship program. This program allows upper middle and
high school students to work with Shodor staﬀ and other scientists in a learning
or apprentice mode. Apprentices use computational science to conduct scientiﬁc
research, create mathematical models of scientiﬁc phenomenon and use those
models to perform a variety of science and mathematical experiments.
The SUCCEED Apprenticeship program is targeted towards developing and
evaluating activities and support mechanisms to move students from an excitement for computational science and IT, to becoming an expert in one or
more areas of computational science and associated IT components. The project
looks to primarily answer the question: what programs, activities, and support
mechanisms are required to ensure that excited students become expert students in one or more areas, and how is that transition evaluated? The project
methodology looks to bridge the excitement-expert gap by providing long-term,
mentor-supported opportunities for upper middle and high school students in the
local area.
During their participation in the program, apprentices take classes, work in
project teams on local, regional and nationally funded projects, and have numerous opportunities to develop experience, culminating in the development of
expertise in one or more areas of computational science. For example, apprentices may work in the ﬁeld of computational chemistry, helping support Shodor’s
statewide computational chemistry computing services.
Through the combination of appropriate structure and meaningful work content, the SUCCEED Apprenticeship Program provides outstanding opportunities for students while providing the project staﬀ with the mechanism by which
to measure and evaluate this pipeline-building program.

3

Participants

The SUCCEED Apprenticeship Program, in its third year, has already surpassed
its goal of working with 100 students over a three-year period. Participants are

Building Excitement, Experience and Expertise in Computational Science

17

upper middle and rising 9th-12th grade students who have an interest in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM). Each apprentice is required
to spend 780 hours in the program over the course of two years. Apprentices are
recruited from Shodor SUCCEED workshops, local school-based programs and
summer camp programs. Students are interviewed and admitted based on their
interest in computational science, IT and STEM areas. Apprentices are paid a
stipend over the course of their apprenticeships, which could be extended as long
as two years.
During the Fall of 2007, the SUCCEED Apprenticeship program had approximately 60 applicants, twice as many applicants as we had space available for
in the 2007-2008 class. Applicants were from diverse ethnic and socio-economic
backgrounds. Each applicant completed an online application for consideration
in the program. Each student was interviewed and evaluated in the following
areas: their interest in the program, commitment to the program, teamwork,
communication (both oral and written), and leadership.
After careful review of each applicant’s application, and based on the comments from staﬀ during the interviews, the program enrolled 50 new apprentices
(beginner apprentices) for the 2007-2008 school year.
The new enrollment increased the total number of beginner and advanced
apprentices enrolled in the SUCCEED Apprenticeship program for 2007-2008
school year to 71.

4

Program Structure and Curriculum

During the second and third year of the program, we continued to develop and
evaluate the SUCCEED Apprenticeship program methodology. Apprentices were
divided into cohort 1 (beginner apprentices) and cohort 2 (advanced apprentices)
which depends on when they enrolled in the program. Due to the success and
the number of students enrolled in the SUCCEED Apprenticeship program, the
program has divided the students into diﬀerent tracks (Track A and Track B).
Students attend workshops depending on the Track in which they selected. Track
A classes were held on the 1st and 3rd Saturday of each month, while Track B
classes were held on the 2nd and 4th Saturdays each month. Both the advanced
and beginner apprentices were divided into Tracks. Thus, classes were held every
Saturday at Shodor for the beginner and advanced apprentices. The Track schedule allowed us to accommodate the large number of students in the program and
to provide ﬂexibility to the students.
Students in their second year of the program worked on diﬀerent projects for
local organizations. These projects challenged the knowledge of the apprentices
and allowed them to work with real clients in the community. The ﬁrst year apprentices completed and presented mini-projects on modeling, web design and
other uses of innovative technology. In addition, some apprentices became apprenterns or completed the program to become interns at Shodor.
Throughout the year, all apprentices additionally improve math skills using
computational tools; improve writing skills by completing weekly journals to

18

P. Jacobs

Fig. 1. SUCCEED Apprenticeship Program Structure

reﬂect on what they have learned and improve communication skills through
regular discussions with their mentor and through oral presentation.

5

Program Activities and Findings

There are ﬁve major complementary and interdependent activities of the SUCCEED Apprenticeship program:
1. Teaching and supporting the appropriate and authentic use of IT-related
technologies, techniques, and tools, with a particular focus on computational
science and its associated areas.
Apprentices attended workshops to gain experience and develop expertise in
one or more areas of computational science and associated uses of the technologies, techniques, and tools of IT, within the context of stem. Students were
introduced to computational science through a two-week (60-hour), academically
intensive education and research program. Students learned and used advanced
computational science technologies, techniques, and tools to study a wide variety
of scientiﬁc events. Topics involved general uses of computational science, basic
numerical methods, scientiﬁc programming, model validation and veriﬁcation
and research methods incorporating computational science.
Throughout the 2007-2008 school year, the apprentices attended workshops,
completed assignments and worked on group projects. Each apprentice had a
time commitment of 18 hours a month at Shodor during the school year and
240 hours during the summer. The 18 hours a month consist of 2 classes and 2
hours a week in the afternoons. The apprentices attended workshops every other
Saturday to learn new computational science and STEM skills. Outside of class,
they were given assignments to practice and use new skills and group projects
to demonstrate the knowledge of a given skill set.

Building Excitement, Experience and Expertise in Computational Science

19

Apprentices new to the program, beginner apprentices, had a more structured curriculum. Beginning apprentices attended classes in basic IT skills such
as agent modeling, web design, programming and graphics. Their work was organized into modules of two to three month durations. After a module was completed, apprentices worked in teams to complete assigned projects. During the
summer, the beginner apprentices attended classes in math, journaling, problem
solving and creative thinking, held career days and team building activities.
Advanced apprentices (students in their 2nd year of the program) focused
on a project based curriculum. All advanced apprentices were assigned to a
team to work with mentors and clients on projects and to receive training as
needed. Advanced apprentices learned advanced modeling, software development
processes, high level design, detailed design, database/ER diagrams, graphics
and quality assurance.
During Fall 2007, the Apprenticeship program added a new component, the
Apprenticeship Math Component (AMC), to help students continue to improve
their math skills. The AMC leverages the math resources in Shodor’s award winning Interactivate courseware. Students are required to complete an associated
set of activities in Number/Operations, Geometry/Measurement, Algebra and
Probability/Statistics that are graded according to a rubric speciﬁc to the topic.
Additionally, students are asked to write about the mathematics in the activity
and assess the associated materials. Students are required to correct their work
until it meets a particular score valued from the rubric.
All apprentices are required to re-work all of their assignments and projects
until the quality of their work meet the rubrics or standards set by the staﬀ
and mentors. Once apprentices meet the requirements for class attendance, assignments and projects they receive a stipend. Stipend deadlines are set for four
times throughout the year.
2. Provide mentors to deﬁne individual goals and timelines, and provide guidance through technical diﬃculties. Mentors monitor work progress as well as
skill development for individual interns. In addition, mentors are responsible for
overall research team dynamics,distribution of work and project oversight.
In addition to students attending classes, the SUCCEED Apprenticeship program continues to focus on mentoring students. The SUCCEED Apprenticeship
program seeks to implement a ’true’ apprenticeship program where young people learn from working with and learning from those with more experience.
Shodor has approximately 18 staﬀ who have a range of expertise in computational physics, biology, chemistry, math as well as computer science, system
administration, graphics and web design. Each staﬀ is assigned to mentor 6-7
students. Students are required to meet one hour per month with their mentor. Communication between mentors, program coordinator and parents is also
on-going throughout the program.
In addition to monthly meetings, mentors track progress and skill development
of apprentices by reviewing the apprentices weekly reﬂections (questions students have to answer weekly), progress on individual assignments and projects.

20

P. Jacobs

Many students receive additional mentoring from staﬀ when they need help
understanding and/or completing out of class assignments and projects. Staﬀ
also mentor and provide leadership for the advanced apprentices as they work in
research teams on their projects. Staﬀ help facilitate project plans, design and
set up meetings with project clients.
3. Provide opportunities for apprentices to work on local, regional and nationally funded projects. The projects are done as a learning process, and thus will
require intensive guidance to ensure quality workmanship.
Throughout the program, apprentices are provided with the opportunity to
work on local, regional and nationally funded projects. During Fall 2007 and
Spring 2008, we continued to partner with local organizations to provide real
world experience for our advanced apprentices’ projects. These projects range
from working with with local organizations to learning and developing skills for
Shodor’s award winning resources such as CSERD (www.shodor.org/refdesk)
and Interactivate projects (www.shodor.org/interactivate).
4. Providing instruction and opportunities to practice a wide variety of communication skills, including working eﬀectively in a group, interacting with
customers and clients, teaching younger students about the technologies and
exercising leadership.
The SUCCEED Apprenticeship program provides opportunities for apprentices to practice a wide variety of communication skills, including working eﬀectively in a group, interacting with clients as well as teaching STEM workshops for
younger students. During 2007-2008, apprentices had to prepare presentations
and present several projects they worked on to demonstrate their knowledge of
the skills they learned. The presentations helped the apprentices improve their
communication skills.
Apprentices were also given the opportunity to teach workshops about computational science technologies and tools to younger students at Shodor workshops. Apprentices taught workshops from system and agent modeling to system
administration to middle and high school students.
5. Providing formal and informal opportunities in critical thinking, including data retrieval, data organization and analysis, application of evidence-based
reasoning, problem-solving, creative thinking and decision making.
The SUCCEED Apprenticeship provides many opportunities for apprentices
to use and demonstrate critical thinking skills. Apprentices must attend classes to
learn computational science and STEM skills every other Saturday. Apprentices
were given assignments to practice and use new skills. In addition, apprentices
completed group projects to demonstrate a given skill set. Advanced apprentices worked in project teams to integrate various technical skills needed for the
completion of their projects. These projects required that the apprentice use
a variety of innovative skills as well as problem solving. Advanced apprentices
learned and used skills such as modeling, PHP, MySQL, CSS, HTML, Javascript
and Googlemap for their projects.

Building Excitement, Experience and Expertise in Computational Science

6

21

Evaluation

An extensive evaluation of the value added and the measurability of the Apprenticeship program is assessing the extent to which the appropriate structure
and meaningful work content eﬀectively develops students to become an expert
in the areas of computational science and associated IT components. For 20072008, the SUCCEED Apprenticeship program had an overwhelming number of
applicants for the program. For Fall 2007, we had a total number of 71 students
enrolled in the program. We continued to evaluate the program’s success and to
improve the eﬀectiveness of the program’s structure and curriculum. Evaluation
data combines students’ participation, completion of assignments, journals, responses to routine surveys, as well as feedback from staﬀ and others involved in
the program.
In addition to working on their assignments and projects, apprentices are
required to complete a web portfolio that displays their skills and knowledge
learned at Shodor. Since the program began in 2005, an extensive evaluation
process has helped us continually improve the eﬀectiveness of the program’s
structure and curriculum. Not only have applications increased over the past
three years, the percentage of students who stay with the program has nearly
doubled. With the ﬁrst group of program graduates, we see that these apprenticeships have been successful in maintaining apprentices’ interest in science,
math and technology as shown by their completion of the program and their
career plans.
Goal 1: To build and maintain excitement for math and science in a diverse
demographic of middle and high school students. The data presented below in
Figure 2 show that the program has continued to attract and retain a diverse
demographic of middle school students. Advanced Apprentices: In Fall 2007,
29 apprentices remained in the program through the summer of 2007. Twenty
of these apprentices, then in their second year, returned for fall 2007. Four of
these were accepted as Shodor Interns. Of those who returned the breakdown
by gender and ethnicity was as follows: Female: 35%; African-American: 26%;
Other Minorities: 26%. The largest subgroups were White Males and Minority
Females. In addition, 14 apprentices continued in the program through Summer

Fig. 2. SUCCEED Apprenticeship Demographics

22

P. Jacobs

Fig. 3. Apprentices Interest in STEM areas

of 2008 and completed advanced IT projects as described in a later section of
this report. The breakdown by gender and ethnicity of this population was as
follows: Female: 43%; Minority: 64%.
In a addition, to a diverse group of students, the SUCCEED Apprenticeship
program also seeks to increase or maintain student’s excitement for STEM. We
have taken persistence in intention to pursue a career in STEM or a STEMrelated career. as an indicator of excitement for STEM. Soon after being recruited
in Fall 2007 beginning apprentices responded to a questionnaire that asked,
among other items, to indicate their career goals.
GOAL 2. To enable student apprentices to acquire a set of technical, problem
solving, collaboration and communication skills identiﬁed as valuable for the
IT-intensive workplace.
This goal encompasses both computational science and technical (IT) skills
and workplace (SCANS) skills which were assessed separately as follows.
Basic Skill Level - Technical Skills
The structure of the program, developed over the past three years, provides preliminary instruction followed by hands-on experience for all apprentices during
the ﬁrst year of the apprenticeship. At the end of the ﬁrst year mentors rated
beginning apprentices on a 1-5 scale on ability at the basic level to use the skills
that had been taught. Mentors ratings are listed below as High(4 -5), Medium
(3.0-3.9), Low (1-2.9).

Fig. 4. Basic Skill Level

Building Excitement, Experience and Expertise in Computational Science

23

Fig. 5. Advanced Skill Level

Advanced Skill Level. Technical (IT) Skills
During the apprentices’ second year these skills are developed further through
individual and group projects that involve planning, execution, problem solving,
reporting and presentation. As noted above, Advanced Apprentices were required
to attend classes but were allowed more ﬂexibility in hours since group projects
are the main focus of the second year and successful completion of projects is
the goal.
During the Summer session all Advanced apprentices participated actively
in complex projects that required the use of IT skills well beyond the basic
level. As in the previous year advanced apprentices were divided into four teams
to work with mentors to design and produce interactive websites for clients in
the community. At the end of the summer session each group prepared and
presented a presentation to the sponsors of the project. Successful completion
and acceptance by clients is clear evidence of the attainment of IT skills.
In addition to continuing informal assessment and feedback to apprentices,
mentors rated the Advanced Apprentices (Cohort 2) at the end of their second
year on a scale of 1-5 on a range of IT skills. For this rating the criteria were
more stringent than on the rating after the ﬁrst year. Those given a rating of 4-5
were deemed expert and able to teach the skill to others. A rating of 3 indicated
successful use of the skill in projects assigned and completed. Although a rating
of 1 was possible, none of the apprentices received this rating, indicating that all
apprentices had developed at least a minimum level of proﬁciency in every skill.
The results of the assessment by mentors who have been actively engaged
with apprentices indicates that, with very few exceptions, all apprentices who
persisted in the program are able to use the IT skills listed above at an expert
or practical level in any environment where these skills are required.
GOAL 4: To gather evidence of the eﬀectiveness of this structure for increasing participation of traditionally underrepresented demographic groups in ITintensive workplaces.

24

P. Jacobs

The Apprenticeship program, as it has developed over three years, enables
students of diverse backgrounds to gain IT proﬁciency. We have shown that
students of diverse racial and ethnic backgrounds have gained proﬁciency in a
wide range of IT skills. T he percentage of underrepresented groups remains
high among the apprentices who persist through the entire 26-week program. In
addition, many students who have participated in the program expect to have
IT-related careers and thus will take their places in IT-intensive workplaces
as they move into the adult workforce. An interesting and unusual aspect of
the population of apprentices in the program is the high percentage of African
American females. We believe that interaction between students of diverse races,
ethnicities and genders in a learning environment where respect for all students,
as well as mentors and instructors, is the norm and is expected and required has
been an important aspect of the program.
The results of the assessment by mentors who have been actively engaged
with apprentices indicates that, with very few exceptions, all apprentices who
persisted in the program are able to use the IT skills listed above at an expert
or practical level in any environment where these skills are required.

7

Summary

The ﬁrst two of three groups (cohorts) of Apprentices have now completed the
2-year Apprenticeship program and a third group is continuing through the
current year. Since enrollment in the program began in late 2005 a total of 124
students have been admitted into the program; 86 have completed the ﬁrst year
of the program and 29 have completed the full 26-week program. Approximate
20 additional apprentices are expected to complete the full program in Summer
2009.
For three successive years the project has been notably successful in recruiting a diverse group of students and in maintaining diversity in the groups who
have persisted through the full program. The program has also been successful in maintaining apprentices’ interest in STEM and STEM-related careers.
The program, now entering its ﬁnal year, is expected to continue the curriculum and other practices that have been tested and found to be eﬀective
over the past three years. The curriculum, lesson plans and resources are being made available for others interested in developing a similar program at
(http://shodor.org/succeed/curriculum/apprenticeship/).

