The Norm Game - How a Norm Fails
Antoni Dydejczyk, Krzysztof Kulakowski, and Marcin Rybak
Faculty of Physics and Applied Computer Science,
AGH University of Science and Technology,
al. Mickiewicza 30, PL-30059 Krak´
ow, Poland
dydejczyk@ftj.agh.edu.pl,
kulakowski@novell.ftj.agh.edu.pl,
fisher@autocom.pl

Abstract. We discuss the simulations of the norm game between players
at nodes of a directed random network. The ﬁnal boldness, i.e.
the probability of norm breaking by the players, can vary sharply with
the initial boldness, jumping from zero to one at some critical value. One
of the conditions of this behaviour is that the player who does not punish automatically becomes a defector. The threshold value of the initial
boldness can be interpreted as a norm strength. It increases with the
punishment and decreases with its cost. Surprisingly, it also decreases
with the number of potential punishers. The numerical results are discussed in the context of the statistical data on crimes in Northern Ireland
and New Zealand, on divorces in USA, and on the alcohol consumption
in Poland.

1

Introduction

The cultural paradigm of the supremacy of an individual over collective thought
is well established in our culture. On the contrary to this, there is much evidence
that individual decisions and beliefs strongly depend on the social environment.
The eﬀects related are the spiral of silence [1,2], the pluralistic ignorance [3,4],
the bystander eﬀect [5], the group polarization [6], the groupthink [7], the bandwagon eﬀect [8,9], the Abilene paradox [10], stereotyping [11,12] and others. All
these eﬀects show that social groups inﬂuence or sometimes even determine their
members’ behaviour. It is natural that this notion shifts attention of scientists
to investigations of an interaction between players rather than the players themselves, notwithstanding this interaction perception merely in individual minds.
A general review of applications of statistical physics in player-based modeling
can be found in [13]. A physicist could be surprised how far the analogy can be
driven between the cognitive-emotional social ﬁeld [14] and the electromagnetic
ﬁeld [15].
The subject of social norms seems to belong to these parts of the science on human behaviour, which can be treated as a systematic science (in terms of [14]).
Up to our knowledge, the ﬁrst attempt of such a treatment was done by Robert
Axelrod [16,17]. A brief introduction to the problem can be found in the introduction to [18]. Axelrod was inspired by the idea of the evolutionary principle
G. Allen et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2009, Part II, LNCS 5545, pp. 835–844, 2009.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

836

A. Dydejczyk, K. Kulakowski, and M. Rybak

(EP), formulated by himself as follows: ...what works well for a player is more
likely to be used again, whereas what turns out poorly is more likely to be discarded. [19]. Axelrod enumerated three independent mechanisms which lead to
the realization of EP: i) more eﬀective individuals survive more likely, ii) players
learn by trial and error and maintain strategies which are more eﬀective, iii)
players observe each other and imitate the winners. Axelrod suggested that in
the problem of norms, the third mechanism is most applicable. In the opinion
of the present author the second mechanism is even more important for norms
which can persist in the timescale of the order of human life. The argument is
that such norms are characteristic for a social group rather than for a given
person, and they are obeyed sometimes just by tradition. Investigation of this
kind of norms with statistical tools makes sense, as the psychics of an individual
player can be reduced there to a black box. This is the area where a sociophysicist
is allowed to enter. For a review on games on graphs see [20].
In our previous work [21] a new scheme of simulation was formulated for the
norm game [16,17]. Most brieﬂy, the original version of the norm game can be
described as follows. N players are positioned at nodes of a fully connected network. The players are endowed with their initial boldnesses, i.e. probabilities of
defecting (breaking the norm), and with initial vengeances, i.e. the probabilities
of punishing the defection, if observed at other players. Next, a player is selected
and tempted to break the norm. If he does, he is granted with some prize. Further, if a neigbour of the defector decides to punish, the defector has to pay a
ﬁne. Finally, also the punisher incurs some cost of his action. An application of
the genetic algorithm leads to spreading of most eﬀective strategies.
This game, with some simpliﬁcations described in Sect. II, was simulated
recently [21] in a directed Erd¨
os-R´enyi network [22,23]. The main result was the
sharp dependence of the ﬁnal distribution of the players’ boldness on their initial
boldness. The values of the initial boldness of the players were selected from the
range (0.9ρ, ρ), where 0 < ρ < 1. Then, ρ is a measure of the initial boldness in
the system: initially, all players defect with probability close to ρ. Below some
threshold value ρc of ρ, the mean value of the ﬁnal boldness was found to be
close to zero. When ρ > ρc , the same mean value was found to be close to one.
Calculated values of ρc were found to decrease with the cost parameter γ. In
parallel, a similar bistability was obtained by means of analytical calculations
[21,24].
The aim of the present work is to investigate this discontinuity. New numerical results to be reported here are as follows:
i) A necessary condition for the appearance of the discontinuity is that once a
player abstains from punishing, his boldness is set to one.
ii) The discontinuity remains in the undirected growing networks: both in the
scale free and the exponential ones, but it disappears in the directed growing
networks.
iii) The value of ρc increases with the punishment and it decreases with the
mean node degree.

The Norm Game - How a Norm Fails

837

These results are described in Sect. III with more details. They are discussed in
Sect. IV in the context of some statistical data, which display a relatively quick
variations in time. Final remarks in Sect. V close the text.

2

The Simulation Algorithm

Basically, we use the same algorithm as in [21] for diﬀerent kinds of networks.
Players are placed at nodes of a network of a given topology. For the directed
Erd¨
os-R´enyi network, for each node i its degree k(i) is selected from the Poisson
distribution, and then the neigbors of i are chosen with uniform probability. The
links are directed from the neigbours to the node k; this means that the player
at i can be punished by his neighbours, but not the opposite. Obviously, each
neigbour has its own neighbours who can punish him.
As the next step, each player i is endowed by the probability that he defects
b(i) (boldness) and the probability that he punishes v(i) (vengeance), with the
condition b(i)+v(i) ≤ 1. The boldnesses are selected from the range (ρ−0.01, ρ),
where ρ is a real number from the range (0.01, 1). As before, ρ is a measure of
the initial boldness in the system. For each i, the vengeance is set as v(i) =
(1 − b(i))/μ, where μ ≥ 1. Then, the initial state is described by two parameters
ρ and μ. As a rule, μ = 1 or μ = 2.
The dynamics is described by two parameters β and γ. A node i is selected
randomly. The player at i defects with probability b(i). If he does, his boldness
b(i) is set to 1, and his vengeance v(i) is set to 0. If he does not, b(i) is set
to 0 and v(i) is set to 1. This settings can be treated as an example of social
labelling [27]. Then, a neighbour j of i is checked if he punishes or not, with his
actual vengeance v(i). If he does not punish, he is treated as a defector. Then,
his boldness b(j) is set to 1 and his vengeance v(j) is set to 0. If j punishes, the
boldness of punished i is reduced by a factor 1 − β, i.e.
b(i) → b(i)(1 − β)

(1)

Simultaneously, the punisher j pays the cost of punishing, what leads to a reduction of his vengeance as
v(j) → v(j)(1 − γ)

(2)

In this way, we omit the parameters of the payoﬀs, which are not necessary.
Once the defector is punished, the algorithm selects another player i to be
tempted to defect. The simulation is repeated for the undirected growing networks: exponential and scale-free ones [25,26], and for the directed growing networks. In the last case the direction of nodes was selected either from the new
node to its older neigbours, or the opposite.

3

Numerical Results

Although the threshold eﬀect is present for the directed Erd¨
os-R´enyi networks [21],
it disappears in the directed Albert-Barab´
asi networks where the direction of edges

838

A. Dydejczyk, K. Kulakowski, and M. Rybak

is chosen from newly attached nodes to their older neighbours. The eﬀect disappears also in the latter case when the direction of all edges is inverted. These
results are shown in Fig. 1. Then, this combination of the age of nodes and the
1
0.8

undirected
new
old

b

0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0

0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9

1

ρ
Fig. 1. The mean boldness for Albert-Barab´
asi growing networks with M = 3. For the
undirected network the threshold value is observed at ρc about 53. For two directed
networks the direction is either from new to old nodes or the opposite. Then, either
new nodes can punish those to which they are attached (the plot ’new’), or the old
nodes can punish those attached to them (the plot ’old’). No threshold is observed for
the directed networks.

(a) μ = 1

(b) μ = 2

Fig. 2. The value of the norm strength ρc for the directed Erd¨
os-R´enyi network, for
μ = 1 and μ = 2. The system size is 104 nodes. The mean in-degree < k >= 2.

The Norm Game - How a Norm Fails

839

direction of edges between them does modify signiﬁcantly the system behaviour.
The nature of this modiﬁcation remains to be clariﬁed.
The simulations were concentrated on the calculation on the threshold boldness ρc against the punishment parameter β and the cost parameter γ. Let us
repeat that if the initial value of ρ, what is a rough measure of the initial boldness, is smaller than ρc , then the ﬁnal boldness is small; the defection is rare.
On the contrary, if ρ > ρc , most players defect in the stationary state. In other
words, it is more diﬃcult to defect if ρc is large. Then, ρc can be treated as a
measure of the norm strength. The possible size eﬀect was checked for an example of ten directed Erd¨
os-R´enyi networks of size from N = 103 to 1.5 × 104 . The
threshold value ρc was 0.41 for N = 1000 and remained 0.40 for all higher N .
Its root mean square deviation decreased with N from 0.016 to 0.005. Also, the
time to get the ﬁnal value of the mean boldness remained about 40 timesteps
for all above values of N , where one timestep is equivalent to a temptation of
N randomly selected players. The simulations conﬁrm the previous result [21]
that ρc increases with the punishment constant β. Also, they give a new result,
that ρc decreases with the punishment cost γ. Both facts are natural; the norm
is stronger if the punishment is heavy for the defector, and it is weaker if the
punishment is costful for the punisher. These results are shown in Fig. 2 for
the directed Erd¨os-R´enyi network with the mean number of potential punishers
´
λ = 5, and in Fig. 3 for the undirected Albert-Barabasi
networks.
On the other hand, these results suggest that the norm strength decreases with
the potential number of neighbours. To verify this, we have calculated ρc for the
directed Erd¨os-R´enyi networks for various numbers of in-neigbours λ as well for
the undirected scale-free networks for various numbers of the parameter M . The
results are shown in Fig. 4 a,b. In both cases the same eﬀect is observed, that the

(a) M = 2

(b) M = 4

´
Fig. 3. The value of the norm strength ρc for the undirected scale-free Barabasi-Albert
4
network, for M = 2 and M = 4, μ = 2. The system size is 10 nodes.

840

A. Dydejczyk, K. Kulakowski, and M. Rybak
1

1

3
4
5
6
7

0.9
0.8

2
3
4
5
6
7

0.9
0.8
0.7
ρc

ρc

0.6
0.7

0.5
0.4

0.6

0.3
0.2

0.5

0.1
0.4

0
0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

γ

(a) directed ER

0.8

0.9

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

γ

(b) undirected AB

Fig. 4. The value of the norm strength ρc for the directed Erd¨
os-R´enyi networks for
λ = 3 − 7, β = 0.95, μ = 2 and for the undirected scale-free Albert-Barab´
asi network,
for M = 2 − 7, β = 0.95, μ = 2

norm strength ρc decreases with the mean number of potential punishers, which
is λ for the the directed Erd¨os-R´enyi networks and 2M for the undirected scalefree networks. This results is somewhat surprising. Before the calculation is done,
we expected that an increase of the number of punisher should make the norm
more strong. We have to admit that the process contains some internal feedback
from those tempted to their neighbours. Once the norm is broken, those who
can punish have to decide if the punishment cost is not too large. According to
our algorithm once they do not punish, they become defectors. If the norm was
broken at all, this outcome was not possible. In this sense, the larger number of
potential punishers who do not punish can lead to an avalanche of new defectors.
This is a possible explanation of the observed decrease of ρc with the number of
neighbors.

4

Some Stylized Facts

Some statistical data suggest that indeed some ’equilibrium’ social states are
possible, where a norm is obeyed to some deﬁnite extent. Once such a state
ceases its stability, the system moves to another state, where the mean boldness
is constant again or it ﬂuctuates only slowly. This transformation can be seen
in the statistical data as a large change of a given quantity, accompanied by
its relatively slow variation before and after the change. Such a change can be
interpreted as a discontinuous jump between two states. Here we are going to
mention four examples and to comment them shortly.
Our ﬁrst example is the number of recorded criminal oﬀences per year in
Northern Ireland. Between 1980 and 1997 it varied between 50 thousands and
70 thousands, but it increased to about 120 thousands in 1997 [28,29]. This
jump was probably triggered by the fact that since 1997 the Provisional IRA

The Norm Game - How a Norm Fails

841

has observed a ceaseﬁre. At this moment, large hidden arsenals became useless
for the patriotic purposes. As a consequence, the social norm ’preserve your gun
for the outbreak’ has failed. The data on murders in New Zealand between 1950
and now show a similar dynamics [30]. Before 1986 the number of homicides did
not excess 60 per year, but it was not smaller than 120 per year between 1987
and 1994. This change is correlated with the transformation of New Zealand to
free-trade economy, started in 1984. Here the norm is the Commandment ’You
shall not murder’ which did not cease its universality in 80-s; perhaps it was
the punishment what decreased. Our third example is the number of divorces
in USA. The data [31] show that this number increased twice (from about 2.5
to about 5.0 per 1000 population) between 1965 and 1975. This change was accompanied by a similarly large relative increase of numbers of rapes, murders
and robberies within the same time period [32]. Obviously, this fall of norms was
triggered by the Vietnam war, but it is not easy to separate this cause of divorces
from the accompanying sexual revolution. Divorced people often look for other
partners, not necessarily unmarried, what accelerates the process like in a chain
reaction [33]; still the related lifetime is not shorter than a couple of years. Our
last example is the fall of spirits consumption in Poland in 1981 from 8 to 6
litres of pure alcohol per an adult per year [35]. At that time, Polish people had
drank mainly spirits, while the French preferred wine and the German - beer. To
drink alcohol is in Poland a kind of social norm, to show friendship and empathy, paying no heed to health losses. This need for a demonstration of common
feeling of being unhappy was released by the new hope of a political transformation, brought by the free trade union ”Solidarity” and the message of John
Paul II. The political transformation in Europe is not visible at the same data
for other countries; the consumption of wine in France and of beer in Germany
decreased rather smoothly [35]. The plots on the statistical data on all of four examples are shown in initial and somewhat more extended version of this paper in
arXiv [34].
As we see, all these changes were triggered by some events: the ceaseﬁre in
Northern Ireland, the economic transformation in New Zealand, Vietnam war in
USA or political reforms in Poland. To interpret these changes in terms of our
model picture, we admit that in each case the event as those listed above changes
the punishment or/and it cost. This inﬂuences the temptation process, which is
more or less steady in the society; new and new people are faced with the question:
to divorce or not, to drink or not, to break law or not. Their decisions are inﬂuenced by individual attitudes of their neighbours, which are also determined in the
process. As an output we see a social change in macroscopic data. We note that
according to our numerical results, the abrupt fall of norm preserving is a consequence of the rule ’those who abstain from punishing, defect’. In other words, the
society is divided into defectors and punishers. A question arises, if this rule makes
sense in our four examples. To ﬁnd an answer, we have to identify the punishment.
In the ﬁrst and second example to punish is to report the case to the police. Then,
the interpretation is clear: who did not report to the police is guilty. In the third
example to punish could be to condemn divorces in public. However, in principle

842

A. Dydejczyk, K. Kulakowski, and M. Rybak

one could be faithful in marriage and tolerant towards manifestations of sexual
promiscuity. We face the same problem also in the fourth example, where many
people prefer the strategy ’don’t drink but let drink’. Then, our numerical result
seems to apply to two examples out of four. This diﬃculty is solved, if the norm
itself is redeﬁned as ’the duty to punish’. According to this new point of view,
to obey a norm means to declare in public that this norm should be obeyed. In
particular in our third example what is important is to declare in public that the
institution of marriage is holy and inviolable. Similarly in the fourth example the
norm is to insist that to be accepted in the group, everybody must drink. In this
way, the metagame (in terms of Axelrod) is the game. This transformation can
be interpreted theoretically as follows: the preservation of a given norm should be
evaluated by counting not those people who preserve it, but rather those who punish for its defection. This formulation raises the question about the status of norms
which vanish in a continuous way. This in turn calls for an experimental criterion,
which change is continuous and which is sharp. These questions are beyond the
scope of this paper.

5

Final Remarks

Even if numerically complete, the study is preliminary. It reveals the connection
between consequences of decisions of individual players and the state of the society at a macro-level. In the above calculations, these consequences are chosen as
to label the players: who once defected will never punish and who once punished
will never defect. In this way, the society is divided into two opposite groups.
These rules of labelization should be justiﬁed and relaxed if necessary in accordance with the social reality, and these modiﬁcations in each case do depend on
the speciﬁc norm under consideration.
The discontinuity found here for the norm game is similar to the sharp variation of a collective behaviour, described in [36] within a dynamic model of a
social imitation. However, the mechanism is diﬀerent; what is collective in our
model of the norm game is the social labeling, when decisions of the players,
triggered by a single defection, classify them irrevocably as bold or vengeful.
On the contrary to the results of [36], the time variation of the boldness and
vengefulness display no hysteresis eﬀect. However it is possible that the norm
game can be described within the Random Field Ising Model, as applied in [36].
Indeed, an appropriate reformulation of this formalism could provide an insight
to the time dynamics of the social behaviour with respect to norms.
To conclude, the sharp dependence of the ﬁnal boldness on its initial distribution follows from the labelling consequences of initial decisions of the players.
This sharpness does not depend much on the network topology. However, it can
be removed if the direction of the links is determined by the age of nodes in
growing networks.
Acknowledgements. We thank Jean-Philippe Bouchaud for pointing us reference [36]. The research is partially supported within the FP7 project SOCIONICAL, No. 231288.

The Norm Game - How a Norm Fails

843

References
1. Noelle-Neumann, E.: The spiral of silence: A theory of public opinion. Journal of
Communication 24, 43–51 (1974)
2. Noelle-Neumann, E.: The Spiral of Silence: Public Opinion - Our Social Skin.
University of Chicago Press, Chicago (1993)
3. Allport, F.H.: Institutional Behavior. University of North Carolina Press, Chapel
Hill (1933)
4. Prentice, D.A., Miller, D.T.: Pluralistic ignorance and alcohol use on campus: Some
consequences of misperceiving the social norm. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 64, 243–256 (1993)
5. Latan´e, B., Darley, J.M.: The Unresponsive Bystander: Why Doesn’t He Help?
Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliﬀs (1970)
6. Moscovici, S., Doise, W.: Conﬂict and Consensus: A General Theory of Collective
Decisions. Sage Publ., London (1994)
7. Janis, I.L., Mann, L.: Decision making: A psychological analysis of conﬂict, choice,
and commitment. Free Press, NY (1977)
8. Navazio, R.: An experimental approach to bandwagon research. Public Opinion
Quarterly 41, 217–225 (1977)
9. Morowitz, V.G., Pluzi´
nski, C.: Do polls reﬂect opinions or do opinions reﬂect polls?
The impact of political polling on voters’ expectations, preference, and behavior.
J. of Consumer Research 23, 53–67 (1996)
10. Harvey, J.B.: The Abilene Paradox. Jossey-Bass, San Francisco (1996)
11. Lippmann, W.: Public Opinion. Free Press Paperbacks, NY (1997) (ﬁrst edition
NY 1922)
12. Haslam, S.A., Salvatore, J., Kessler, T., Reicher, S.D.: How Stereotyping Yourself
Contributes to Your Success (or Failure). Sci. Am. (April 2008)
13. Castellano, C., Fortunato, S., Loreto, V.: Statistical physics of social dynamics
(arXiv:0710.3256)
14. Brown, J.F.: Individual, Group, and Social Field. American J. of Sociology 44,
858–867 (1939)
15. Sallach, D.L.: Social Field Theory: Concept and Application (preprint 2006)
16. Axelrod, R.: An evolutionary aproach to norms. Amer. Political Sci. Rev. 80, 1095–
1111 (1986)
17. Axelrod, R.: Complexity of Cooperation player-Based Models of Competition and
Collaboration. Princeton University Press, Princeton (1997)
18. Fent, T., Groeber, P., Schweitzer, F.: Coexistence of social norms based on in- and
out-group interaction. Advances in Complex Systems 10, 271–286 (2007)
19. Axelrod, R.: The Evolution of Cooperation. Basic Books, NY (1984)
20. Szab´
o, G., F´
ath, G.: Evolutionary games on graphs. Phys. Reports 446, 97–216
(2007)
21. Kulakowski, K.: Cops or robbers - a bistable society. Int. J. Mod. Phys. C 19,
1105–1111 (2008)
22. Bollob´
as, B.: Random Graphs. Cambridge UP, Cambridge (2001)
23. Caldarelli, G.: Scale-Free Networks. Oxford UP, Oxford (2007)
24. Kulakowski, K.: The norm game in a mean-ﬁeld society. Journal of Economic Interaction and Coordination (in print) (arXiv:0801.3520)
25. Bornholdt, S., Schuster, H.G. (eds.): Handbook of Graphs and Networks: From the
Genome to the Internet. Wiley-VCH, Berlin (2003)

844

A. Dydejczyk, K. Kulakowski, and M. Rybak

26. Dorogovtsev, S.N., Goltsev, A.V.: Critical phenomena in complex networks. Rev.
Mod. Phys. 80, 1275–1335 (2008)
27. Marshall, G. (ed.): The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Sociology. Oxford UP, Oxford
(1998)
28. data of Eurostat, http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/
29. French, B., Freel, R.: Experience of crime: Findings from the 2005 Northern Ireland
crime survey, Northern Ireland Oﬃce, Research and Statistical Bulletin (2/2007),
http://www.equality.nisra.gov.uk/Experiencesofcrime2005crimesurvey.pdf
30. data of the Sensible Sentencing Trust,
http://www.safe-nz.org.nz/statsgraph.htm
31. Monthly Vital Statistics Report 39(12) suppl. 2, May 21 (1991)
32. data of the Disaster Center,
http://www.disastercenter.com/crime/uscrime.htm
33. Everett, C.: Legal Decisions and Family Outcomes. Routledge, London (1998)
34. Kulakowski, K., Dydejczyk, A.: arXiv:0810.5291
35. data of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, World Drink
Trends (2003)
36. Michard, Q., Bouchaud, J.-P.: Theory of collective opinion shifts: from smoooth
trends to abrupt swings. Eur. Phys. J. B 47, 151–159 (2005)

