Retail Exposures Credit Scoring Models for Chinese
Commercial Banks
Yihan Yang1, Guangli Nie2, and Lingling Zhang1,2,*
1

School of Management, Graduate University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing 100190, China
2
Chinese Academy of Sciences Research Center on Fictitious Economy and Data Science,
Beijing 100190, China
nkyangyihan@yahoo.com.cn, sdungl@163.com, zhangll@gucas.ac.cn
Abstract. This paper firstly discussed several credit scoring models and their
development history, then designed the target system of individual credit scoring with individual housing loans data of a stated-owned commercial bank and
logistic method, and established an individual credit scoring model including
testing. Finally, the paper discussed the application of the individual credit scoring model in consumer credit domain, and brought forward corresponding conclusions and policies.
Keywords: Credit Scoring; Consumer Credit; Logistic Regression.

1 Introduction
With the rapid advancement of our society in recent years, people’s consumption and
investment concept has changed greatly. The individual consumption loan has become an important financing channel for personal consumption. Individual consumption credit business, such as housing credit, automobile credit has greatly developed.
However, with the rapid development of individual consumption credit in Chinese
commercial banks, default events of individual consumption credit business happened
a lot, and the level of consumption credit risk assessment needs to be improved immediately. Therefore, study on the individual consumption credit risk has important
theoretical value and practical significance.
The New Basel Capital Accord not only built the minimum capital adequacy ratio
which covers the sources of credit risk, market risk, and operational risk, supervision
and inspection, and market constraints, but also put forward Standard Approaches and
IRB (Internal Rating-Based Approaches) to measure credit risk. It pointed out that
banks with full conditions should implement IRB and estimated customers’ PD (Probability of Default) by building models with historical data [5]. Compared with the old
Capital Accord of 1998, the New Capital Accord took the estimated value of commercial banks' internal rating system as input parameters for the capital calculation, which
was a major innovation. These formulas are based on modern risk management technology, involving a large number of mathematical statistics, as well as quantitative risk
analysis, which is of great help to strengthen the internal risk management.
*

Corresponding author.

G. Allen et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2009, Part II, LNCS 5545, pp. 633–642, 2009.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

634

Y. Yang, G. Nie, and L. Zhang

2 Customer Credit Rating and Its Development
From the development history of international commercial banking, we could see that
the customer credit rating of commercial banks has evolved from Expert System,
Credit Scoring, to the Probability of Default Model. Due to the relatively short operating history of China's commercial banks and their lack of experience in data analysis,
most commercial banks still widely use the more traditional Credit Scoring method.
2.1 Expert System
Expert System is a traditional method of credit analysis which relies on credit experts'
professional knowledge, skills and experience, uses a variety of specialized analysis
tools, analyzes key elements and then makes a comprehensive assessment of credit
risk based on subjective judgments. Table 1 summarizes some influential indicators
Table 1. Main Qualitative Indicators

CAMEL

5C

5P

3F

CAMPARI

6A

Capital Adequacy
Asset Quality
Management
Earnings
Liquidity
Character
Capacity
Capital
Collateral
Condition
Personal
Purpose
Payment
Protection
Perspective
Management Factor
Financial Factor
Economic Factor
Character
Ability
Margin
Purpose
Amount
Repayment
Insurance
Economic Aspects
Technical Aspects
Managerial Aspects
Organizational Aspects
Commercial Aspects
Financial Aspects

Retail Exposures Credit Scoring Models for Chinese Commercial Banks

635

both at home and abroad, mainly CAMEL system, 5C elements, CAMPARI elements,
5P elements, 3F elements, 6A elements, and so on.
2.2 Credit Scoring
Credit scoring model uses observable characteristic variables of the borrower, and
calculates a numerical value (score) to represent the debtor’s credit risk and classify
borrowers into different risk levels. For individual customers, observable characteristic variables include income, assets, age, occupation, as well as place of residence,
and so on. The key of credit scoring model is to choose characteristic variables and
determine their respective weight. At present, the most widely used score models
include Linear Probability Model, Logit Model, Probit Model, Decision Tree Method,
ANN(Artificial Neural Networks), as well as SVM(Support Vector Machine).
Credit scoring began with Beaver’s single-variable analysis of 79 bankrupt companies [1]; Altman put forward the Z score model and ZETA score model based on
multivariate statistics [3]; Matin, Ohlson and Wigintonfor for the first time used Logit
model to analyze the enterprise bankruptcy [6]; Katz et al. used discriminant analysis
in credit scoring study; Ou and Penman adopted Probit model to predict corporate
bankruptcy. In the application of artificial intelligence, Lee et al. made empirical
analysis on credit scoring samples with two decision tree methods as CART and
MARS [9]; Gestel et al., Min & Lee, Liu Min, Lin Chengde adopted support vector
machine method in bankruptcy prediction and credit assessment, proving that the
machine learning performance was superior to the traditional method [14].
This article focused on the application of Logit model,. Westgaard & Wijst used
the enterprise’s micro-economic information, integrated the financial indicators, and
estimated the default probability of the portfolio in retail banking with Logit model.
The method was used in the credit risk management of Norwegian business sector,
achieving very good results [4]. Lanine and Vennet analyzed characteristics of banks
inclining to bankruptcy with Logit model and trait recognition method, targeted at the
confusion and crisis of Russian banks in the 1990s [10].
2.3 Probability of Default Model
Since the 1990s, a number of models that could directly calculate the default probability emerged, including Moody's RiskCalc model and Credit Monitor, KPMG’s Riskneutral Pricing Model and the Mortality Model.
Compared with the traditional Expert System and Credit Scoring method, the
Probability of Default Model could directly estimate the customer’s probability of
default, and therefore had a high requirement for historical data, requiring commercial
banks to establish a consistent and clear-cut definition of default, and to accumulate
historical data of at least five years. According to the status quo of China's banking
industry, commercial banks should combine default probability model with the traditional credit scoring, expert system, which could help raise the level of credit risk
assessment.

636

Y. Yang, G. Nie, and L. Zhang

3 The Process of Modeling
This paper designed the target system of individual credit scoring with individual
housing loans data of a stated-owned commercial bank for credit scoring model verification. If we apply the framework to other credit products, such as car loans, personal consumption loans, and so on, we just need change the relative elements and
maintain the overall framework. Flow chart of the model is shown in Fig. 1 below:

Fig. 1. Flow Chart of the Model

3.1 Establishing the Indicator System
The dependent variable for Logistic regression is discrete, and the predicted value of
the model is output in form of probability [15]. Similar to the discriminant analysis,
Logistic regression can deal with the issue of classification, while the difference is
that Logistic regression requires neither normal distribution nor the equal variance
assumption [9]. Personal credit data rarely meet with these two assumptions, so Logistic regression is more suitable for credit scoring models. The regression model
built with Logistic distribution curve is also known as Logit model. The equation for
logic model is as follows:

P
) = β 0 + β 1 X 1 + LL + β n X n
1− P

Ln (

(1)

We established the indicator system and listed quantitative indicators of the individual housing loan credit scoring model as Table 2 shows.
3.2 Data Collection
According to the definition of "normal loan" and "non-performing loan", we collect
all individual housing loan samples covering all the indicators. Data in observation

Retail Exposures Credit Scoring Models for Chinese Commercial Banks

637

period generate variable X; performance period comes after the observation
period; we watch the performance of samples in this period, and generate
variable Y.

Observation
Period

2006.1.1

Performance
Period

2006.12.31

2007.12.31

Fig. 2. Observation period & performance period

Data processing in observation period: According to the data available, we choose
the observation period from 2006.1.1 to 2006.12.31, which is a whole year, preventing some holidays from impacting the model, and X i is from data in this period.
We choose the performance period from 2007.1.1 to 2007.12.31, and determine the
customer credit according to the customer’s performance in this period.
3.3 Data Cleaning
According to the data available and China's actual situation, we identify the model’s
main factors X i and the dependent variable Y (i = 1 2 ... ... .8). Main factors and data
cleaning methods are shown in table 2.
Table 2. Main factors data cleaning

Explanatory Variables X i

Cleaning Methods

Repayment Ratio (the amount
of repayment / loans) X 1
Down payment ratio (the amount
of down payment /loans) X 2
Loan percentage

Loan period

X3

X4

We clean out those customers whose accounts
were settled before 2006
If a customer has over one record, we choose
the last record.

638

Y. Yang, G. Nie, and L. Zhang
Table 2. (Continued)

Non-repayment period
ratio(non-repayment
periods/total periods) X 5

X6

Asset
Gender

Age

For a record who has over one due bill, we
choose the sum; for a record whose number of
nor-repayment periods is 0, we clean it out.

X7

This indicator is generated in SAS system according to customers’ ID number
Ibid

X8

The number of cumulative overdue times accumulated in SAS system is shown in
Fig. 3 below:

Fig. 3. Chart of cumulative times

As can be seen from the chart, when the cumulative overdue times are over 7, the
overdue frequency changes very little, that’s to say, the possibility for those customers to change into "good guys" is very small, so we take those whose cumulative
overdue frequence is ≥ 7 as bad customers.
Y=1 if bad customers(cumulative overdue frequence ≥ 7 in 2007)
Y=0 if good customers (cumulative overdue frequence <7 in 2007)
From the chart, we could see that

Retail Exposures Credit Scoring Models for Chinese Commercial Banks

Credit Score=1-

639

1
N

1 + exp(∑ − β i X i )

(2)

i =1

X i is the value of the explanatory variable I; β i is the corresponding weight; N is
the number of explanatory variables. The Score here is the ultimate value and the
probability of being a good customer in this model. Therefore, the higher the value,
the better the result is.
3.4 Logit Regression
We receive a total of 1317 records after data cleaning, and then we build a model with
these 1317 customers and make corresponding parameter test.
Table 3. Result of logit regression

Independent Variable

Coefficient
Estimation

Age

0.0759

Significance
Test
(Wald Test)
0.0004

Total Assets(RMB)

-9.38E-07

0.0326

Repayment Ratio

-0.9711

0.0075

Down payment ratio

-426.7

0.0024

Loan period

-0.0168

0.0002

R2

Loan quota

0.0155

0.0022

-2.4466

0.0066

is 0.9175,
which
means the
fitness is
good.

Non-repayment
ratio

period

Goodness of
Fit Test
HL test is
not
significant
(0.8425).
The fit data

The relevant information of Logistic regression shows that the fitness is good.
2

Hosmer-Lemeshow test (HL test) is not significant, R =0.9175 shows that the accuracy of the model is higher. Gender statistics are not significant and doesn’t enter the
model. The results of "Association of Predicted Probabilities and Observed Responses" show the correlation between probability forecasting and observed dependent variables. The Percent Concordant is 94.7%, and the Percent Discordant is 3.8%,
which shows that there is a strong correlation between the predicted and observed
values at the current level, and the regression model has a strong predicting ability.

640

Y. Yang, G. Nie, and L. Zhang

3.5 Model Diagnosis
We operate a linear diagnosis on the model, and the result is shown in Table 4 below.
Table 4. Linear diagnosis

Independent Variable

Freedom

Tolerance

VIF

Age
Total Assets(RMB)
Repayment Ratio
Down payment ratio
Loan period
Loan quota
Non-repayment period ratio
Age

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

0.9808
0.93513
0.98616
0.70581
0.57696
0.66951
0.56939
0.55633

1.01957
1.06937
1.01403
1.41682
1.73322
1.49362
1.75627
1.7975

Usually we set VIF=10 or Tolerance=0.1 as threshold value. When VIF<10, or Tolerance>0.1,we think the variables selected have no obvious collinearity. The VIF of
variable selected in this model is less than 5, so the model has no collinearity problem.
3.6 Model Explanation
(1)The estimated coefficient of the age factor is positive, having a negative correlation
with the final score value. This is because customers in the database are aged 21-58.
Customers with lower ages (generally 25-40 years old) are the main force in society,
whose bright future and better income guarantee a lower loan default rate. Customers
aged 45-58 are close to retirement, so the default rate is relatively higher. The result
here happens to coincide with the personal credit score standard of China
Construction Bank. The bank gives customers aged of 36-50 a credit score of 6, while
those aged 50 and above a credit score of 4 (China Construction Bank Web site).
This shows that above a certain limit of age, the older the customer, the higher the
default rate.
(2)The estimated coefficient of the age factor is negative, having a positive correlation with the final score value. The more the assets are, the lower the default rate is. It
is worth noting that the estimated coefficient of this indicator is relatively small in this
model, and the weight appears to be low. Considering the reality that China’s personal
property declaration system is not perfect, and there is a certain degree of hidden
income, we argue that the actual "monthly income" indicator would be of greater
importance to personal credit than that in this paper.
(3) The estimated coefficients of Repayment Ratio, Down payment ratio, and Nonrepayment period ratio are negative, having a positive correlation with the final score
value. The estimated coefficient of the loan quota factor is positive, having a negative

Retail Exposures Credit Scoring Models for Chinese Commercial Banks

641

correlation with the final score value, which shows that the higher the loan quota is,
the larger the loan amount, and thus the bigger the probability of default; this is in line
with the real business. It is worth noting that the estimated coefficient of the loan
period factor is negative. According to general analysis of business, loans with longer
duration will have more uncertainty, leading to greater likelihood of default, that is,
the loan period should have had a positive correlation with the default rate. But the
model here gives a negative coefficient. One explanation could be that the length of
the loan agreement is influenced by the owner’s risk attitude. Cautious customers are
inclined to have loans with longer periods. Most Chinese customers of housing loans
are risk avoiding, and their default probability is relatively low, so the loan period has
a negative correlation with the default probability. This result shows that in China’s
current data accumulation, because of all the banks' scrutiny, customers who can get
loans of longer periods generally have good credit.

4 Conclusions
Credit risk is the most dangerous one in financial industry. The construction of
evaluation model of individual credit is urgently needed. Based on this, this article
discussed the method of evaluating customer credit. In combination with the theory of
personal credit risk, we choose Logistic regression with data of individual housing
loan from some Chinese Commercial Bank, and make theoretical research and empirical analysis on the evaluation of individual credit risk management in Chinese
Commercial Banks. The model based on Logistic regression shows that there are six
indicators that greatly affect individual credit evaluation as follows: age, assets, loan
quota, Repayment Ratio, Down payment ratio, and Non-repayment period ratio.
Through comparison between conclusions at home and abroad, it could be concluded that the model is right and effective, and the empirical result is consistent with
the real experience. However, in the process of constructing the model, some basic
information of customers which is very important to the construction of the model,
such as education background, professions, marriage status, etc. is not taken into
consideration due to bad quality of data in commercial bank. Therefore, we strongly
suggest that China should establish a united basic database of individual credit information to obtain comprehensive data and mark the client credit more accurately.
Because the samples in this article are consumption credit data taken from a typical
Chinese commercial bank, the finally constructed individual credit scoring model can
be a good reference for other commercial banks to evaluate individual consumption
credit.

Acknowledgements
This research has been partially supported by a grant from National Natural Science
Foundation of China (#70621001, #70531040, #70501030, #70472074), Beijing
Natural Science Foundation (#9073020).

642

Y. Yang, G. Nie, and L. Zhang

References
1. Beaver, W.: Financial rations are predictors of failure. Journal of Accounting Research (4),
Suppl. 71–111 (1966)
2. Altman, E., Haldeman, N.P.: ZETA analysis: A new model to identify bankruptcy risk of
corporations. Journal of Banking and Finance (1), 29–54 (1977)
3. Altman, E., Narayanan, P.: An International Survey of Business Failure Classification
Models. Financial Markets, Institutions and Instruments 6(2) (1997)
4. Westgaard, S., Wijst, N.: Default probabilities in a corporate bank portfolio: A logistic
model approach. European Journal of Operational Research (135), 338–349 (2001)
5. Basle Committee. Basle Committee on Banking Supervision. The New Basel Capital Accord. Bank for International Settlements, Basle (April 2003)
6. Wiginton, J.C.: A note on the comparison of logit and discriminant models of consumer
credit behavior. Financial Quant. Anal. (15), 757–770 (1980)
7. Press, J., Wilson, S.: Choosing between Logistic regression and discriminant analysis.
Journal of American Statistical Association 73(7), 699–705 (1978)
8. Scott, D.F., Martin, J.D.: Industry Influence on Financial Structure. Financial Management, 67–73 (Spring 1975)
9. Shin, K.S., Lee, T.S., Kim, H.J.: An application of support vector machines in bankruptcy
prediction model. Expert Systems with Applications (28), 127–135 (2005)
10. Lanine, G., Vennet, R.V.: Failure prediction in the Russian bank sector with logit and trait
recognition models. Expert Systems with Applications (30), 463–478 (2006)
11. Laitinen, E.K., Laitinen, T.: Bankruptcy prediction: application of the Taylor’s expansion
in logistic regression. Int. Rev. Financial Anal. 9(4), 327–349 (2000)
12. Flagg, J.C., Giroux, G.A., Wiggins, C.E.: Predicting corporate bankruptcy using failing
firms. Rev. Financial Econ. (1), 67–78 (1991)
13. Kay, O.W., Warde, A., Martens, L.: Social differentiation and the market for eating out in
the UK. Int. J. Hosp. Manage. 19(2), 173–190 (2000)
14. Gestel, T.V., Baesens, B., Suykens, J.A.K., Poel, D.V., Baestaens, D.E., Willekens, M.:
Bayesian kernel based classification for financial distress detection. European Journal of
Operational Research (2005)
15. Cox, D.R., Snell, E.J.: Analysis of Binary Data. Chapman & Hall, London (1989)

