A Second Order Adjoint Method to Targeted
Observations
Humberto C. Godinez and Dacian N. Daescu
Department of Mathematics and Statistics,
Portland State University, Portland OR 97207
{hgodinez,daescu}@pdx.edu

Abstract. The role of the second order adjoint in targeting strategies is
studied and analyzed. Most targeting strategies use the ﬁrst order adjoint
to identify regions where additional information is of potential beneﬁt to
a data assimilation system. The ﬁrst order adjoint posses a restriction on
the targeting time for which the linear approximation accurately tracks
the evolution of perturbation. Using second order adjoint information it
is possible to maintain some accuracy for longer time intervals, which
can lead to an increase on the target time. We propose the use of the
dominant eigenvectors of the Hessian matrix as an indicator of the directions of maximal error growth for a given targeting functional. These
vectors are a natural choice to be included in the targeting strategies
given their mathematical properties.

1

Introduction

Observation targeting strategies aim to identify optimal regions where supplemental data can improve the forecast of a data assimilation system. Adjoint
modeling has been an essential tool for the development of targeting strategies in the context of variational data assimilation methods. The adjoint of the
tangent linear model associated to an atmospheric model is a key ingredient to
implementing various targeting strategies, such as gradient sensitivity, dominant
singular vectors, and sensitivity to observations ([1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6]).
The ﬁrst order adjoint (FOA) model provides the gradient of a scalar-valued
forecast aspect, typically a forecast error measure. As such, the FOA represents
a ﬁrst order approximation to the evolution of perturbations in the atmospheric
model. The accuracy of this approximation is limited by the magnitude of the
perturbation and by the time length of the forecast. As the forecast time lead
increases, the accuracy of the FOA to track the initial-condition error propagation is impaired. This poses a limitation on the time window for which targeting
strategies based on the FOA ﬁelds are reliable. To overcome this practical difﬁculty and to increase the eﬀectiveness of adjoint targeting strategies, a second
order adjoint (SOA) model may be considered to capture the quadratic terms in
the error growth approximation. An overview of the SOA model implementation
and applications to variational data assimilation is provided in [7].
G. Allen et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2009, Part II, LNCS 5545, pp. 322–331, 2009.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

A Second Order Adjoint Method to Targeted Observations

323

In our work a targeting strategy based on SOA modeling is considered and
numerical experiments are presented in a comparative analysis between the ﬁrst
order and the second order adjoint-based observation targeting guidance. The
importance of incorporating SOA information is investigated by using ﬁrst and
second order Taylor approximations to model the nonlinear error growth and
perturbations in a forecast error functional.
Section 2 brieﬂy revisits the four dimensional variational (4D-Var) data assimilation and the FOA and SOA models. In section 3 the implementation of
the FOA and SOA models to a shallow water (SW) model is presented. First
and second order Taylor approximations to the perturbations in a forecast error functional are analyzed. A novel targeting strategy based on the eigenvalues
and eigenvectors of the Hessian matrix of the forecast aspect is implemented in
section 4 using the SW model. Conclusions and future work are in section 5.

2

Data Assimilation and Adjoint Modeling

Given an initial state x0 , let Mi denote the discrete atmospheric model (forward
model) that evolves the state from ti to ti+1
xi+1 = Mi (xi ) ,

i = 0, . . . , N − 1.

(1)

Data assimilation techniques [8] combine information from a dynamical model, a
prior (background) estimate, and observational data to provide an optimal initial
condition (analysis) to the dynamical system (1). The 4D-Var analysis [9] is
obtained by minimizing a cost functional that measures the discrepancy between
the model state, background estimate, and time distributed observational data
J (x0 ) = x0 − xb

T

B−1 x0 − xb +
k
i=0

(yi − Hi [xi ])T R−1
i (yi − Hi [xi ])

(2)

where xb is the background, yi is the observation vector at ti , B and R are the
error covariance matrices for the background and observations, respectively, and
Hi is the observational operator mapping the state into observations at ti .
Adaptive observations are supplementary data collected to reduce the error
of some aspect of the forecast at veriﬁcation time tv > tk over a veriﬁcation
domain Dv , expressed as
Jv (xv ) =

1
P xv − xtv , P xv − xtv
2

E

(3)

where xtv is the true state at the veriﬁcation time, xv is the state of the system at time tv , P is a projection operator on Dv satisfying P∗ P = P2 = P.
The inner product , E is deﬁned as x, y E = x, Ey , where E is a symmetric positive deﬁnite matrix, typically chosen to induce the total energy norm.
The measure (3) is the forecast error functional at the veriﬁcation time tv over
the veriﬁcation domain Dv .

324

2.1

H.C. Godinez and D.N. Daescu

Taylor Expansion of the Forecast Error Functional

The functional Jv implicitly depends on the initial condition x0 of (1)
Jv (xN ) = Jv (Mt0 →tN (x0 )) ,

(4)

where Mt0 →tN is the nonlinear model integration from t0 to tN = tv ,
Mt0 →tN = MN −1 ◦ · · · ◦ M0 (x0 ) .

(5)

A perturbation δx0 in the initial condition will result in a perturbation δJv (xN ) =
Jv (xN + δxN ) − Jv (xN ) that, to a second order Taylor approximation, can be
expressed
1
δJv (xN ) ≈ ∇x0 Jv (xN ) δx0 + δxT0 ∇2x0 Jv (xN ) δx0
2

(6)

The gradient ∇x0 Jv (xN ) is obtained through the FOA model associated to (1)
λN = ∇xN Jv (xN )
λi =

M∗i

(xi ) λi+1 ,

(7)
i = N − 1, . . . , 0

(8)

where Mi is the derivative (tangent linear model) of Mi , and M∗i its adjoint.
Second order derivative information, as the product of the Hessian ∇2x0 Jv (xN )
times a user-deﬁned vector, may be obtained by integration of a SOA model.
2.2

SOA Model Equations

The equations of the discrete SOA model associated to (1) and (4) are
νN = ∇2xN Jv (xN ) μN = PT EPμN
∂
¯ i+1 μi ,
νi = M∗i (xi ) νi+1 +
M∗i (xi ) λ
∂xi

(9)
i = N − 1, . . . , 0

(10)

where μ is the solution to the tangent linear model (TLM)
μ0 = w
μi+1 = Mi (xi ) μi ,

(11)
i = 0, . . . , N − 1,

(12)

¯ i+1 in the last term of (10)
w is an user-deﬁned vector, and the notation λ
indicates that the state derivative applies to the M∗i (xi ) operator only while
treating the adjoint variables λi+1 as constants ([10], [7]).
The solution of the SOA model (9)-(10) provides the Hessian vector product
∇2x0 J (x0 ) μ0 = ν (t0 ) that is required to evaluate the second order term in the
Taylor approximation (6), thus providing the quadratic term for the evolution
of perturbations in the forward model.

A Second Order Adjoint Method to Targeted Observations

3

325

The SW Model, FOA and SOA Taylor Approximations

A global 2D shallow water (SW) model on a sphere is used for the numerical
experiments. The model describes the hydrodynamic ﬂow on a sphere under the
assumptions that the vertical motion is much smaller that the horizontal motion.
It is also assumed that the ﬂuid depth is small compared with the radius of the
sphere (radius of Earth). The equations of the SW model are
dv
= −f k × v − ∇φ,
dt
∂φ
= −∇ · [(φ − φs ) v] ,
∂t

(13)
(14)

∂
d
=
+ v · ∇, v = ui + vj with i, j, k being the unit vectors in the
where
dt
∂t
three orthonormal directions on the sphere, u and v are the zonal and meridional velocity components, respectively, h is the ﬂuid depth, hs is the bottom
topography, g the gravitational constant, φ = gh, φs = ghs , and f is the Coriolis
parameter. The norm used on the state space x is the total energy norm, induced
by the inner product
x, x

E

=

g
1 2
u + v 2 + h2 .
2
h0

A Godunov type ﬁnite volume discretization method is used to discretize the
SW equations. The Van-Leer transport scheme, as described in [11], is employed
for the space discretization. Computations are done on a 2.5◦ × 2.5◦ grid with
a time step Δt = 450s and the veriﬁcation time is set at tv = t0 + 24h. The
reference state (‘truth‘) xt0 is taken from the trajectory produced by a numerical
integration of the SW model using as initial condition the 500hPa ERA-40 data
set from the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF),
valid for March 15 2002 at 06 : 00 hours. The background state xb is taken from
a 6-hour model simulation initialized at t0 − 6h with the ERA-40 data set valid
for March 15 2002 at 00 : 00 hours. The diﬀerence between the 24h forecasts
initiated from xt0 and xb , respectively, exhibits a high discrepancy in the region
[55◦ W, 35◦ W ] × [52◦ N, 65◦ N ] which is taken as the veriﬁcation domain Dv at tv .
The discrete TLM, FOA, and SOA models are obtained using the Automatic
Diﬀerentiation package TAMC [12]. The discrete SOA can be seen as the action
of the Hessian matrix of the scalar forecast aspect of interest on a vector. The
code for the second order adjoint can be computed in the forward over reverse
mode, this is, taking the tangent of a forward-backward integration.
3.1

Taylor Approximation with Adjoint Models

The Taylor approximation (6) is valid for relatively small perturbations of the
initial condition x0 and a short forecast time lead, depending on the nonlinearity
of the forward model. Taking the SW model as the forward model, forecast
perturbations are computed together with their ﬁrst and second order Taylor

326

H.C. Godinez and D.N. Daescu

Fig. 1. Left ﬁgure: Taylor approximation (6) of the perturbation of the forecast error
functional (3) as a function of initial condition perturbations coeﬃcient ε. Right ﬁgure:
Time evolution of (6) as a function of the veriﬁcation time tv , with ε = 0.1.

approximations using the FOA and SOA models. To corroborate the accuracy
of the approximations to δJv , the initial condition, taken from the background
state, is perturbed according to
x0 (ε) = x0 + δx0 (ε) ,

δx0 (ε) = ε x0 − xt (t0 )

where ε is a coeﬃcient that controls the perturbation in the initial condition of
the forward model. The perturbation δJv , as well as the adjoint-based approximations, are computed for values of the perturbation coeﬃcient ε ranging from
−0.4 to 0.4 with increments of 0.01 and ﬁxed tv = 24h, then for a time-varying
forecast lead tv − t0 ranging from 6-hour to 72-hour with one hour increments.
Figure 1 (left) shows the perturbation δJv of the forecast error, and its ﬁrst
and second order Taylor approximations. It is noticed that the second order
approximation remains accurate over a wide range of perturbations as compared
to the ﬁrst order approximation.
Figure 1 (right) shows the time evolution of the Taylor approximation using
the FOA and SOA models, as a function of tv , while keeping ε = 0.1 ﬁxed. As the
veriﬁcation time increases the second order approximation remains signiﬁcantly
more accurate than the ﬁrst order approximation. Similar results were obtained
with various values of ε = 0.
It must be noticed that the perturbation growth is time dependent, this is,
the solutions of the forward and adjoint models depend on the veriﬁcation time
tv . An important question to address is the accuracy of the approximation as the
veriﬁcation time is increased. The approximation can lose accuracy if there is a
strong nonlinear time dependence of the forward model which is not accurately
captured in the adjoint models. Traditional targeting strategies account only for
linear error propagation and diﬀer on the selection of the norm used to measure
the error growth propagation (e.g. total energy vs. error covariance metric [3]).
The limited accuracy of the ﬁrst order approximation is a major diﬃculty in

A Second Order Adjoint Method to Targeted Observations

327

extending the targeting time interval and the use of second order derivative
information may prove to be of relevance in practical applications.

4

Targeting Using SOA Information

Applications of the FOA sensitivity analysis during ﬁeld experiments to collect
targeted observations are presented in [1], which gives the fundamentals for
targeting strategies based on adjoint modeling.
The FOA model provides the gradient of the forecast error functional Jv with
respect to the initial condition x0 of the forward model. The gradient is used to
deﬁne a space-distributed sensitivity ﬁeld
Fv = ∇x0 Jv

(15)

2

where the 2-norm is taken at each grid-point on the mesh. In the FOA targeting
approach supplementary observations are taken at locations where Fv exhibits
the largest magnitude.
To accurately track the propagation of perturbations, we propose a new targeting method to incorporate SOA information.
Consider the second term in the Taylor approximation (6)
1 T
δx Hδx0 ,
2 0

(16)

where H = ∇2x0 Jv (xN ) is the Hessian matrix of Jv . Without loss of generality,
consider initial perturbations with unit two-norm, that is δx0 2 = 1, then (16)
is a Rayleigh-Ritz ratio
δxT0 Hδx0
.
(17)
δxT0 δx0
The vector for which the Rayleigh-Ritz ratio (17) is maximized provides the
direction of maximal quadratic error propagation in the second order term of
the Taylor approximation. Since H is a symmetric matrix, the maximum of (17)
is provided by the eigenvector associated with the leading eigenvalue of H [13].
In [4], [3] the singular vectors of the tangent linear model are used to deﬁne
a sensitivity ﬁeld for targeted observations. Following a similar approach, we
deﬁne the sensitivity function based on the leading eigenvectors of the Hessian.
Let σi be the ith eigenvalue of H, ordered so that σ1 ≥ σ2 ≥ . . . ≥ σn , and
let vi be its corresponding eigenvector. Consider the ﬁrst m leading eigenvectors
vi , i = 1, . . . , m, where m << n, n being the dimension of the matrix. The
SOA-based sensitivity ﬁeld is deﬁned as
m

Fm =
i=1

σi
vi
σ1

2
2

,

(18)

were the norm of the eigenvector is evaluated on each grid-point of the mesh.

328

4.1

H.C. Godinez and D.N. Daescu

Eigenvectors of the Hessian of the SW Forecast

At the 2.5-degree grid resolution the dimension of the discrete state vector x is
n ∼ 3 × 104 , such that the number of entries in the Hessian matrix H is of order
of 109 . Storing such a matrix is clearly unpractical, however, iterative methods
that require the action of the matrix on a vector can be implemented to obtain
the Hessian eigenvalues and eigenvectors. The Arnoldi Package (ARPACK) [14]
is used to compute the leading eigenpairs of H. For one matrix vector product
of the Hessian the tangent linear model is integrated forward in time to the
veriﬁcation time tv and the FOA and SOA models are integrated backward in
time to any targeting instance ti of the data assimilation window.

Fig. 2. Top ﬁgures: sensitivity ﬁeld (15) at ti = t0 (left) and at ti = t0 + 6h (right).
Bottom ﬁgures: sensitivity ﬁeld (18) with m = 10 eigenvectors at ti = t0 (left) and at
ti = t0 + 6h (right). The veriﬁcation domain Dv is the region within the rectangle.

The setup for the reference and control simulations, as well as the veriﬁcation
domain and veriﬁcation time, are the same as in section 3. For comparison, the
sensitivity ﬁelds obtained with the FOA sensitivity function (15) are shown in ﬁgure 2 for ti = t0 (top-left) and ti = t0 + 6h (top-right). The locations of adaptive
observations (marked with •) correspond to the grid points where the sensitivity
ﬁelds have the largest magnitude. Figure 2 also shows the sensitivity ﬁeld obtained
with (18), using m = 10 leading eigenvectors of the Hessian matrix, at ti = t0
(bottom-left) and ti = t0 + 6h (bottom-right). The diﬀerence in the sensitivity
ﬁelds between the FOA and SOA methods illustrates the diﬀerent type of perturbation growth being measured. Both FOA and SOA ﬁelds are time-varying, thus
the location of targeted observations depends on the targeting instant.

A Second Order Adjoint Method to Targeted Observations

329

Table 1. Leading eigenvalues of the Hessian matrix for ti = 0h to 6h, at 1-hour increments and corresponding CPU time for the computation of the leading 10 eigenvalues
and eigenvectors at each time instance
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
ti (h)
σ1
8.455 7.272 6.721 5.932 5.270 4.355 3.541
CPU (s) 1698.52 1651.28 1589.41 1542.74 1477.11 1429.97 1368.50

Table 1 shows the leading eigenvalue of H for a targeting time ti from 0h
to 6h, at 1-hour increments. The leading eigenvalue decreases in magnitude as
ti increases, which may indicate that as the forecast time lead is shortened the
impact of the second order derivative information decreases. This is consistent
with the analysis in section 3.1, where the contribution of the SOA was shown to
diminish for forecasts closer to the initial time. Table 1 also shows the CPU time,
in seconds, for the computation of 10 leading eigenpairs of the Hessian matrix
at each hour on a 1.86GHz Xeon Quad Core 5320 Processor. The computational
overhead of a SOA integration is about 3 times that of a FOA integration.
4.2

Targeted Observations and Data Assimilation Experiments

To illustrate the SOA targeting strategy we apply a 4D-Var data assimilation
scheme with adaptive observations to the SW model. The assimilation window is
[0h, 6h] with the veriﬁcation time set tv = 24h. A ﬁrst assimilation experiment is
performed with 20 adaptive observations placed at t = 0h where the sensitivity
ﬁeld (18) has the highest values, as marked in ﬁgure 2 (bottom-left). The performance of adaptive observations obtained from the eigenvector sensitivity function (18) is compared with that obtained from the FOA sensitivity function (15),
as marked in ﬁgure 2 (top-left).

Fig. 3. Longitudinal (left) and latitudinal (right) forecast error average over the veriﬁcation domain without data assimilation (circles), with data assimilation using adaptive
observations from FOA (triangles), and adaptive observations from eigenvectors of the
Hessian (squares)

330

H.C. Godinez and D.N. Daescu

Fig. 4. Longitudinal (left) and latitudinal (right) forecast error average over the target domain without data assimilation (circles), with data assimilation using adaptive
observations at both t = 0h and t = 6h from FOA (triangles), and eigenvectors of the
Hessian (squares)

Figure 3 shows the longitudinal (left) and latitudinal (right) forecast error average over the veriﬁcation domain. It is noticed that the SOA targeting guidance
improved the overall forecast quality, as compared to the FOA methodology.
In a second experiment, 20 adaptive observations are placed at both t = 0h
and 6h. Figure 4 shows the longitudinal and latitudinal averages of the forecast
error, where again it is noticed an improvement in the forecast quality from
the adaptive observations obtained with the SOA ﬁeld (eigenvectors) over the
adaptive observations obtained with the FOA sensitivity ﬁeld. It is also noticed
that insertion of targeted observations at t = 6h is of signiﬁcant beneﬁt to the
forecast, indicating a larger forecast impact from these observations. This is consistent to the observation sensitivity study in [6] where is was found that the
forecast sensitivity to observations increases for observations near the end of
the assimilation window, and thus closer to the veriﬁcation time. In addition,
accounting for data interaction is essential when multiple targeting instants are
considered [15], and this is an area where further research is much needed. Nevertheless, the results show the relevance of the SOA in targeting strategies when
dealing with large time intervals and/or highly nonlinear forecast models.

5

Conclusions

Properly accounting for nonlinear error growth is an unresolved issue in targeted
observations for numerical weather prediction. In this study a novel approach
based on second order adjoint modeling is proposed to account for the quadratic
initial-condition error growth in the model forecast. Preliminary numerical experiments indicate that the SOA methodology is eﬀective and may outperform
the traditional FOA approach to observation targeting. Further experiments are
required to validate this approach in realistic models. To fully exploit the beneﬁts of the SOA model, novel targeting strategies must combine information from
both FOA and SOA models to form a more cohesive and accurate strategy.

A Second Order Adjoint Method to Targeted Observations

331

Acknowledgments. This research was supported by the NASA Modeling,
Analysis and Prediction Program under award NNG06GC67G and by the 2006
Intel Oregon Faculty Fellowship program. The work of the ﬁrst author was also
supported by a scholarship from Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Technolog`ıa.

References
1. Langland, R.H., Gelaro, R., Rohaly, G.D., Shapiro, M.A.: Targeted observations
in FASTEX: Adjoint-based targeting procedures and data impact experiments in
IOP17 and IOP18. Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc. 125, 3241–3270 (1999)
2. Langland, R.H.: Issues in targeted observing. Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc. 131, 3409–
3425 (2005)
3. Palmer, T.N., Gelaro, R., Barkmeijer, J., Buizza, R.: Singular Vectors, Metrics,
and Adaptive Observations. J. Atmos. Sci. 55, 633–653 (1998)
4. Buizza, R., Montani, A.: Targeting Observations Using Singular Vectors. J. Atmos.
Sci. 56, 2965–2985 (1999)
5. Baker, N.L., Daley, R.: Observation and background adjoint sensitivity in the adaptive observation-targeting problem. Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc. 126, 1431–1454 (2000)
6. Daescu, D.N.: On the Sensitivity Equations of Four-Dimensional Variational (4DVar) Data Assimilation. Mon. Wea. Rev. 136, 3050–3065 (2008)
7. Le Dimet, F.X., Navon, I.M., Daescu, D.N.: Second-Order Information in Data
Assimilation. Mon. Wea. Rev. 130, 629–648 (2002)
8. Kalnay, E.: Atmospheric Modeling, Data Assimilation, and Predictability, p. 364.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (2002)
9. Le Dimet, F.X., Talagrand, O.: Variational algorithms for analysis and assimilation
of meteorological observations: theoretical aspects. Tellus 38A, 97–110 (1986)
10. Daescu, D.N., Navon, I.M.: Eﬃciency of a POD-based reduced second-order adjoint
model in 4D-Var data assimilation. Int. J. Numer. Meth. Fluids 53, 985–1004 (2007)
11. Lin, S.J., Chao, W.C., Sud, Y.C., Walker, G.K.: A Class of the van Leer-type
Transport Schemes and Its Application to the Moisture Transport in a General
Circulation Model. Mon. Wea. Rev. 122, 1575–1593 (1994)
12. Giering, R.: Tangent linear and Adjoint Model Compiler, Users manual. Center
for Global Change Sciences, Department of Earth, Atmospheric, and Planetary
Science. MIT, Cambridge (1997)
13. Horn, R.A., Johnson, C.R.: Matrix Analysis. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1985)
14. Lehoucq, R.B., Sorensen, D.C., Yang, C.: ARPACK Users’ Guide: Solution of
Large-scale Eigenvalue Problems with Implicitly Restarted Arnoldi Methods. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, Philadelphia (1998)
15. Daescu, D.N., Navon, I.M.: Adaptive observations in the context of 4D-Var data
assimilation. Meteorol. Atmos. Phys. 85, 205–226 (2004)

