Applying Wavelet and Fourier Transform
Analysis to Large Geophysical Datasets
Bjørn-Gustaf J. Brooks
Iowa State University, Ames IA 50011, USA
bjorn@climatemodeling.org

Abstract. The recurrence of periodic environmental states is important
to many systems of study, and particularly to the life cycles of plants and
animals. Periodicity in parameters that are important to life, such as precipitation, are important to understanding environmental impacts, and
changes to their intensity and duration can have far reaching impacts.
To keep pace with the rapid expansion of Earth science datasets, eﬃcient
data mining techniques are required. This paper presents an automated
method for Discrete Fourier transform (DFT) and wavelet analysis capable of rapidly identifying changes in the intensity of seasonal, annual,
or interannual events. Spectral analysis is used to diagnose model behavior, and locate land surface cells that show shifting cycle intensity, which
could be used as an indicator of climate shift. The strengths and limitations of DFT and wavelet spectral analysis are also explored. Example
routines in Octave/Matlab and IDL are provided.

1

Introduction

Many geophysical systems under study today are seasonal or operate on cycles
in which particular states are revisited. Variation in systems that show recurrent states (e.g. climate change, the El Ni˜
no Southern Oscillation, Milankovitch
cycles) is one of the most important topics in Earth science today. There exist a variety of mathematical methods for determining their dominant modes,
among which Fourier and wavelet analysis both have the advantage of having
common libraries and routines in several languages and software packages that
can be used to develop automated routines to rapidly search for changes to the
intensity and periodicity of cycles.
This paper uses an example dataset of temperature, precipitation, and soil
moisture model output from the Parallel Climate Model (PCM). PCM is a fully
coupled model. Ensembles of simulations were used to show global mean surface
temperature increase of ∼1.9 ◦ C during the twenty-ﬁrst century and a 3% increase in global precipitation[1]. A more complete description can be found in [2].
Figure 1 represents the 10 year running average of the 2796 land surface grid
cells clustered into ecoregions by Hoﬀman and others[1], who used the descriptive variables of temperature, precipitation, and soil moisture to assign each land
G. Allen et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2009, Part II, LNCS 5545, pp. 426–434, 2009.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

Applying Wavelet and Fourier Transform Analysis

427

10yr Ensemble Averages− 32 Clusters

Fig. 1. Global map of 2796 PCM land surface cells taken from Hoﬀman and others[1]

surface cell to 1 of 32 ecoregion types through a 99 year (1188 month) Business
As Usual (BAU) general circulation model (i.e. PCM). Three ﬁelds of ecological
importance were analyzed: temperature (K), precipitation (kg m−2 s−1 ), and soil
moisture (fractional volume of root zone water ranging from 0:1).
The colors of each land surface cell in Figure 1 indicate the ecoregion type assigned by the Multivariate Spatio-Temporal Clustering (MSTC) procedure[1; 3],
which was based on an iterative k-means algorithm[4]. Each land cell at each time
point is described by three parameters of temperature, precipitation, and soil moisture that deﬁne its location in three-dimensional data space. Hoﬀman and others
grouped these data points into clusters, called ecoregions, based on their euclidean
distances. Climate changes for a land cell were said to have occurred when a land
cell entered a climate regime that it had never previously visited.
To suit the purposes of this paper a scalable DFT routine was employed to
identify particular PCM land surface cells that showed signiﬁcant changes to the
periodicity of their annual cycles. Two example land surface cells were selected
for detailed wavelet analysis and to demonstrate how changes to the annual cycle within a time series of interest are located. The primary focus is to identify such
variant land surface cells, which may serve as potential indicators of climate change.

2

Discrete Fourier Transform Signal Detection

Discrete Fourier transform analysis can be a useful technique for detecting periodic signals in time series[5]. Periodic signals within a time series are obtained by
decomposing the time series into two parts, a real, {Fn (x)} and an imaginary,
{Fn (x)}. The power spectra of a DFT (Figure 2A) can be used to represent
the cumulative magnitude of a signal within a time series. Changes to the spectral power of peaks within diﬀerent window segments of a time series (e.g. a
slackening annual cycle) can be identiﬁed by segmenting the time series into
windows and computing the DFT power spectrum (DFTPS) for each window.
When combined with Monte Carlo simulations, estimates for the signiﬁcances
of peaks in a power spectrum can also be determined. Example routines are
available online at: www.climatemodeling.org/pcm/cyclicity/.

428

B.-G.J. Brooks

A

12 mo.

10

10

Spectral Power

Temperature (K
)

20

0

5

-10

-20
0

100

0
0.02

200

0.03

0.04

0.05

0.06

0.07

0.08

0.09

0.1

Frequency (cycles/month)

Time (months)

B 30

12 mo.

10

10

Spectral Power

Precipitation (kg m-2 s-1
)

20

0
-10
-20

5

-30
-40
0

100

0
0.02

200

0.03

0.04

0.05

0.06

0.07

0.08

0.09

0.1

Frequency (cycles/month)

Time (months)

12 mo.

0.5

Spectral Power

Soil Moisture (vol. frac. root zone water
)

C

2

0

0

100

200

Time (months)

0
0.02

0.03

0.04

0.05

0.06

0.07

0.08

0.09

0.1

Frequency (cycles/month)

Fig. 2. Comparison of Discrete Fourier transform power spectrum (DFTPS) and time
series plots. The DFTPS of three time series (mean subtracted) {(ti , xi )}200
i=1 (soil moisture, precipitation, and temperature) of one Middle Eastern land cell from the Parallel
Climate Model are shown in the left column with their corresponding DFT power spectra. Gray bars in the DFTPS locate the annual (12 month) period. Row A. represents
temperature, B. precipitation, and C. soil moisture.

To compute the DFTPS in the second column of Figure 2, a 200 month segment of the original time series was extracted, {(ti , xi )}200
i=1 , which represents
PCM precipitation data sampled at monthly increments xi . The series was standardized to a variance of 1, and then expressed as the sum of a series of sines
and cosines through Fourier expansion. In its simplest form the DFT is denoted
by Equation 1
x(n) =

1
N

N −1
k=0

X(k)ej2πnk/N , n = 0, 1, 2 . . . N − 1

(1)

Applying Wavelet and Fourier Transform Analysis

429

procedure pcm locate
input: time series, {(ti , xi )}nterms
i=1
output: a k (amplitude), and tau k
for k = 1,nw do
w = x[i:i+ne]
w_n = w/std_dev(w)
w_ft = fft(w_n)
w_sp = w_ft * conj(w_ft)
a_k = real(w_sp)
tau_k = imaginary(w_sp)
end do

Fig. 3. The general procedure that locates windows within a time series with signiﬁcant
variation in the period and amplitude of the annual cycle. nw is the number of windows
within the time series. ne is the number of elements (x) within each window.

√
where x(n) is the input time series at sample n, and j = −1 is the basis for
complex numbers. Many software packages have built in libraries and routines
for DFT analysis and for producing DFTPS.
Figure 2 represents the monthly PCM output of temperature, precipitation,
and soil moisture for one land surface cell. The left column represents the time
series of the ﬁrst 200 months of temperature, precipitation, and soil moisture for
that same grid cell. The right column of DFT power spectra show the DFTPS
of cycles within the three time series. The DFTPS each have one dominant
cycle near f = 0.083 (12 months), and can be used to answer two types of
questions: ‘What are the periods of cycles in the time series’ and ‘What are
their signiﬁcances?’
A well known limitation of Fourier expansion is that it has no time resolution meaning that although DFTPS indicate the frequencies present in a signal,
nothing is indicated about where they are present in that signal or how their
intensity changes through time. To avoid such problems a routine a routine was
developed (pcm locate.m) that divides each time series into window segments
and computes their DFTPS to search for changes to the intensity and duration
of the annual annual cycle (Figure 3). The results of all the land surface cells
were sorted to identify particular cells that show dramatic change in their annual
cycle. This routine can be scaled to run on a cluster.

3

Wavelets

Unlike Fourier expansion, wavelet functions broaden time series analysis into
time-scale space, which allows wavelet methods to detect periodicities that are
intermittent throughout the dataset[6]. Wavelet transform slides a window along

430

B.-G.J. Brooks

the signal calculating the spectrum at each position, solving the time-domain
limitation of Fourier expansion by a method more eﬃcient that windowing[7].
Wavelet spectrograms can be used as representations of time and frequencydomain changes for the variant land surface cells once identiﬁed.
Wavelet functions (ψ) concern the relationship between a dilation parameter
S, also called scale, and a translation parameter τ , also called shift and are
described by Equation 2.
1
ΨS,τ (η) = √ Ψ
S

η−τ
S

(2)

η is a nondimensional sampling parameter, and S −1/2 normalizes the energy
across diﬀerent scales, which allows the spectral power of a signal to be compared
across diﬀerent scales. Equation 2 shows a key distinction of wavelet analysis
in that it does not specify a wavelet basis function. This ﬂexibility permits
diﬀerent wavelet functions to be used. Changing the wavelet function or varying
the parameters that accompany the wavelet function, for example the scale,
has important eﬀects on the resulting spectrogram. Although many studies use
the Morlet wavelet function for its frequency resolution, in this paper the Paul
function is used to provide better time resolution. A comparison of the uses of
diﬀerent wavelet functions can be found in [8].
Wavelet basis functions or wavelets have zero means (Figure 4) and are localized in time and Fourier space. Given an array of equally spaced observations, xn ,
from n = 0 . . . N − 1, a continuous wavelet function, ψ(η), can detect variations
in the power of an array of data[9].
As in Fourier analysis the resulting wavelet power spectrum is partitioned
into a real part (the amplitude) and an imaginary part (the phase information).
The key distinction of wavelet transform is that the period and spectral power
of the wavelet transform can be plotted through time (Figure 5). Strongly cyclic
events are indicated by hot colors on the spectrogram, while small peaks and

Morlet

Paul

Gaussian

Time
Domain

Frequency
Domain

Fig. 4. Wavelet functions. The plots in the upper row indicate the real (solid) and
imaginary (dotted) parts in the time domain, while the bottom row corresponds to the
frequency domain of those same wavelet functions.

Applying Wavelet and Fourier Transform Analysis

431

Fig. 5. Paul wavelet spectrograms of two land surface cells, divided into left (a typical
polar cell) and right (a particularly variant Mid East cell) columns. Hot colors (red)
indicate high spectral power (a strong cycle), whereas blue indicates little spectral
intensity (a weak cycle). A. represents the temperature data for both cells. B. the
precipitation, and C. soil moisture. The cone of inﬂuence is shown by the red curve, and
a 95% conﬁdence interval is indicated for the annual cycle by the black line encircling it.

weak cycles are indicated by cool colors. These plots can be reproduced using
the pcm wv.pro script in the online repository.
Because a continuous wavelet transform of a ﬁnite length time series has edge
artifacts near the beginning and end of the power spectrum that represent an
incomplete localization of the data, a cone of inﬂuence (COI) is used in wavelet

432

B.-G.J. Brooks

spectrograms to represent the threshold below which the signiﬁcance of cycles
is dubious[6]. However, if dealing with geographic data, such as for a band of
longitude with ﬁxed latitude, the data are continuous (i.e. they wrap around)
and no COI is necessary.

4

Monte Carlo Statistical Significances

Although a spectral peak may appear in the data, it could be a computational
artifact. Monte Carlo (MC) simulations can be used as null models to determine
the statistical signiﬁcances of peaks within a power spectrum. For any time series
there are frequencies within which peaks are likely to be the result of random
chance. MC trials are one way to decipher the signiﬁcance of spectral peaks from
random chance. Two MC routines are used as null models and the signiﬁcance
of spectral peaks in the original signal are computed by counting the number of
times the amplitude of a peak generated by a random permutation of the data
is able to exceed that of the original time series.
As opposed to purely theoretical (white noise) simulations, the two MC methods used here simulate the probability of occurrence of spectral peaks based on
assumptions about the cause of the periodicity. These MC methods are adapted
from Cornette[10], and Rohde and Muller[11]. They assume that ﬂuctuations
in the DFTPS follow an exponential form, such that the probability of spectral
power at frequency f would be P (h) = e−h/h(f ) where h(f ) denotes the average
height h of the power spectrum at frequency f across many trial simulations.
In the ﬁrst method, random walk trials, at each time increment ti , a data point
xi is randomly selected from the series and used to generate a permutation of the
original sequence {(ti , xi )}1188
i=1 . This represents the null hypothesis that diversity
is a random walk. It is important to reject that variations in the time series are
not best described by a random walk for cases where the fundamental dynamics
of a system are complex or poorly constrained. The plot of the mean of 10,000
random walk trials is shown by the red curve in the right column of Figure 2.
For random block trials, the time series data are partitioned into N blocks of
length M . At each increment of N the blocks are randomly permuted to obtain a
random sequence. This method preserves some short term relationships between
data points in the time series, and represents the hypothesis that variation in
the time series is independently driven (i.e. directed) with major random perturbations. For the temperature, precipitation, and soil moisture PCM output a
block length, M , of 12 (months) is used to represent the null model that seasonal
trends are directed, but interannual variability is random. This is represented by
the blue curve that appears in the right column of Figure 2. An example script
for producing this plot can be found in our online repository (dftps.m).
Signiﬁcance is computed for a peak of height h at a frequency f , as the
fraction, p, of the randomly generated sequences for which the MC spectrum at
f exceeds h. Table 1 lists the signiﬁcance of the annual cycle in precipitation for
the Middle Eastern cell in three diﬀerent windows of the time series to show its
evolution (cf. Figure 5B). The probability that a MC simulation of the 12 month

Applying Wavelet and Fourier Transform Analysis

433

Table 1. The signiﬁcances of the annual peak in the data from Figure 5B (precipitation data for the Mid East cell) ﬂuctuates throughout the time series. Statistical
signiﬁcances of the 12 month cycle relative to 10,000 random walk (RW) and random
block (RB) Monte Carlo simulations are given below in four conterminous 48 month
windows of the time series between 600 and 743 months.

window location in
RW
RB
segment time series signiﬁcance signiﬁcance
precipitation
One
600-647
0.002
0.001
Two
648-695
0.003
0.000
Three
696-743
0.043
0.032
cycle has a greater signiﬁcance is very small (p < 0.005) in windows one and
two. Segment three however, has a reduced signiﬁcance that seems to indicate a
slackened annual cycle near 700 months.

5

Summary of Results

Reliable climate change determinations require powerful analytical tools, among
which spectral analysis can be included. Figure 1 shows an example output from
Hoﬀman and others[1] MSTC technique, which assigned each of the 2796 land
cells to one of 32 climate regimes at each time point (month). Their evolution
was tracked through time. Hoﬀman and others chose one representative Middle
Eastern cell as an example that underwent a climate change by transitioning into
the hottest and driest climate state, a regime it had never previously visited. The
rigorousness of this climate transition can be explored by showing a shift in the
intensity and duration of its annual cycles, for example in the duration of wet
season precipitation events or in the intensity of peak summer temperatures.
While, temperature spectrograms for the polar and Middle East land cells are
nearly identical (Figure 5A), substantial diﬀerences exist in soil moisture and
precipitation. The ﬁrst 600 months of soil moisture data for the Middle East land
cell contrasts the last 600 months in Figure 5C. The ﬁrst half is characterized by
a strong annual soil moisture cycle, which are accompanied by a range of possibly
signiﬁcant 12−120 month interannual soil moisture cycles. The second half of the
time series shows noticeably fewer of these interannual cycles and more frequent
gaps in the annual soil moisture cycle. The low frequency (red and blue) cycles
that appear below the annual period should be regarded with caution, as they
have a limited recurrence and do not have statistical signiﬁcances equal to that
of the 12 month cycle.
A diminishing annual soil moisture cycle could be the result of two phenomena.
It may be the consequence of changes in air temperature or precipitation. Little
change appears throughout the temperature spectrogram, therefore is appears
to be the latter case.

434

B.-G.J. Brooks

Interestingly, the slackening of the precipitation cycle shown Figure 5B roughly
coincides with a shift in the annual precipitation cycle. However, changes to the
soil moisture cycle appear more clear than those to the precipitation cycle, and
this information could be related to the timing of the observed climate transition
as determined by clustering, and it could be used to understand whether the shift
was one primarily of one or two environmental parameters. This would be especially useful for examining land surface cells that have strong seasonal precipitation events.
Spectral analysis techniques can be a useful means to rapidly identify variant periodicities in geophysical time series, and to diagnose the behavior of
model simulations. The periodicity captured by model output, and especially
the change in duration and intensity of cycles, is an important feature that can
be rapidly analyzed using the methods outlined in this paper.

Bibliography
[1] Hoﬀman, F.M., Hargrove, W.W., Erickson, D.J.: Using clustered climate regimes
to analyze and compare predictions from fully coupled General Circulation Models.
Earth Interactions 9(10), 1 (2005)
[2] Washington, W.M., Weatherly, J.W., Meehl, G.A., Semtner Jr., A.J., Bettge,
T.W., Craig, A.P., Strand Jr., W.G., Arblaster, J., Wayland, V.B., James, R.,
Zhang, Y.: Parallel climate model (PCM) control and transient simulations. Climate Dynamics 16, 755–774 (2000)
[3] Hoﬀman, F.M., Hargrove, W.W.: Multivariate geographic clustering using a
Beowulf-style parallel computer. In: Arabnia, H.R. (ed.) Proc. International
Conference on Parallel and Distributed Processing Techniques and Applications
(PDPTA 1999), Las Vegas, Nevada, vol. III, pp. 1292–1298. CSREA Press (June
1999)
[4] Hartigan, J.A.: Clustering Algorithms. John Wiley & Sons, New York (1975)
[5] Cadzow, J.A.: Discrete–Time Systems: An Introduction with Interdisciplinary Applications. Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliﬀs (1973)
[6] Torrence, C., Compo, G.P.: A practical guide to wavelet analysis. Bulletin of the
American Meteorological Society 79, 61–78 (1998)
[7] Kaiser, G.: A Friendly Guide to Wavelets. Birkh¨
auser, Boston (1994)
[8] De Moortel, I., Munday, S.A., Hood, A.W.: Wavelet analysis: the eﬀect of varying
basic wavelet parameters. Solar Physics 222, 203–228 (2004)
[9] Farge, M.: Wavelet transforms and their applications to turbulence. Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics 24, 395–457 (1992)
[10] Cornette, J.L.: Gauss-van´ıˇcek and fourier transform spectral analyses of marine
diversity. Computing in Science and Engineering 9(4), 61–63 (2007)
[11] Rohde, R.A., Muller, R.A.: Cycles in fossil diversity. Nature 434, 208–210 (2005)

