Determination of Cardiac Ejection Fraction by
Electrical Impedance Tomography - Numerical
Experiments and Viability Analysis
Franciane C. Peters, Luis Paulo S. Barra, and Rodrigo Weber dos Santos
Universidade Federal de Juiz de Fora, Juiz de Fora, Minas Gerais, Brasil
franciane.peters@engenharia.ufjf.br, luis.barra@ufjf.edu.br,
rodrigo.weber@ufjf.edu.br

Abstract. Cardiac ejection fraction is a clinically relevant parameter
that is highly correlated to the functional status of the heart. Today the
non-invasive methods and technology that measure cardiac ejection fraction, such as MRI, CT and echocardiography do not oﬀer a continuous
way of monitoring this important parameter. In this work, we numerically
evaluate a new method for the continuous estimation of cardiac ejection
fraction based on Electrical Impedance Tomography. The proposed technique assumes the existence of recent Magnetic Resonance (MR) images
of the heart to reduce the search space of the inverse problem. Simulations were performed on two-dimensional cardiac MRI images with
electric potentials numerically obtained by the solution of the Poisson
equation via the Boundary Element Method. Diﬀerent protocols for current injection were evaluated. Preliminary results are presented and the
potentialities and limitations of the proposed technique are discussed.

1

Introduction

Cardiac ejection fraction indicates the measure of the blood fraction that is
pumped from each ventricle in each step of the heart cycle. The ejection fraction
of both left ventricle (EFLV) and right ventricle (EFRV) can be determined.
But the clinical use of EFLV is more common and it is frequently called ejection
fraction (EF). By deﬁnition, the ejection fraction is calculated in the following
way:
EDV − ESV
PV
=
(1)
EF =
EDV
EDV
where P V is the volume of blood pumped, that is given by the diﬀerence between
the end-diastolic volume (EDV ) and the end-systolic volume (ESV ). Cardiac
ejection fraction is a relevant parameter that is highly correlated to the functional status of the heart. To determine EF, diﬀerent techniques can be used,
like echocardiography, cardiac magnetic resonance and computed tomography.
However, because of the costs of these techniques, they can not be used for continuous monitoring. In this work, we numerically evaluate a new method for the
continuous estimation of cardiac ejection fraction based on Electrical Impedance
Tomography (EIT).
G. Allen et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2009, Part I, LNCS 5544, pp. 819–828, 2009.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

820

F.C. Peters, L.P.S. Barra, and R.W. dos Santos

EIT is a technique that reconstruct conductivity distribution images inside
a conductor domain based on protocols of current injection and potential measurement on the boundary of the domain. This technique has a large utilization
on geophysics, monitoring of industrial activities [1] and on biomedical engineering [2,3,4]. In this last area, the EIT is considered as a viable technique for
monitoring long periods, since it is not based on ionizing radiation. The EIT
spacial resolution is not as high as the traditional imaging methods. Nevertheless, its portability, low cost and time resolution are the main advantages of the
technique.
The aim of the present work is to present a study on the viability of EIT
to the continuous monitoring of cardiac ejection fraction. Previous work have
shown preliminary results on the same topic [5,6,7]. In this work, we extend
previous results and give new contribution in many aspects: 1) We develop a
more realistic 2D model that includes the lungs. Because of their low conductivity, these regions behave as a barrier to the electrical currents and poses new
challenges to the problem. 2) The results presented in this work were obtained
using the Levenberg-Marquardt method [8] for the solution of the inverse problem associated to EIT. Previous work have adopted diﬀerent methods, such as
the Powell’s method [9], Genetic Algorithms [10,11] and FAIPA (Feasible Arc
Interior Point Algorithm) [12]. 3) Diﬀerent protocols for current injection are
evaluated for the estimation of cardiac ejection fraction.
Preliminary results are presented and the potentialities and limitations of the
proposed technique are discussed. The results suggest the proposed technique is
a promising diagnostic tool that oﬀers continuous and non-invasive estimation
of cardiac ejection fraction.

2
2.1

Methods
2D Models Based on Magnetic Resonance Images

From magnetic resonance (MR) images, the regions of interest, in this case the
two ventricles were manually segmented in two diﬀerent phase: end of the systole
and the end of diastole. Each curve of the segmentation was parameterized by
a spline, with a minimum number of points. The left ventricle (LV) spline has
7 control points and the right one (RV) 8 points. The external boundary of
the thorax and the boundaries of the lungs were also segmented. For simplicity,
these curves are assumed constant during the heart cycle. Figure 1 shows a
segmentation example.
The goal of our method is to recover the shape of the internal cavi ties of
the heart, presently considered in two-dimensions, from electric potential measurements. Therefore, with two coordinates for each spline control point the
methods would need to estimate a total of 30 ((7+8)*2) parameters. To reduce
the number of parameters to be estimated the following strategy was adopted.
During MRI segmentation we have used the same number of control points for
the splines in both systole and diastole phase. This allows us to restrict the search
space forcing that each control point i belongs to a line that connects the position

Determination of Cardiac Ejection Fraction by EIT

821

Fig. 1. Manual segmentation of an MR image. The boundary of the lungs is represented
in blue and the boundary of the ventricle cavities in red.

at systole and diastole. Thus, a linear interpolation is used, parameterized by
a scalar ti , between the values of the coordinates of each control point i. The
spline relative to the end of systole can be obtained with ti = 0, ∀i, and the
one relative to the end of diastole with ti = 1, ∀i. Doing so, the method goal
is to recover the shape of the ventricular cavities via the estimation of the 15
parameters ti , with i = 1...15.
2.2

Forward Problem and Governing Equations

The proposed 2D model splits the domain in regions that represent diﬀerent
biological tissues, heart cavities, lungs and torso. Each tissue can be mainly
electrically identiﬁed by its conductivity. Grimnes [13] presents the main factors
that inﬂuence the properties of biological tissues. Although they may be classiﬁed
in only four groups, epithelium, muscle, connective tissue and nervous tissue, the
tissues can be divided in thirty kinds in accordance to their electrical properties
[14]. In addition, the value of the conductivity of each tissue depends on the
frequency of the electrical current, on the temperature, on the presence of water,
among other issues.
Table 1. Resistivity values of biological tissues that are found in the literature
Tissue
Blood

Heart

Lung

Resistivity (Ωcm)
150
150
100
400
250
400 - 800
727 - 2363
1400
600 - 2000

Reference
Barber and Brown [16]
Yang and Patterson [17]
Schwan and Kay [18]
Patterson and Zhang [19]
Yang and Patterson [17]
Baysal and Eyuboglu [20]
Barber and Brown [16]
Patterson and Zhang [19]
Baysal and Eyuboglu [20]

822

F.C. Peters, L.P.S. Barra, and R.W. dos Santos

In this work, we assume the conductivity of each tissue is taken as known,
constant and isotropic. These are all simpliﬁed assumption, since biological tissues are usually heterogeneous and anisotropic. However, biological tissues are
diﬃcult to characterize, and the reported values vary substantially in the literature. Table 1 presents some resistivity values for blood, heart and lung found in
the literature.
For the remaining tissues that compose the section of the thorax, that from
here on we call the torso region, Bruder et al. [15] proposes a mean resistivity
of 500Ωcm. The conductivity of the air is 1020 Ωcm, but the conductivity of
the lung ﬁlled of air is diﬃcult to determine. Rush et al. [21] presents a very
simpliﬁed resistivity distribution model characterized by the presence of cavities
ﬁlled of blood, surrounded by homogeneous material with resistivity ten times
greater. The same scheme, properly extended to include the lung regions, is used
in this work. Preliminarily, the resistivity of the blood is here taken as 100Ωcm
and the torso to be 1000Ωcm. Two diﬀerent values were tested for the resistivity
of the lungs: 20000Ωcm (Ratio of Lung to Torso resistivity (RLT) of 20) and
50000Ωcm (RLT of 50).
The forward problem consists of calculating the electrical potential on the external boundary of the torso that is generated by the current injection on a pair
of electrodes. Given that our 2D model has three regions with diﬀerent but constant and isotropic conductivities (heart cavities, lungs and torso) the electrical
potential at each point of the regions, φ, must satisfy Laplaces’ equation:
∇2 φ = 0

(2)

and the boundary conditions are
σL ∇φ = σT ∇φ ,
σB ∇φ = σT ∇φ ,
∂φ
= Ji ,
σT
∂n
∂φ
=0,
∂n

x ∈ Γ1
x ∈ Γ2
x ∈ Γ3ie
x ∈ (Γ3 − Γ3ie )

where Γ1 is the interface between the lung and torso region, Γ2 is the interface
between the blood and the torso region, Γ3 is the external boundary of the
thorax, Γ3ie is the part of Γ3 where the ith electrode is, Ji is the electrical
current injected on the ith electrode and σL , σB and σT are the conductivities
of the lung, blood and torso, respectively.
In the present work, the forward problem is solved by the Boundary Element
Method (BEM) [22]. Further details of the implementation can be found in [23].
2.3

The Inverse Problem

The inverse problem associated to EIT aims to recover the shape of the ventricular cavities via the estimation of the vector t, that contains the 15 parameters
ti , with i = 1...15 (as described in Section 2.1). This is done via the minimization

Determination of Cardiac Ejection Fraction by EIT

823

of an objective function that measures the distance between measured electrical potential values (φ¯j ) taken from a pair of electrodes identiﬁed by j on the
external boundary and the computed ones (φ(t)j ) that depends on the heart
cavity shape parameterized by t and is calculated as described in Section 2.2.
Therefore, the goal is to ﬁnd the best parameter vector t that minimizes Eq. 3:
F =

1
2

m

(φ(t)j − φ¯j )2

(3)

j=1

where m is the number of measurements and depends on the current injection
pattern. In this work, the “measured” electrical potential values (φ¯j ) were also
synthetically generated, i.e., also numerically obtained.
This minimization problem is solved by the method known as LevenbergMarquardt [8]. The implementation of the method and the subroutines that
compute the objective function are done in Fortran77.
2.4

Numerical Experiments and Stimulation Patterns

For the 2D problem in consideration the areas of the transversal section of the
cavities were assumed to be proportional to their volumes, i.e. a cylindrical
approximation so that EF is calculate by:
EF =

EDA − ESA
EDA

(4)

where EDA and ESA are the areas of the transversal section of the ventricle at
the end of the diastole and at the end of the systole, respectively.
From MR images taken at the end of the systole and at the end of the diastole
the cardiac ventricles were manually segmented and in accordance to (4) the
EF of the left ventricle is 59.24% and the EF of the right ventricle is 29, 95%.
After that, a cardiac disfunction was synthetically generated. The simulated
disfunction consists of a modiﬁed cardiac cycle in which the end-diastolic volume
is the same as in the normal cycle but the end-systolic volume is greater than
the normal one. In this new cardiac cycle, the EF of the left ventricle is 33.01%
and the EF of the right ventricle is 16.19%. These are the target values to be
estimated by the here proposed method.
Two patterns of electrical current injection were tested: a diametrical one,
with electrodes evenly distributed along the torso boundary; and an adaptive
one, with electrodes that are near the region of interest. The ﬁrst yields a set
of 104 measurements and the second one yields a set of 78. The arrows of the
Fig. 2 present the pairs of electrodes sequentially used for current injection in
each pattern.
As mentioned before in Section 2.1 we have also tested two diﬀerent 2D models. Each with a diﬀerent value for the resistivity of the lungs: 20000Ωcm (Ratio
of Lung to Torso resistivity (RLT) of 20) and 50000Ωcm (RLT of 50). Finally,
for each of 4 optimization problems (2 Stimulus Patterns times 2 RLT models)
we have tested the optimization method with two diﬀerent initial guesses. One

824

F.C. Peters, L.P.S. Barra, and R.W. dos Santos

Fig. 2. Two stimulation patterns used in this work. The ﬁrst one is the diametrical
and the second one is the adaptive.

Fig. 3. A typical target (pink) and the two initial guesses (green) given to the optimization procedure: (a) ti = 0, ∀i ; (b) ti = 1, ∀i

guess is the parameter set t that corresponds to the shape of the ventricles at
the end of the diastole of normal heart, i.e. ti = 1, ∀i and the other at the end
of the systole for the normal tissue, i.e. ti = 0, ∀i . The initial guesses and the
targets can be compared in Fig. 3. Thus, the method was executed a total of 8
times (2 Stimulus Patterns times 2 RLT models times 2 initial guesses).

3

Results

Table 2 presents the results of our numerical experiments that aims the EF estimation of the synthetically generated cardiac disfunction. The columns present
the results for the models with diﬀerent values for the resistivity of the lungs:
Ratio of Lung to Torso resistivity (RLT) of 20 and RLT of 50. Each couple
of rows presents the comparison of the two stimulation pattern implemented:
diametrical and adaptive pattern. In addition, for each pair (stimulus pattern,
RLT) results are presented for two diﬀerent initial conditions. The ﬁrst one corresponds to the shape of the ventricles at the end of the diastole of the normal
heart, i.e. ti = 1, ∀i and the other at the end of the systole for the normal
heart, i.e. ti = 0, ∀i. The last row of the table presents the target EF values for
comparison.

Determination of Cardiac Ejection Fraction by EIT

825

Table 2. Values of the ejection fraction estimated for the synthetic cardiac disfunction
for two RLT ratios and two diﬀerent stimulation patterns. The last row shows the
target values.

Initial
Guess

RLT= 50
EF (%)
RV
LV

RLT= 20
EF (%)
RV
LV

Diametrical Pattern
ti = 0

13.00

34.41

15.32

34.22

ti = 1

16.09

32.21

15.80

33.04

Adaptive Pattern
ti = 0

12.97

35.86

20.54

29.94

ti = 1

18.72

32.84

20.89

29.40

Target

16.19

33.01

16.19

33.01

Figure 4 allows a geometrical comparison between the ﬁnal results and the
actual target curves. It is important to emphasize that, to make the comparison fair, the results presented in this ﬁgures are obtained with the same initial
guesses, ti = 1, ∀i.
The results show that in general the error in the computed ejection fraction of the left ventricle is smaller than the one of the right. The mean absolute error of the left ventricle results is 1.64 while the right ventricle ones
is 2.42. Moreover, except in one case, the diametrical pattern provides results
closer to the actual values than the other pattern. The diametrical pattern
provides a mean absolute error of 1.00 while the error of the adaptive pattern is 3.06. About the initial guess, both of them provided good results. But
the best ones are obtained with the guess on the original diastole curve with
a mean absolute error of 1.54 against an error of 2.52 for the other initial
guess.
The geometrical results presented in Fig. 4, showing only the ventricular cavities, suggest that the results become worst in the case the lung resistivity is
greater. This behavior is expected because greater resistivities around the region
of interest tend to block the electrical current to reach this area. For instance,
for the best experimented pattern, the diametrical one, the mean absolute error
obtained with the greatest resistivity (RLT = 50) is 2.2 times the error obtained
with the other lung resistivity (RLT = 20).
Using the diametrical pattern, the best result was obtained for the left ventricle and RLT of 20. The absolute error in the value of the ejection fraction is
of 0.03. It is possible to see this result in Fig. 4(b). In this case it is very diﬃcult
to see the diﬀerence between the result and the target and it is the best of the
8 tested cases. About the adaptive pattern, the best one was obtained for the
left ventricle and RLT of 50. In this case, the absolute error in the value of the
ejection fraction is 0.17.

826

F.C. Peters, L.P.S. Barra, and R.W. dos Santos

Fig. 4. Some results for the diametrical and the adaptive pattern and the target

4

Conclusions

The presented results suggest that the proposed methodology allows a suitable
indication of the cardiac ejection fraction. We observed that the error in the
ejection fraction predictions for the right ventricle are greater than those found
for the left ventricle and this is in agreement with other techniques, such as with
echocardiography.
Concerning the diﬀerent patterns for current injection tested in this work, the
errors obtained with the diametrical pattern are smaller than those using the
adaptive pattern, in general. However this fact does not discard the use of the
adaptive pattern, as it presents good results and spends around 19 min. in a
Pentium 4, 3.00 GHz, for a complete solution, 25% less then the diametrical.
Comparing the results obtained with diﬀerent lung resistivities we may conclude that the inverse problem becomes more diﬃcult to be solved as the RLT
increases. Therefore, the results suggest the current injection should be triggered
during the expiratory phase, when the air volume and the corresponding lung
resistivity are smaller.

Determination of Cardiac Ejection Fraction by EIT

827

The preliminary results presented in this work suggest the proposed technique is a promising diagnostic tool that may oﬀer continuous and non-invasive
estimation of cardiac ejection fraction.
Acknowledgements. The ﬁrst author would like to thank CAPES and Mestrado em Modelagem Computacional (UFJF) for the Master’s scholarship.

References
1. Kim, M., Kim, K., Kim, S.: Phase boundary estimation in two-phase ﬂows with
electrical impedance tomography. Int. Comm. Heat Transfer 31(8), 1105–1114
(2004)
2. Polydorides, N., Lionheart, W., McCann, H.: Krylov subspace iterative techniques:
On the brain activity with electrical impedance tomography. IEEE Transactions
on Medical Imaging 21(6), 596–603 (2002)
3. Seo, J., Kwon, O., Ammari, H., Woo, E.: A mathematical model for breast cancer lesion estimation: Electrical impedance technique using TS2000 commercial
system. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering 51(11), 1898–1906 (2004)
4. Trigo, F., Lima, R., Amato, M.: Electrical impedance tomography using extended
Kalman ﬁlter. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering 51(1), 72–81 (2004)
5. Barra, L.P.S., Peters, F.C., Martins, C.P., Barbosa, H.J.C.: Computational experiments in electrical impedance tomography. In: XXVII Iberian Latin American
Congress on Computational Methods in Engineering, Bel´em, Brasil (2006)
6. Barra, L.P.S., Santos, R.W., Peters, F.C., Santos, E.P., Barbosa, H.: Parallel computational experiments in electrical impedance tomography. In: 18th Symposium
on Computer Architecture and High Performance Computing, Ouro Preto, Brasil,
vol. 1, pp. 7–13. Sociedade Brasileira de Computa¸ca
˜o, High Perfomance Computing
in the Life Sciences (2006)
7. Barra, L.P.S., Mappa, P., Cardoso, S., Peters, F.C.: Comparison of the Computational Performance of Optimization Algorithms in the Solution of an Inverse
Problem (in Portuguese). In: VIII Simp´
osio Mecˆ
anica Computacional - SIMMEC,
Belo Horizonte, Brasil. PUC-Minas (2008)
8. Madsen, K., Nielsen, H., Tingleﬀ, O.: Methods for non-linear least squares problems
(2004)
9. Press, W., Teukolsky, S., Vetterling, W.: Flannery: Numerical Recipes in Fortran,
vol. 77. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1986)
10. Holland, J.: Adaptation in Natural and Artiﬁcial Systems. University of Michigan
Press (1978)
11. Holland, J.: How Adaptation builds Complexity. Addison-Wesley Pub. Co., Reading (1995)
12. Herskovits, J.: Feasible direction interior-point technique for nonlinear optimization. Journal of Optimization Theory and Applications 99(1), 121–146 (1998)
13. Grimnes, S.: Bioimpedance and bioelectricity basics (2008)
14. Gabriel, C.: The dielectric properties of biological tissue: I. literature survey (1996)
15. Bruder, H., Scholz, B., Abrahamfuchs, K.: The inﬂuence of inhomogeneous volume conductor models on the ECG and the MCG. Physics in Medicine and Biology 39(11), 1949–1968 (1994)
16. Barber, D.C., Brown, B.H.: Applied potential tomography. Journal of Physics EScientiﬁc Instruments 11(9), 723–733 (1984)

828

F.C. Peters, L.P.S. Barra, and R.W. dos Santos

17. Yang, F., Patterson, R.P.: The contribution of the lungs to thoracic impedance measurements: a simulation study based on a high resolution ﬁnite diﬀerence model.
Physiological Measurement 28(7), S153–S161 (2007)
18. Schwan, H.P., Kay, C.F.: Speciﬁc resistance of body tissues. Circulation Research 4(6), 664–670 (1956)
19. Patterson, R.P., Zhang, J.: Evaluation of an EIT reconstruction algorithm using ﬁnite diﬀerence human thorax models as phantoms. Physiological Measurement 24(2), 467–475 (2003)
20. Baysal, U., Eyuboglu, B.M.: Tissue resistivity estimation in the presence of positional and geometrical uncertainties. Physics in Medicine and Biology 45(8), 2373–
2388 (2000)
21. Rush, S., McFee, R., Abildskov, J.A.: Resistivity of body tissues at low frequencies.
Circulation Research 12(1), 40–50 (1963)
22. Brebbia, C., Telles, J.C.F., Wrobel, L.C.: Boundary Elements Techniques: Theory
and Applications in Engineering. Springer, Heidelberg (1984)
23. Barra, L.P.S., Peters, F.C., Santos, R.W.: Numerical Experiments for the Viability
Analysis of the Determination of the Cardiac Ejection Fraction by the Electrical
Impedance Tomography (in Portuguese). In: XXIX CILAMCE - Congresso Ibero
Latino Americano de M´etodos Computacionais em Engenharia, Macei´
o, Brasil.
ABMEC (2008)
24. Metherall, P.: Three Dimensional Electrical Impedance Tomography of the Human
Thorax. PhD thesis, University of Sheﬃeld (1998)

