Workshop on Using Emerging Parallel Architectures
for Computational Science
Bertil Schmidt and Douglas Maskell
School of Computer Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798
{asbschmidt,asdouglas}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract. The Workshop on Using Emerging Parallel Architectures for
Computational Science, held in conjunction with ICCS 2009, provides a forum
for exploring the capabilities of emerging parallel architectures such as GPUs,
FPGAs, Cell B.E., and multi-cores to accelerate computational science
applications.
Keywords: Computational Science, Parallel Computer Architectures, GPGPU,
Reconfigurable Computing, Heterogeneous Multi-cores, High Performance
Computing.

1 Introduction to the Workshop
Welcome to the Workshop on Using Emerging Parallel Architectures for
Computational Science. This workshop has been motivated by the significant
transformation of the computing landscape in recent years with the emergence of
more powerful processing elements such as GPUs, FPGAs, Cell B.E., multi-cores,
etc. On the multi-core front, Moore's Law has transcended beyond the single
processor boundary with the prediction that the number of cores will double every 18
months. Going forward, the primary method of gaining processor performance will be
through parallelism. Multi-core technology has visibly penetrated the global market.
Accordingly to the Top500 lists, the HPC landscape has evolved from supercomputer
systems into large clusters of dual or quad-core processors. Furthermore, GPUs,
FPGAs and heterogeneous multi-cores have been shown to be formidable computing
alternatives, where certain classes of applications witness more than one order of
magnitude improvement over their GPP counterpart. Therefore, future computational
science centers will employ resources such as FPGAs, GPUs and Cell architectures to
serve as co-processors to offload appropriate compute intensive portions of
applications from the servers. This workshop provides a forum for exploring the
capabilities of emerging parallel architectures to accelerate computational science
applications.
The technical program was put together by the Workshop Chairs Bertil Schmidt
and Douglas Maskell and 19 members of a distinguished program committee. The
workshop received 23 submissions. After an initial screening 21 submissions were
reviewed by at least three experts in the field. Based on the reviews, 16 papers were
selected for presentation at the workshop and inclusion in the workshop proceedings.
G. Allen et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2009, Part I, LNCS 5544, pp. 861–863, 2009.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

862

B. Schmidt and D. Maskell

We wish to thank the program committee members for submitting thoughtful
reviews and all authors who submitted high-quality manuscripts. We plan to continue
the workshop next year.

2 Workshop Organizers
Workshop Co-Chairs:
• Bertil Schmidt (Nanyang Technological University, Singapore)
• Douglas Maskell (Nanyang Technological University, Singapore)
Program Committee:
• Michael Huebner (University of Karlsruhe, Germany)
• Manfred Schimmler (University of Kiel, Germany)
• David Luebke (NVIDIA, USA)
• Simon See (SUN Microsystems)
• Neil Bergmann (University of Queensland, Australia)
• Philip Leong (Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong)
• Heiko Schroder (RMIT University, Australia)
• Alexandros Stamatakis (TU Munich, Germany)
• Dominique Lavenier (IRISA, France)
• Tarek El-Ghazawi (George Washington University, USA)
• Jaroslaw Zola (Iowa State University, USA)
• Michela Taufer (University of Delaware, USA)
• Rick Goh (IHPC, Singapore)
• Scott Emrich (University of Notre Dame, USA)
• Ananth Kalyanaraman (Washington State University, USA)
• Shi Haixiang (NTU, Singapore)
• Gerrit Voss (Fraunhofer IGD, Germany and NTU, Singapore)
• Weiguo Liu (NTU, Singapore)
• Malcolm Low (NTU, Singapore)

3 List of Accepted Papers
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Solving Sparse Linear Systems on NVIDIA Tesla GPUs, M. Wang, H. Klie, M.
Parashar, H. Sudan
Multi-walk Parallel Pattern Search Approach on a GPU Computing Platform,
W. Zhu, J. Curry
Pairwise Distance Matrix Computation for Multiple Sequence Alignment on the
Cell Broadband Engine, A. Wirawan, B. Schmidt, C.K. Kwoh
Evaluating the Jaccard-Tanimoto Index on Multi-Core Architectures, V.
Sachdeva, D.M. Freimuth, C. Mueller
A particle-mesh integrator for galactic dynamics powered by GPGPUs, D.
Aubert, M. Amini, R. David
Evaluation of the SUN UltraSparc T2+ Processor for Computational Science, M.
Sandrieser, S. Pllana, S. Benkner

Workshop on Using Emerging Parallel Architectures for Computational Science

7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.

863

Streamlining Offload Computing to High Performance Architectures, M. Purcell,
O. Callanan, D. Gregg
Power Consumption of GPUs from a Software Perspective, S. Collange, D.
Defour, A. Tisseran
A Note on Auto-tuning GEMM for GPUs, Y. Li, J. Dongarra, S. Tomov
Parallel calculating of the goal function in metaheuristics using GPU, W.
Bozejko, C. Smutnicki, M. Uchronski
Fast Conjugate Gradients with Multiple GPUs, A. Cevahir, A. Nukada, S.
Matsuoka
CUDA solutions for the SSSP problem, P.J. Martín, R. Torres, A. Gavilanes
Experiences With Mapping Non-Linear Memory Access Patterns into GPUs, E.
Gutierrez, S. Romero, M.A. Trenas, O. Plata
A Massively Parallel Architecture for, Bioinformatics, G. Pfeiffer, S. Baumgart,
J. Schroder, M. Schimmler
Accelerated Discovery of Discrete M-Clusters/Outliers on the Raster Plane using
Graphical Processing Units, C. Trefftz, J. Szakas, I. Majdandzic, G. Wolffe
GPU accelerated RNA folding algorithm, G. Rizk, D. Lavenier

