A Multilevel Multiscale Mimetic (M3 ) Method
for an Anisotropic Infiltration Problem
Konstantin Lipnikov, David Moulton, and Daniil Svyatskiy
Los Alamos National Laboratory, Theoretical Division,
Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA
{lipnikov,moulton,dasvyat}@lanl.gov

Abstract. Modeling of multiphase ﬂow and transport in highly heterogeneous porous media must capture a broad range of coupled spatial and
temporal scales. Recently, a hierarchical approach dubbed the Multilevel
Multiscale Mimetic (M3 ) method, was developed to simulate two-phase
ﬂow in porous media. The M3 method is locally mass conserving at all
levels in its hierarchy, it supports unstructured polygonal grids and full
tensor permeabilities, and it can achieve large coarsening factors. In this
work we consider inﬁltration of water into a two-dimensional layered
medium. The grid is aligned with the layers but not the coordinate axes.
We demonstrate that with an eﬃcient temporal updating strategy for
the coarsening parameters, ﬁne-scale accuracy of prominent features in
the ﬂow is maintained by the M3 method.
Keywords: multiscale, hierarchical, two-phase ﬂow, heterogeneous
porous media, inﬁltration.

1

Introduction

High ﬁdelity simulations of multiphase ﬂow and transport in porous media play
a key role in driving scientiﬁc advances in a broad range of complex multiscale
applications, including carbon sequestration, aquifer assessment and protection,
and nuclear waste disposal. However, there are fundamental mathematical and
computational hurdles that arise from the wide range of strongly coupled spatial
and temporal scales. For example, the permeability of porous media is highly
heterogeneous and may span several orders of magnitude, from nearly impermeable barriers to high-permeable ﬂow channels. To address this challenge we have
developed the new Multilevel Multiscale Mimetic (M3 ) method [1].
The M3 method builds recursively a problem-dependent multilevel hierarchy
of models. Each model preserves important physical properties of the continuum
model, such as local mass conservation. In contrast to two-level methods, such
as the multiscale ﬁnite element methods [2,3,4], the multiscale mortar ﬁnite
element method [5] and the Multiscale Finite Volume (MSFV) method [6], the
multilevel hierarchy facilitates large total coarsening factors, of 100 or more in
each coordinate direction.
G. Allen et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2009, Part I, LNCS 5544, pp. 685–694, 2009.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

686

K. Lipnikov, D. Moulton, and D. Svyatskiy

Building and maintaining the hierarchy of models incurs only a moderate computational overhead especially for a small coarsening factor on each level. The
M3 method supports unstructured polygonal meshes, and is readily extended
to unstructured polyhedral meshes. In addition, it can handle full permeability
tensors and accommodates general coarsening strategies to capture accurately
the complexity of the heterogeneous subsurface environment.
The M3 method [1] merges two computational strategies to balance accuracy
and eﬃciency in two-phase ﬂow simulations. The ﬁrst strategy is the algebraic
coarsening developed by Y. Kuznetsov for single phase ﬂows that reduces the
degrees of freedom inside coarse-grid cells [7]. The second strategy is a novel
approach to the conservative coarsening of velocities on the edges of a coarsegrid cell. This combination ensures that the coarse-scale system has the same
sparsity structure as the ﬁne-scale system, and with recursion leads to a multilevel algorithm. Due to its algebraic nature, the method can be adapted to other
discretizations of the same algebraic form, such as the mixed ﬁnite element and
ﬁnite volume methods.
In this work we demonstrate the capabilities of the M3 method for inﬁltration
into a stratiﬁed porous medium that is composed of sloping and non-uniform layers and strongly anisotropic inclusions. The majority of two-level methods solve
localized ﬁne-scale ﬂow problems to capture the inﬂuence of ﬁne-scale structures.
Formulation of local problems with appropriate localized sources and boundary
conditions can be problematic, particularly for anisotropic media [8]. The multiscale mortar ﬁnite element method [5] oﬀers a more robust approach for this
case, as the accuracy can be controlled via reﬁnement of the mortar space. The
M3 method uses a diﬀerent mechanism for controlling the accuracy via eﬃcient
incorporation of global information into the hierarchy of models. Numerical experiments demonstrate that the M3 method can maintain ﬁne-scale solution
accuracy, even with large coarsening factors, while signiﬁcantly reducing the
overall simulation time.
The paper outline is as follows. In Section 2, we present the mathematical
model of the inﬁltration problem. In Section 3, we describe essential features of
the M3 method. In Section 4, we illustrate the eﬀectiveness of the method with
the simulation of water inﬁltration into a layered anisotropic porous medium.

2

Mathematical Model of a Two-Phase Flow

We consider the ﬂow of two immiscible phases, non-wetting (e.g., air, denoted
a) and wetting (e.g., water, denoted w), in a two-dimensional domain subject
to gravity (see, e.g., [9,10]). The eﬀects of compressibility and capillary pressure
are neglected. Conservation of each phase implies,
∂Sj
+ ∇ · uj = −qj ,
j = a, w ,
(1)
∂t
where Sj and uj are the saturation and the velocity of phase j, respectively, and
the porosity, φ, is assumed constant. The Darcy velocity of phase j is given by,
φ

uj = −K · λj (∇pj − ρj g) ,

(2)

A M3 Method for an Anisotropic Inﬁltration Problem

687

where K is the absolute permeability tensor; λj = krj /μj is the relative mobility
of phase j, with krj the relative permeability and μj the viscosity; ρj is the
density and g is the gravitational acceleration vector.
Assuming that the two phases ﬁll the pore volume we have the constraint
Sa + Sw = 1. This may be combined with the sum over j of (1) to yield the bulk
ﬂuid conservation law,
(3)
∇ · u = qa + qw .
Here the total or bulk ﬂuid velocity, u = ua + uw , may be written in the form,
u = −K(λ∇p − (λa ρa + λw ρw )g),

(4)

where λ = λw + λa is the total mobility, and neglecting capillary pressure we
have set p = pa = pw to be the reference pressure. Thus, the two-phase system
that we model is comprised of an elliptic equation for the pressure, obtained by
substitution of (4) into (3), and a hyperbolic equation for the water saturation,
S = Sw , given by (1) with j = w. The initial and boundary conditions used to
close the model are given in Section 4.

3
3.1

Multiscale IMPES Method
Time Integration and Fine-Scale Discretization

We use the IMPES (IMplicit Pressure and Explicit Saturation) time integration
method. First, the pressure equation is solved to deﬁne the velocity ﬁeld. Second,
the hyperbolic equation for the water saturation is integrated explicitly using the
single-point upwind ﬁnite volume method [11].
To discretize the pressure we consider a polygonal partition of the domain Ω,
denoted Ωh , that is the union of the polygonal cells ei , i = 1, . . . , N . We apply
the Mimetic Finite Diﬀerence (MFD) method [12] to the ﬁrst-order form of the
pressure equation, given by (4) and (3). For each cell ei , we deﬁne one pressure
unknown, pi , which represents the integral average of p. Similarly, for each edge
j , we deﬁne one unknown, uj , which represents the average normal ﬂux u · n
(a scalar) through this edge. The MFD discretization of the pressure equation
reads
qng
M(Sn ) BT
un
.
(5)
n =
B
0
p
qn
Here n denotes the time step, M(Sn ) is the mass matrix computed using the
current saturation and B is the discrete divergence operator. The source qng captures Dirichlet data and the gravitational term in (4), and qn captures Neumann
data and the source/sink term in (3).
3.2

Two-level Method for the Pressure Equation

We begin by describing a two-level coarsening method, a building block for the
multilevel method. Let N0 = N , N1 ≤ cN0 , with 0 < c < 1, and
N1

EI ,

ΩH =
I=1

EI =

ei ,
i∈F (EI )

688

K. Lipnikov, D. Moulton, and D. Svyatskiy

Fig. 1. Schematic of the two steps of the two-level upscaling method for a 2 × 2 square
macro-cell. The cell-centered pressure unknowns are represented by circles, and the
velocity unknowns are represented by arrows. The ﬁrst step is an equivalent reduction,
while the second step is approximate.

where F (EI ) is a set of indices of ﬁne-grid cells forming the macro-cell EI .
We assume that the coarse-grid partition ΩH is non-overlapping and conformal.
Note that each macro-edge of a macro-cell EI is not necessarily a straight line,
as it is simply a collection of ﬁne-grid edges.
The two-level method consists of two steps, which are illustrated in Fig. 1. For
simplicity, we omit the time superscript n, and consider aggregation of four cells
into a single macro-cell. First, for each macro-cell, we eliminate all internal ﬂux
unknowns, and replace all internal pressure unknowns with a single pressure [7].
By construction, this single pressure on each macro-cell is the volume-weighted
average of the corresponding ﬁne-grid pressures:
PI =

i∈F (EI )

pi |ei |

i∈F (EI )

|ei |

.

This ﬁrst step is an equivalent modiﬁcation of the original system (see [1] for
details). The unknowns in the resulting system are shown in Fig. 1(middle).
The second step is to perform a conservative ﬂux coarsening procedure that
leaves one ﬂux unknown UJ per macro-edge LJ . Mass conservation dictates that
the coarse ﬂux on a macro-edge must be a weighted sum of the corresponding
ﬁne-grid ﬂuxes. This coarsening makes the ﬁnal structure of the reduced system,
shown in Fig. 1(right), identical to the original system. For each ﬁne-grid ﬂux
uj we introduce the coarsening parameter αj , as follows
uj = αj UJ .

(6)

This parameter is related to the ﬁrst moment of the ﬂux, and plays an important role in the M3 algorithm. It is used to deﬁne the interpolation of the ﬂux,
and it inﬂuences the coarse-scale pressure model. Suppose that the problem (5)
is solved exactly. Then we can calculate coarse-grid ﬂuxes UJ and derive coarsening parameters αj . Such parameters will make the upscaling procedure exact.
However, these parameters are functions of time, and accurately recomputing

A M3 Method for an Anisotropic Inﬁltration Problem

689

them at each time step would be equivalent in cost to the ﬁne-scale IMPES formulation. In the M3 method these parameters are derived from an approximate
solution of the ﬁne-scale problem (5) and we recompute these parameters only
when it is necessary to maintain accuracy (see Section 3.3).
3.3

Multilevel Hierarchy of Pressure Models

The two-level coarsening method results in coarse-grid equations that have the
same structure as the ﬁne-grid equations. Hence a multilevel algorithm follows naturally by applying this process recursively, and generates a hierarchy of
discrete upscaled pressure models. To maintain the accuracy of this hierarchy
without compromising the overall performance of the method, eﬃcient update
strategies are required. We have implemented the local and global update strategies described below.
Local Update Strategy. Here, the M3 method is focused on the total mobility.
The total mobility changes signiﬁcantly in the vicinity of a sharp water front.
The M3 method updates cell-based matrices (over the whole hierarchy) that are
aﬀected by these changes. More precisely, we use the criterion proposed in [13],
λn
1
≤ n−1 ≤ 1 + ελ ,
1 + ελ
λ
where ελ is the user deﬁned threshold, usually 0.1. If this condition is violated,
the cell-based matrices are updated.
Global Update Strategy. In simulations of ﬂow through porous media with
long correlation lengths, or strong anisotropy, local updates of the hierarchy are
not suﬃcient to maintain the accuracy. In these cases, the elliptic nature of the
pressure equation is accentuated and global information is needed. Therefore, we
recalculate ﬂux coarsening parameters during the simulation. These updates are
equi-distributed in time approximately every few hundred time steps. The impact
of these updates on the accuracy of the simulation is discussed in Section 4.
To maintain the overall performance of the simulation, an eﬃcient global approximation strategy for the α’s is needed. In [1] we proposed to leverage the
strength of a robust variational multigrid method for this purpose. The saddlepoint problem (5) is hybridized and reduces to a symmetric positive-deﬁnite
problem for the Lagrange multipliers. We use preconditioned conjugate gradient iterations with Ruge-St¨
uben algebraic multigrid [14] as the preconditioner,
denoted PCG(AMG), to solve approximately for the Lagrange multipliers. The
convergence tolerance εr is usually set to 10−2 − 10−3 , and is reached in only
a few (3-10) iterations. This approach captures critical changes in global ﬂow
behavior. In our original study [1] we demonstrated its eﬀectiveness for highly
heterogeneous porous media with long correlation lengths. Here we focus on the
challenging problem of inﬁltration into a strongly anisotropic medium.

690

4

K. Lipnikov, D. Moulton, and D. Svyatskiy

Numerical Experiments

In our numerical experiments we model the inﬁltration of water into an unsaturated two-dimensional porous medium, shown schematically in Fig. 2(a).
Initially the pore space is ﬁlled with air and a small residual water saturation.
The medium is composed of four sloping layers and two elongated inclusions,
and is partly motivated by the study in [15]. The interfaces of these features are
not aligned with the coordinate axes. A structured orthogonal mesh is mapped
onto these features so that each mesh cell has homogeneous properties. A 32×32
mesh is shown in Fig. 2(b), while the mesh used in our numerical experiments
is 128×128. Based on this mapping, we deﬁne a local coordinate system at the
centroid of each mesh cell that is aligned with the associated layer or inclusion.
In this local coordinate system the absolute permeability tensor is assumed to
be diagonal. The diagonal permeability tensors, as well as their anisotropy ratios, are presented in Table 1. Note that since the local coordinate axes are not
aligned with the Cartesian axes, the absolute permeability is a full tensor in the
Cartesian system.
q = 2cm/day

2m

Zone 5

8m

x

Zone 4
z
Zone 3

8m
10m

Zone 2
Zone 1
P = 1 atm

2m

Zone 6

10m

(a)

(b)

Fig. 2. Computational domain: (a) sloping layered structure with strongly anisotropic
inclusions in Zone 5 and 6, (b) a structured mesh 32x32 is mapped onto the stratigraphy.
The ﬁne 128x128 computational mesh is constructed in a similar way.

To complete the deﬁnition of the two-phase ﬂow model given in Section 2, we
deﬁne the relative permeability curves as,
krw (S) = (S ∗ )2 ,

kra (S) = (1 − S ∗ )2 ,

S∗ =

S − Swr
,
1 − Swr − Snwr

(7)

where S ∗ is the normalized wetting phase saturation, and Swr = Snwr = 0.1 are
the residual saturations of the wetting and non-wetting phases, respectively. In

A M3 Method for an Anisotropic Inﬁltration Problem

691

Table 1. Absolute hydraulic permeability tensors are diagonal in the local coordinate
system of each zone. Note that the anisotropy ratio is 100 within the inclusions (Zones 5
and 6 ) and 50 in Zone 2.
Zone
1
2
3
4
5
6

Kx (m2 )
−12

4 × 10
5 × 10−12
5 × 10−12
9 × 10−12
5 × 10−11
5 × 10−11

Kz (m2 )
−12

4 × 10
1 × 10−13
5 × 10−12
9 × 10−12
5 × 10−13
5 × 10−13

Kx /Kz
1
50
1
1
100
100

addition, the initial saturation is set to a constant, S(t = 0) = Swr = 0.1; the
porosity is constant, φ = 0.2; and the phase viscosities are μw = 1.0 × 10−3, and
μa = 1.8 × 10−5 , both in units of kg · (m · s)−1 . Boundary conditions are shown
schematically in Fig.2(a) with no-ﬂow everywhere except for the water source in
the upper left and the ﬁxed pressure in the bottom right. Fig. 2(b) shows the
dimensions of the domain (10m×10m), with the inﬁltration and ﬁxed pressure
conditions spanning 2m each.
To study the eﬃciency and accuracy of the M3 method for this inﬁltration
problem, we generate a reference solution using the standard IMPES method on
a 128 × 128 mesh. The saturation at T=6 days is plotted in Fig. 3, where lighter
colors represent higher water saturation. Here the rapid ﬂow along both highly
anisotropic inclusions is apparent. Also evident is the inﬂuence of gravity, which
has quickly drawn the ﬂuid down once it passed through the ﬁrst inclusion. In
fact, this arm is now reconnecting with the main ﬂow.

Fig. 3. Reference solution: water saturation proﬁle at T = 6 days computed on mesh
128x128 with the ﬁne-scale IMPES method

692

K. Lipnikov, D. Moulton, and D. Svyatskiy

Since the ﬁne-mesh is a logically structured quadrilateral mesh, the simple
aggregation strategy shown in Fig. 1 is readily applied. Thus, we coarsen by
a factor of two in each direction, recursively, until the desired total coarsening
factor has been reached. We set the mobility threshold, λ = 0.1, which controls
adaptive local updates of the hierarchy. Global updates of the ﬂux coarsening factors (i.e., the α’s) are made uniformly in time. The tolerance of the PCG(AMG)
iteration for these updates is r = 10−3 . The time step is adapted according to
the stability analysis developed by Coats [16].
We conduct two series of tests with this conﬁguration of the M3 method.
First we consider a ﬁxed total coarsening factor of 32 in each coordinate direction, which gives 4 × 4 coarse-grid for the pressure solve. We integrate to a time
of T=6 days, and examine the aﬀect of increasing the number of updates to
the α’s, from 12, to 60, and ﬁnally 120. The saturation at T=6 for these three
scenarios are shown in Fig4(a)-(c). Comparing the result with only 12 updates
in Fig4(a), to the reference solution in Fig.3, we see that a number of features
have evolved either too slowly (e.g., the ﬂow along the upper inclusion), or too
quickly (e.g., the closure of the unsaturated space under the lower inclusion). Increasing to 60 updates, Fig.4(b) begins to correct these problems, but there are
still signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the ﬂow along the upper inclusion. Finally, Fig.4(c)
shows that with 120 updates we recover accuracy comparable to the ﬁne-scale
solution, accurately capturing the highly anisotropic ﬂow through both the upper and lower inclusions. To understand the cost of these multiscale simulations
relative to the ﬁne-scale IMPES simulation, it is useful to note that these update
scenarios correspond to an average of 2972.7, 613.6 and 320.7 time-steps per update, respectively. Moreover, these updates are based on approximate solutions
computed using only 5-10 V-cycles each. The large total coarsening factor leads
to an overall speedup of more than 5 times, for all update scenarios considered
here. Overall, the computational cost of the pressure solver is now negligible,
compared to the cost of the transport.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 4. Multiscale solutions for diﬀerent numbers of updates: (a) coarsest mesh 4x4,
2972.7 time-steps per update, (b) coarsest mesh 4x4, 613.6 time-steps per update, (c)
coarsest mesh 4x4, 320.7 time-steps per update

A M3 Method for an Anisotropic Inﬁltration Problem

(a)

(b)

693

(c)

Fig. 5. Multiscale solutions for diﬀerent coarsening factors: (a) coarsest mesh 16x16,
275.5 time-steps per update, (b) coarsest mesh 8x8, 270.7 time-steps per update, (c)
coarsest mesh 4x4, 265.8 time-steps per update

In the second set of tests we integrate to T=6 days with the number of updates
of the α’s ﬁxed at 150, and consider diﬀerent total coarsening factors of 8, 16,
and 32. The results are shown in Fig.5(a)-(c) and conﬁrm that accuracy comparable to the ﬁne-scale solution has been achieved in all cases. This demonstrates
that with an appropriate number of updates the accuracy of multiscale solution
deteriorates very slowly as the total coarsening factor increases. The M3 method
is very ﬂexible and robust with respect to the total coarsening factor, and hence,
it may be applied to very large-scale simulations where other two-level upscaling
methods are insuﬃcient.

5

Conclusion

In this research we extended the M3 method to include gravity, and studied
its eﬀectiveness on a challenging anisotropic inﬁltration problem. We created a
porous medium with sloping non-uniform layers and two strongly anisotropic
inclusions, and we used a logically structured mapped grid to capture these
features. The M3 method performed very well, achieving accuracy comparable
to the ﬁne-scale solution, at a fraction of the computational cost. As in the
original study [1], updating the ﬂux coarsening parameters enabled the use of
large coarsening factors, a factor of 32 here, while maintaining both accuracy and
overall eﬃciency. This further highlights the importance of the global information
that is provided by the updates of the ﬂux coarsening parameters (the α’s).
In the future we plan to develop an error indicator that will guide a timeadaptive update strategy for these parameters. We anticipate that this advance
will further improve our ability to balance accuracy and eﬃciency. In addition we
are interested in extending this hierarchical methodology to upscale the transport
equation.

694

K. Lipnikov, D. Moulton, and D. Svyatskiy

Acknowledgements. Funded by the Department of Energy at Los Alamos National Laboratory under contracts DE-AC52-06NA25396 and the DOE Oﬃce of
Science Advanced Computing Research (ASCR) program in Applied Mathematical Sciences. The authors thank George Zyvoloski (LANL) for suggestions and
fruitful discussions relating to the numerical experiment.

References
1. Svyatskiy, D., Lipnikov, K., Moulton, J.D.: A Multilevel Multiscale Mimetic (M3 )
method for two-phase ﬂows in porous media. J. Comput. Phys. 227, 6727–6753
(2008)
2. Hou, T.Y., Wu, X.H.: A multiscale ﬁnite element method for elliptic problems in
composite materials and porous media. J. Comput. Phys. 134, 169–189 (1997)
3. Aarnes, J.E., Kippe, V., Lie, K.A.: Mixed multiscale ﬁnite elements and streamline
methods for reservoir simulation of large geomodels. Adv. Water Resour. 28, 257–
271 (2005)
4. Hughes, T.J.: Multiscale phenomena: Green’s functions, the dirichlet-to-neumann
formulation, subgrid scale models, bubbles and the origins of stabilized methods.
Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 127, 387–401 (1995)
5. Arbogast, T., Pencheva, G., Wheeler, M.F., Yotov, I.: A multiscale mortar mixed
ﬁnite element method. Multiscale Model. Simul. 6, 319–346 (2007)
6. Jenny, P., Lee, S.H., Tchelepi, H.A.: Multi-scale ﬁnite-volume method for elliptic
problems in subsurface ﬂow simulation. J. Comput. Phys. 187, 47–67 (2003)
7. Kuznetsov, Y.A.: Mixed ﬁnite element method for diﬀusion equations on polygonal
meshes with mixed cells. J. Numer. Math. 14, 305–315 (2006)
8. Lunati, I., Jenny, P.: Treating highly anisotropic subsurface ﬂow with the multiscale
ﬁnite-volume method. Multiscale Model. Sim. 6, 308–318 (2007)
9. Forsyth, P.A., Wu, Y.S., Pruess, K.: Robust numerical methods for saturatedunsaturated ﬂow with dry initial conditions in heterogeneous media. Adv. Water
Resour. 18, 25–38 (1995)
10. Lunati, I., Jenny, P.: Multiscale ﬁnite-volume method for density-driven ﬂow in
porous media. Computat. Geosci. 12, 337–350 (2008)
11. Forsyth, P.: A control volume ﬁnite element approach to NAPL groundwater contamination. SIAM J. Sci. Stat. Comput. 12, 1029–1057 (1991)
12. Brezzi, F., Lipnikov, K., Simoncini, V.: A family of mimetic ﬁnite diﬀerence methods on polygonal and polyhedral meshes. Math. Mod. Meth. Appl. S. 15, 1533–1551
(2005)
13. Jenny, P., Lee, S.H., Tchelepi, H.A.: Adaptive multiscale ﬁnite-volume method for
multiphase ﬂow and transport in porous media. Multiscale Model. Sim. 3, 50–64
(2004)
14. Ruge, J.W., St¨
uben, K.: Algebraic multigrid (AMG). In: McCormick, S.F. (ed.)
Multigrid Methods. Frontiers in Applied Mathematics, vol. 3, pp. 73–130. SIAM,
Philadelphia (1987)
15. Zyvoloski, G.A., Vesselinov, V.V.: An investigation of numerical grid eﬀects in
parameter estimation. Ground Water 44, 814–825 (2006)
16. Coats, K.H.: Impes stability: Selection of stable timesteps. SPE J 8, 181–187 (2003)

