Bending Virtual Spring-Damper:
A Solution to Improve Local Platoon Control
Jean-Michel Contet, Franck Gechter, Pablo Gruer,
and Abderraﬁaa Koukam
University of Technology of Belfort-Montbeliard (UTBM),
Systems and Transportation Laboratory (SET), Belfort, France
{jean-michel.contet,franck.gechter,
pablo.gruer,abder.koukam}@utbm.fr
http://set.utbm.fr/

Abstract. This article presents a local control approach to linear vehicle
platooning. Linear platoon systems are sets of vehicles that use local or
global perception capabilities to form a train conﬁguration, without any
hard grip element. Public transportation is beginning to interest in platoon systems as a technological base to conceive new services. The main
problem related to platoon system’s control corresponds with maintaining inter-vehicle distance. In literature, the platoon’s geometry control
problem is treated according to two approaches: global or local vehicle
control. This paper focuses on a local approach which does not require
sophisticated sensors and/or costly road equipment. This local control
approach intends to obtain very good global matching to arbitrary trajectories, only from local perception which consists in measuring the
vectorial distance between a given vehicle and its predecessor. The behavior of each platoon vehicle is determined from a physics inspired multi
agent interaction model based on a virtual spring-damper. Furthermore,
stability, platoon safety properties are checked using physics and mathematical proofs. Finally, simulation is used to measure trajectory error
and inter-vehicle distance evolution.
Keywords: Platoon, local control, stability proof, simulation.

1

Introduction

Platoon systems can be deﬁned as sets of vehicles that apply local or global perception capabilities to adopt and maintain a train-like or other geometric conﬁguration or formation. Train platoon conﬁgurations are also called linear platoons.
Control of vehicles’ movement within a linear platoon can be decomposed into
two main subproblems: longitudinal control and lateral control. Longitudinal
control consists in controlling braking and acceleration in order to stabilize the
distance between following vehicles. Lateral control consists in determining a
vehicle’s direction according to the platoon’s trajectory. Linear platoon conﬁgurations (Cf. Fig. 1) attract considerable attention as an approach to innovative
G. Allen et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2009, Part I, LNCS 5544, pp. 601–610, 2009.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

602

J.-M. Contet et al.

Fig. 1. Example of linear platoon simulation in front of System and Transportation
laboratory (SET)

transportation systems [1]. Their main impact [2], when applied to urban transportation, are: (i) reducing private car aﬄuence (i.e. avoiding traﬃc jams), (ii)
improving security thanks to automatic driving assistance (obstacle detection
and avoidance, automatic car parking,...). Platoon based transportation systems
are supposed to exhibit a set of convenient properties: adaptability to particular
user’s service requests, reconﬁgurability to accommodate a variable number of
resources, depending on demand and others.
From the scientiﬁc and technological point of view, platoon system’s control
includes some relevant challenges. The main problem related to platoon systems
relates to inter-vehicle distance control. In literature, the control of platoon’s
global geometry can be divided into two main approach: global or local vehicle
control. Within the global approaches each following vehicle is made aware of the
leading vehicle trajectory. This solution generally uses some positioning systems
such as GPS [9,10]. According to the global control strategy, the leading vehicle
broadcasts driving information (steering and speed) to each follower vehicle (i. e.,
the European Chauﬀeur project [11]). This approach yields very good trajectory
following but the global position perception by GPS or other technology implies
some road adaptation to avoid tunneling or canyon eﬀects. Moreover, a safe,
reliable communication network between vehicle is required. To concluded, the
global control approach gives the best results with strong constraints on sensors
(high cost), road adaptation and communication reliability between vehicles.
On the other hand, local control consists in computing the vehicle’s command
references (acceleration and direction) only from vehicle’s own perceptions. Most
of the lateral or longitudinal control strategies proposed within local approaches
based on PID (Proportional, Integral, Derivative) controllers [12,13,14] or other
regulation-loop based algorithm [11,15,16,17,23]. Some other works, propose to
base on simulated physical phenomena to calculate vehicle’s control references.
For instance, Gehrig and Stein [18] take inspiration from physical particle forces.
Soo-yeong Yi and Kil-to Chong [19] model immaterial grip by means of an
impedance control mechanism. The local approach has been criticized because
of their relatively poor trajectory matching and the accordion eﬀect they produce during platoon evolution. Indeed, naive local control approaches increase
the trajectory matching error since a follower vehicle tends to anticipate the
direction change. On the other hand the local approach, unlike the global one,

Bending Virtual Spring-Damper

603

does not require any sophisticated and highly fallible sensor and can be used in
any environment, without any road upgrading.
The paper proposes a local approach which improves the trajectory in any
curved trajectory. This approach is based on a virtual spring-damper which
bends to avoid curve anticipation. This paper is structured as follows. The Formal (behavior and interaction) Models are presented. Then, stability proofs are
presented using mathematical and physical points of view. Finally simulation
results are shown. This paper concludes by stressing main contributions and by
drawing some perspectives and future works.

2
2.1

Formal Models
Behavioral Model

In the approach presented here, an alternative to centralized control, vehicles are
autonomous entities in mutual interaction. Consequently, the intended embodiment for the local platoon control algorithms is a reactive multi-agent system
(RMAS). Reactive agents are relatively simple entities that behave based on their
own local perceptions [3]. The reactive approach is one of the most interesting
due to its robustness, adaptability and simplicity.
The behavior of each vehicle agent is determined from a physics inspired
model that minimizes interactions: each vehicle relates only with the preceding
one in the platoon. Steady platoon motion over arbitrary trajectories emerges
as a global result of individual behaviors. Statechart of Fig. 2 is a high level
representation of vehicle agent behavior. The global behavior integrates two

PERCEPTION
start || EndCompute
/ initPercept
Waiting

measuring
/ EndPercept
&& ReadAnglDist
VEHICLE CONTROL
EndPercept/
initCompute

Waiting

C

[distance =< safetyDistance]

[distance > safetyDistance]
Compute

Stop

/ computeSpeed && EndCompute

/ safetyStop && EndCompute

Fig. 2. Inserted vehicle agent behavior

604

J.-M. Contet et al.

parallels sub behaviors one corresponding to the perception and the other to the
action. The vehicle perception behavior correspond to the measure of the intervehicle vectorial distance using a sensor such as a laser range ﬁnder. When the
perception cycle is ended, the vehicle control behavior starts. The A distinction
is made between the inter-vehicle distance being under the safety distance or not.
The safety distance represents the distance required to perform a safety stop.
If the inter-vehicle distance is under the safety distance, function safetyStop is
called, which triggers a safety stop operation. If the distance is above the safety
distance, the function computeSpeed is called to compute the new vehicle’s speed
reference from the physics inspired interaction model.
2.2

Interaction Model

Physics inspired interaction model is used to specify the response of an agent,
as determined by its perceptions. The model proposed in this paper is based
on three virtual forces: spring force F s , damping force F d and surface friction
force F f , as in [5,6], augmented by torsion force F l , introduced to improve
the interaction model in curved trajectories, by adding a ﬂexion force to the
impedance control model. The virtual link forces are calculated from a classical
spring damper model with stiﬀness k, damping h and spring’s un stretched length
l0 . Each vehicle i is represented by its position X i = [xi ,yi ]. The mass of the
vehicle is denoted as m (we assume that each vehicle has the same mass). The
distance between vehicles is d = X n+1 − X n .
Longitudinal and lateral control references can be determined from just these
three forces (F s , F d , F f ), by calculating a new acceleration value. However,
simulations and experimentations [6] have exhibited an increase in trajectory
error from one vehicle to its follower. This error is due to limitations of the
linear impedance control model (Cf. Fig. 3 left). Figure 3 shows the acceleration anticipation and its consequence, trajectory error. To avoid this problem,
we propose to add a force, due to the ﬂexing of the impedance control. This
force counters the acceleration anticipation. This force is deduced from a virtual
moment, result of a ﬂexing spring M oment = km ∗ θ ∗ z with km the torsion
spring parameter and θ the spring angle of ﬂection. This force is computed as

Fig. 3. Acceleration problem and issue

Bending Virtual Spring-Damper

605

the vector product of the distance between the moment application point and
the preceding vehicle position (C.f Fig. 3 right).
Those forces allow to compute the vehicle’s acceleration, by using Newton’s
law of motion determined relatively to the preceding vehicle reference:
Spring force
F s = −k( X n+1 − X n − l0 )un+1
˙ n+1 − X
˙ n)
Damping force
F d = −h(X
˙
Friction force of the surface
F f = −λX n
Torsion force
F torsion = M A ∧ M oment

n

Acceleration value:
˙ n+1 −X
˙ n )+−λX
˙ n +M A∧M oment
m∗γ = −k( X n+1 −X n −l0 )un+1 n −h(X
(1)
By discrete integration, we can then determine speed and vehicle state (position and orientation). Then the command reference can be computed. In our
case, it consists in vehicle direction and speed 1 . Model parameters are determined by considering the vehicle’s characteristics and constraints.

3

Inter-Vehicle Distance Stability Analysis

Analysis of the interaction model by applying classical laws allows to prove that
the interaction model satisﬁes a set of platoon stability properties. The next
section presents two kinds of proofs: one applying a direct approach and the
other using an energetic point of view.
3.1

Platoon Stability Based on Transfer Function

Platoon stability is treated following the “string stability” problem which has been
studied in 1977 by Caudill and Garrard [8]. A platoon is said to be stable if, under no other excitations, the error magnitude decreases as it propagates along the
vehicle stream. Here, we proposed to prove the string stability relatively to longitudinal control. Formally speaking, if the transfer function of the system composed
of two successive vehicles exhibits a magnitude less or equal to 1, string stability is
obtained [21,22]. In order to verify this property, the control law of vehicles i and
i − 1 must be expressed with θ = 0 (Longitudinal control): let us suppose A equal
X(s)i
. From laws of motion applied to vehicles i and i − 1, we obtain
to X(s)
i−1
¨ i = −kX i − hX
˙i
m∗X
¨
˙ i−1
m ∗ X i−1 = −kX i−1 − hX

(2)

From these equations A can be deduced: A = s2h∗s+k
+h∗s+k .
String stability is guaranteed only if: |A(jω)| ≤ 1. This condition is veriﬁed with
2
k ≤ m∗ω
2 . This study proof that our system is stable to any frequency. The error
propagation will be attenuated through the platoon.
1

The choice of a command law takes into account the characteristics of the test vehicle
used in our laboratory.

606

3.2

J.-M. Contet et al.

Inter-Vehicle Distance Stability Proof Based on Energy

We intend to check if the stability2 of the system is kept in run time. To this
end we apply Lyapunov stability of motion conditions [7,20]. The system energy
results from the addition of kinetic and potential energies. We take vehicle i as
reference frame to express the energy.
E = Ekinetics + Epotential = Ekinetics + Epot (Fs ) + Epot (Ftorsion )
˙ X)
˙ + 1 ∗ k ∗ (X.X) +
E = 12 ∗ m ∗ (X.
F .dY dθ
2
X θ

(3)

By applying Lyapunov stability of motion conditions [7,20], we obtain
∂E(x,y,θ)
∂x
∂E(x,y,θ)
∂y

=

x22 (km sin(θ) − h)
y22 (km cos(θ) − h)

(4)

The derivative of Energy is negative if the angular h ∗ km is greater than
1 since θ ∈ [−π/2, π/2] . Applying Lyapunov stability of motion conditions
as in [6,4], shows that the system is stable when time tends to inﬁnity. Thus,
the distance between vehicles tends to the un stretched spring length when the
platoon moves without environmental inﬂuence, if the condition on rotation
angle (θ ∈ [−π/2, π/2]) is veriﬁed.

4

Experimentation Results

The physics inspired interaction model previously deﬁned was the base to the
speciﬁcation of the local platooning control algorithms. Based on those algorithms, simulation experiments were designed and performed to check a set of
safety platoon conditions. The simulations have been made on a simulator able
to take into account vehicle dynamics properties. The simulator has 3D graphic
display capabilities developed with OpenSceneGraph3 , in connection with a dynamics engine4 used to model the physical aspects (realistic model of a car
moving in a material environment.) The vehicle dynamics have been modeled
as a physical box with 4 shock absorber wheels. Vehicle models integrate the
dynamic properties of a real vehicle. Simulations have been realized in order to
visualize inter-vehicle distance and vehicle position evolution within a platoon
(C.f Fig. 4).
In order to perceive the environment and the preceding vehicle, the model of
a laser range ﬁnder has been included in the follower vehicles. The laser measurement system is based on a time-of-ﬂight measurement principle. Simulations
have been performed to verify the platoon evolution during startup and lateral
displacement situations.
2
3
4

platoon stability is represented by the stabilization of the distance between each
follower vehicle.
http://www.openscenegraph.org/projects/osg
http://www.ode.org/

Bending Virtual Spring-Damper

607

Fig. 4. 3 Dimensions simulator: platoon of 5 vehicles into a station (rays correspond
to the second vehicle laser range ﬁnder)

4.1

Platoon Startup

The simulation starts with 4 platoon vehicles at 1.6 meter of inter-vehicle
distance.
The ﬁrst vehicle is controlled by the user. Each follower vehicle follows the
preceding one, by executing its own perception-based behavior. Figure 5 shows
the inter-vehicle distance during the platoon evolution. The inter-vehicle distance value is initialized to 1.6 meter with a vehicle speed of 30 km/h then a
safety stop is performed. All inter-vehicle distances decrease to 0.5 meter. This
shows that there are no collisions but only some little oscillations in simulations.
4.2

Platoon Lateral Displacement

Platoon lateral displacement simulation (station entering and exiting) have been
realized to check that each vehicle follows correctly its predecessor.
Figures 6 illustrates platoon evolution during station exiting, by tracing both
the leader and follower trajectories. This ﬁgure exhibits a little increase in
	


	

	

Fig. 5. 3D simulator: inter-vehicle distance evolution

608

J.-M. Contet et al.
Y

X

Fig. 6. 3D simulator: Trajectory error during the station exit

Wheel rotation
(degree)
5.73
11.46
17.2
22.9
28.65

Curve
radius
18 m
9m
6m
4.5 m
3.6 m

medium maximum
error
error
12 cm
14 cm
30 cm
40 cm
50 cm
65 cm
55 cm
67 cm
67 cm
75 cm

Fig. 7. 3D simulator: trajectory error in curve

trajectory error from one vehicle to its follower. The maximum of this error
does not exceed the width of a wheel (C.f Fig. 6 left).
4.3

Relationship between the Curve and the Trajectory Error

The simulation presented next was intended to show the relationship between
the bend radius and the trajectory error as presented previously.
This simulation corresponds to the vehicle starting with a given wheel angle.
Then, the simulator computes the evolution of the distance error. Figures 7 and
table illustrates the error in the curve. This error increases with the magnitude
of the wheel angle.

5

Conclusion

The aim of this article was to present a better local platoon control based on the
bending of a virtual spring damper. Platoon control, as presented in this paper,
bases only on local perception capabilities. Each vehicle behavior is deduced from
a physics inspired interaction model an embodied in a reactive agent architecture.
The use of physics inspired forces enables an easier tuning of the interaction
model parameters and the adaptation to any kind of vehicle. Besides, the physic

Bending Virtual Spring-Damper

609

model has been used to prove platoon stability, by using classic physical proof
method: energy analysis. Analogously, another stability proof have been realized
following a transfer-function approach. To assert the transition from abstract
to concrete, simulations have been implemented to show the applicability of
the theoretical model. Some simulations have been made on a 3D simulator
which integrates vehicle dynamic properties (maximal speed and acceleration,
....). These experimentations exhibit a little curved trajectory error during the
platoon evolution and indicate that the presented approach improves platoon
quality. We are now working on the application of this model on real vehicles.
Moreover, we are also advancing into further research on the use of Formal
Models in order to prove some application properties and to ensure a zero default
embedded software for real vehicles.

References
1. Hedrick, J.K., Tomizuka, M., Varaiya, P.: Control issues in automated highway
systems. IEEE Control Systems Magazine, 21–32 (1994)
2. Debojyoti, M., Asis, M.: Pollution control by reduction of drag on cars and buses
through platooning. Int. J. of Environment and Pollution 30(1), 90–96 (2007)
3. Ferber, J.: Multi-Agent System: An Introduction to Distributed Artiﬁcial Intelligence. Addison Wesley Longman, Harlow (1999)
4. Gaud, N., Gechter, F., Galland, S., Koukam, A.: Holonic multiagent multilevel
simulation: Application to real-time pedestrians simulation in urban environment.
In: Twentieth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, IJCAI 2007,
pp. 1275–1280 (2007)
5. Contet, J.M., Gechter, F., Gruer, P., Koukam, A.: Physics inspired multiagent
model for vehicle platooning. In: International Conference on Autonomous Agents
and Multiagent Systems AAMAS (2007)
6. Contet, J.M., Gechter, F., Gruer, P., Koukam, A.: Multiagent System Model for
Vehicle Platooning with Merge and Split Capabilities. In: Third International Conference on Autonomous Robots and Agents, pp. 41–46 (2006)
7. Taylor, F., Lyapunov, A.M.: The general problem of the stability of the motion
(1992)
8. Garrard, W.L., Caudill, R.J.: Dynamic Behavior of Strings of Automated Transit
Vehicles. SAE Transactions, 1365–1378 (1977)
9. Martinet, P., Thuilot, B., Bom, J.: Autonomous Navigation and Platooning using
a Sensory Memory. In: International IEEE Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems, IROS 2006, Beijing, China (2006)
10. Myung, J.W., Jae Weon, C.: A relative navigation system for vehicle platooning.
In: SICE 2001, Proceedings of the 40th SICE Annual Conference, pp. 28–31 (2001)
11. Fritz, H.: Longitudinal and lateral control of heavy duty trucks for automated
vehicle following in mixed traﬃc: Experimental results from the CHAUFFEUR
project. In: IEEE Conference on Control Applications - Proceedings, vol. 2, pp.
1348–1352 (1999)
12. Ioannou, P., Xu, Z.: Throttle and brake control systems for automatic vehicle
following. IVHS Journal, 345 (1994)
13. Moskwa, J.J., Hedrick, K.J.: Nonlinear algorithms for automotive engine control.
IEEE Control Systems Magazine 10, 88–93 (1990)

610

J.-M. Contet et al.

14. Daviet, P., Parent, M.: Longitudinal and lateral servoing of vehicles in a platoon.
In: Proceedings of IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium, pp. 41–46 (1996)
15. Sheikholeslam, S., Desoer, C.A.: Longitudinal control of a platoon of vehicles with
no communication of lead vehicle information: A system level study. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology 42, 546–554 (1993)
16. Lee, H., Tomizuka, M.: Adaptive vehicle traction force control for intelligent vehicle
highway systems (IVHSs). IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics 50, 37–47
(2003)
17. Kehtarnavaz, N., Griswold, N.C., Lee, J.S.: Visual control of an autonomous vehicle
(BART)–The vehicle-following problem. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology 40, 654–662 (1991)
18. Gehrig, S.K., Stein, F.J.: Elastic bands to enhance vehicle following. In: IEEE
Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems, Proceedings, ITSC, pp. 597–
602 (2001)
19. Yi, S.-Y., Chong, K.-T.: Impedance control for a vehicle platoon system, Mechatronics (UK), vol. 15, p. 627 (2005)
20. Leipholz, H.: An introduction to the stability of Dynamic systems and rigid bodies
(1987)
21. Swaroop, D., Hedrick, J.K.: String stability of interconnected systems. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 41, 349–357 (1996)
22. Liang, C., Peng, H.: Optimal Adaptive Cruise Control with Guaranteed String
Stability (1998)
23. Klancar, G., Matko, D., Blazic, S.: Wheeled Mobile Robots Control in a Linear
Platoon. Journal of Intelligent and Robotic System (2008)

