Toward the New Generation of Intelligent
Distributed Computing Systems
Robert Schaefer1 , Krzysztof Cetnarowicz1 , Bojin Zheng2 ,
´ zy´
and Bartlomiej Snie˙
nski1
1

Department of Computer Science
AGH University of Science and Technology, Krakow, Poland
2
College of Computer Science
South-Central University for Nationalities, Wuhan, China

Abstract. This paper is an introduction to the works presented in Intelligent Agents and Evolvable Systems Workshop. The workshop focuses
on the various applications of agent-oriented systems, the roles of evolution and interactions of agents to build intelligent systems.

Agent-oriented system is the new attractive tool for high performance distributed
processing. Agent-oriented programming comprehends the ability to integrate
the resources of computer networks with the ﬂexibility of their governing. Software agent technology constitutes also the powerful tool for solving various decentralized decision making and technological problems. Multi-agent systems
have many connections to evolutionary computation. Evolutionary system can
be implemented in an agent-oriented fashion. Evolution is also regarded as one
of fundamental forms of adaptation of intelligent agents. The workshop Intelligent Agents and Evolvable Systems focuses on the various applications of agentoriented systems, the roles of evolution and interactions of agents to build intelligent systems.
The ﬁrst group of papers presented in the workshop concerns theoretical aspects of multi-agent systems, their formal descriptions, architectures, and applications of such systems to solving various engineering tasks as well.
Cetnarowicz in “From Algorithm to Agent” tries to introduce the relation
between the notion of the algorithm and the concept of the agent. His approach
helps to develop more formal description of the agent, and crucial properties of
the agent and the cooperative multi-agent system.
The paper “Agent-Based Model and Computing Environment Facilitating the
Development of Distributed Computational Intelligence Systems” by Byrski and
Kisiel-Dorohinicki proposes a simple formalism that describes the hierarchy of
multi-agent systems, which is particularly suitable for the design of a certain
class of distributed computational intelligence systems. The mapping between
the formalism and the existing computing environment AgE is also sketched out.
´ zy´
Snie˙
nski in “Agent Strategy Generation by Rule Induction in PredatorPrey Domain” shows the new rule induction method for generating artiﬁcial
agent strategy. This method was tested on a predator-prey domain. Experimental
results show that the learning process is fast.
G. Allen et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2009, Part II, LNCS 5545, pp. 813–814, 2009.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

814

R. Schaefer et al.

The next contribution “Multi-agent system for recognition of hand postures”
by Jurek, Flasi´
nski and My´sli´
nski show how we can apply the multi-agent system to develop a system for recognition of hand postures of the Polish Sign Language using a syntactic pattern recognition approach. They propose to make a
construction of a grammar within a parsable class ETPL(k) dubious.
˙
Ko´zlak, Konieczny, and Zabi´
nska in “Multi-agent crisis management in transport domain” present a multi-agent system for crisis management in transport
domain. The system enables to solve static and dynamic versions of transport
problem such as vehicle failures and traﬃc jams.
The paper “Agent-based environment for knowledge integration” written by
Ko´zlak, Zygmunt and Siwik shows an environment for the integration of knowledge expressed with the use of the ontology description languages. Presented
approach may enable to obtain access to services, which oﬀer knowledge contained in various distributed databases associated with semantically described
web portals.
The last paper of this group “The norm game – how a norm fails” by Kulakowski,
Dydejczyk and Rybak presents the simulations of the norm game between players at nodes of a directed random network. The authors suggested that the ﬁnal
boldness, i.e. the probability of norm breaking by the players, can vary with the
threshold value of the initial boldness which can be interpreted as a norm strength.
The simulation results are discussed in the context of the statistical data on crimes,
divorces and on the alcohol consumption.
Another group of papers is devoted to algorithms solving hard engineering problems controlled by the linguistic or biological and social inspired mechanisms.
Paszy´
nski, Paszy´
nska and Grabska in “Graph transformations for modeling
hp-adaptive Finite Element Method with mixed triangular and rectangular elements” present a new approach that allows to control the iterative, adaptive
process of solving partial diﬀerential equations by the system of graph grammar
productions. Such a linguistic model helps to exploit the concurrency in the each
step of the iteration. It may be also used for proﬁling the computation in the
cluster environment in order to gain the maximum speedup.
In the next paper of this group “Graph grammar based Petri nets model
of concurrency for self-adaptive hp-Finite Element Method with triangular elements” by Paszy´
nski, Paszy´
nska and Szymczak the Petri net is used as a model
of the graph grammar production scheduling. The similar technique of hp–FEM
computation controlling as in the previous paper is applied in the case of rectangular meshes.
Barabasz, Schaefer and Paszy´
nski in “Handling ambiguous inverse problems
by the adaptive genetic strategy hp–HGS” deliver the socially inspired, multideme, genetic algorithm for eﬀective solving of inverse, parametric problems
for partial diﬀerential equations. The accuracy of solving direct problem is dynamically adjusted to the accuracy of evaluating inverse problem error, which
additionally decreases the total computational cost.

