Atmospheric and Oceanic
Computational Science
First International Workshop
Adrian Sandu1 , Amik St-Cyr2 , and Katherine J. Evans3
1

1

Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
sandu@cs.vt.edu
2
National Center for Atmospheric Research
amik@ucar.edu
3
Oak Ridge National Laboratory
evanskj@ornl.gov

The Workshop

The ﬁrst workshop on Atmospheric and Oceanic Computational Science brings
together computational and domain scientists who develop computational tools
for the study of the atmosphere and oceans. These tools are essential for understanding and prediciting weather, air and water pollution, and the evolution of
the planet’s climate. The dynamics of the atmosphere and of the oceans is driven
by a multitude of physical processes and is characterized by a multiple spatial
and temporal scales. Moreover, the computations are very large scale: present
day models track the time evolution of tens of millions to tens of billions variables. These factors make atmospheric and oceanic simulations a challenging,
vibrant research ﬁeld with a tremendous impact on society at large.
Topics covered in this symposium include new methods for spatial and temporal discretization, parallel and high performance computing, advances with
existing models, and data assimilation and observation targeting algorithms.

2

The Papers

Ten papers have been selected for oral presentations.
A Fully Implicit Jacobian-Free High-Order Discontinuous Galerkin Mesoscale
Flow Solver by A. St-Cyr, D. Neckels proposes a discretization of the compressible Euler equations using the discontinuous Galerkin approach on collocated
Gauss type grids. Time discretization uses a stiﬄy stable Rosenbrock W-method
is combined with an approximate evaluation of the Jacobian.
Time acceleration methods for convection on the cubed sphere by R. Archibald,
K. Evans, J. Drake, and J. White discusses new algorithms to overcome the
scalability barriers in climate simulations. A combination of multiwavelet discontinuous Galerkin method with exact linear part time-evolution schemes can
overcome the time barrier for advection equations on a sphere.
Comparison of Traditional and Novel Discretization Methods for Advection Models in Numerical Weather Prediction by C. Mavriplis, S. Crowell, D. Williams, and
G. Allen et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2009, Part II, LNCS 5545, pp. 241–242, 2009.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

242

A. Sandu, A. St-Cyr, and K.J. Evans

L. Wicker compares CPU time, number of degrees of freedom and overall behavior of solutions for ﬁnite diﬀerence, spectral diﬀerence and discontinuous Galerkin
methods on several model advection problems relevant to numerical weather prediction.
A non-oscillatory advection operator for the compatible spectral element method
by M.A. Taylor, A. St-Cyr,and A. Fournier presents the development of a monotone
or sign-preserving advection operator based on a spectral element formulation,
and implemented via the highly scalable cubed-sphere atmospheric dynamical
core package HOMME into the Community Climate System Model (CCSM).
Simulating Particulate Organic Advection Along Bottom Slopes to Improve Simulation of Estuarine Hypoxia and Anoxia by P. Wang and L.C. Linker presents
an approach to move volatile solids from the shoals to the channel by simulating
movement of particulate organics due to slopes based on an example in the Chesapeake Bay eutrophication model. Implementations for the simulation of this behavior in computer parallel processing are discussed.
Explicit time stepping methods with high stage order and monotonicity properties by E.M. Constantinescu and A. Sandu introduces a three and a four order
explicit time stepping methods with high stage order and favorable monotonicity
properties. The proposed methods are based on general linear methods, and are
generalizations of both Runge-Kutta and linear multistep methods.
Improving GEOS-Chem Model Tropospheric Ozone through Assimilation of
Pseudo Tropospheric Emission Spectrometer Profile Retrievals by K. Singh, P. Eller,
A. Sandu, K. Bowman, D. Jones, and M. Lee discusses a recently-developed adjoint model of GEOS-Chem global chemical transport model, and 4D-variational
data assimilation studies used to improve of 2006 summer time distribution of
global tropospheric ozone through assimilation of pseudo proﬁle retrievals from
the Tropospheric Emission Spectrometer (TES).
Chemical Data Assimilation with CMAQ: Continuous vs. Discrete Advection
Adjoints by T.Y. Gou, K. Singh, and A. Sandu discusses a new implementation
of the adjoint of Community Multiscale Air Quality (CMAQ) modeling system.
The construction of discrete adjoint code is derived from the forward model code
with the aid of automatic diﬀerentiation.
A Second Order Adjoint Method to Targeted Observations by H.C. Godinez
and D.N. Daescu studies the role of the second order adjoints in observation
targeting strategies. The dominant eigenvectors of the Hessian matrix indicate
the directions of maximal error growth for a given targeting functional. These
vectors are a natural choice to be included in the targeting strategies given their
mathematical properties.
A scalable and adaptable solution framework within components of the Community Climate System Model by K.J. Evans, D.W.I. Rouson, M.A. Taylor, A.G.
Salinger, W. Weijer, and J.B. White III implements a a framework for a fully
implicit solution method into the High Order Methods Modeling Environment
(HOMME), and the Parallel Ocean Program (POP) model of the global ocean.
Both of these models are components of the Community Climate System Model
(CCSM).

