Bioinformatics’ Challenges to Computer Science:
Bioinformatics Tools and Biomedical Modeling
Mario Cannataro1 , Rodrigo Weber dos Santos2 , and Joakim Sundnes3
1

University Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy
cannataro@unicz.it
2
Federal University of Juiz de Fora, Brazil
rodrigo.weber@ufjf.edu.br
3
Simula Research Laboratory, Norway
sundnes@simula.no

Abstract. The second edition of the workshop on Bioinformatics’ Challenges to Computer Science aimed to discuss the gap between bioinformatics tools and biomedical simulation and modeling. This short paper
summarizes the papers accepted for the workshop, focusing on bioinformatics applications at the genomics and molecular level as well as
simulation and management at the biomedical level, and gives a brief
outlook on future developments.
Keywords: Bioinformatics, Data Management and Integration, Modelling and Simulation of Biological Systems, Data Visualization.

1

Bioinformatics - An Overview

Bioinformatics[1,2] is an interdisciplinary ﬁeld linking biology with computer science. In the strictest interpretation of the term, see e.g. http://www.wikipedia.org,
bioinformatics is deﬁned as the application of computer science to advance the
ﬁeld of molecular biology. However, for this workshop we have adopted a broader
deﬁnition, which covers development of advanced algorithms and computational
tools to study biomedical problems in general. In addition to classical bioinformatics, this includes the development and use of mathematical models to
describe the aggregate behavior of cells, tissues, organs and organ systems, a
ﬁeld often referred to as systems biology or integrative biology.
Bioinformatics is a ﬁeld under rapid development, as improvements of both
computer hardware, algorithms and data acquisition allow the construction and
analysis of increasingly complex and detailed models and datasets. However, although substantial progress has been made, the potential beneﬁt from computer
science tools in biomedical science is huge, and still far from being fully utilized.
Continuing along the track started with its ﬁrst edition [3], the current edition of
the workshop on Bioinformatics’ Challenges to Computer Science aims to discuss
the gap between bioinformatics tools and biomedical simulation and modeling.
G. Allen et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2009, Part I, LNCS 5544, pp. 807–809, 2009.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

808

2

M. Cannataro, R.W. dos Santos, and J. Sundnes

Goals

The aim of this workshop was to bring together scientists from computer and
life sciences, to discuss future directions of research. As noted above, our broad
deﬁnition of the bioinformatics term essentially divides current research into
two categories; one dealing with data management and analysis on the genetic
and molecular scale, and another dealing with development and application of
advanced system level models. While both of these branches have obtained considerable progress in the past, and may continue to do so for many years to
come, a closer interaction between the two groups hold an even larger potential.

3

Workshop Summary

The papers of the present workshop cover a broad range of applications. The ﬁrst
session is devoted to applications of simulation studies and signal analysis. Indolﬁ
et al. focus on the role of real-time image processing in medicine and present a
novel software tool able to assist the physician during pre-implant analysis and
thus supporting an optimal stent choice. The paper by Peters et al. deals with
the application of electrical impedance tomography to assess cardiac ejection
fraction. Numerical methods based on biophysical models are used to analyze
the potential of this tool. The third paper of the session, by Palumbo et al.,
describes the integrated analysis of diﬀerent biomedical signals of the lower limb
to characterize various physical exercises. Muscles activity and training eﬀectiveness were evaluated by monitoring electromiography (EMG) signals, metabolic
data, oxygen uptake and heart rate, with the overall aim to develop a system
able to manage diﬀerent information coming by various electronic devices.
The papers of the second session focus on the application of computer science
tools in genetics and molecular biology. The paper by Zhang et al. focuses on
an important research problem in DNA microarray data analysis, the discovery
of gene co-regulatory relationships, and describes an improved algorithm for
the analysis of gene co-regulation. Menif et al. address the Haplotype Assembly
Problem (HAP), an important aspect of Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNP)
analysis, and present a set of algorithms for Minimum Fragment Removal based
on the processing of strings. The paper by Miceli et al. addresses the protein
structure prediction problem, central for the understanding of protein function,
and compares several available automatic secondary structure prediction tools.
In addition to the listed papers, the workshop includes time slots for discussion
of future directions in bioinformatics. These slots will be used for discussing
potential future development of the presented research results, with particular
focus on potential directions of mutual beneﬁt and joint interest.

4

Conclusions and Outlook

Bioinformatics tools hold a huge potential for use in medical research and clinical
practice. Both the analysis of genetic information oﬀered by classical bioinformatics and the study of systems behavior with detailed mathematical models

Bioinformatics’ Challenges to Computer Science: Bioinformatics Tools

809

may lead to huge beneﬁts for drug development and personalized health care.
However, the full potential of the ﬁeld can only be achieved by successfully combining these two branches of the ﬁeld. Aquisition and analysis tools for genetic
data may be combined with system level models to perform patient speciﬁc computer simulations of organs and organ systems. This link from the Genome to
the Physiome (see for instance the NSR (National Simulation Resource) Physiome Project - http://nsr.bioeng.washington.edu/) has been deﬁned as a future
grand challenge of biomedical research, and is subject of substantial research
world wide. In the discussion slots of the current workshop we will attempt to
provide a link between the presented research results, and to identify potential collaborative projects that would help to bridge the gap between the two
branches.
Acknowledgements. We would like to thank the members of the program
committee for the invaluable assistance on reviewing the papers and the organizers of ICCS for promoting this workshop.

References
1. Jones, N.C., Pevzner, P.A. (eds.): An Introduction to Bioinformatics Algorithms.
MIT Press, Cambridge (2004)
2. Cohen, J.: Bioinformatics - an introduction for computer scientists. ACM Computing Surveys 36, 122–158 (2004)
3. Cannataro, M., Romberg, M., Sundnes, J., Santos, R.W.d.: Bioinformatics’ challenges to computer science. In: Bubak, M., van Albada, G.D., Dongarra, J., Sloot,
P.M.A. (eds.) ICCS 2008, Part III. LNCS, vol. 5103, pp. 67–69. Springer, Heidelberg
(2008)

