Simulating Particulate Organic Advection along Bottom
Slopes to Improve Simulation of Estuarine
Hypoxia and Anoxia
Ping Wang1 and Lewis C. Linker2
1

University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science, Chesapeake Bay Program,
410 Severn Avenue, Annapolis, MD 21403, USA
pwang@chesapeakebay.net
2
US Environmental Protection Agency/CBPO, 410 Severn Ave., Suite 109,
Annapolis, MD 21403, USA
linker.lewis@epa.gov

Abstract. In a coupled hydrodynamic and water quality model, the hydrodynamic model provides forces for movement of simulated particles in the water
quality model. A proper simulation of organic solid movement from shallow to
deep waters is important to simulate summer hypoxia in the deepwater. It is
necessary to have a full blown particle transport model that focuses organic particulates’ resuspension and transport. This paper presents an approach to move
volatile solids from the shoals to the channel by simulating movement of particulate organics due to slopes based on an example in the Chesapeake Bay eutrophication model. Implementations for the simulation of this behavior in
computer parallel processing are discussed.
Keywords: hydrodynamic model, estuarine model, movement along slope, particulate organic transport, parallel processing.

1 Introduction
The Chesapeake Bay Estuarine (Water Quality and Sediment Transport) Model is
designed to simulate the current estuarine eutrophication in the Chesapeake and to
examine nutrient and sediment reductions to restore water quality [1]. It simulates
algal blooms due to excessive nutrient inputs, and the subsequent decay of organics
and reduction in dissolved oxygen in deep water, particularly in the middle channel of
the main-stem Bay and tidal tributaries in the summer. Volatile, or reactive organics
in the Bay are in dissolved and particulate forms and the particulate organics are also
referred to as volatile solids or volatile suspended solids. We propose that volatile
solids deposition to the channel bed come from other areas of the estuary, including
the near-shore shallow waters, other then solely algal production and settling in the
water column overlying the deep channel [2, 3]. This is based on the observation that
a simple mass balance of the algal production over the deep channel of the mainstem
Chesapeake is insufficient for generation of the observed anoxia in the deep water.
G. Allen et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2009, Part II, LNCS 5545, pp. 283–292, 2009.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

284

P. Wang and L.C. Linker

The Water Quality and Sediment Transport Model is coupled with the Estuarine
Hydrodynamic Model [4] which provides forcing for particle transport in water
columns. The hydrodynamic model also provides bottom shears stress for the simulation of scour and resuspension of sediment from bed. Besides movement due to hydrodynamic forces, sediment can also sink down and move along bed slope due to
gravity [5]. The Chesapeake Bay Estuarine Model assigned settling velocities to
simulate sinking from upper model cells toward sediment beds for different sediment
classes, however without considering movement along bed slope [6]. The resuspension due to bottom shear is under development for inorganic solids, while the resuspension for organic solids are only partially simulated by reducing net settling rates
based on model calibration. In this context, once organic solids settle on bed, they will
no-longer be scoured or resuspended. This causes insufficient transport of organic
solids from shallow to deep waters and causes insufficient oxygen demand to simulate
the observed anoxia and hypoxia. A remedy to this in the earlier phase of model, i.e.,
with a grid of 13,000 cells [6], was by adjusting some parameters through model
calibration that yielded reasonable simulation of dissolved oxygen (DO) as shown in
Figure 1. The circle symbols are observed DO and the dots are simulated DO in the
13,000-cell model. However, as the model grid was refined by an order of magnitude
to the current 57,000 cells many shallow water and shoal cells became less connected
with deep water and the adjusted parameters in the old model calibration became less
optimal, as pointed out by Michael Kemp of the University of Maryland Center for
Environmental Science (personal communication) and illustrated by Figure 2. Here
we assume that the coarse grid has two cells horizontally, from the right shoal to the
channel (Figure 2a); while the finer grid has four cells horizontally (Figure 2b). The
materials from the areas of downward arrows can reach the channel bottom cell (letters A and B) more easily for the coarser grid than for the finer grid. This is one of
the reasons causing insufficient organic material delivered to deep waters. Even the
new refined grid model tried to optimize the same parameters as those in the coarse
grid, the calibration of oxygen demand in deep waters is degraded [7]. The plus symbols in Fig. 1 represent the DO simulation in the refined 57,000 cell model.

Fig. 1. DO simulations in a coarse grid model (13k grid) and after grid refinement (57k grid)

Simulating Particulate Organic Advection along Bottom Slopes to Improve Simulation

285

Channel cells

a)
Shoal cells
A

Channel cells

b)
Shoal cells

B

Fig. 2. Schematic coarser (a) and finer (b) grids, showing differences in potential receiving
materials from the surface (the downward block-arrows) by channel bed cells (A and B) of the
two grids: Cell A of the coarser grid has more chance to receive input materials than Cell B of
the finer grid

In general, if a model simulates well on major mechanisms, a refinement of grid
would improve simulation. The degradation after grid refinement may be due to the
model discounts some important mechanisms which cannot be simulated well by
some adjusted parameters used in the initial coarse grid. This paper explores a method
to simulate one of the missing mechanisms, i.e., movement of volatile solids along
slopes, so that to better simulate volatile solid movement and oxygen demand in
channel for the Chesapeake Bay Estuarine Model.

2 Method
2.1 Basic Model
The Chesapeake Bay Estuarine Model, a coupled 3-dimensional finitedifference/finite-volume CH3D Hydrodynamic Model and CE-QUAL-ICM Water
Quality Model, is used. The model grid uses the Z-grid structure. In this paper, the
implementation of slope movement for model is based on the refined 57k grid.
Daily loads to the model were provided by the Chesapeake Bay Watershed Model.
The water quality model simulates major nutrient cycles, including algal growth and
decay, involving 36 state variables. Particle movement in the water is controlled by
hydrodynamic forces of advection. The CH3D Hydrodynamic Model simulates
physical processes impacting estuarine circulation and vertical mixing, that includes
tides, freshwater inflows, wind, density effect by salinity and temperature, turbulence,
and the Coriolis effect [8]. The basic equations are:

286

P. Wang and L.C. Linker

∂u/∂x + ∂v/∂y + ∂w/∂z = 0
∂u/∂t + ∂u2/∂x + ∂uv/∂y + ∂uw/∂z = f v - 1/ρ ∂P/∂x + ∂[AH ∂u/∂x ] /∂x +
∂[AH ∂u/∂y] /∂y + ∂[AV ∂u/∂z ] /∂z
∂v/∂t + ∂v2/∂y + ∂uv/∂x + ∂vw/∂z = -f u - 1/ρ ∂P/∂y + ∂[AH ∂v/∂x ] /∂x +
∂[AH ∂v/∂y ] /∂y + ∂[AV ∂v/∂z ] /∂z
∂P/∂z = - ρ g
where, (u, v, w) = velocities in (x, y, z) directions, t = time, f = Coriolis parameter,
ρ=density, P=pressure, AH = horizontal turbulent, AV,= vertical turbulent, and g =
gravitational acceleration.
For sediment material, S, to transport:
∂S/∂t + ∂uS//∂x + ∂vS/∂y + ∂wS/∂z = ∂[KH ∂S/∂x ] / ∂x + ∂[KH ∂S/∂y ] /∂y
+ ∂[KV ∂S/∂z ] /∂z
where, KH = eddy coefficient for horizontal turbulent, and KV = eddy coefficient for
vertical turbulent. The vertical turbulence is handled by using the concept of eddy
viscosity and diffusivity to represent the velocity and density correlation terms. They
are computed from main flow characteristics using a method developed by Donaldson
[9] and Sheng [10].
Besides the transport, settling of volatile solids in the water column is calculated:
∂S/∂t = [transport by hydrodynamic forces] + SU (W/dz) – S (W/dz)
where, SU = solid in a cell above, W = settling velocity in water column, and dz = cell
thickness.
Since the resuspension of volatile solid by bottom shears stress is not simulated, a
remedy is set for the cells that interface the bed sediment: use net settling velocity,
Wnet, which is after a subtraction from the settling velocity (W) to account for the unsimulated resuspension. The Wnet is obtained empirically through model calibration.
Thus, the volatile solid in the bottom cell is calculated by:
∂S/∂t = [transport by hydrodynamic forces] + SU (W/dz) – S (Wnet / dz)
The movement of materials in water columns is through the faces connecting
model cells. In a Σ-grid, bottom cells are connected with vertical faces. While in a
Z-grid, bottom cells are not always connected. There, cells among layers are divided by horizontal faces (Fig. 2), including the bottom face of bottom cells even
there is slope on bed (as the bold curves in Figure 3). The grid uses a different
number of layers to represent different water depths. Particle transport by hydrodynamic forces from a bottom cell (e.g., A) to another bottom cell (e.g., C) in the adjacent water column where there is a layer difference as in this example, the particle
will first go parallel to the adjacent cell of the same layer (e.g., B) through a vertical
face, then move downward to the bottom cell through a horizontal face (as by the
line-arrows a->b->c).

Simulating Particulate Organic Advection along Bottom Slopes to Improve Simulation

287

2.2 Adding Movement along Slopes
The initial Chesapeake Bay Water Quality Model does not simulate movement of
volatile organic solids along bottom slopes. We add an additional simulation of particulate organic movement along bottom slopes besides their movement by hydrodynamic forces.
We need to connect bottom cells and determine slope directions. This task is easier to implement in a Σ-grid, since the bottom cells are physically connected.
In a Z-grid the bottom cells are not always physically connected by their faces.
The movement along slopes among bottom cells (star symbol in Figure 3) is through
direct links, as shown by the block-arrows in Figure 3. In order to implement movement along the bottom slopes in a Z-grid we need to set up computationally an image
of the bottom to surface cells. Surface cells are in the same layer and are always connected. The looping computation of solid movement among bottom cells can use the
linkages among their counterpart surface cells’ image. Nevertheless, for the transport
in water columns among bottom cells, materials still need to go the “detour” routes
(Fig. 3, line-arrows).
The degrees of slope angles affect the movement along slopes. The angle of slope
(α) can be determined from the distance between centers of two adjacent cells (c) and
their bathymetry difference (d): α = tan-1(d/c).
Channel cells

Shoal cell
B

b

C

c

a

A

Fig. 3. Schematic graph showing transport simulation among bottom cells in a z-grid. Note:
Letters a, b, c with line-arrows are the hydrodynamic movements from cell A to cell C. The
movement along slopes among bottom cells (stars) can be implemented through direct links by
the block-arrows, which was not simulated by the existing model.

The weight of a solid particle, minus its buoyancy, is the net downward force, f1 =
m*g – b, where m is mass of solid, g is gravitational acceleration, b is buoyancy =
(m/ρs)*ρw*g,= m*g*ρw/ρs, ρw is density of water, and ρs is the density of the solid.
The resultant force along the slope, f2 = f1 * sin(α). The net force along the slope, f3 =
f2 – R, where R is resistance by water and bed. The acceleration of the movement (a)
by the net force along the slope is: a =f3/(m*g - b)/g = f3/[m(1 - ρw/ρs)]. The travel
distance (s) in a time step (t) if the initial velocity assumes zero: s = a*t * t /2 = t2 *
f3/[2m(1 - ρw/ρs)]. The horizontal moving distance in the Z-grid, h = s * cos(α). The
ratio of h / c is proportional to the fraction of the materials moving from shoal cells
toward center cells. Thus, the model is able to simulate an additional movement of
solid particles along bed slopes.

288

P. Wang and L.C. Linker

We compare DO simulation by the 13k calibration, the initial 57k model (Figure 1),
and the improved 57k model with movement along slopes (Figure 4, presented later).
2.3 Slope Setup in Grid Computation
Slopes exist among all bed cells. We may simulate movement along slopes for all bottom cells. Alternatively, we may only consider significant slopes, such as across channels, since we mainly want to improve DO simulation in channel and slope is significant
across channels. Correspondingly, there are two options to compute movement along
slopes among bottom cells: 1) referencing all bottom cells and considering slopes between the reference cell and its adjacent cells; 2) referencing channel bottom cells and
considering slopes to each reference cell from its shoal cells on two sides.
In the first option, for each reference cell (Table 1, column 1), there are maximum
4 adjacent cells (columns 2-5; zero cell number means the corresponding adjacent cell
does not exist at grid boundary). A reference cell can either receive input from, or
provide output to, its adjacent cells, depending on slope toward to or away from the
cell. The computation of transport along slope between two cells loops all bottom
cells (i.e., the reference cells) for four rounds for their four sides of adjacent cells. To
avoid double counting, the transport between two cells is computed only when the
reference cell receives input, while the associated adjacent cell reduces the same
amount. The disadvantage of this option is that it needs to loop all bottom cells which
prolongs computing time.
The second option does not consider all slopes in the model grid. We only reference
channel cells (Table 2, Column 2; Column 1 is total shoal cells on one side from the
channel cell). Then, we list the corresponding shoal cells, from deep to shallow for each
side (Table 2, begin from Column 3). The cells one-by-one receive materials from its
shallower adjacent ones. Since there are generally two shoal sides for a channel cell,
therefore, a channel cell appears twice in Column 2, while the shoal cells only appear
once. Note: if there are two dips in one transact, then they should be separated from the
shallowest cell between the dips, and each dip cell is a reference cell.
Table 1. Bottom cell linkages for slope by referencing all bottom cells

Reference
cell
1
2
..
..
102
..
..
..
11064

Cell (left
adjacent)
101
102

Cell (right
adjacent)
571
572

Cell (upper
adjacent)
0
1

Cell (lower
adjacent)
2
3

***

***

***

***

0

10002

11063

0

Note: Numbers for the cells are not actual. 0 indicates no corresponding adjacent cell,
due to the adjacent to grid boundary.

Simulating Particulate Organic Advection along Bottom Slopes to Improve Simulation

289

Table 2. Bottom cell linkages for slope by referencing channel bottom cells

Total
side cells
4
2
5
3

3
5

Reference
channel cell
201
201
232
232
..
..
..
999
999

Cells from channel to shoal (on either one
side) ----------------------------------------Æ
410
511
620
721
121
98
440
541
649
751
862
151
102
74

***
***

***
***

***
***

***

***

Note: Numbers for the cells are not actual.

2.4 Implementing Parallel Processing
The Chesapeake Bay Water Quality Model parallel processing used domain decomposition for model cells. The decomposition is based on the numbers of total surface
cell, total model cell, and total faces that connect cells, while does not specifically
count channel cells and their shoal cells. Note: each bottom cell has a corresponding
surface cell, therefore, bottom cells can be referred using surface cells. In this context, looping bottom cells in a decomposed domain can be expressed with looping
surface cells.
In the first option of referencing cells in section 2.3, it is relatively easy to decompose the cells in Table 1 into domains, since it deals with all surface cells in the
ordinary order. Therefore, it can use the general decomposition routine in the main
program. However, because the surrounding 4 cells do not always split into a same
domain, each of the four side cells needs to be handled separately to associate with
the reference cells.
The second option of referencing cell focuses on channel cells and their shoal cells.
This method saves computing time, but additional efforts and cautions are needed in
domain decomposition, since the channel (referencing) cells are not specified in the
main program’s domain decomposition, and the lateral cells in one profile of a reference channel cell may be decomposed into different domains. A reference cell in a
decomposed Table 2 may not necessarily be a channel cell, but should be the deepest
cell among the cells in the decomposed profile in that domain.

3 Results and Discussion
3.1 Comparing DO Simulations by Slope Movement and the Initial Model
The plus symbols in Figure 4 represent the simulation of DO by the initial 57k grid
model calibration, and the stars are the DO simulation after the implementation of the
simulation of slope movement. The simulation of volatile solids’ movement along the

290

P. Wang and L.C. Linker

bottom slope yields lower DO (the star symbols) than the simulation by the initial
57K grid model (the plus symbols), and closer to the observed (the circle symbols).
Consistently, the amounts of volatile solids in channel cells are higher in the revised
57k model than the initial 57k model. This supports the idea that the inability in the
simulation of anoxia in the channel may be due in part to the lack of transport of volatile suspended sediments from the shallows to the channel, and that implementing
movement of particulate organics along slopes can improve the simulation. In models
of this type without an explicit simulation of resuspension and transport of particulate
organics this approach may be important in order to represent the role of primary production and its fate [11].

Fig. 4. DO simulation in 57k grid, before and after the simulation of slope movement

3.2 Significance of Slope Movements along Axial versus Lateral Directions
In option 2 of selecting cells we only reference channel bed cells and calculate the
movement toward channel from the shoal in the lateral direction, but not the slope
movement along the axial direction. This is based on the following two facts. A) The
Bay’s bathymetry shows that slope gradients are less significant along the axial direction than the lateral direction. B) The hourly hydrodynamic flow fields in the main
stem bay and its tributaries indicate that the flow vectors along the channel axial direction are dominant, about 3 to 5 times the lateral direction, except during full high or
low tide. Mass fluxes by currents are stronger along the axial direction than laterally.
The lateral direction generally has weaker flow and steeper slopes than the axial direction, therefore, slope movement becomes importance in material movement in the
lateral direction, while, material movement along the axial direction can be well simulated by water flow alone.

Simulating Particulate Organic Advection along Bottom Slopes to Improve Simulation

291

3.3 Exploring Other Factors Regulating Transport from Shoal to Channel
The improvement of the DO simulation by slope movement in this paper is a preliminary study and further analysis is necessary. We can also explore other methods that
may also promote drift of organic suspended solids to the channel, for example, adjustment of settling velocity.
A slower settling rate allows material to suspend at the water column for a longer
time and have more horizontal movements before settling on the bed. If the dominant
movement is toward the channel, then the channel may receive more volatile suspended solids under a slower settling than a faster settling rate. However, if the
movement direction is dominantly unidirectional, the differences in material transport
from the shoal to the channel between a slower settling and faster settling rate may be
insignificant.
Ultimately a more sophisticated simulation of the resuspension of organic particulates from the bed and its subsequent transport is what’s needed to more fully represent the movement of organic material from the shoals to the channel.

4 Conclusion
Besides movement due to hydrodynamic forces, in this simulation, particulate organic
particles can settle down to the bed and move along the slope of the bed. This paper’s
approach in the simulation of organic particulate “focusing” to deep waters is important in the simulation of volatile suspended solid transport from shoal to channel, and
for the simulation of anoxia and hypoxia in deep waters. The simulation of slope
movement appears important in eutrophic simulations when the model does not adequately simulate the resuspension and transport of organic particles. Implementation
of the slope movement for the Chesapeake Bay Estuarine Model significantly improves model simulations of summer anoxia.

References
1. Cerco, C.F., Cole, T.M.: Three-Dimensional Eutrophication Model of Chesapeake Bay.
Technical Report EL-94-4, U.S. Army Engineer Waterways Experiment Station, Vicksbutg, MS, USA (1994)
2. D’Elia, C.F., Harding, L.W., Leffler, M., Mackiernan, G.B.: The role and control of nutrients in Chesapeake Bay. Water Sci. Tech. 26, 2635–2644 (1992)
3. Kemp, W.M., Boynton, W.R., Adolf, J.E., Boesch, D.F., Boicourt, W.C., Brush, G.,
Cornwell, J.C., Fisher, T.R., Gilbert, P.M., Hagy, J.D., Harding, L.W., Houde, E.D., Kimel, D.G., Miller, W.D., Newell, R.I.E., Roman, M.R., Smith, E.M., Stevenson, J.C.: Eutrophication of the Chesapeake Bay: Historic trends and ecological interactions. Marine
Ecology Progress Series 303, 1–29 (2005)
4. Johnson, J.H., Kim, K.W., Heath, R.E., Hsieh, B.B., Butler, L.: Validation of a threedimensional hydrohynamic model of Chesapeake Bay. J. Hydr. Engrg., ASCE 199(1), 2–
20 (1993)
5. Postma, H.: Sediment transport and sedimentation in the estuarine environment. In: Lauff,
G.H. (ed.) Estuaries, pp. 158–179. Am. Asso. Adv. Sci., Wash. (1967)

292

P. Wang and L.C. Linker

6. Cerco, C.F., Noel, M.: The 2002 Chesapeake Bay Eutrophication Model, US Army Corps
of Engineers, prepared for USEPA Chesapeake Bay Program. EPA-903-R-04-004 (2004)
7. CBPO Modeling Subcommittee: Chesapeake Bay Modeling Subcommittee April meeting
(2008),
http://www.chesapeakebay.net/committee_msc_meetings.aspx
8. Johnson, J.H., Heath, R.E., Hsieh, B.B., Kim, K.W., Butler, L.: User’s guide for a threedimensional numerical hydrodynamic, salinity, and temperature model of Chesapeake Bay,
U.S. Army Engineer, Baltimore, MD, USA (1991)
9. Donaldson, C.: Atmospheric turbulence and the dispersal of atmospheric pollutants. In:
Haugen, D.A. (ed.) Workshop on Micrometeorology, pp. 313–390. American Meteorological Society, Boston (1973)
10. Sheng, Y.P.: A three-dimensional mathematical model of coastal, estuarine and lake currents using boundary fitted grid, Report No. 585, A.R.A.P. Group of Titan systems, New
Jersey, Princeton, NJ (1986)
11. Harding, L.W., Mallonee, M.E., Perry, E.S.: Toward a predictive understanding of primary
productivity in a temperate partially stratified estuary. Estuar. Coastal Shelf Sci. 55, 437–
463 (2002)

