Third Workshop on Teaching Computational Science
(WTCS 2009)
Alfredo Tirado-Ramos1 and Angela Shiflet2
1

Informatics Institute, University of Amsterdam
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
2
Wofford College
Spartanburg, South Carolina, U.S.A.
alfredo@science.uva.nl, shifletab@wofford.edu

Abstract. The Third Workshop on Teaching Computational Science, within the
International Conference on Computational Science, provides a platform for
discussing innovations in teaching computational sciences at all levels and
contexts of higher education. This editorial provides an introduction to the work
presented during the sessions.
Keywords: computational science, teaching, parallel computing, e-Learning,
collaborative environments.

1 Introduction
Today’s technology-driven societies require students who have been trained in
technology-based environments, such as computational science. Until recently,
computational science education was too costly and impractical for most academic
institutions of higher learning. Now, however, such institutions can integrate methods
from computer science, mathematical modeling, simulation, and scientific
visualization, among others, to create virtual laboratories for in-silico experimentation
and learning. The interaction of computational methods allows teachers and students
to pose more intriguing questions in lower cost experimental settings. Thus, higher
education is currently witnessing the rapid adoption of computational tools and
methods by science teachers around the world. In the past few years, many teachers
have shared experiences on the use of high performance, as well as not-so-high
performance, computing facilities in order to promote the benefits and importance of
computational science instruction in science classrooms. The Third International
Workshop on Teaching Computational Science (WTCS2009), held in Baton Rouge,
Louisiana, U.S.A., in conjunction with the International Conference on
Computational Science (ICCS 2009) offers a technical program consisting of
presentations dealing with the state of the art in the field, following the successful
2008 WTCS in Krakow, Poland [1]. The workshop includes presentations that
describe innovations in the context of formal courses involving, for example,
introductory programming, service courses and specialist undergraduate or
postgraduate topics.
G. Allen et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2009, Part II, LNCS 5545, pp. 3–4, 2009.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

4

A. Tirado-Ramos and A. Shiflet

2 The Workshop
During the workshop sessions, we had 12 oral and 2 poster presentations. Nguyen et
al discussed interesting approach to statistical methods to infer knowledge during the
learning process. Landau proposes that teaching within this research-like, problemsolving approach is a more motivating and efficient technique than teaching the
various disciplines separately. Jacobs presents an interesting experience and provides
access to web material, which could be useful to prepare other similar programs.
Bloomfield describes the use of R, a language typically used in computational science
and engineering, as a useful tool in computational science teaching. Muresano
describes a new innovative masters degree program with the aim of introducing
students to core concepts such as large scale simulation and high performance
computing. Shiflet describes successful strategies for managing epidemics in a
microbiology course, where science students are usually unaware of potential
advantages and complexities. Del Vado discusses an intelligent tutoring system for
teaching data structures, an important subject in computational science training.
Gavilanes describes an interesting tool for use in introductory classes, which allows
students to focus on schemas and algorithm design rather than language syntax. Borne
presents a computational science program centered on data representation and
visualization covering a broad range of physical and biological sciences. Stevenson
proposes extending classical argumentation structures as the basis for computational
science education. Liu provides a summary of simulation and modeling process that
illustrate how teaching tools can be used and how increasingly complex models can
be introduced. Wallin presents the structure and goals of the first two years of a
computational mathematics program, along with some observations about the
elements that we have found that have been challenging in its implementation.
Finally, as poster presentations, Gallardo presents an approach to adaptation to
European Credit Transfer System, and Parker presents a new mathematics elective for
an undergrad computational science program.

3 Conclusions
The presentations in ICCS 2009's Third International Workshop on Teaching
Computational Science (WTCS2009) illustrate the variety and depth of computational
science education around the world. Moreover, the growing success of the workshop
attests to the increasing interest in this important interdisciplinary area.
Acknowledgments. We would like to acknowledge P.M.A. Sloot and D. van Albada
for their continuous support and commitment to the success of this workshop.

Reference
1. Tirado-Ramos, A., Luo, Q.: Second Workshop on Teaching Computational Science WTCS
2008. In: Bubak, M., van Albada, G.D., Dongarra, J., Sloot, P.M.A. (eds.) ICCS 2008, Part
II. LNCS, vol. 5102, pp. 657–658. Springer, Heidelberg (2008)

