Simulation of the Electron Tunneling Paths in
Networks of Nano-particle Films
ˇ
Milovan Suvakov
and Bosiljka Tadi´c
Department for Theoretical Physics, Joˇzef Stefan Institute, Box 3000, 1001 Ljubljana,
Slovenia
Milovan.Suvakov@ijs.si, Bosiljka.Tadic@ijs.si
http://www-f1.ijs.si/∼tadic/, http://www-f1.ijs.si/∼suvakov/

Abstract. Thin ﬁlms of nano-particles deposited on substrates are
important for new technological applications. Their physical properties
depend crucially on particle size and structural inhomogeneity of the
deposition. To systematically investigate these dependencies, we apply
graph theory and simulations of voltage-driven tunneling conduction.
We implement a network model of nano-particle ﬁlms, based on data of
particle positions on a two-dimensional plane. Assuming that connected
particles on the network are within the tunneling distance, we then implement a continuous-time electron tunneling on the network and show
how the current–voltage characteristics depend on the graph structure.
We visualize the conduction paths through the network which correspond
to the measured currents both in random and spatially inhomogeneous
ﬁlms.
Keywords: nano-particles; network; electron Tunneling Paths.

1

Introduction

In search of new materials for advanced technology applications [1] metallic
nano-particles deposited on a two-dimensional substrate either as regular arrays [2,3,4] or as thin ﬁlms [5] are being extensively investigated. Often thin
ﬁlms are grown by spin casting or methods that involve non-linear processes in
which nano-particles move in a liquid, both leading to characteristically inhomogeneous structures, that can be varied via control parameters of the process
[6,7,8]. It has been recognized that the physical properties of these nano-particle
arrays and thin ﬁlms depend on the mutual positions of the nano-particles and
global characteristics of the structure [9]. In particular, enhanced non-linear
conduction properties have been observed in certain structures of nano-particles
[10,11,12,13,14,15].
In order to systematically investigate the topology eﬀects on the conduction in
two-dimensional nano-particle structures, here we propose a numerical approach
based on the graph theory and simulations of the electron tunneling processes.
Our approach consists of two steps:
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part II, LNCS 4488, pp. 641–648, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

642

ˇ
M. Suvakov
and B. Tadi´c

– Mapping of an arbitrary nano-particle array to a graph;
– Implementation of electron-tunneling through the graph;
In the ﬁrst part, as described below, the positions of nano-particles on a twodimensional substrate are exactly observed. The mapping of the structure to the
graph enables quantitative study of the structure in many details. In the second
part, the dynamics of voltage-driven electron tunnelings are strictly linked to
the graph structure and thus their dependence on the structural elements of the
graph can be easily traced. We demonstrate by simulations and by graphical
means (visualizing the conduction paths) how the current ﬂows through two
such graphs, which correspond to two types of ﬁlms made by random and by
correlated deposition of particles.

2
2.1

Mapping of Nano-particle Films to Networks
Particle Deposition

For implementation of our numerical methods we assume that the positions
of nano-particles on the substrate are known, e.g., from STM measurements
or by statistical estimates based on the parameters of the deposition process.
To illustrate our approach, we generate two types of ﬁlms, shown in Fig. 1,
by sequential deposition of particles of a unique size (determined by the grid
spacing). In Fig 1(a) the deposition site for a new particle is randomly selected
away from already occupied sites, resulting in a random homogeneous structure.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 1. Examples of the nano-particle ﬁlms with (a) random and (b) correlated deposition at density ρ = 10% grid points covered by particles. Network edges are shown
corresponding to the radius r of 2 grid points, discussed in the text.

Simulation of the Electron Tunneling Paths in Networks

643

In contrast to the random deposition, in Fig. 1(b) we apply self-avoiding randomwalk dynamics to select the deposition sites. In this case, the non-linear selfavoiding process leads to an inhomogeneous deposition, with inhomogeneity at
diﬀerent scales [16]. In both cases we put N = 1000 particles on the rectangular
plane with 100 × 100 grid points (see Fig. 1).
2.2

Emergent Networks

Next we make a nano-particle ﬁlm network by connecting pairs of nano-particles,
which are spaced within a small radius r from each other. For the purposes of
the tunneling processes that we would like to study on these ﬁlms, the radius
r will be selected to coincide with the ”tunneling distance”, that is known for
each nano-particle type. In our numerical experiment, we may vary r from one
to few grid points. The emergent networks have a variable, but limited node connectivity, which reﬂects the local inhomogeneity of the deposition. For instance,
the networks shown in Fig. 1 have the average local connectivity k = 9 but
with small dispersion σk1 = 2.62 in the random deposition network, whereas
σk2 = 4.05 in the case of correlated deposition network. Further topological
properties of such networks can be studied using the appropriate algorithms and
the graph theory [17,18].
In the next section we implement the conduction via microscopic tunneling of
charges through these networks. For this purpose it is important to check that
for a given average particle density ρ (surface coverage) and ﬁxed radius r, the
system is above the geometrical percolation point.

3

Conduction

For the simulations of the tunneling currents driven by voltage diﬀerences between two electrodes, the network structure (Fig. 1) is ﬁxed by its adjacency
ˆ We then place the electrodes at left-most and right-most nodes of the
matrix A.
network. By increasing the voltage diﬀerence, the conditions for the electron tunneling into the system of nano-particles from the side of higher voltage electrode
are created. Increasing the voltage in small steps, the front of tunneling charges
moves towards the low-voltage electrode and eventually touches the electrode
when the voltage exceeds a threshold value VT , which depends on the distance
between electrodes and other details of the process, described below.
3.1

Tunneling Implementation

The energy of charged particles on a network of size N is given by the Hamiltonian [10,12,13,19]:
E=

1 † −1
Q M Q + Q · V ext + Qμ Φμ = E (1) + E (2) + Qμ Φμ
2

(1)

with the vector of charges at nodes (nano-particles) Q ≡ {Qi }, i = 1, 2 · · · N ,
ˆ and the potential of the electrodes Φμ , μ ∈
the matrix of capacitancies M,

ˇ
M. Suvakov
and B. Tadi´c

644

{+, −, gate}. The external potential is V ext = M −1 Cμ Φμ , where Cμ is the
vector of capacitance between dots and electrodes μ. The microscopic structure
of the underlying nano-particle array appears through the oﬀ-diagonal elements
ˆ i.e., via the adjacency matrix, i.e., Mij = −Aij for i = j.
of the matrix M,
The inter-particle charge transport is a stochastic process in which tunneling
of an electron between nodes i → j at time t is governed by the probability
distribution pij (t) = Γij exp(−Γij t), with the tunneling rate [11,10]
Γij = −

ΔEij /e2 R
,
1 − exp(ΔEij /kB T )

(2)

which is determined by the energy change ΔEij associated with the tunneling
process. Here e is the electron charge, R is quantum resistance and T is temperature.
Next we calculate the energy changes associated to the tunneling along the
links of the network. After a single electron tunneling process from dot a to dot
b (Qi = Qi + δbi − δai ) the change in the interaction energy term in Eq.(1),
ΔE (1) (a → b) = E (1) − E (1) can be written as:
ΔE (1) (a → b) =

1
2

(Qi + δbi − δai )Mij−1 (Qj + δbj − δaj )−
ij

1
2

Qi Mij−1 Qj (3)
ij

−1
(3) becomes:
Using Mij−1 = Mji

ΔE (1) (a → b) =
i

1
−1
−1
−1
−1
−1
−1
Qi (Mib
− Mia
) + (Maa
+ Mbb
− Mab
− Mba
) . (4)
2

Similarly, the change in the second energy term of Eq.(1), which is associated
with the interaction with the external potential, ΔE (2) (a → b) = E (2) − E (2)
becomes
ΔE (2) (a → b) =

(Qi + δbi − δai )Viext −
i

Qi Viext = Vbext − Vaext .

(5)

i

In addition, the contribution from the tunneling processes between electrodes
and dots is computed. A tunneling process between an electrode and a dot a
(Qi = Qi ± δai ) contributes the energy changes in both terms, which are:
ΔE (1) (a ↔ ±) =

1
2

(Qi ± δai )Mij−1 (Qj ± δaj ) −
ij

=±
i

1
2

Qi Mij−1 Qj
ij

1 −1
−1
Qi Mia
+ Maa
,
2

(6)

and
ΔE (2) (a ↔ ±) =

(Qi ± δai )Viext −
i

Qi Viext = ±Vaext .
i

(7)

Simulation of the Electron Tunneling Paths in Networks

645

We can write the expressions (4) and (6) can be written in a concise form using
−1
the appropriate variables Vc ≡ i Qi Mic
. We obtain:
1
−1
−1
−1
−1
ΔE (1) (a → b) = Vb − Va + (Maa
+ Mbb
− Mab
− Mba
),
2

(8)

1 −1
ΔE (1) (a ↔ ±) = ±Va + Maa
.
(9)
2
In the case when C << Cq the oﬀ-diagonal elements of inverse capacitance
matrix fall oﬀ exponentially and in calculations of Vc we can use only nearst
neighbor terms, which speeds up the calculations.
In the simulations, following an increase of the voltage on one electrode, it
takes some transient period until the distribution of charges become stationary.
We then sample the charges at all nodes and currents through all links of the
network. The relevant quantities are measured in the following units: charge
Q[e], voltage V [e/Cg ], time t[RCg ] and current I[e/RCg ]. In this paper we focus
on certain properties of current in the limit C
Cg and we set T = 0, where
the tunneling eﬀects are most pronounced, and Φgate = Φ− = 0.
The numerical implementation in C++ is done according to the following
steps:
Input: graph, parameters
Calculate capacitance and inverse capacitance matrix
Initialize vectors Q, Vc with zeros
Initialize time t=0
While(enough sampled data)
Calculate vector Vc
Calculate energy change for all junctions
For each link t(i,j)=next random from distribution pij(t)
Process the tunneling with smallest time t(i,j)
Increment time t=t+t(i,j)
If(relaxation is done)
Sample data of interest
End If
End While
3.2

Conduction Paths and Nonlinear Currents

As mentioned above, driven by the external potential, the charges are entering
the system from the higher-voltage electrode. When the voltage is small, the
charges can screen the external potential, in which case the system may become
static and there is no current. For the voltage larger than a threshold value VT the
screening does not occur and, after some transient time, a stationary distribution
of charges over dots sets-in with a constant current through the system. In
general, the experimental measurements of the current-voltage characteristics in
nano-particle arrays revealed a non-linear dependence [13] according to the law
I ∼ (V /VT − 1)ζ ,

(10)

ˇ
M. Suvakov
and B. Tadi´c

646

0.01

Random
Correlated
slope 2.3
slope 2.4

0.1

0.01

Distribution

I [rel. units]

0.001

1e-04

0.001
1e-05

1e-06
0.1

1

10

100

1e-04
0.01

Random
Correlated
0.1
I/Imax

(V-VT)/VT

(a)

1

(b)

Fig. 2. Conduction on the networks shown in Fig. 1: (a) Non-linear I-V curves with
solid lines representing the power-law ﬁts, according to Eq. (10); (b) Distribution of
normalized currents over links. The solid lines represent ﬁts with Eq. (11).

in a range of values of voltage above V > VT . In Fig. 2(a) we show the results of
the simulated current-voltage curves in our two networks. They exhibit a typical
non-linear behavior with the exponent ζ > 2. The diﬀerence between these two
curves appears in the saturation region, visible in the case of inhomogeneous network for voltage around 30VT . This saturation can be explained by the existence
of a large number of bottle necks in the inhomogeneous network structure.
For the ﬁxed value of voltage V = 10VT we demonstrate how the electrons
ﬂow through the network by monitoring the currents through each link. All data
are collected after a transient (relaxation) period. The distributions of currents
through the links are shown in Fig. 2(b) for the two network topologies. In the
case of random network there is a well deﬁned power-law tail with a large slope of
≈ 4.5 (solid line). For the correlated network we found that the ﬂow distribution
can be well ﬁtted with a q-exponential form [20]
P (x) = B0 1 − (1 − q)

I/Imax
x0

1/(1−q)

,

(11)

often found in non ergodic dynamical systems. Here we ﬁnd B0 = 0.22, q = 1.21
and x0 = 0.03. Applying, for a comparison, the same expression to ﬁt the ﬂow
data collected on the random structure, (doted line Fig. 2(b)), we ﬁnd quite
diﬀerent values: B0 = 0.1, q = 1.01 and x0 = 0.12. These values are compatible
with the even distribution of ﬂow over links in the random deposition structure,
and the absence of links which play a special role in the conduction process.
The observed quantitative diﬀerence in the current ﬂow over these two networks are graphically illustrated by visualization of the conduction paths with
an appropriate java applet. The images are shown in Fig. 3. Diﬀerent levels of
gray color are proportional to the current ﬂow along the network links.

Simulation of the Electron Tunneling Paths in Networks

(a)

647

(b)

Fig. 3. Conduction paths on networks shown in Fig. 1: (a) random, (b) correlated
structure. Intensity in the gray scale is proportional to the ﬂow over links.

4

Conclusions

We have implemented a numerical algorithm for analysis of the electron tunneling conduction through nano-particle arrays on a two-dimensional substrates.
The inputs in the algorithm are positions of the nano-particles in the x-y plane,
that can be obtained either from the appropriate measurements in the real systems or from a theoretical model.
We have demonstrated how the algorithm works in two types of networks,
corresponding to a random and a correlated deposition of nano-particles. In
particular, the ﬂow over the links has been studied quantitatively by the statistical distributions and visualized graphically. In both networks we obtain a
non-linear current–voltage characteristics with most available experimental data
of nano-particle arrays. Furthermore, we have demonstrated that both of these
measures appear to be dependent on the actual structure of the network. Hence,
these measures of the current ﬂow can be used as a tool to characterize the ﬁlm
structure–conduction properties.
The graphic visualization algorithm developed in this work (made available for
an interactive application on the author’s Web site) can be used for visualization
of ﬂow in a general case of planar graphs.

Acknowledgments
We thank the ﬁnancial support by the Marie Curie Research and Training Network MRTN-CT-2004-005728 project and by the programme P1-0044 of the
Ministry of high education, science and technology (Slovenia).

648

ˇ
M. Suvakov
and B. Tadi´c

References
1. T. Bigioni, X. Lin, T. Nguyen, E. Corwin, T. Witten, and H. Jeager. Kinetically
driven self assembly of highly ordered nanoparticle monolayers. Nature Materials,
5:265, 2006.
2. C. I. Duru¨
oz, R. M. Clarke, C. M. Marcus, and J. S. Harris, Jr. Conduction threshold, switching, and hysteresis in quantum dot arrays. Phys. Rev. Lett., 74(16):
3237–3240, 1995.
3. C
¸ . Kurdak, A. J. Rimberg, T. R. Ho, and J. Clarke. Activated transport and scaling
behavior in the current-voltage characteristics and coulomb-blockade oscillations
of two-dimensional arrays of metallic islands. Phys. Rev. B, 57(12):R6842–R6845,
Mar 1998.
4. A. J. Rimberg, T. R. Ho, and J. Clarke. Scaling behavior in the current-voltage
characteristic of one- and two-dimensional arrays of small metallic islands. Phys.
Rev. Lett., 74(23):4714–4717, Jun 1995.
5. P. Moriarty. Nanostructured materials. Reports of Progress in Physics, 64:297–381,
2001.
6. P. Moriarty, M. D. R. Taylor, and M. Brust. Nanostructured cellular networks.
Phys. Rev. Lett., 89(24):248303, 2002.
7. Z. Konstantinovic, M. G. del Muro, M. Varela, X. Batlle, and A. Labarta. Particle
growing mechanisms in ag-zro2 and au-zro2 granular ﬁlms obtained by pulsed laser
deposition. Nanotechnology, 17:4106, 2006.
8. M. Brust, D. Bethell, Kiely C. J., and D. J. Schiﬀrin. Self-assembled gold nanoparticle thin ﬁlms with nonmetallic optical and electronic properties. Langmuir,
14(19):5425 –5429, 1998.
9. C. P. Martin, M. O. Blunt, and P. Moriarty. Nanoparticle networks on silicon:
Self-organized or disorganized? Nano Lett., 4(12):2389 –2392, 2004.
10. B. K. Ferry and S. M. Goodnick. Transport in Nanostructures. Cambridge University Press, 1997.
11. U. Geigenm¨
uller and G. Sch¨
on. Single-electron eﬀects in arrays of normal tunnel
junctions. Europhysics Letters, 10:765–+, December 1989.
12. N. S. Bakhvalov, G. S. Kazacha, K. K. Likharev, and S. I. Serdyukova. Statics and
dynamics of single-electron solitons in two-dimensional arrays of ultrasmall tunnel
junctions. Physica B Condensed Matter, 173:319–328, September 1991.
13. A. A. Middleton and N. S. Wingreen. Collective transport in arrays of small
metallic dots. Phys. Rev. Lett., 71(19):3198–3201, 1993.
14. M. N. Wybourne, L. Clarke, M. Yan, S. X. Cai, L. O. Brown, J. Hutchison, and
J. F. W. Keana. Coulomb-blockade dominated transport in patterned gold-cluster
structures. Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 36:7796–7800, 1997.
15. R. Parthasarathy, X. Lin, K. Elteto, T. F. Rosenbaum, and H. M. Jeager. Percolating through networks of random thresholds: Finite temperature electron tunneling
in metal nanocrystal arrays. Phys. Rev. Lett., 92:076801, 2004.
16. G. F. Lawler. Intersections of Random Walks. Birkhauser-Boston (1996).
17. R. K. Ahuja, T. L. Magnanti, and J. B. Orlin. Network Flows: Theory, Algorithms,
and Applications. Prentice Hall, 1993.
ˇ
18. M. Suvakov
and Tadi´c B. Topology of cell-aggregated planar graphs. Springer
(Berlin) Part III, 3993:1098, 2006.
ˇ
19. M. Suvakov
and B. Tadi´c. Transport processes on homogeneous planar graphs with
scale-free loops. Physica A, 372:354–361, 2006.
20. Tsallis C. Possible generalization of boltzmann-gibbs entropy. J. Stat. Phys, 52:479,
1988.

