Implicit Surface Reconstruction from Scattered
Point Data with Noise
Jun Yang1,2, Zhengning Wang1, Changqian Zhu1, and Qiang Peng1
1

School of Information Science & Technology Southwest Jiaotong
University, Chengdu, Sichuan 610031 China
2
School of Mechanical & Electrical Engineering Lanzhou Jiaotong
University, Lanzhou, Gansu 730070 China
yangj@mail.lzjtu.cn, {znwang, cqzhu, pqiang}@home.swjtu.edu.cn

Abstract. This paper addresses the problem of reconstructing implicit function
from point clouds with noise and outliers acquired with 3D scanners. We
introduce a filtering operator based on mean shift scheme, which shift each
point to local maximum of kernel density function, resulting in suppression of
noise with different amplitudes and removal of outliers. The “clean” data points
are then divided into subdomains using an adaptive octree subdivision method,
and a local radial basis function is constructed at each octree leaf cell. Finally,
we blend these local shape functions together with partition of unity to
approximate the entire global domain. Numerical experiments demonstrate
robust and high quality performance of the proposed method in processing a
great variety of 3D reconstruction from point clouds containing noise and
outliers.
Keywords: filtering, space subdivision, radial basis function, partition of unity.

1 Introduction
The interest for point-based surface has grown significantly in recent years in
computer graphics community due to the development of 3D scanning technologies,
or the riddance of connectivity management that greatly simplifies many algorithms
and data structures. Implicit surfaces are an elegant representation to reconstruct 3D
surfaces from point clouds without explicitly having to account for topology issues.
However, when the point sets data generated from range scanners (or laser scanners)
contain large noise, especially outliers, some established methods often fail to
reconstruct surfaces or real objects.
There are two major classes of surface representations in computer graphics:
parametric surfaces and implicit surfaces. A parametric surface [1, 2] is usually given
by a function f (s, t) that maps some 2-dimensional (maybe non-planar) parameter
domain Ω into 3-space while an implicit surface typically comes as the zero-level
isosurface of a 3-dimensional scalar field f (x, y, z). Implicit surface models are
popular since they can describe complex shapes with capabilities for surface and
volume modeling and complex editing operations are easy to perform on such models.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part II, LNCS 4488, pp. 57–64, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

58

J. Yang et al.

Moving least square (MLS) [3-6] and radial basis function (RBF) [7-15] are two
popular 3D implicit surface reconstruction methods.
Recently, RBF attracts more attention in surface reconstruction. It is identified as
one of most accurate and stable methods to solve scattered data interpolation
problems. Using this technique, an implicit surface is constructed by calculating the
weights of a set of radial basis functions such they interpolate the given data points.
From the pioneering work [7, 8] to recent researches, such as compactly-supported
RBF [9, 10], fast RBF [11-13] and multi-scale RBF [14, 15], the established
algorithms can generate more and more faithful models of real objects in last twenty
years, unfortunately, most of them are not feasible for the approximations of
unorganized point clouds containing noise and outliers.
In this paper, we describe an implicit surface reconstruction algorithm for noise
scattered point clouds with outliers. First, we define a smooth probability density
kernel function reflecting the probability that a point p is a point on the surface S
sampled by a noisy point cloud. A filtering procedure based on mean shift is used to
move the points along the gradient of the kernel functions to the maximum probability
positions. Second, we reconstruct a surface representation of “clean” point sets
implicitly based on a combination of two well-known methods, RBF and partition of
unity (PoU). The filtered domain of discrete points is divided into many subdomians
by an adaptively error-controlled octree subdivision, on which local shape functions
are constructed by RBFs. We blend local solutions together using a weighting sum of
local subdomains. As you will see, our algorithm is robust and high quality.

2 Filtering
2.1 Covariance Analysis
Before introducing our surface reconstruction algorithm, we describe how to perform
eigenvalue decomposition of the covariance matrix based on the theory of principal
component analysis (PCA) [24], through which the least-square fitting plane is
defined to estimate the kernel-based density function.
Given the set of input points Ω {pi}iє[1,L], pi є R3, the weighted covariance matrix
C for a sample point pi є Ω is determined by

＝

(

L
C = ∑ p j − pi
j =1

)(p j − pi )

T

(

⋅ Ψ p j − pi

)

h ,

(1)

where pi is the centroid of the neighborhood of pi, Ψ is a monotonically decreasing
weight function, and h is the adaptive kernel size for the spatial sampling density.
Consider the eigenvector problem

C ⋅ el = λl ⋅ el .

(2)

Since C is symmetric and positive semi-define, all eigenvalues λl are real-valued and
the eigenvectors el form an orthogonal frame, corresponding to the principal
components of the local neighborhood.

Implicit Surface Reconstruction from Scattered Point Data with Noise

59

Assuming λ0≤λ1≤λ2, it follows that the least square fitting plane H(p):
( p − pi ) ⋅ e0 = 0 through pi minimizes the sum of squared distances to the neighbors
of pi. Thus e0 approximates the surface normal ni at pi, i.e., ni = e0. In other words, e1
and e2 span the tangent plane at pi.

2.2 Mean Shift Filtering
Mean shift [16, 17] is one of the robust iterative algorithms in statistics. Using this
algorithm, the samples are shifted to the most likely positions which are local maxima
of kernel density function. It has been applied in many fields of image processing and
visualization, such as tracing, image smoothing and filtering.
In this paper, we use a nonparametric kernel density estimation scheme to estimate
an unknown density function g(p) of input data. A smooth kernel density function
g(p) is defined to reflect the probability that a point pє R3 is a point on the surface S
sampled by a noisy point cloud Ω. Inspired by the previous work of Schall et al. [21],
we measure the probability density function g(p) by considering the squared distance
of p to the plane H(p) fitted to a spatial k-neighborhood of pi as

{

g ( p ) = ∑ gi ( p ) = ∑ Φ i ( p − p pro ) Gi ( p pro − pi ) 1 − ⎡⎣( p − pi ) ⋅ ni h ⎤⎦
L

L

i =1

i =1

2

},

(3)

where Φi and Gi are two monotonically decreasing weighting functions to measure the
spatial distribution of point samples from spatial domain and range domain, which are
more adaptive to the local geometry of the point model. The weight function could be
either a Gaussian kernel or an Epanechnikov kernel. Here we choose Gaussian
function e− x / 2σ . The ppro is an orthogonal projection of a certain sample point p on
the least-square fitting plane. The positions p close to H(p) will be assigned with a
higher probability than the positions being more distant.
The simplest method to find the local maxima of (3) is to use a gradient-ascent
process written as follows:
2

2

L

∇g ( p ) = ∑ ∇ g i ( p ) ≈
i =1

−2 L
∑ Φi ( p − ppro ) Gi (ppro − pi ) ⎣⎡( p − pi ) ⋅ ni ⎦⎤ ⋅ ni .
h2 i =1

(4)

Thus the mean shift vectors are determined as
⎧L
m(p) = p − ⎨∑ Φi ( p − ppro ) Gi ( ppro − pi ) ⎡⎣( p − pi ) ⋅ ni ⎤⎦ ⋅ ni
⎩ i =1

∑Φ (p − p ) G (p
L

i =1

i

pro

i

pro

⎫
− pi ) ⎬ .
⎭

(5)

Combining equations (4) and (5) we get the resulting iterative equations of mean
shift filtering

pij +1 = m(p ij ) , pio = pi ,

(6)

where j is the number of iteration. In our algorithm, g(p) satisfies the following
conditions
g ( p2 ) − g ( p1 ) >∇g ( p1 )( p2 −p1 )

∀p1 ≥ 0,∀p2 ≥ 0 ,

(7)

60

J. Yang et al.

thus g(p) is a convex function with finite stable points in the set U = {pi | g ( pi ) ≥ g ( p1i )}

resulting in the convergence of the series {pij , i = 1,..., L, j = 1, 2,...} . Experiments show
that we stop iterative process if p ij +1 − pij ≤ 5 × 10−3 h is satisfied. Each sample
usually converges in less than 8 iterations. Due to the clustering property of our
method, groups of outliers usually converge to a set of single points sparsely
distributed around the surface samples. These points can be characterized by a very
low spatial sampling density compared to the surface samples. We use this criteria for
the detection of outliers and remove them using a simple threshold.

3 Implicit Surface Reconstruction
3.1 Adaptive Space Subdivision
In order to avoid solving a dense linear system, we subdivide the whole input points
filtered by mean shift into slightly overlapping subdomains. An adaptive octree-based
subdivision method introduced by Ohtake et al. [18] is used in our space partition.
We define the local support radius R=α di for the cubic cells which are generated
during the subdivision, di is the length of the main diagonal of the cell. Assume each
cell should contain points between Tmin and Tmax. In our implementation, α=0.6, Tmin
=20 and Tmax =40 has provided satisfying results.
A local max-norm approximation error is estimated according to the Taubin
distance [19],
ε = max f ( pi ) / ∇f ( pi ) .

(8)

pi − ci < R

If the ε is greater than a user-specified threshold ε0, the cell is subdivided and a local
neighborhood function fi is built for each leaf cell.
3.2 Estimating Local Shape Functions
Given the set of N pairwise distinct points Ω={pi}iє[1,N], pi єR3, which is filtered by
mean shift algorithm, and the set of corresponding values {vi}iє[1,N], vi єR, we want to
find an interpolation f : R3→R such that
f ( p i ) = vi .

(9)

We choose the f(p) to be a radial basis function of the form
N

f ( p ) = η ( p ) + ∑ ω iϕ ( p − p i
i =1

)

,

(10)

where η(p)= ζkηk(p) with {ηk(p)}kє[1,Q] is a basis in the 3D null space containing all
real-value polynomials in 3 variables and of order at most m with Q = { 3m + 3 } depending
on the choice of φ, φ is a basis function, ωi are the weights in real numbers, and | . |
denotes the Euclidean norm.

Implicit Surface Reconstruction from Scattered Point Data with Noise

61

There are many popular basis functions φ for use: biharmonic φ(r) = r, triharmonic
φ(r) = r3, multiquadric φ(r) = (r2+c2)1/2, Gaussian φ(r) = exp(-cr2), and thin-plate
spline φ(r) = r2log(r), where r = |p-pi|.
As we have an under-determined system with N+Q unknowns and N equations, socalled natural additional constraints for the coefficient ωi are added in order to ensure
orthogonality, so that
N

N

∑ ω η =∑ ω η
i =1

i

1

i =1

i

2

=

=

N

∑ωη
i =1

i

Q

=0 .

(11)

The equations (9), (10) and (11) may be written in matrix form as
⎛A
⎜ T
⎝η

η ⎞⎛ ω ⎞ ⎛ v ⎞ ,
⎟⎜ ⎟ = ⎜ ⎟
0 ⎠⎝ ζ ⎠ ⎝ 0 ⎠

(12)

where A=φ(|pi-pj|), i,j =1,…,N, η=ηk(pi), i=1,…,N, k=1,…,Q, ω=ωi, i=1,…,N and
ζ=ζk, k=1,…,Q. Solving the linear system (14) determines ωi and ζk, hence the f(p).

Fig. 1. A set of locally defined functions are blent by the PoU method. The resulting function
(solid curve) is constructed from four local functions (thick dashed curves) with their associated
weight functions (dashed dotted curves).

3.3 Partition of Unity
After suppressing high frequency noise and removing outliers, we divide the global
domain Ω={pi}iє[1,N] into M lightly overlapping subdomains {Ωi}iє[1,M] with Ω ⊆ ∪ i Ωi
using an octree-based space partition method. On this set of subdomains {Ωi}iє[1,M], we
construct a partition of unity, i.e., a collection of non-negative functions {Λi}iє[1,M]
with limited support and with ∑Λi=1 in the entire domain Ω. For each subdomain Ωi
we construct a local reconstruction function fi based on RBF to interpolate the
sampled points. As illustrated in Fig. 1, four local functions f1(p), f2(p), f3(p) and f4(p)
are blended together by weight functions Λ1, Λ2, Λ3 and Λ4. The solid curve is the
final reconstructed function.
Now an approximation of a function f(p) defined on Ω is given by a combination
of the local functions
M

f (p ) = ∑ fi (p ) Λ i (p ) .

(13)

i =1

The blending function is obtained from any other set of smooth functions by a
normalization procedure

62

J. Yang et al.

Λ i ( p ) = wi ( p )

∑ w (p )
j

.

(14)

j

The weight functions wi must be continuous at the boundary of the subdomains Ωi.
Tobor et al. [15] suggested that the weight functions wi be defined as the composition
of a distance function Di:Rn→[0,1], where Di(p)=1 at the boundary of Ωi and a decay
function θ: [0,1]→[0,1], i.e. wi(p)= θ ◦ Di(p). More details about Di and θ can be
found in Tobor’s paper.
Table 1. Computational time measurements for mean shift filtering and RBF+PoU surface
reconstructing with error bounded at 10-5. Timings are listed as minutes:seconds.
model
Pinput
Pfilter
Tfilter
Toctree
Trec

Bunny
362K
165K
9:07
0:02
0:39

Dragon head
485K
182K
13:26
0:04
0:51

(a)

(b)

Dragon
2.11M
784K
41:17
0:10
3:42

(c)

Fig. 2. Comparison of implicit surface reconstruction based on RBF methods. (a) Input noisy
point set of Stanford bunny (362K). (b) Reconstruction with Carr’s method [11]. (c)
Reconstruction with our method in this paper.

4 Applications and Results
All results presented in this paper are performed on a 2.8GHz Intel Pentium4 PC with
512M of RAM running Windows XP.
To visualize the resulting implicit surfaces, we used a pure point-based surface
rendering algorithm such as [22] instead of traditionally rendering the implicit
surfaces using a Marching Cubes algorithm [23], which inherently introduces heavy
topological constraints.
Table 1 presents computational time measurements for filtering and reconstructing
of three scan models, bunny, dragon head and dragon, with user-specified error
threshold 10-5 in this paper. In order to achieve good effects of denoising we choose a
large number of k-neighborhood for the adaptive kernel computation, however, more
timings of filtering are spent . In this paper, we set k=200. Note that the filtered points
are less than input noisy points due to the clustering property of our method.
In Fig. 2 two visual examples of the reconstruction by Carr’s method [11] and our
algorithm are shown. Carr et al. use polyharmonic RBFs to reconstruct smooth,

Implicit Surface Reconstruction from Scattered Point Data with Noise

63

manifold surfaces from point cloud data and their work is considered as an excellent
and successful research in this field. However, because of sensitivity to noise, the
reconstructed model in the middle of Fig. 2 shows spurious surface sheets. The
quality of the reconstruction is highly satisfactory, as be illustrated in the right of
Fig. 2, since a mean shift operator is introduced to deal with noise in our algorithm.
For the purpose of illustrating the influence of error thresholds on reconstruction
accuracy and smoothness, we set two different error thresholds on the reconstruction
of the scanned dragon model, as demonstrated by Fig. 3.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 3. Error threshold controls reconstruction accuracy and smoothness of the scanned dragon
model consisting of 2.11M noisy points. (a) Reconstructing with error threshold at 8.4x10-4. (c)
Reconstructing with error threshold at 2.1x10-5. (b) and (d) are close-ups of the rectangle areas
of (a) and (c) respectively.

5 Conclusion and Future Work
In this study, we have presented a robust method for implicit surface reconstruction
from scattered point clouds with noise and outliers. Mean shift method filters the raw
scanned data and then the PoU scheme blends the local shape functions defined by
RBF to approximate the whole surface of real objects.
We are also investigating various other directions of future work. First, we are trying
to improve the space partition method. We think that the Volume-Surface Tree [20], an
alternative hierarchical space subdivision scheme providing efficient and accurate
surface-based hierarchical clustering via a combination of a global 3D decomposition at
coarse subdivision levels, and a local 2D decomposition at fine levels near the surface
may be useful. Second, we are planning to combine our method with some feature
extraction procedures in order to adapt it for processing very incomplete data.

References
1. Weiss, V., Andor, L., Renner, G., Varady, T.: Advanced Surface Fitting Techniques.
Computer Aided Geometric Design, 1 (2002) 19-42
2. Iglesias, A., Echevarría, G., Gálvez, A.: Functional Networks for B-spline Surface
Reconstruction. Future Generation Computer Systems, 8 (2004) 1337-1353
3. Alexa, M., Behr, J., Cohen-Or, D., Fleishman, S., Levin D., Silva, C. T.: Point Set
Surfaces. In: Proceedings of IEEE Visualization. San Diego, CA, USA, (2001) 21-28
4. Amenta, N., Kil, Y. J.: Defining Point-Set Surfaces. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 3
(2004) 264-270

64

J. Yang et al.

5. Levin, D.: Mesh-Independent Surface Interpolation. In: Geometric Modeling for Scientific
Visualization, Spinger-Verlag, (2003) 37-49
6. Fleishman, S., Cohen-Or, D., Silva, C. T.: Robust Moving Least-Squares Fitting with
Sharp Features. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 3 (2005) 544-552
7. Savchenko, V. V., Pasko, A., Okunev, O. G., Kunii, T. L.: Function Representation of
Solids Reconstructed from Scattered Surface Points and Contours. Computer Graphics
Forum, 4 (1995) 181-188
8. Turk, G., O’Brien, J.: Variational Implicit Surfaces. Technical Report GIT-GVU-99-15,
Georgia Institute of Technology, (1998)
9. Wendland, H.: Piecewise Polynomial, Positive Definite and Compactly Supported Radial
Functions of Minimal Degree. Advances in Computational Mathematics, (1995) 389-396
10. Morse, B. S., Yoo, T. S., Rheingans, P., Chen, D. T., Subramanian, K. R.: Interpolating
Implicit Surfaces from Scattered Surface Data Using Compactly Supported Radial Basis
Functions. In: Proceedings of Shape Modeling International, Genoa, Italy, (2001) 89-98
11. Carr, J. C., Beatson, R. K., Cherrie, J. B., Mitchell, T. J., Fright, W. R., McCallum, B. C.,
Evans, T. R.: Reconstruction and Representation of 3D Objects with Radial Basis
Functions. In: Proceedings of ACM Siggraph 2001, Los Angeles, CA , USA, (2001) 67-76
12. Beatson, R. K.: Fast Evaluation of Radial Basis Functions: Methods for Two-Dimensional
Polyharmonic Splines. IMA Journal of Numerical Analysis, 3 (1997) 343-372
13. Wu, X., Wang, M. Y., Xia, Q.: Implicit Fitting and Smoothing Using Radial Basis
Functions with Partition of Unity. In: Proceedings of 9th International Computer-AidedDesign and Computer Graphics Conference, Hong Kong, China, (2005) 351-360
14. Ohtake, Y., Belyaev, A., Seidel, H. P.: Multi-scale Approach to 3D Scattered Data
Interpolation with Compactly Supported Basis Functions. In: Proceedings of Shape
Modeling International, Seoul, Korea, (2003) 153-161
15. Tobor, I., Reuter, P., Schlick, C.: Multi-scale Reconstruction of Implicit Surfaces with
Attributes from Large Unorganized Point Sets. In: Proceedings of Shape Modeling
International, Genova, Italy, (2004) 19-30
16. Comaniciu, D., Meer, P.: Mean Shift: A Robust Approach toward Feature Space Analysis.
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 5 (2002) 603-619
17. Cheng, Y. Z.: Mean Shift, Mode Seeking, and Clustering. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 8 (1995) 790-799
18. Ohtake, Y., Belyaev, A., Alexa, M., Turk, G., Seidel, H. P.: Multi-level Partition of Unity
Implicits. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 3 (2003) 463-470
19. Taubin, G.: Estimation of Planar Curves, Surfaces and Nonplanar Space Curves Defined
by Implicit Equations, with Applications to Edge and Range Image Segmentation. IEEE
Transaction on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 11 (1991) 1115-1138
20. Boubekeur, T., Heidrich, W., Granier, X., Schlick, C.: Volume-Surface Trees. Computer
Graphics Forum, 3 (2006) 399-406
21. Schall, O., Belyaev, A., Seidel, H-P.: Robust Filtering of Noisy Scattered Point Data. In:
IEEE Symposium on Point-Based Graphics, Stony Brook, New York, USA, (2005) 71-77
22. Rusinkiewicz, S., Levoy, M.: Qsplat: A Multiresolution Point Rendering System for Large
Meshes. In: Proceedings of ACM Siggraph 2000, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA, (2000)
343-352
23. Lorensen, W. E., Cline, H. F.: Marching Cubes: A High Resolution 3D Surface
Construction Algorithm. Computer Graphics, 4 (1987) 163-169
24. Hoppe, H., DeRose, T., Duchamp, T., McDonald, J., Stuetzle, W.: Surface Reconstruction
from Unorganized Points. In: Proceedings of ACM Siggraph’92, Chicago, Illinois, USA,
(1992) 71-78

