A Fast Handoff Scheme Between PDSNs in 3G Network
Jae-hong Ryu1 and Dong-Won Kim2,∗
1

Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute (ETRI)
161 Gajeong-dong, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, 305-350, Korea
2
Department of Information and Communication, Chungbuk
Provincial University, 40 Gumgu-ri, Okchon-gun, Chungbuk, 373-807, Korea
won@ctech.ac.kr

Abstract. This paper proposes a fast handoff scheme between PDSNs (Packet
Data Serving Nodes) which provide packet services to a mobile node. The
proposed handoff scheme does not require reestablishment of a PPP connection
that may occur in the process of performing handoff between PDSNs. The
handoff method between PDSNs requires that the PDSNs should receive
subscribers’ information about mobile nodes from their neighbor PDSNs
forming a communication network. When the PDSN recognizes the mobile
node moving into its coverage area, it can quickly establish a communication
channel with the mobile node based on the subscriber information received
already. As a result, the handoff is performed without reestablishing PPP.
Therefore, the handoff between PDSNs can be performed faster removing time
needed for establishing a PPP session with a terminal and for terminating a
previously set up PPP session.
Keywords: Handoff, Packet Data Serving Node, PPP connection.

1 Introduction
The number of users accessing the Internet through a mobile phone or a Personal Data
Assistant (PDA) is increasing rapidly. And CDMA2000 is one of the leading
technologies for the third-generation (3G) wireless communications and is being
standardized by the 3G Partnership Project 2 (3GPP2)[1]. The CDMA 2000 network
can provide both circuit-switched and packet-switched data services [2]. While the
circuit-oriented data service is suitable for applications that need bulk data transfer,
most data applications will be more efficiently provided by the packet-switched data
service.
Since mobile subscribers of a wireless network can roam and move from one cell
to another, there is a need for handoff support. Depending on channel usage, there are
three types of handoff in the CDMA 2000 system, namely, hard handoff, soft handoff,
and softer handoff. A hard handoff requires the MS (Mobile Station) to reestablish
synchronization when it enters a new cell. It requires a complex signaling operation
between an MS and a network node in order to reestablish a radio channel in the new
∗

Corresponding author.

Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 676–684, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

A Fast Handoff Scheme Between PDSNs in 3G Network

677

cell. Moreover, after the cellular handoff stage is completed, the MS needs to perform
Mobile IP signaling if the care-of-address is changed due to the cellular handoff.
The CDMA2000 works with Mobile IP protocol [3] to provide mobility in the IP
layer. For packet data service in the CDMA network, the Mobile IP supports the
handoff of the mobile station moving from one cell to another. The Mobile IP is
standardized by the IETF, allows a mobile station to transparently access the Internet
without changing its IP address when the mobile station moves to another IP domain
[3]. The data packets that are destined to the MS cannot reach the MS if the MS has
changed its attachment from one PDSN in the CDMA 2000 system to another. A fast
moving MS will require a timely completion of the handoff operation so that little
data is lost during handoff. Therefore, handoff performance in terms of completion
time and data loss prevention has been the key to improving the quality of service
[11]. While the CDMA 2000 handoff scheme [2, 4] may be suitable for a packetswitched data service for moderate speed mobile users, there is considerable room for
improvement such that the system can provide better performance to fast moving
users that can benefit from low handoff latency.
This paper proposes a fast handoff scheme between PDSNs (Packet Data Serving
Nodes) for a mobile node that can reduce signaling latency and user data loss during
handoff. This improvement is achieved by exchanging subscribers’ information about
mobile nodes among their neighbor PDSNs forming a communication network.
A number of suggestions have been made so far to improve handoff performance.
[5] has suggested the use of a previous foreign agent notification extension allowing
data packets in flight to the MS’s previous foreign agent to be forwarded to its new
location. This reduces the packet loss during the Mobile IP handoff stage. In [6], the
authors suggest hierarchical domains of Internet routers in which the Mobile IP
registration to the home network can be avoided when the MS hands off regionally
within the domain thereby reducing the frequency of access to the home network.
This approach reduces the time delay of Mobile IP handoff made within the same
domain, but it is not effective when the handoff takes place between different
domains. Similar concepts of hierarchy of Internet routers and regional registration
have been used in [7, 8, 9].
Our scheme, on the other hand, does not rely on the domain concept and yet it
yields less delay regardless of which router the MS hands off to. In addition to the
above efforts to improve the performance of Mobile IP handoff, [10] suggests a
cellular handoff scheme for CDMA 2000 that replaces a part of the signaling steps
carried out by Mobile IP packets with link level signaling messages, thereby reducing
message processing delay in the Mobile IP layer.
[11] proposes an improved hard handoff scheme by making a part of the signaling
procedure carried out concurrently with other parts in an effort to reduce the total time
that it takes to complete the signaling. Our scheme gives better performance than
other schemes as shown in Section 4.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. A brief introduction to the
current CDMA 2000 handoff scheme is given in Section 2. The proposed fast handoff
scheme is described in Section 3. Section 4 presents performance evaluation of the
proposed signaling scheme with the standard one, and some concluding remarks are
given in Section 5.

678

J.-h. Ryu and D.-W. Kim

2 Handoff Scheme of CDMA2000 System
The CDMA2000 consists of radio networks and IP core networks. Figure 1 shows the
architecture of the CDMA2000 network. In the radio network, a Base Station
Controller (BSC) communicates with a packet data serving node (PDSN) through the
packet control function (PCF), which is responsible for handling a logical link
between the BSC and the PDSN. Mobile Switching Center (MSC) controls user
traffic channels in the radio network.
MSC/HLR/HS
MS
BSC/PC

Correspondent
Nod

Home
Agen

BT

Internet
G/

mobile
statio

PDSN(FA)
BSC/PC

AAA
serve

radio network

IP core network

BT

Fig. 1. Architecture of the CDMA2000 Network

The functional elements for the packet data service in the IP core network consist
of PDSN, home agent (HA) for Mobile IP service, HLR/HSS and Authentication,
Authorization and Accounting (AAA) server. The PDSN provides the interface
between the radio network and the IP core network, and performs foreign agent (FA)
functions of the Mobile IP protocol. It is responsible for point-to-point protocol (PPP)
connection to the mobile station and for logical link (R-P session) to the PCF. It is
also responsible for the mapping between the PPP connection and the R-P session.
For Mobile IP service, the PDSN is a default router for the mobile station. The mobile
station registers with its home agent via the PDSN. After successful registering,
the PDSN de-encapsulates data packets which are sent by a correspondent node to the
mobile station and are tunneled from the HA. And the PDSN forwards them to the
mobile station.
The AAA server supports both the Challenge Handshake Authentication Protocol
(CHAP) and the Password Authentication Protocol (PAP) based authentication while
a mobile station establishes a PPP connection to the PDSN and requests the Mobile IP
registering to the PDSN. The HA maintains the current location of a registered mobile
station in its binding table. It is also responsible for the delivery of data to a registered
mobile station based on its binding table. The binding table includes home address
assigned to a mobile station and COA, which is the address of PDSN that a mobile
station has connected on the PPP link.
Handoff methods in CDMA 2000 based wireless data communications can be
broken down into handoff between PCFs (Packet Control Functions) and handoff
between PDSNs. The handoff between PCFs occurs in a case where the movement of
a mobile node between PCFs happens, and PCFs gets changed before and after the
moving but are in an identical PDSN area. In this case, care-of-address used by the
mobile node does not change so that the mobility is guaranteed.

A Fast Handoff Scheme Between PDSNs in 3G Network

679

The handoff between PDSNs occurs in a case where a mobile node moves to
another PDSN area. In this case, since care-of-address changes, the IP protocol of the
mobile node should be reset. For this, by using a FA (Foreign Agent) function of the
PDSN, an IP should be reassigned to the mobile node, and the mobile node should
register in a new FA. Only after this, the moving of the mobile node is completed. In
other words, when a mobile node moves to another PCF in a PDSN area in a state
where the mobile node is registered for Mobile IP in the PDSN. The PCF traces the
mobility. A packet transmitted from an IP network to the mobile node, is transmitted
to the PDSN through a HA (Home Agent) according to the IP address of the mobile
node. Then, the PDSN transfers the newly registered packet to the PCF through a
radio and packet (R-P) interface and the PCF transfers it to the mobile node.
However, when a mobile node moves into another PDSN area, the MIP is
registered in the new PDSN. This registration informs the new PDSN of the mobile
node's IP address moving. In this case, since a new FA registers in an HA, an IP
packet to be transferred to the mobile node is transferred to the new PDSN from the
HA and then transferred to the mobile node. Accordingly, loss of the user packets
occurs during the delay time because this PPP re-registration cannot be prevented.
That is, generally a contact point corresponding to the PPP of an MS is a PDSN
and since the MS has moved into a new PDSN, a process which reestablishes a PPP
session should be performed in order to obtain a new PPP contact point.

Fig. 2. Standard CDMA2000 call process for a mobile node to initially connect a call

Fig. 2 is a schematic diagram of a signal flow showing a standard CDMA2000 call
process for a mobile node to initially connect a call. Referring to Fig. 2, when a
mobile node first connects a call, the mobile node transfers a calling message
containing a data service request to a PCF. When a call is established, a PCF plays a
role to exchange signals and traffic information between an AP (Access Point) and a
PDSN. The PCF receiving the message transmits this information to a PDSN to
establish RP connection and performs a PPP connection setup procedure. Here, RP

680

J.-h. Ryu and D.-W. Kim

connection means an interface connection between a PCF and a PDSN for signaling
(A11) and user traffic (A10). The PDSN performs a FA function in an MIP and an
NAS (Network Access Server) function for setting up a PPP with a terminal. At this
time, after the PDSN allocates an address to the mobile node, the mobile node
completes PPP setup. The PDSN transmits an advertisement message to the mobile
node periodically. Through this message, the mobile node can confirm its current
Internet contact point.
Meanwhile, when the mobile node receives this advertisement message and
transmits a mobile IP registration request (MIP RRQ) to the PDSN, the PDSN and the
HA determine whether or not the subscriber is one of those subscribers who are
qualified for the MIP support, and then perform authentication. If the subscriber
cannot be authenticated, the PDSN includes an error in the mobile IP registration
reply (MIP RPL) code, transmits the code to the mobile node and terminates the call.
However, if the subscriber is authenticated to perform normal MIP, the PDSN
maintains visitor information and by informing it to the mobile node, the registration
procedure is finished. Thus, if a PPP is set up and a call is effectively established,
actual data communications between the mobile node and a host are performed.

Fig. 3. Handoff procedure of standard CDMA2000 network

A handoff example will now be explained referring to Fig. 3. Fig. 3 is a schematic
diagram showing a process to support mobility of a mobile node in which the process
of Fig. 2 is performed twice. For the following explanation, a couple of terms is
defined. A tPDSN (target PDSN) is a PDSN providing packet services to a newly
connected mobile node which is moved into its concerned area. An sPDSN (source
PDSN) is a PDSN to which, before moving, the mobile node was connected. It is
assumed that at present a mobile node receives data services through sPCF (source
PCF) and sPDSN after connected to the Internet. Since the subscriber moves and
handoff between sPCF and tPCF (target PCF), and tPDSN occurs, a new RP session
and PPP session should be set up. Here, a target PCF and a target PDSN mean a PCF

A Fast Handoff Scheme Between PDSNs in 3G Network

681

and a PDSN of a network to which the subscriber should be connected because of the
moving. This process will now be explained in detail. First, tPCF transmits A11
RRQ message to tPDSN, and according to this, tPDSN responds to PCF with an RLP
message. If this process is successful, a PPP session is reestablished between the
mobile node and tPDSN. Then, tPDSN transmits an MIP advertisement message to
the mobile node, and according to this, the mobile node transmits an MIP registration
request to tPDSN. In response to this, tPDSN again transmits an MIP registration
reply to the mobile node, and by doing so, a new MIP is set up. Then, A11 interface
for signaling between sPCF and sPDSN is performed and the existing PPP session is
terminated. Thus, when handoff between PDSNs is performed, processes for setting
up a new PPP session and terminating an existing PPP session are needed such that
unnecessary time and resources may be expended.
In this situation, the proposed method can perform handoff in a short time without
performing unnecessary PPP reestablishment that may occur in handoff between
PDSNs.

3 Proposed Fast Handoff Scheme
A preferred embodiment of the proposed scheme to remove this problem will now be
explained referring to Fig. 4. Fig. 4 is a schematic diagram showing a detailed process
such that the additional PPP connection process in the handoff method of Fig. 3 can
be omitted when a mobile node moved.

Fig. 4. Signal flow of proposed handoff scheme

682

J.-h. Ryu and D.-W. Kim

Let’s consider a situation where a mobile node performs data communications with
sPDSN before moving and then moves to another network, so the handoff is needed.
When the mobile node is first trying to connect a packet call, the sPDSN makes
subscriber information which the subscriber sets initially, shared by all PDSN
neighboring the sPDSN. Here, subscriber information indicates an IP address of the
subscriber, options defined when ICP and IPCP are tried, and so on. In this state, if
subscriber movement occurs, the tPDSN senses that the subscriber moved into its
concerned area and transfers the subscriber number and IP address of the mobile node
to the sPDSN to which the subscriber was connected before the moving. Upon
receiving this, the sPDSN transfers all information on the subscriber to the tPDSN.
Upon receiving the information, the tPDSN stores the subscriber information as
database items, and performs a procedure related to MIP with the mobile node.
Referring to Fig. 4, the embodiment will now be explained in detail as a signal
flow between the mobile node and apparatuses in the wireless data communications
network. PCF transmits A11 registration request message to tPDSN, and according to
this, tPDSN transmits A11 registration response message to tPCF. Thus, the process
for RP setup is the same as in Fig. 3. However, instead of the PPP session setup
procedure as shown in Fig. 3, the PPP session related data – e.g., MN IP address,
MRU, protocol control field compression (PFC), async. control character map
(ACCM), address control field compression (AFC) – are received from sPDSN, to
which the mobile node was connected before the moving, and utilized as PPP setup
resources of the mobile node. The tPDSN transmits an MIP advertisement message to
the mobile node which has moved into its concerned area, and according to this, the
mobile node transmits an MIP registration request to tPDSN. In response to this,
tPDSN again transmits an MIP registration reply to the mobile node, and by doing so,
a new MIP is set up. Then, A11 interface for signaling between sPCF, to which the
mobile node belonged before the moving, and sPDSN is updated.
Meanwhile, when the MIP setup is normally allocated, the PPP resources set to
sPDSN may request termination or reestablishment by itself without negotiation with
the mobile node, and accordingly, to the extent that the information is managed, the
information is retained.

4 Performance Evaluation
According to the method for handoff between PDSNs of the proposed scheme as
described above, handoff is performed without reestablishing PPP and accordingly
handoff between PDSNs can be performed faster by a time (Ts) needed for
establishing a PPP session with a terminal and a time (Tt) for terminating a previously
set up PPP session. Here, since at least 10 messages are transmitted and received
during LCP and IPCP negotiation for establishing and terminating PPP session
according to the standard, Ts and Tt are given, respectively, by
Ts = 2TLcp_ConfigReq + 2TLcp_ConfigAck + 2TIpcp_ConfigReq + 2TIpcp_ConfigAck

(1)

Tt = TLcp_TermReq + TLcp_TermAck

(2)

A Fast Handoff Scheme Between PDSNs in 3G Network

683

The time reduction (Tr) effect can be achieved as follow.
Tr = Ts + Tt + Tnl

(3)

Where, Tnl means the network latency time. It depends on processing capacity of
network nodes and network traffic loads.
We measured the delay performance of the proposed scheme on our testbed [12].
Fig.5. shows the comparison results of connection time. When the normalized traffic
load is 0.5, we can save over 1.1 seconds. Generally, two cases don’t show a big
difference under the lower traffic load. But under the higher traffic load, our proposed
scheme has the better performance by skipping PPP reestablishment and also reducing
packet loss during handoff.
2.5

)s 2
(e
1.5
im
t
ya 1
le
d 0.5
0

proposed
conventional

0

0.1

0.2

0.3 0.4 0.5
traffic load

0.6

0.7

Fig. 5. Comparison of connection delay between the conventional scheme(diamond) and the
proposed scheme(square)

5 Conclusions
In this paper, we have proposed a method for handoff between PDSNs which can
reduce signaling latency and user data loss during handoff. This improvement is
achieved by exchanging subscribers’ information about mobile nodes among their
neighbor PDSNs forming a communication network.
When a PDSN recognizes a mobile node moving into its coverage area, it can
quickly establish a communication channel with the mobile node based on the
received subscriber information. As a result, handoff is performed without
reestablishing PPP. Therefore, handoff between PDSNs can be performed faster,
removing time needed for establishing a PPP session with a terminal and for
terminating a previously set up PPP session.

References
1. 3GPP2/TSG-P, P.S0001-A-1.DOC Version 1.0 Version Date: December 15, 2000
2. Inter-Operability Specification (IOS) for CDMA 2000 Access Network Interfaces
(PN-4545), Ballot version, Jun. (2000)
3. C.E. Perkins, (ed.): Ipv4 Mobility Support, RFC 2002, Oct. (1996)

684

J.-h. Ryu and D.-W. Kim

4. 3rd Generation Partnership Project 2.: Wireless IP Architecture Based on IETF Protocols,
3GPP2 P.R0001, Version 1.0.0, Jul. (2000)
5. C. Perkins and D. Johnson: Route Optimization in Mobile IP, IETF draft-ietf-mobileipoptim-09.txt, Feb. (2000)
6. R. Ramjee et al.: IP micro-mobility support using HAWAII, IETF draft-ietf-mobileiphawaii-01.txt, Jul. (2000)
7. C. Perkins: Mobile-IP Local Registration with Hierarchical Foreign Agents, IETF
draft-perkinsmobileip-hierfa-00.txt, Feb. (1996)
8. E. Gustafsson et al.: Mobile IP Regional Registration, IETF draft-ietf-mobileip-reg-tunnel02.txt, Mar. (2000)
9. A. Campbell et al.: Cellular IP, IETF draft-ietf-mobileipcellularip-00.txt, Jan. (2000)
10. S. Thalanany and A. Singh: Quick handoff scheme in a 3G Wireless Network, IETF draftthalanany-mobileipqh- 00.txt, Jul. (2000)
11. Hoon Choi, Nader Moayeri: A Fast Handoff Scheme for Packet Data Service in the
CDMA 2000 System, GLOBECOM (2001) 1747-1753
12. Eunjun Rhee, Jaehong Ryu, Won Ryu: Implementation of Packet Data Serving Node in
the CDMA2000 Network, APIS (2002)

