Modelbase System in Remote Sensing Information
Analysis and Service Grid Node
Yong Xue1,2, Lei Zheng1,3, Ying Luo1,3, Jianping Guo1,3, Wei Wan1,3, Wei Wei1,3,
and Ying Wang1,3
1

State Key Laboratory of Remote Sensing Science, Jointly Sponsored by the Institute of
Remote Sensing Applications of Chinese Academy of Sciences and Beijing Normal University,
Institute of Remote Sensing Applications, Chinese Academy of Sciences, P.O. Box 9718,
Beijing 100101, China
2
Department of Computing, London Metropolitan University, 166-220 Holloway Road, London
N7 8DB, UK
3
Graduate School, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
y.xue@londonmet.ac.uk

Abstract. In this article we describe a modelbase system used in Remote
Sensing Information Analysis and Service Grid Node (RISN) at Institute of
Remote Sensing Applications (IRSA), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS).
The goal of the Node is to make good use of physically distributed resources in
the field of remote sensing science such as data, models and algorithms, and
computing resource left unused on Internet. With the modelbase system, we can
organize and manage models better and make full use of models. With this
system, we update both local and remote models easily, and we can also add
remote modelbase into our modelbase management system. At the same time,
we provide interfaces to access and run models from our node. Implementing it,
we use Oracle to organize and manage models, use java language to connect
with Oracle database and run models on Condor platform.
Keywords: Modelbase system, Remote sensing information analysis and
Service Grid Node, modelbase management system.

1 Introduction
The research of model management theory began 80th last century. In 1980 Blanning
(1980) first imported the notion of modelbase, and designed model query language
(MQL) like database query language to management models. Geoffrion (1987)
designed structural model language (SML), which introduced structural program
design into building models. Muhanna et al. (1988) introduced system theory into
modelbase management system. Wesseling et al. (1996) designed dynamic model
language to support special data structural.
Modelbase can be devised into two kinds by its models: graph modelbase whose
models are graph and arithmetic modelbase whose models are arithmetic or program.
Kuntal et al. (1995) Organized Large Structural Modelbases which were full of graph
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part II, LNCS 4488, pp. 538–541, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Modelbase System in Remote Sensing Information Analysis and Service Grid Node

539

models at 1995, which gave a good example of graph modelbase, but arithmetic
modelbase is different according its application. Liu et al. built a simulation
supporting system of cold rolling process control system based on modelbase. Li et al.
(2002) built water environment models and put them in modelbase. So we present an
arithmetic modelbase that is used in remote sensing application and also can connect
to Grid environment - Condor platform through RISN at IRSA, CAS, China based on
the Condor platform.
The node is a special node of Spatial Information Grid (SIG) in China. The node
will be introduced in Section 2. The modelbase system and the function of modelbase
in the node will be demonstrated in Section 3. Finally, the conclusion and further
development will be addressed in Section 4.

2 Remote Sensing Information Analysis and Service Grid Node
Remotely sensed data is one of the most important spatial information sources, so the
research on architectures and technical supports of RISN is the significant part of the
research on SIG. The aim of the Node is to integrate data, traditional algorithm and
software, and computing resource distributed, provide one-stop service to everyone
on Internet, and make good use of everything pre-existing. The Node is extendable,
which contains many personal computers, supercomputers or other nodes. It also can
be as small as just on personal computer. There are two entries to the Node: 1) A
portal implemented by JSP. User can visit it through Internet browses, such as
Internet Explorer and others; 2) A portal implemented by web service and workflow
technology. It is special for SIG. Other Grid resources and Grid systems can be
integrated with our node through this portal. The node provides the application
services such as aerosol optical depth retrieval, land surface temperature retrieval, soil
moisture retrieval, surface reflectance retrieval, and vegetation index applications
from MODIS data. To manage models, we used modelbase system in the node.
Figure 1 shows the structure of our modelbase system.

3 Modelbase System in Remote Sensing Information Analysis and
Service Grid Node
Modelbase system has two main parts: modelbase file system and modelbase
management system.
3.1 Modelbase File System
Modelbase file system is the place where models are stored. In the RISN, models are
stored in several computers, remote computers and remote modelbases. All models
treated as virtually stored in one computer with modelbase management system. We
achieve the distributed management system in this architecture. The system has
another benefit: we can add both models separately or in remote modelbase freely but
not download models to our computers. In our RISN, we provide Condor platform to
run models on Grid system, so the architecture assumes to the option of sharing
resources in the Grid computing.

540

Y. Xue et al.

Fig. 1. Information registry of models in remote modelbase

3.2 Modelbase Management System
Modelbase management system contains the registry information of models, the
interface with Condor platform and the interface with portal.
3.2.1 Registry of Models
We import notion of meta-module (Xue et al. 2006) and extends it in our system. In
our system, every model is a meta-module, and the information is stored in the table
of modelbase.
3.2.2 Updating in Remote Modelbase
In our design, we can add remote modelbase expediently but no need to download
models to our computer. But in order to add models in remote computer into our
modelbase system, the information of models is needed to be registered, and a method
is needed to be provided to get models if you want to provide your models to run by
others. If you register your modelbase information in our modelbase system, we will
provide an interface to connect to your modelbase and make it part of our modelbase.
3.2.3 Models Access and Running on a Grid Computing Platform
As our modelbase system is one part of RISN, we provide interface to connect with
our portal and workflow.
After select the model you want to run, you can run by pressing the “submit”
button on the portal, or download model to your own computer according to the
information of the model to run. If you choose to run the model on our Remote
Sensing Information Analysis and Service Grid Node, we provide some model to run
on the Condor platform, you need to input parameter as required.

4 Conclusion and Future Work
Grid technology is a very effective method for remotely sensed data processing
service. Through it the existing remotely sensed models and algorithms resource can

Modelbase System in Remote Sensing Information Analysis and Service Grid Node

541

be shared seems like the common service in Grid environment. In this article we
describe a modelbase system used in Remote Sensing Information Analysis and
Service Grid Node which can be used on Condor platform. With the modelbase
system, we can organize and manage models better and make full use of models and
run models on Condor platform. Any models can be added by any users who are
authorized, in the future, models will be added to modelbase only after checked by
administrator.

Acknowledgment
This publication is an output from the research projects “Multi-scale Aerosol Optical
Thickness Quantitative Retrieval from Remotely Sensing Data at Urban Area”
(40671142) and "Grid platform based aerosol monitoring modeling using MODIS
data and middlewares development" (40471091) funded by NSFC, China and “863
Program - Remote Sensing Information Processing and Service Node” funded by the
MOST, China.

References
1. Blanning, R.W.,: How Managers Decide to Use Planning Models. Long Range Planning.
13(1980) 32-35
2. Geoffrion, A.,: An Introduction to Structured Modeling. Management Science.
33:5(1987)547-588
3. Muhanna, W.A., and Roger, A.P.: A System Framework for Model Software Management.
TIMS/ORSA meeting, Washington, DC. 4(1988)

