Grate Furnace Combustion:
A Submodel for the Solid Fuel Layer
H.A.J.A. van Kuijk, R.J.M. Bastiaans, J.A. van Oijen,
and L.P.H. de Goey
Eindhoven University of Technology, P.O. Box 513, 5600 MB,
Eindhoven, The Netherlands
h.a.j.a.v.kuijk@tue.nl

Abstract. The reduction of NOx -formation in biomass ﬁred grate furnaces requires the development of numerical models. To represent the
variety in scales and physical processes playing a role in the conversion,
newly developed submodels are required. Here, a submodel for the reverse combustion process in the solid fuel layer on the grate is described.
The submodel is shown to give good predictions for the velocity of the
combustion front as well as for the spatial proﬁles of porosity, oxygen
mass fraction and temperature. These predictions are essential input for
NOx -calculations.
Keywords: Grate furnace, reverse combustion, biomass.

1

Introduction

A popular way of medium small-scale thermal biomass conversion is the use
of grate furnace combustion [1]. The operating conditions and design of such a
furnace have to be chosen carefully to meet the NOx emission limits. Numerical
models can support the making of these choices, provided that accurate submodels for the phenomena occurring in the oven are available.
The formation of NOx in the furnace (cf. [1]) is strongly determined by the
combustion process in the furnace. Generally, the conversion processes takes
place in two zones. In the primary conversion zone, the solid fuel is gasiﬁed on
a moving grate. In the secondary conversion zone, additional air is supplied to
burn out the resulting gas mixture. Due to the low combustion temperatures in
both zones, the main source for the NO is the fuel-N (fuel-bound nitrogen). In
the solid fuel layer, the fuel-N is released as so-called N-precursors, mainly NH3 .
In the secondary conversion zone, part of these precursors is converted to NO.
The combustion process as well as the NOx -formation process is highly complex due to the diﬀerent physical phenomena involved, i.e. transport of heat
and mass as well as chemical reactions. Furthermore, a wide range of length
scales is involved. The overall combustion process is determined by the conversion of single particles, occurring at a typical length scale of a particle diameter.
Multiple particles are converted simultaneously in a reaction wave, propagating
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part I, LNCS 4487, pp. 947–954, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

948

H.A.J.A. van Kuijk et al.

trough the solid fuel layer in the primary conversion zone on a length scale of
the bed height. Finally, the gases originating from the solid fuel layer burn out
and transfer their heat to the boiler present in the oven at a length scale given
by the dimension of the oven.
To represent the variety in scales and physical processes aﬀecting the NOx formation process, submodels for (i) the combustion process in the solid fuel
layer, (ii) the release of N-precursors from the solid fuel layer (iii) the gas phase
combustion process and (iv) the oxidation of the N-precursors are required [2].
Without a submodel for the combustion process in the solid fuel layer, advanced
models for the secondary combustion zone (cf. [3]) have to operate with a boundary condition based on measurements just above the solid fuel layer, which
strongly restricts their ﬂexibility (cf. [4]).
In developing a model for the solid fuel layer, its resemblance to a ﬁxed bed
combustion process can be exploited. In a reference frame traveling at the same
velocity as the grate, the combustion process is similar to reverse combustion
in a ﬁxed bed [5]. In this mode, air is ﬂowing in the upward direction through
the fuel layer, while the reaction front propagates downward. Reverse ﬁxed bed
combustion processes can be described with 1-dimensional models.
Existing 1-dimensional numerical models for reverse ﬁxed bed combustion
(e.g. [6], [7]) and coal have the disadvantage that due to the great amount of
detail in the equations and their time-dependent formulation, they require calculation times that are too long to study changes in furnace design and operating
conditions [4]. The complexity may also lead to numerical diﬃculties (cf. [8]).
Application of sensitivity analyses to these models is generally not reported,
which raises the question up to which extent their complexity and the resulting
calculation times are justiﬁed.
The present work addresses the need for a model that is able to describe the
reaction front propagating in the solid fuel layer with only the essential processes
and at low computational costs. Therefore, a limited set of equations based on
a model from the literature [9] is used. The predictions of the model are at the
length scale of the bed, while in the model chemistry and transport processes
at the level of a single particle are accounted for. At the moment the model
presented here is operating with a parameter set for coal combustion, but as the
combustion process for wood-like biomass is essentially the same, the model can
be adapted for this.
In this work, two important new aspects of the model are presented. Firstly,
it is shown that this model can be solved also numerically, while in the past it
has been solved analytically only [10]. This opens the possibility to extend the
model for increased accuracy and ﬂexibility if necessary. Secondly, it is shown
that stationary solutions for the reverse combustion process can be obtained by
using a reference frame attached to the combustion front. This enables convenient performance of parametric studies and results in fast calculation times.
In addition, with the numerical analysis it can also be shown that the eﬀect of
heat and mass and heat transfer limitations in the fuel bed lead to a change

Grate Furnace Combustion: A Submodel for the Solid Fuel Layer

949

in ﬂame structure and thus to the applicability of analytical solution methods.
This study is presented elsewhere (cf. [11]).
An important feature of the model is that it can be combined with a submodel
for the release rates of N-precursors. These release rates are strongly determined
by the conversion rate and temperature, (cf. [12]), two quantities that can be
predicted with the model. These quantities can serve as input for a submodel
consisting of N-precursor release rates based on measurements in a heated grid
reactor (cf. [13]) or TGA (cf. [12]))
It is the purpose of this paper to illustrate the advantages of the numerical
implementation of the model and the possibilities it oﬀers to serve as a submodel
for grate furnace combustion. An extensive comparison of model results with
experiments falls not within the present scope. Suﬃce it to remark that the model
currently predicts conversion rates that have the correct order of magnitude
compared to experimental results (eg. [14]) which is good, considering that i)
the model is not highly detailed, while ﬁxed bed conversion is a complex process,
ii) no adaption of the model constants was performed to ﬁt the model to the
measurements, iii) there are large uncertainties in some of the model constants
and iv) there are large uncertainties in experimental results reported (compare
[10] with [14])
The outline of this paper is as follows. First, the model equations are discussed
(Sec. 2). Then, it is shown that the model can predict spatial proﬁles of the
variables and the conversion rate of the solid material (Sec. 3). Finally, the
conclusions are presented (Sec. 4).

2

Model Equations and Data

In this section a short review of the model equations and data presented in Ref.
[10] is given. The model consists of a set of three equations for the porosity of the
fuel bed , the temperature T and the oxygen mass fraction Y as a function of
the spatial coordinate x. In order to obtain this set, the original timedependent
model equations have been transformed to a reference frame traveling at the
same velocity as the combustion front [9]. This results in:
vs

vs

vs

d
(ρs (1 − )) = −R
dx

d
d
d
( ρg Y ) +
( ρg vg Y ) −
dx
dx
dx

ρg D

(1)

dY
dx

d
d
d
((1 − )ρs cps T + ρg cpg T ) +
( ρg vg cpg T ) −
dx
dx
dx

Λ

= νR

(2)

dT
dx

(3)

= −ΔHr R

Here, vs is the velocity of the solid, which is moving due to the change in
reference frame. The ﬁrst terms on the rhs. of each equation are convective ﬂuxes
involving vs . These result from the transformation of time-derivatives in the
original reference frame. Other symbols in this set of equations are the reaction

950

H.A.J.A. van Kuijk et al.

source term R, reaction enthalpy ΔHr , eﬀective coeﬃcients for dispersion D and
conduction Λ as well as speciﬁc heat cp and density ρ for gas and solid (subscripts
g and s, respectively). The boundary conditions are given at the unburnt side
(u; x → −∞) and burnt side (b; x → ∞)
|u = 0,

Y |u = Yu ,

dY
dx

T |u = Tu ;

=0
b

dT
dx

= 0.

(4)

b

In this paper, instead of using vs and vg , results are presented in terms of the
gas mass ﬂux and solid mass ﬂux at the unburnt side, given by
mgu =

u ρgu vgu ;

msu = (1 −

u )ρs vsu .

(5)

Summarizing, the stationary model equations (1,2) and (3) together with the
boundary conditions can be used to obtain (x), Y (x) and T (x) as well as msu
as a a function of gas mass ﬂux mgu .
Expressions for the reaction source term, the diﬀusion coeﬃcient and the
conductivity coeﬃcient are required to solve the model. To obtain an expression
for R the heterogeneous surface reaction of coal with oxygen
C + νO2 → (1 + ν) CO2 ,

(6)

is used. As measurements indicate that the primary product in the reaction zone
is CO2 [10], this is a reasonable assumption. The volumetric reaction rate per
unit volume can be expressed by
R=

1
S 2/3 ρg Y.
kr −1 + km −1

(7)

Here, kr is an Arrhenius rate constant, km a mass transfer coeﬃcient and S the
speciﬁc surface area of the fuel bed. Introducing the dimensionless mass transfer
coeﬃcient,
km
(8)
Km =
kr
it can be seen that for Km → ∞, R is limited by kinetics, while Km → 0
indicates that R is limited by mass transfer eﬀects. In the kinetically limited
case, the expression reduces to that given by Field [15]:
R = kr ρg Y S.

(9)

with kr given by
kr = Af T exp −

Ea
RT

,

(10)

in which the pre-exponential factor is indicated with Af and the activation
energy by Ea . The speciﬁc surface area in the rate expression can be related to
particle properties. For spherical particles of diameter dp in an SC (simple cubic)

Grate Furnace Combustion: A Submodel for the Solid Fuel Layer

951

structure reacting as a shrinking core, the speciﬁc surface area during conversion
can then be expressed by [10]
S = Su

1−
1−

2/3

.

(11)

u

Finally, expressions for the gas density, the eﬀective conductivity the dispersion coeﬃcient and the mass transfer coeﬃcient are needed. The gas density is
given by
Tu
ρg = ρgu .
(12)
Tb
Correlations for Λ, D and km are given in [10]. The model equations and
additional data are implemented in the one dimensional laminar ﬂame code
Chem1d [16].
Table 1. Data used for the calculations for a propagating reaction front in a bed of
coal particles [10]
Parameter
Tu
ΔH
cps
ρs
ρsa
dp
ρgu (Tu )
cpg
Yu
Af
Ea
ν

3

Unit
K
J g−1
J kg−1 K−1
g cm−3
g cm−3
cm
g cm−3
J kg−1 K−1
−
cm K−1 s−1
kJ mol−1
−

Value
288
28.9 × 103
1.8
1220 × 10−3
470 × 10−3
2.5
1.226 × 10−3
1.13
0.23
6 × 104
150
2.67

Results

Model results consist of spatial proﬁles of , T and the heat release q.
˙ Here,
we present solutions for varying mgu (cf. Fig. 1). The latter quantity can be
determined by the equation q˙ = −ΔHr R and is a measure for the magnitude
reaction source term. The results show that with increasing mgu , q˙ increases.
At the same time, the width of the boundary layers in the proﬁles for T and Y
increases. Due to the increased ﬂow of air, the conversion of the solid fuel b as
well as Tb become higher.
From the spatial ﬂame proﬁles for diﬀerent mgu , the conversion b as well as
Tb can be determined as a function of mgu (cf. Figs. 2b, 2c). By using Tb in the
evaluation of Km (cf. (8)), Kmb can be determined (cf. Fig. 2d). Furthermore,
msu results from the calculations (cf. Fig. 2a). It can be observed that msu
initially increases when mgu increases, until a maximum is reached. Then, msu

0.25
Y
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
-20 -10 0 10
x(cm)

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
20

2500
10
2000
8
1500
6
1000
4
T
500
2
q˙
0
0
-20 -10 0 10 20
x(cm)

(a)

q(J
˙ cm−3s−1)

H.A.J.A. van Kuijk et al.

T (K)

Y

952

(b)

0.25

1

0.2

0.9

0.15

Ef ↑
b

msu(10 −2g cm−2s−1)

Fig. 1. Spatial ﬂame proﬁles for varying gas mass ﬂux. Results for Y and (a) and
T and q˙ (b). The arrows indicate results obtained with increasing mgu from mgu =
4.9×10−3 g cm−2 s−1 to mgu = 14.6×10−3 g cm−2 s−1 in steps of 2.4×10−3 g cm−2 s−1 .

0

0.5
1
1.5
mgu(10 −2g cm−2s−1)
(a)

0.6
0

2

2

10 0
K mb

Ef ↑

1500

10 −2

1000
500
0

0.5
1
1.5
mgu(10 −2g cm−2s−1)
(b)

10 2

2500
2000

Ef ↑

0.7

0.05
0

T (K)

0.8

0.1

0.5
1
1.5
mgu(10 −2g cm−2s−1)
(c)

2

10 −4
0

Ef ↑

0.5
1
1.5
mgu(10 −2g cm−2s−1)
(d)

2

Fig. 2. Flame parameters as a function of gas mass ﬂux for varying activation energy. Results for the solid mass ﬂux (a), the porosity (b), the temperature (c) and
dimensionless mass transfer coeﬃcient (d). Solid line: Ea = 150 kJ mol−1 , dashed line:
Ea = 160 kJ mol−1 , dotted line: Ea = 170 kJ mol−1 .

decreases until extinction takes place. The shape of the curve of msu as a function
of mgu (Fig. 2) was explained in earlier works in terms of the counterbalancing
eﬀects of the increased oxygen supply to and and increased convective heat
transport out of the reaction zone with increasing mgu (cf. [17]). The temperature
Tb and porosity b increase continuously with increasing mgu . (Due to limitations

Grate Furnace Combustion: A Submodel for the Solid Fuel Layer

953

of the current numerical implementation, the extinction point b = 1 is not
reached completely). The dimensionless mass transfer coeﬃcient Kmb (i.e. Km
evaluated at Tb ) shows that for low mgu , the source term is controlled by kinetics
(Kmb > 1). At mgu ∼ 1.0 × 10−3 g cm−2 s−1 mass transfer eﬀects begin to play
a role (Kmb < 1). Furthermore, it can be seen that all parameters are sensitive
to changes in Ea .
A typical calculation time to obtain results for a variation of mgu from zero
up to the extinction point is only ten minutes on a PC. Furthermore, with other
models for coal beds with an instationary formulation (e.g. [18]), it is no longer
necessary to wait until a steady state is reached when a parameter is varied.

4

Conclusions

From the numerical results presented in this paper, it can be concluded that the
two most important quantities that determine the release of the N-precursors
can be predicted, namely the front velocity and temperature. These quantities
can be determined as a function of gas mass ﬂow, the main controlling parameter in a grate furnace. In the calculations, both kinetics and mass transfer
limitations can be taken in into account. Furthermore, the eﬀect of fuel parameters (particle size and bed density) that show strong variations in practical
combustion processes has been included via the correlations used to determine
the model coeﬃcients.
The implementation of a stationary set of equations as is performed here has
two important advantages. Firstly, the calculation times are short. This makes
the method proposed here suitable for application as a submodel in a grate furnace. Moreover, the the model can be extend further with additional important
phenomena and still remain within the limits of reasonable calculation times.
In addition, the instationary implementation makes it convenient to perform
parametric studies. This makes it achievable to study the eﬀect of additional
phenomena included in the model by means of a sensitivity analysis to determine their eﬀect on the velocity of the reaction front, the temperature and the
structure of the reaction zone.
First, the model will be extended to describe the additional chemistry necessary for biomass conversion by using the Chem1D modules for the gas phase
kinetics. It is also planned to include the eﬀect of other parameters that are
shown to have a large impact on the combustion process in practical applications, e.g. the moisture content of the fuel.

References
1. S. van der Loo, H. Koppejan, Handbook of Biomass: Combustion and Coﬁring,
Twente University Press, 2002.
2. R. J. M. Bastiaans, H. A. J. A. van Kuijk, B. A. Albrecht, J. A. van Oijen, L. P. H.
de Goey, Catalysis for Renewables, Wiley-VCH, 2006, Ch. Thermal biomass conversion and NOx emissions.

954

H.A.J.A. van Kuijk et al.

3. B. A. Albrecht, R. J. M. Bastiaans, J. A. van Oijen, L. P. H. de Goey, NOx emissions
modelling in biomass combustion grate furnaces, in: A. Reis, W. J., W. Leuckel
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 7th European Conference on Industial Furnaces and
Boilers, Porto, Portugal, 2006.
4. R. Scharler, T. Feckl, I. Obernberger, Modiﬁcation of a Magnussen constant of
the Eddy Dissipation Model for biomass grate furnaces by means of hot gas in-situ
FT-IR absorption spectroscopy, Progress in Computational Fluid Dynamics 3 (2-4)
(2003) 102–111.
5. H. Thunman, B. Leckner, Ignition and propagation of a reaction front in crosscurrent bed combustion of wet biofuels, Fuel 80 (4) (2001) 473–481.
6. H. Thunman, B. Leckner, Inﬂuence of size and density of fuel on combustion in a
packed bed, Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 30 (2) (2005) 2939–2946.
7. J. C. Wurzenberger, S. Wallner, H. Raupenstrauch, J. G. Khinast, Thermal conversion of biomass: Comprehensive reactor and particle modeling, AIChE Journal
48 (10) (2002) 2398–2411.
8. P. T. Radulovic, M. U. Ghani, L. D. Smoot, An improved model for ﬁxed bed coal
combustion and gasiﬁcation, Fuel 74 (4) (1995) 582–594.
9. R. Gort, J. J. H. Brouwers, Theoretical analysis of the propagation of a reaction
front in a packed bed, Combust. Flame 124 (1-2) (2001) 1–13.
10. R. Gort, On the propagation of a reaction front in a packed bed, Ph.D. thesis,
Twente University, Enschede, The Netherlands (1995).
11. H. A. J. A. van Kuijk, R. J. M. Bastiaans, J. A. Oijen, L. P. H. de Goey, Reverse
ﬁxed bed combustion: kinetically controlled and mass transfer controlled ﬂame
structures. To be published.
12. W. de Jong, A. Pirone, M. A. Wojtowicz, Pyrolysis of miscanthus giganteus and
wood pellets: TG-FTIR analysis and reaction kinetics, Fuel 82 (9) (2003) 1139–
1147.
13. A. Toland, R. J. M. Bastiaans, A. Holten, L. P. H. Goey, Kinetics of CO release from
bark and medium density ﬁbre board pyrolysis, Biomass and Bioenergy. Submitted
for publication.
14. P. Nicholls, Underfeed combustion, eﬀect of preheat, and distribution of ash in fuel
beds, Bulletin of the United States Bureau of Mines 378 (1934) 1–76.
15. M. A. Field, D. W. Gill, B. B. Morgan, P. G. W. Hawksly, Combustion of Pulverized
Coal, BCURA, Leatherhead, 1967.
16. Chem1d, A one-dimensional laminar ﬂame code. www.combustion.tue.nl.
17. D. Lozinski, J. Buckmaster, Quenching of reverse smolder, Combust. Flame 102 (12) (1995) 87–100.
18. J. Cooper, W. L. H. Hallett, A numerical model for packed-bed combustion of char
particles, Chemical Engineering Science 55 (20) (2000) 4451–4460.

