Introduction to the ICCS 2007 Workshop on
Dynamic Data Driven Applications Systems
Frederica Darema
National Science Foundation, USA
darema@nsf.gov

Abstract. This is the 5th International Workshop on Dynamic Data Driven
Applications Systems (DDDAS), organized in conjunction with ICCS. The
DDDAS concept entails the ability to dynamically incorporate data into an
executing application simulation, and in reverse, the ability of applications to
dynamically steer measurement processes. Such dynamic data inputs can be
acquired in real-time on-line or they can be archival data. DDDAS is leading to
new capabilities by improving applications modeling and systems management
methods, augmenting the analysis and prediction capabilities of simulations,
improving the efficiency of simulations and the effectiveness of measurement
systems. The scope of the present workshop provides examples of research and
technology advances enabled through DDDAS and driven by DDDAS. The
papers presented in this workshop represent ongoing multidisciplinary research
efforts by an international set of researchers from academe, industry, national
and research laboratories.
Keywords: applications, measurements, dynamic runtime, sensors, grids.

1 Introduction
The Dynamic Data Driven Applications Systems (DDDAS) [1,6] concept entails the
ability to dynamically incorporate data into an executing application simulation, and
in reverse, the ability of applications to dynamically steer measurement processes.
Such dynamic data inputs can be acquired in real-time on-line or they can be data
retrieved from archival storage. The DDDAS concept offers the promise of
improving modeling methods, augmenting the analysis and prediction capabilities of
application simulations, improving the efficiency of simulations and the effectiveness
of measurement systems. The kind of multidisciplinary advances that can be enabled
through the DDDAS concept, as well as technology capabilities required to support
DDDAS environments, have been discussed in [1-8, 10-11]; papers presented in the
DDDAS/ICCS Workshops Series provide examples of advances enabled through an
increasing number of projects. The DDDAS Program [5] announced in 2005, with
seeding efforts on DDDAS having started previously (2000 – 2005) through the NSF
ITR Program [6], have provided some initial funding support for these efforts. In
particular, the DDDAS Program was co-sponsored by multiple NSF Directorates and
Offices, and by NOAA and NIH, and in cooperation with Programs in the European
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part I, LNCS 4487, pp. 955–962, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

956

F. Darema

Community and the United Kingdom [5]. The value of DDDAS has been increasingly
recognized by the broader community and has been discussed in the reports of “blue
ribbon” studies [7, 8] and community driven workshops [10, 11]. DDDAS is a
“revolutionary and important” direction [7]. This impact of DDDAS to scientific,
engineering, and societal areas is increasingly becoming widely and internationally
recognized: the 2006 NSF sponsored DDDAS Workshop [4], drew participation from
multiple US agencies, and there is an established cooperation of European programs
with the US on DDDAS. Furthermore, at the same time there is an increasing interest
by industry on DDDAS, and this is manifested through the participation of industry in
a number of the DDDAS research projects.
The need for synergistic multidisciplinary research in enabling DDDAS
capabilities has been articulated from the outset and consistently thereafter [1-8]; and
specifically, there is need for synergistic multidisciplinary research advances in
applications modeling, in mathematical and statistical algorithms, in measurement
methods and data management, and in computer systems software, targeted towards
creating DDDAS capabilities and environments. Furthermore, in [2] the case is made
that the DDDAS concept leads to an infrastructure that goes beyond the traditional
notions of computational grids, and provides an impetus for new directions and
capabilities in CyberInfractrucure environments [9]. Presently an increasing number
of multidisciplinary research efforts on DDDAS is being pursued by an international
set of researchers from academe, industry, national and research laboratories, leading
to new capabilities in application modeling and measurement capabilities, computer
sciences methods, and development of enhanced software systems architectural
frameworks supporting DDDAS environments, and driving new directions in
CyberInfrastructure [4].
The efforts presented in this workshop provide examples of technologies and new
capabilities that are being developed based on the DDDAS concept and in supporting
DDDAS environments. The www.cise.nsf.gov/dddas and www.dddas.org sites are
source of information on a multitude of projects and other efforts encompassed under
the DDDAS rubric. The present workshop is the fifth of a series of international
workshops on the DDDAS topic that have been organized as part of ICCS, starting
with ICCS’03. The Workshop provides a forum where project investigators update
the broader community on the progress in their project. In addition, the discussions
that take place, provide an opportunity for leveraging advances made in related
projects, and facilitating objectives for creating collaborations and liaisons among
complimentary projects, thus leading “systems of systems” through horizontal
integration across projects, and creation of “software architectural frameworks”
through vertical integration leveraging across projects. In addition to DDDAS/ICCS
and the NSF sponsored workshops [1, 6], other workshops and community building
activities are organized by the research community [e.g. 10, 11] further broadening
the outreach to other researchers and application areas. The papers presented in the
present workshop represent a sample of the scope of technical efforts pursued. This
introduction serves as an overview to place in context the work presented in the
workshop.

Introduction to the ICCS 2007 Workshop on DDDAS

957

2 Overview of Work Presented in This Workshop
The papers presented in this workshop represent a sample of the ongoing research
efforts to enable DDDAS capabilities, in a wide set of areas, such as: enhanced civil
and mechanical systems; health systems; critical infrastructure systems, such as
electrical power grids, transportation and urban water distribution systems, emergency
detection, response and disaster mitigation; enhanced methods for severe weather
analysis and prediction; air, water, and subsurface chemical contaminant propagation
and mitigation of damage; human and social systems; and enhanced computer
systems software methods and environments. The papers represent ongoing efforts
synergistic, multidisciplinary research advances in applications modeling,
applications algorithms, measurement methods, and in systems software. These
efforts contribute and build the layers of software architectural frameworks that are
being developed to enable and support DDDAS capabilities and requirements. A
number of projects have interactions and collaborations with relevant industrial
partners, and with regional and other governmental organizations, to utilize existing
infrastructure resources and to demonstrate in realistic situations the new capabilities
developed. Each paper, together with an overview of the respective project, discusses
at depth recent technical advances made in the project.
Papers [12-15] discuss applications related to human health: from personalized
pharmaceuticals, to advanced medical intervention and customized medical treatment.
In [12] is discussed the onset of a paradigm shift in pharmaceutical and biotechnology
research methods, leading towards a future world of personalized medicines, which
will be enabled through a foundational framework that will be based on the DDDAS
concept. In [13] new frameworks and architectures for brain-machine interface
communication and control capabilities are developed, using mixture models to
enhance rehabilitation of disabled patients. In [14] and [15] are presented new
modeling methods and distributed computational frameworks for advanced medical
procedures. Paper [14] discusses an image-guided neurosurgery and grid-enabled
software environment by integrating real-time acquisition of intra-operative
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (I-MRI) with the preoperative MRI, fMRI, and DTMRI data. Paper [15] discusses work on novel advances for cancer tumor treatment
by utilizing real-time imaging data to provide dynamic control of a laser heat source
targeted to ablate only the tumor-tissue, and at the same time imparting minimal
damage to the tumor surrounding area.
In papers [16-22], new applications and methods are enabled in the areas of
environmental and natural resource management. Dynamic streaming of data into the
application models and architecture and adaptive control of sensor networks, is a
common aspect of the work discussed here. Papers [16] and [17] discuss new
capabilities on DDDAS methods for application models driving and establishing
system architecture, enabling adaptive management and control of stationary and
mobile sensors for monitoring ecosystems such as forests [16] and aqueous
environments [17], and addressing issues such reducing errors and uncertainty,
dynamic control of the sensor network for power management, and adaptive
placement of mobile sensors. Papers [18-21] address advances through DDDAS in
contaminant tracking in subsurface and aqueous environments (e.g. oil spills in [18]),
or in the atmosphere ([19-21]). In [19] DDDAS methods are used to perform analysis

958

F. Darema

and accurately predict the path of the contaminant, by effectively solving the forward
problem, as well as the inverse problem, so that the location of the contaminant
source can be identified. Furthermore the project is developing enhanced reducedorder-modeling approaches to enable such predictions and analysis to be done in nearreal time. Papers [20] and [21] use the DDDAS concept to develop enhanced Kalman
Filtering methods and an integrated framework for analysis of transport of
atmospheric chemical pollutants (like sulfur) in wide geographical regions. In the
context of a research effort addressing the development of DDDAS environments for
coastal and environmental applications, paper [22] focuses on discussing the advances
in a software framework for providing accurate and timely analysis for hurricane
events. Paper [23] uses DDDAS approaches for improving analysis and the accuracy
of predicting the path of wildfires, through dynamic incorporation, into executing
simulations, measurement data dynamically acquired through aerial survey, thermal
sensors on the ground, winds and humidity measurements, together with archival data
on the terrain and vegetation.
Papers [24-28] discuss work that is aimed to create DDDAS-based enhanced
critical infrastructure systems, where simulation models use dynamic data inputs and
control the data acquisition process in real-time evolving conditions to provide
optimized planning, operation and response and mitigation of the impact of adverse
unexpected conditions. Advances made include work reported in [24] on ad-hoc
simulation modeling and monitoring data for adaptive management of transportation
systems to optimize conditions in urban traffic and to provide decision support for
responding to adverse and disruptive events such as needs emergency evacuation of a
city area. Work reported in [25] on adaptive monitoring and detection of water
contamination in a city system, and determining the source of the contaminant; this
work can lead to more safe urban water systems and provide response capabilities in
cases of adverse events affecting a city’s water system. Papers [26-28] discuss the
development of DDDAS environments for optimized management of electrical
power-grid systems, to predict, respond, and mitigate, failures such as power demand
surge, or disruptive events such as failure of transformers and thus avoid extensive
blackouts. The methods include streaming monitoring data in to continually running
simulation models, and through simulation control determine adaptively the kinds of
further monitoring needed, as well as develop robust methods in the presence of
measurement uncertainties.
Papers [29-32] deal with behavioral and situational awareness management
systems, which, through DDDAS approaches, seek to develop advanced analysis,
prediction, and response capabilities. Paper [29] discusses work where data from
continually monitored cell-phone activity is streamed into agent-based simulations, to
detect potentially disruptive events, like traffic congestion or an adverse event in a
large crowd gathering, or evacuation situations. Work discussed in [30] is aimed at
developing methods and frameworks to support large DDDAS “mixed reality”
environments of agent-based simulations together with full scale preparedness
exercise, by modeling individual and group dynamics, and using on-line monitoring
for analyzing and predicting the onset of behaviors and actions, in situations such as
the effects and impact of an epidemic disease, or a chemical or radiological release,
and guiding responders actions as such events evolve. Paper [31] discusses DDDAS
methods to track facial expressions and body movement to detect human behaviors

Introduction to the ICCS 2007 Workshop on DDDAS

959

such as deception and predict intent. In [32] is the use of DDDAS approaches to
enhance fidelity of simulations for social sciences studies environments, through
adaptive data collection processes, to minimize the impact of input data uncertainties.
Papers [33-38] discuss novel methods of weather analysis and forecast, including
for situations of severe or extreme weather events. In [33] and [34] are discussed
DDDAS-based simulation and measurement methods and software frameworks, for
supporting the required cyber-infrastructure for tornadic events, and for improving the
accuracy of predicting the tornado path. Paper [33] presents software infrastructure
advances needed to support real-time, dynamic and adaptive feed-back loop between
dynamic incorporation of monitoring data into the executing simulation models, and
in return continuous and simulation-based adaptive control of multiple and
heterogeneous on-line measurements, such as radar measurements, winds,
atmospheric pressure, temperature, humidity, etc. Work in [34] is developing new
algorithmic methods, by applying active learning with support vector machines
approaches, to improve the methods for discriminating between conditions that lead
to onset of tornados versus those that do not. In [35] are discussed new advances in
adaptive observation strategies through integration of non-linear adaptive weather
prediction models, as well as algorithms that learn from past-experience, for adaptive
planning and control of the best discrete locations and times for additional
measurements under time-varying conditions, in order to minimize the forecast errors
for “high-impact” weather in the Pacific. Paper [36] uses DDDAS to enhance and
overcome limitations of traditional data-assimilation approaches; the new methods
reported here treat jointly position and amplitude data assimilation, and extend the
methodology to multivariate fields, as a generalized solution applicable to
meteorological, oceanographic and hydrological applications. While measurements
in ambient environments are very important and used extensively in many modeling
efforts (including many of the ones presented in this workshop), there is value also
derived from more controlled measurement environments; this is the approach in the
efforts discussed in [37] and [38] which use DDDAS-based adaptive modeling and
measurement methods for weather forecasting. Paper [37] discusses the experimental
infrastructure as a testing observatory for laboratory simulations of planetary flows
that functions in real- time. Paper [38] discusses the software methods for more
efficient execution of the weather model simulator, including fluids modeling,
algorithms and performance.
Papers [39-43] address DDDAS-based methods on structural monitoring, faulttolerance, and optimized management of systems like buildings, aircraft, windturbines, fluid thermal systems, optimized performance in materials. In [39] are
presented advances through DDDAS for prediction of “near real-time” structural
dynamics and impact, in a structure like an aircraft, through reduced-order modeling
methods integrated with on-line sensor data, together with the development of a novel
sensor-data compression algorithm and it’s application to fast detection of structural
damage. The research pursued in [40] applies DDDAS to materials characterization
by enabling new methods for determining a priori and as the experiment proceeds the
collection of data needed to characterize the material. Paper [41] is employing
DDDAS for evaluation of fluid-thermal systems for conditions such of a heated jet
injected into a laminar boundary layer. Paper [42] is applying DDDAS to novel
capabilities for more effective fault diagnosis is wind turbines, and more efficient

960

F. Darema

operation of such systems. The efforts in [43] are developing new systems methods
for supporting DDDAS environments for analysis of structural aspects of sensor
instrumented buildings, and specifically new methods for managing distributed
communication and coordination of over large self-organized networks of
heterogeneous devices, under critical conditions with resource constraints and needs
for prioritization of resource allocation.
Papers [44-48] discuss algorithmic and software advances for supporting DDDAS
environments. The focus of paper [44] is on novel algorithms to support parallel
multi-block numerical models coupled with global stochastic optimization algorithms,
dynamic multi-dimensional, scientific datasets, and adaptive runtime management
strategies, resulting into a software architectural framework for developing large-scale
and complex decision-making DDDAS systems. In [45] methods are developed for
dynamic intrusion detection and a software framework to support the requirements of
such applications. Work in [46] uses DDDAS to improve on the precision and
robustness of signal and speech recognition process. In [47] are discussed methods
and a framework to enable verification of dynamically composable and configurable
simulations, such as those required in DDDAS environments. Paper [48] discusses the
challenges of propagation and compounding of uncertainties and novel methods on
increasing confidence in evolving complex simulations in DDDAS environments.

3 Summary
DDDAS has been gaining recognition as an important and revolutionary concept that
creates new capabilities in applications and measurement methods and systems.
Through efforts that are developing DDDAS environments, we are in a strong path
towards accomplishing such objectives and realize the DDDAS promise.

References
1. NSF Workshop, March 2000; www.cise.nsf.gov/dddas
2. F. Darema, Grid Computing and Beyond: The Context of Dynamic Data Driven Applications
Systems, Proceedings of the IEEE, Special Issue on Grid Computing, March 2005
3. F. Darema, Dynamic Data Driven Applications Systems: A New Paradigm for Application
Simulations and Measurements, ICCS’04; F. Darema, Dynamic Data Driven Applications
Systems: New Capabilities for Application Simulations and Measurements, ICCS’05; and
F. Darema, Introduction to the ICCS2006 Workshop on Dynamic Data Driven
Applications Systems
4. NSF Sponsored Workshop on DDDAS-Dynamic Data Driven Applications Systems, Jan
19-20, 2006 [www.cise.nsf.gov/dddas]
5. DDDAS-Dynamic Data Driven Applications Systems Program Solicitation (NSF 05-570);
www.cise.nsf.gov/dddas
6. NSF Information Technology Research (ITR) Program (1999-2004)
7. SBES: Simulation-Based Engineering Science - Revolutionizing Engineering through
Simulation, May 2006; (http://www.ices.utexas.edu/events/SBES_Final_Report.pdf)
8. Defense Modeling, Simulation, and Analysis – Meeting the Challenge, National Reseach
Council of the National Academies, Report, 2006,

Introduction to the ICCS 2007 Workshop on DDDAS

961

9. Cyberinfrastructure Report http://www.communitytechnology.org/nsf_ci_report
10. International Mini-Workshop on DDDAS (Dynamic Data Driven Application Systems:
"Optimal measurement and control of distributed parameter systems using mobile
actuator and sensor networks"; Dec. 2006, Utah State University (CSOIS:
www.csois.usu.edu)
11. 2006 DDDAS and Environmental Problems Workshop, National Laboratory for Scientific
Computing (LNCC), Petropolis, Brasil, July 10-14, 2006
12. Pharmaceutical Informatics and the Pathway to Personalized Medicines; Sangtae Kim
and Venkat Venkatasubramanian
13. Towards Real-Time Distributed Signal Modeling for Brain Machine Interfaces; Jack
DiGiovanna, Loris Marchal, Prapaporn Rattanatamrong, Ming Zhao, Shalom Darmanjian,
Babak Mahmoudi, Justin Sanchez, José Príncipe, Linda Hermer-Vazquez, Renato
Figueiredo and José Fortes
14. Grid-Enabled Software Environment for Enhanced Dynamic Data-Driven Visualization
and Navigation During Image Guided Neurosurgery; Nikos Chrisochoides, Andriy
Fedorov, Andriy Kot
15. Using Cyber-Infrastructure for Dynamic Data Driven Laser Treatment of Cancer; C.
Bajaj, J. T. Oden, K. R. Diller, J. C. Browne, J. Hazle, I. Babu¡ska, J. Bass, L. Bidaut, L.
Demkowicz, A. Elliott, Y. Feng, D. Fuentes, B. Kwon, S. Prudhomme, R. J. Sta_ord, and
Y. Zhang
16. From Data Reverence to Data Relevance: Model-Mediated Wireless Sensing of the
Physical Environment; Paul G. Flikkema, Pankaj K. Agarwal, James S. Clark, Carla Ellis,
Alan Gelfand, Kamesh Munagala, and Jun Yang
17. AMBROSia: an Autonomous Model-Based Reactive Observing System; David Caron,
Abhimanyu Das, Amit Dhariwal, Leana Golubchik, Ramesh Govindan, David Kempe,
Carl Oberg, Abhishek Sharma, Beth Stauffer, Gaurav Sukhatme, Bin Zhang
18. Dynamically Identifying and Tracking Contaminants in Water Bodies; Craig C. Douglas,
Martin J. Cole, Paul Dostert, Yalchin Efendiev, Richard E. Ewing, Gundolf Haase, Jay
Hatcher, Mohamed Iskandarani6, Chris R. Johnson, and Robert A. Lodder
19. Hessian-based model reduction for large-scale data assimilation problems; Omar Bashir,
Omar Ghattas, Judith Hill, Bart van Bloemen Waanders, and Karen Willcox
20. Localized Ensemble Kalman Dynamic Data Assimilation for Atmospheric Chemistry;
Adrian Sandu, Emil M. Constantinescu, Gregory R. Carmichael, Tianfeng Chai, John H.
Seinfeld, and Dacian D¢aescu
21. Data Assimilation in Multiscale Chemical Transport Models; Lin Zhang and Adrian
Sandu
22. Building a Dynamic Data Driven Application System for Hurricane Forecasting;
Gabrielle Allen
23. A Dynamic Data Driven Wildland Fire Model; Jan Mandel, Jonathan D. Beezley, Lynn S.
Bennethum, Soham Chakraborty, Janice L. Coen, Craig C. Douglas, Jay Hatcher,
Minjeong Kim, and Anthony Vodacek
24. Ad Hoc Distributed Simulation of Surface Transportation Systems; R. M. Fujimoto, R.
Guensler, M. Hunter, K. Schwan, H.-K. Kim, B. Seshasayee , J. Sirichoke, W. Suh
25. Cyberinfrastructure for Contamination Source Characterization in Water Distribution
Systems; Sarat Sreepathi, Kumar Mahinthakumar, Emily Zechman, Ranji Ranjithan ,
Downey Brill, Xiaosong Ma, and Gregor von Laszewski
26. Integrated Decision Algorithms for Auto-Steered Electric Transmission System Asset
Management; James McCalley, Vasant Honavar, Sarah Ryan, William Meeker, Daji Qiao,
Ron Roberts, Yuan Li, Jyotishman Pathak, Mujing Ye, Yili Hong

962

F. Darema

27. DDDAS For Autonomic Interconnected Systems: The National Energy Infrastructure; C.
Hoffmann, E. Swain, Y. Xu, T. Downar, L. Tsoukalas, P. Top, M. Senel, M. Bell, E.
Coyle, B. Loop, D. Aliprantis, O. Wasynczuk, and S. Meliopoulos
28. Implementing Virtual Buffer for Electric Power Grids; R. Gao, L. H. Tsoukalas
29. Enhanced Situational Awareness: Application of DDDAS Concepts to Emergency and
Disaster Management ; Gregory R. Madey, Albert-László Barabási, Nitesh V. Chawla,
Marta Gonzalez, David Hachen, Brett Lantz, Alec Pawling, Timothy Schoenharl, Gábor
Szabó, Pu Wang and Ping Yan
30. Bio-terror Preparedness Exercise in a Mixed Reality Environment; A. R. Chaturvedi, C.
Hsieh, T. H. Bhatt, A. L. Santone
31. Dynamic Tracking of Facial Expressions Using Adaptive, Overlapping Subspaces;
Dimitri Metaxas, Atul Kanaujia and Zhiguo Li
32. AIMSS: An Architecture for Data Driven Simulations in the Social Sciences; Catriona
Kennedy, Georgios Theodoropoulos, Volker Sorge, Edward Ferrari, Peter Lee, and Chris
Skelcher
33. Realization of Dynamically Adaptive Weather Analysis and Forecasting in LEAD: Four
Years Down the Road; Lavanya Ramakrishnan, Yogesh Simmhan, and Beth Plale
34. Active Learning with Support Vector Machines for Tornado Prediction; Theodore B.
Trafalis, Indra Adrianto, Michael B. Richman
35. Adaptive Observation Strategies for Forecast Error Minimization; Nicholas Roy, HanLim Choi, Daniel Gombos, James Hansen, Jonathan How, and Sooho Park
36. Two Extensions of Data Assimilation by Field Alignment; Sai Ravela
37. A Real-time Observatory for Laboratory Simulation of Planetary Circulation; S Ravela, J
Marshall, C Hill, A Wong, and S Stransky
38. Planet-in-a-Bottle: A Numerical Fluid-Laboratory System; Chris Hill, Bradley C.
Kuszmaul, Charles E. Leiserson, and John Marshall
39. Time-Parallel Exploitation of Reduced-Order Modeling and Sensor Data Reduction for
Structural and Material Health Monitoring DDDAS; J. Cortial, C. Farhat, L.J. Guibas, and
Manjunath Rajashekhar
40. Multi-level Coupling of Dynamic Data-Driven Experimentation with Material
Identifcation; John G. Michopoulos and Tomonari Furukawa
41. Evaluation of Fluid- Thermal Systems by Dynamic Data Driven Application Systems -Part
II; D. Knight, Q. Ma, T. Rossman and Y. Jaluria
42. Dynamic Data-Driven Fault Diagnosis of Wind Turbine Systems; Yu Ding, Eunshin
Byon, Chiwoo Park, Jiong Tang, Yi Lu, Xin Wang
43. Building Verifiable Sensing Applications Through Temporal Logic Specification; Asad
Awan, Ahmed Sameh, Suresh Jagannathan, and Ananth Grama
44. Dynamic Data-Driven Systems Approach for Simulation-based Optimizations; Tahsin
Kurc, Xi Zhang, Manish Parashar, Hector Klie, Mary F. Wheeler, Umit Catalyurek, and
Joel Saltz
45. DDDAS/ITR: A Data Mining and Exploration Middleware for Grid and Distributed
Computing; Jon B. Weissman, Vipin Kumar, Varun Chandola, Eric Eilertson, Levent
Ertoz, Gyorgy Simon, Seonho Kim, Jinoh Kim
46. A Combined Hardware/Software Optimization Framework for Signal Representation and
Recognition; Melina Demertzi, Pedro Diniz, Mary W. Hall, Anna C. Gilbert, and Yi Wang
47. Equivalent Semantic Translation from Parallel DEVS Models to Time Automata;
Shoupeng Han and Kedi Huang
48. Validating Evolving Simulations; Paul Reynolds, Ross Gore, Xinju Liu, and Michael
Spiegel

