Detecting Invisible Relevant Persons in a
Homogeneous Social Network
Yoshiharu Maeno1 , Kiichi Ito2 , and Yukio Ohsawa3
1

Graduate School of Systems Management, Tsukuba University,
3-29-11 Otsuka, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 112-0012 Japan
maeno.yoshiharu@nifty.com
2
Graduate School of Media and Governance, Keio University,
5322 Endo, Fujisawa-shi, Kanagawa 252-8520 Japan
3
School of Engineering, the University of Tokyo,
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8563 Japan

Abstract. An algorithm to detect invisible relevant persons in a homogeneous social network is studied with computer simulation. The network
is eﬀective as a model for contemporary inter-working terrorists where
large hub persons do not exist. Absense of large hub persons results in
that the observed communication ﬂow is also homogeneous. Clues regarding invisible relevant persons are hardly found in communication
records. This task is, therefore, generally diﬃcult. We demonstrate that
our algorithm identiﬁes the portion of the market baskets representing
communication records, where invisible relevant persons are likely to be
hidden, with good precision.

1

Problem

The activity of an organization is often under inﬂuence of invisible, but relevant
persons. The inﬂuence is not directly observed. For example, a coordinator,
who provides a number of activists with clever plans, communication means,
attacking skill, money, etc., is hidden behind a terrorist network. The coordinator
plays a role to synchronize the whole network toward a target. Understanding
such invisible relevant persons from observed data provides important clues to
invent hypothetical scenarios on opportunity and threat in business and social
problems.
Network models such as a scale-free network (governed by a power law)
[Barab´
asi 1999] or a small-world (governed by an exponential law) [Watts 1998],
have been studied as a generic abstraction of society, an economic system, and
nature. It should, however, be noticed that individual systems have various concrete properties. (1) A model for contemporary inter-working terrorists, (2) a
model for a self-organizing community, and (3) a model for a purposefully organized business team have quite diﬀerent structures. Center-and-periphery structure, characterized by the existence of big hub persons, is a common property of
the models (2) and (3). We call such a model an inhomogeneous social network.
Invisible relevant persons are usually the hub persons. They can be detected by
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 74–81, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Detecting Invisible Relevant Persons in a Homogeneous Social Network

75

investigating communication from the hub persons toward peripheral persons.
On the other hand, the model (1) is diﬀerent in that it does not possess representative central persons. It is compared to networks of networks. We call this
model a homogeneous social network.
In this paper, we study an algorithm to detect invisible relevant persons in
a homogeneous social network. The algorithm aims at identifying precisely the
portion of the observed communication, which includes traces and clues to the
invisible relevant persons. We generate a test data set of market basket form
representing communication among visible and invisible persons from a homogeneous social network with computer simulation. We demonstrate the precision
characteristics of the algorithm with the test data set.

2

Social Network Model

We present a basic structure of a homogeneous social network, compared with
inhomogeneous networks. Three models mentioned in 1 are described.

Fig. 1. Model for contemporary inter-working terrorists: a homogeneous network consisting of 995 nodes. The inset shows distribution of nodal degree. The persion ID=5223
is used in the evaluation.

A model for contemporary inter-working terrorists is illustrated in Fig.1. The
network is derived from a number of empirical studies, simulation analysis, and
jounalistic articles on terrorism [Popp 2006], [Singh 2004]. The network consists

76

Y. Maeno, K. Ito, and Y. Ohsawa

Fig. 2. Model for a self-organizing community: an inhomogeneous network consisting of
490 nodes. It is a scale-free network governed by a power low (Barab´
asi-Albert model).
The inset shows distribution of nodal degree.

of 995 nodes. As a whole, (1) the network seems to have two large groups: larger
one on the left and smaller one on the right, (2) smaller groups seem to exit
inside the two groups, (3) the boundary between the groups is not clear, and (4)
the network does not possess big hub persons providing with a center facility
among persons. The inset shows the occurrence distribution of nodal degree.
The horizontal axis is normalized degree; degree devided by the average degree.
It is governed by an exponential law; y ∝ e−3.1x . The degree ranges from 3
to 8. The average degree is 3.9. The deviation in the degree is small. It is the
characteristics of the homogeneous network. Most persons are equivalent in that
they have similar degree or centrality measure. Absense of large hub persons
results in the fact that communication ﬂow is also homogeneous. This model is
used in the simulation study in 4.
A model for a self-organizing community is illustrated in Fig.2. It is a scalefree network derived from Barab´asi-Albert model [Barab´
asi 1999]. The scale-free
network is used to describe World Wide Web strucutre, scientist’s collaboration
network, etc.. The network consists of 490 nodes. The inset shows the occurrence
distribution of nodal degree. It is governed by a power low; y ∝ x−2.1 . The average degree is 3.6. The deviation in the degree is large. About 10 big hub persons
are easily identiﬁed. The hub persons inﬂuence the way the network operates.
Detecting invisible persons in such a network was studied in [Maeno 2006a].
A model for a purposefully organized business team is illustrated in Fig.3. The
network is derived from empirical studies and analysis on communication via

Detecting Invisible Relevant Persons in a Homogeneous Social Network

77

email exchange within Enron [Keila 2006]. Enron was an energy company which
ended in bankruptcy in 2001 because of the institutionalized accounting fraud.
The network consists of 184 nodes. The inset shows the occurrence distribution
of nodal degree. The average degree is 22.8. The deviation in the degree is large.
The distribution is, however diﬀerent from that for Fig.2. There are not small
peripheral persons. Most persons contribute to functioning of the network. This
may be a characteristic of the business team.

Fig. 3. Model for a purposefully organized business team: an inhomogeneous network
consisting of 184 nodes. The inset shows distribution of nodal degree.

3

Algorithm

The algorithm to detect invisible persons in a homogeneous social network is
presented. The algorthm is based on the crystallization algorithm [Ohsawa 2005]
used in the human-interactive annealing process [Maeno 2007], [Maeno 2006b].
The input to the algorithm is observation data having market basket form; bi =
{ej }. An individual event is denoted by ej . A market basket is a set of events
occuring simultaneously, spatially, or related strongly under a given subject. The
output is ranking of bi which indicates relative likeliness that the market basket
provides clues to invisible events. The invisible event, which should have been
in the market basket originally, is missing in the market baskets ranked highly.
The events are clustered into groups based on co-occurrence as a measure
of similarity between events. Jaccard coeﬃcient for the all pairs of events is

78

Y. Maeno, K. Ito, and Y. Ohsawa

calculated from eq.(1). Jaccard coeﬃcient is often used as a measure of cooccurrence in web mining and text analysis applications [Ohsawa 2006]. We can
utilize various expertise on clustering. For example, k-medoids [Hastie 2001] or
hierarchical clustering are simple, but eﬃcient techniques. The k-medoids clustering is an EM algorithm similar to k-means algorithm for numerical data. A
medoid event emed(j) is an event locating most centrally within a cluster cj .
They are initially selected at random. Other |E| − |C| events are classiﬁed into
the clusters based on the Jaccard coeﬃcint to the medoids. A new medoid is
selected within the individual cluster so that the sum of Jaccard coeﬃcints from
events within the cluster to the modoid can be maximal. This is repeated until
the medoid events converge. Advanced algorithms for unsupervised learning like
self-oraganization mapping can also be employed.
J(i, j) ≡

Freq(ei ∩ ej )
.
Freq(ei ∪ ej )

(1)

The ranking of bi is evaluated as follows. A dummy event DEi , representing
invisible events, is inserted into bi , that results in bi → {ej } ∪ DEi . The index
i can be used to identify the market basket where the corresponding dummy
event was inserted. The mixture of clusters resulting from the invisible events in
the market basket is calculated with the Jaccard coeﬃcient between the dummy
event and the events in the clusters. It is evaluated according to eq.(2) using
eq.(3). The market baskets which are ranked highly according to the largeness
of eq.(2) are retrieved as candidate market baskets where invisible events should
have been hidden.
|c|−1

Inu (i) ≡

u( max J(DEi , ek )).
j=0

u(x) =

4

ek ∈cj ,bi

1 for x > 0
.
0 otherwise

(2)

(3)

Evaluation

The objective of evaluation is to study how precise information regarding invisible persons the algorithm can retrieve from the test data with computer
simulation. We use precision as a measure. In information retrieval, precision
has been used as evaluation criteria. Precision is the fraction of relevant data
among the all data returned by search.
4.1

Test Data

We describe the detail of the test data used for evaluation. It is generated from a
homogeneous social network in Fig.3, as communication records among persons
in the two steps below.

Detecting Invisible Relevant Persons in a Homogeneous Social Network

79

1. Collecting communication records into market basket: Market baskets representing communication among neighbor persons is generated. Persons within
a speciﬁc distance (hop count) from a communication initiator are grouped
into a market basket. This corresponds to a single conversation taking place
regarding a speciﬁc subject the communication initiator concerns. An example market basket is b1 = {954, 1930, 3261, 5093, 5223, 7743, 7808, ...}, representing communication initiated by the person ID=954.
2. Conﬁguring invisible relevant persons: A latent structure regarding persons of interest is conﬁgured to the market basket by deleting the person from the data. Deletion made the structure invisible. As a result, the
deleted persons and the links inter-connecting them become a latent structure hidden behind the market basket. The example market basket becomes
b1 = {954, 1930, 3261, 5093, 7743, 7808, ...} if the person ID=5223 is an invisible person focused in evaluation. The resulting market baskets are like
a bundle of email exchange records which lacks in oral communication from
the invisible persons. The market baskets are the input to the algorithm.
The algorithm attempts to identify b1 as a candidate market basket where
invisible persons should have been hidden.
For evaluation in 4.2, market baskets are conﬁgured from persons within ﬁve
hops from individual persons in the ﬁrst step 1. One hop is as long as one
edge on the network shown in Fig.1. The number of persons within ﬁve hops
is about 20% of the whole persons on the average. This is a relatively long
distance communication. The latent structure of interest includes ﬁfteen persons
within two hops from the person ID=5223. These persons are remarkable in
that they are equally close to every person in the network. They are not like a
CEO governing a whole company in a hierarchical construct. We focus on them
regarding them as a coordinating strategist group, who provides a number of
activists inter-working in the terrorist network with clever plans, communication
means, attacking skill, money, etc.. Persons in either the large cluster on the left
or the small cluster on the right do not occupy such unbiased position. These
persons are deleted from the market basket in the second step, so that they can
be made invisible within the market basket data input to the algorithm.
4.2

Precision

Here, precision is evaluated by calculating the ratio of correct market baskets
within the market baskets retrieved by the algorithm. The correct market baskets
are those where persons had been deleted in the second step of 4.1. A single
simulation condition is demonstrated in this paper. Systematic study on various
conditions is planned.
Fig.4 shows the calculated precision. The horizontal axis is the number of
retrieved basket data according to the ranking the algorithm outputs. The box
in the ﬁgure lists 11 of highly ranked market baskets. The top 10 baskets retrieved as candidates are correct. Precision is good. This indicates the algorithm
provides relevant suggestions regarding invisible persons. Clues to trace the invisible persons themselves will be found by monitoring the communication of the

80

Y. Maeno, K. Ito, and Y. Ohsawa

Fig. 4. Precision to identify the market baskets, where persons were made invisible, as
a function of the number of retrieved market baskets

persons included in the market baskets. The algorithm is successful in a diﬃcult
task; detecting invisible persons in a homogeneous social network.

5

Discussion

An algorithm to detect invisible persons in a homogeneous social network was
studied. The portion of the market baskets, where invisible persons are likely
to exist, was identiﬁed with good precision. There are still remaining issues on
the algorithm. We need to investigate two aspects more closely; (1) variability of social network structure and (2) communication pattern in terms of time
sequence. Although we showed three models of social network, a number of alternative models exist for various domains of society, an economic system, and
nature. Is a single algorithm applicable to such a wide range of models ? Communication sequence provides useful information to infer the inﬂuence ﬂowing in
a social network. Can the algorithm be modiﬁed with a time sequence analysis ?
The topology of the network itself evolves as the communication pattern and
consequently emerging inter-dependency between persons change. Understanding such dynamical nature is important to become aware of potential opportunity
and threat arising from the latent structure hidden behind the surface behaviors.
We need to take a next step to understand the various impacts resulted from
the social network, latent structures, and environment. For example, how do you
avoid inconvenience caused by a speciﬁc action of a speciﬁc person in the social
network inﬂuenced by an invisible relevant person’s speciﬁc desicion making in a
speciﬁc circumstance ? This is a hypothetical but concrete scenario invented to

Detecting Invisible Relevant Persons in a Homogeneous Social Network

81

obtain opportunity and to eliminate threat. For this purpose, we believe that it
is essential to visualize various concepts and relationships in a map to recognize
prior understanding and cognition to observation [Ohsawa 2006]. The humaninteractive annealing process [Maeno 2007], [Maeno 2006b] is an eﬀort toward
such an objective.

References
[Barab´
asi 1999] A. L. Barab´
asi, R. Albert, and H. Jeong: Mean-ﬁeld theory for scalefree random networks, Physica A 272, 173-187 (1999).
[Hastie 2001] T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, and J. Friedman: The elements of statistical
learning: Data mining, inference, and prediction (Springer series in statistics).
Springer-Verlag (2001).
[Keila 2006] P. S. Keila, and D. B. Skillicorn: Structure in the Enron email dataset,
J. Computational & Mathematical Organization Theory 11, 183-199 (2006).
[Maeno 2007] Y. Maeno, and Y. Ohsawa: Human-computer interactive annealing for
discovering invisible dark events, to appear, IEEE Trans. Industrial Electronics (2007).
[Maeno 2006a] Y. Maeno, and Y. Ohsawa: Stable deterministic crystallization for discovering hidden hubs, Proc. IEEE Int’l. Conf. Systems, Man & Cybernetics,
Taipei (2006).
[Maeno 2006b] Y. Maeno, K. Ito, K. Horie, and Y. Ohsawa: Human-interactive annealing for turning threat to opportunity in technology development, Proc.
IEEE Int’l. Conf. Data Mining, Workshops, Hong Kong, 714-717 (2006).
[Ohsawa 2006] Y. Ohsawa eds.: Chance discovery in real world decision making.
Springer-Verlag (2006).
[Ohsawa 2005] Y. Ohsawa: Data crystallization: chance discovery extended for dealing
with unobservable events, New Mathematics and Natural Computation 1,
373-392 (2005).
[Popp 2006] R. L. Popp, and J. Yen: Emergent information technologies and enabling
policies for counter-terrorism, IEEE Press (2006).
[Singh 2004] S. Singh, J. Allanach, T. Haiying, K. Pattipati, and P. Willett: Stochastic
modeling of a terrorist event via the ASAM system, Proc. IEEE Int’l. Conf.
Systems, Man & Cybernetics, Hague, 6/5673-6/5678 (2004).
[Watts 1998] D. J. Watts, and S. H. Strogatz: Collective dynamics of small-world
networks, Nature 398, 440-442 (1998).

