An Enhanced Positioning Scheme Based on
Optimal Diversity for Mobile Nodes in
Ubiquitous Networks
Seokyong Yang and Sekchin Chang
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Seoul, Seoul, Korea
{syuun,schang213}@uos.ac.kr

Abstract. A lot of schemes have been proposed for the realization of
u-city. Especially, most of the schemes are based on ubiquitous networks.
For various u-city services to be available, mobile nodes can be employed
in ubiquitous networks. However, an accurate positioning scheme is required for the practical usage of the mobile nodes in the ubiquitous
networks. In this paper, an optimal diversity technique is proposed to
improve the positioning performance. Simulation results indicate that
using the optimal diversity scheme, the positioning performance can considerably be enhanced for mobile nodes in ubiquitous networks.

1

Introduction

A lot of attention has recently been paid to the establishment of the services
such as intelligent disaster prevention, intelligent building management, intelligent health care, intelligent traﬃc control, and so on in metropolitan cities [1].
The services can be converged more eﬃciently and can be accessed more easily via ubiquitous networks [2]. The city which can oﬀer the services based on
ubiquitous networks is generally called u-city. Usually, the wireless sensor node
is considered a realistic basis for the implementation of ubiquitous networks [3].
When the wireless sensor node is equipped with mobility, the node acts as a
mobile node in ubiquitous networks. For the practical realization of the mobile
node, the sensor node algorithm can be implemented in a cellular modem [4].
Using the implementation approach, the design limitation such as low cost and
low power [3, 5] can be overcome since the node is able to utilize the resources
of the cellular phone. Moreover, once the wireless sensor node is implemented in
the cellular modem, the u-city services can easily be oﬀered to the cellular phone
holder in ubiquitous networks. However, an eﬃcient positioning is an inevitable
requirement for the practical use of the mobile node in ubiquitous networks.
As proposed in [4], it is assumed in this paper that the positioning approach
consists of location detection and location tracking. In this paper, an optimal
diversity scheme is proposed to improve the positioning performance. The optimal scheme is based on multiple antennas. Especially, a novel structure and new
This work was supported by Smart (Ubiquitous) City Consortium under Seoul
R&BD Program.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 636–643, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

An Enhanced Positioning Scheme Based on Optimal Diversity

637

message format are presented to eﬃciently implement the multiple antennas and
to eﬀectively acquire the optimal diversity, respectively. Simulation results indicate that the proposed diversity scheme can signiﬁcantly improve the positioning
performance for mobile nodes in ubiquitous networks.

2

The Eﬃcient Structure for Mobile Nodes with Multiple
Antennas

For the realistic implementation of the mobile node, the sensor node module
can be included in a cellular modem [4]. In addition, the mobile node employs
multiple antennas to achieve the optimal diversity. Fig. 1 illustrates the structure of the cellular modem to include the mobile node with multiple antennas
[6]. Since most of the recent cellular modems are based on the system-on-chip

RF
for cellular
Modem

RF
for wireless
sensor node

Hardware
Accelerator
for Cellular
Modem

Embedded
Processor

DSP

Graphics
Accelerator

Imaging
Accelerator

Hardware
Accelerator
for wireless
sensor node

Fig. 1. The modem structure for the mobile node with diversity

(SoC) technology in the design, the cellular modem mainly consists of embedded
processor, embedded DSP, hardware accelerators, graphics and imaging accelerators as shown in Fig. 1. In the view of such SoC structure, the hardware
accelerator can be considered a kind of peripheral module. This indicates that
the SoC structure relatively easily allows the addition of the hardware accelerators with low complexity. Therefore, the sensor node algorithm can be added in
the cellular modem as a simple hardware accelerator since the algorithm exhibits
relatively low complexity [7]. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the multiple antennas can
be utilized to acquire the optimal diversity gain for the positioning of the mobile
node. As indicated in [6], the modem structure utilizes only one RF module for
two antennas in Fig. 1, which signiﬁcantly alleviate the hardware overhead for
the multiple antennas. Therefore, an eﬃcient antenna switching and corresponding message format are also required for the optimal diversity combining.

638

S. Yang and S. Chang
start

Coarse detection of a
mobile node location

Send the coarse estimate
to mobile node

Fine detection of the
mobile node location
based on the coarse
estimate

by
reference sensor nodes
by
central sensor node

by
mobile node

Tracking of the mobile
node based on the fine
estimate

by
mobile node

Send the tracking
information to the
central sensor node

by
mobile node

Fig. 2. The eﬃcient positioning scheme for mobile nodes

3

The Enhanced Positioning Scheme Based on Optimal
Diversity for Mobile Nodes

The mobile node can aﬀord various u-city services to the phone user in ubiquitous networks. However, the location of the mobile node should accurately be
detected and tracked to fully utilize the functionality of the node because the
node can move in ubiquitous networks. Fig. 2 depicts the eﬃcient positioning
scheme for mobile nodes [4]. The positioning scheme consists of coarse and ﬁne
location detection, and location tracking in Fig. 2. As indicated in the ﬁgure,
the reference sensor nodes roughly detect the location of the target mobile node.
As the coarse detection, the trilateration scheme [8] is usually utilized by the
reference sensor nodes which are selected from general wireless sensor nodes.
Since the coarse detection usually exhibits simple computation, the general sensor nodes can perform the detection without high power consumption. However,
the ﬁne detection and the location tracking require highly intensive computation, which usually leads to high cost and high power consumption. Therefore,
the target mobile node should perform the detection and the tracking by itself
since the node can fully exploit the resources of the cellular phone. In the ﬁne
detection, the mobile node can increase the accuracy of the coarse estimate using
an optimization technique such as the steepest descent algorithm [9]. Usually,
the kind of algorithm exhibits fairly good performance when the initial value
is close to the optimal value. If the coarse estimate can be used as the initial
value, the algorithm can generate a fairly accurate estimate. For the use of the
coarse estimate as the initial value in the ﬁne estimation, the coarse estimate
should be transmitted to the target mobile node by a central sensor node which
is selected from the reference nodes. However, the received estimate usually includes the error due to the channel fading, which degrades the performance of

An Enhanced Positioning Scheme Based on Optimal Diversity

639

the ﬁne location detection. To overcome the performance degradation, the optimal diversity can be utilized in the mobile node. For the mobile node to achieve
the optimal diversity gain on the modem structure of Fig. 1, the central node
should transmit the coarse estimate using the proposed message format which
is illustrated in Fig. 3. As shown in the ﬁgure, the message format includes

Location information field

Pilot
Symbol

. . .

Coarse
estimate

Pilot
Symbol

For antenna 1
n1

Coarse
estimate

. . .

For antenna 2
n3

n2

N = n2 – n1 = n3 – n2

Fig. 3. The message format for the optimal diversity of mobile nodes

location information ﬁeld which consists of the same two coarse estimation values and two pilot symbols. The ﬁrst pilot symbol and the second pilot symbol
are located at the discrete time-index of n1 and n2 , respectively in the ﬁgure. As
depicted in Fig. 3, the total time length for pilot symbol and coarse estimate is
N . When the central sensor node transmits the coarse estimates in the message
format, the received coarse estimate signal at the k th antenna rk (n) is expressed
as
(1)
rk (n) = αk · s(n) + ηk (n)
where s(n) denotes the transmitted coarse estimation signal, and αk and ηk (n)
indicate the channel parameter and additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN),
respectively at the k th antenna. In (1), the ﬂat fading is considered the channel
eﬀect. In addition, in (1) k = 1 when n1 ≤ n < n2 , and k = 2 when n2 ≤
n < n3 . In other words, the mobile node receives the ﬁrst coarse estimate at
the 1st antenna, and then switches to the 2nd antenna and receives the second
coarse estimate at the 2nd antenna. Then, the received coarse estimate signals
are combined as follows:
r(n) = w1 · r1 (n) + w2 · r2 (n)

(2)

where wk denotes an optimal weighting coeﬃcient for the k th antenna. For the
optimal diversity gain in (2), the weighting coeﬃcients, w1 and w2 are determined
to maximize the signa-to-noise ratio (SNR) of r(n). Using Cauchy’s inequality,
the SNR of r(n) can be expressed as
σs2 |
σn2

2
2
k=1 wk αk |
2
2
k=1 |wk |

≤

σs2

2
k=1
σn2

2
k=1
2
2
|w
k|
k=1

|wk |2

|αk |2

=

σs2
σn2

2

|αk |2
k=1

(3)

640

S. Yang and S. Chang

where σs2 and σn2 denote signal power and noise power, respectively. Using the
condition for the equality in (3), wk is determined as
wk = α∗k

(4)

where ∗ denotes the complex conjugate. As indicated in (4), the channel parameters need to be estimated for the optimal coeﬃcients. The channel estimation
can be performed using the pilot symbols in the message format of Fig. 3. From
(2) through (4), the weighing coeﬃcients of (4) maximizes the SNR of the combined signal r(n) of (2), which leads to the optimal diversity combining. Since
the signal with the maximal SNR usually causes the best receiver performance,
the mobile node can achieve the highest probability for decoding the received
coarse estimate signal correctly using the proposed optimal diversity technique.
This surely increases the estimation accuracy in the location detection because
the detection searches the ﬁne location position based on the decoded coarse
estimate value. Therefore, it is concluded that the mobile node can enhance the
estimation performance of the location detection using the optimal diversity.

N
Pilot
symbol

Updated
coordinate

Cellular modem

At n1
Antenna 1

At n2

Antenna 2

N
RF
for reference
sensor

Pilot
symbol

Updated
coordinate

RF
for wireless
sensor node

Hardware
Accelerator
for wireless
sensor node

Reference sensor
node

N = n1 – n2

Fig. 4. The transmission of the updated estimate using optimal transmitter diversity
in mobile nodes

If the mobile node is in motion, the ﬁne estimate should continuously be
updated in the location tracking as follows [4]:
x(n+1) = x(n) + ˆl ·

, y (n+1) = y (n) + m
ˆ ·

(5)

where x(n) and y (n) are the updated coordinates of the mobile node at time index
of n. In (5), ˆl and m
ˆ are the integer indices to indicate the motion direction and
the motion amount of the mobile node. In addition,
denotes the coordinate
incremental for tracking. Since high computation is usually required to determine
ˆl and m,
ˆ the mobile node also performs the location tracking by itself. Therefore,
the mobile node should send the updated coordinate back to the central node
whenever the update of (5) occurs. For the central node to decode the received

An Enhanced Positioning Scheme Based on Optimal Diversity

641

coordinate more correctly, the optimal transmitter diversity can be utilized in
the mobile node as shown in Fig. 4. In other words, the mobile node transmits
the updated coordinate and the pilot symbol through the antenna 1 at the time
index of n1 , and then switches to antenna 2 and transmits the same coordinate
and the pilot symbol through antenna 2 at the time index of n2 . In Fig. 4,
N denotes the total time length of the updated coordinate data and the pilot
symbol, and is deﬁned as n2 − n1 . If the central node combines the received
coordinate signals which are also weighted by the optimal coeﬃcients of (4), the
probability for correctly decoding the updated coordinate signal can be increased
as in the case of the ﬁne detection. Note that the pilot signals are also used for
the channel estimation in the central node.
In the optimal diversity scheme, the additional overhead mainly includes simple addition and multiplication as shown in (2), which is minor in the system
complexity. In addition, since the channel estimation is usually performed in
most wireless systems [10], the additional complexity is not signiﬁcant in the
determination of the weighting coeﬃcients of (4).

4

Simulation Result

Simulation results exhibit the eﬀectiveness of the proposed optimal diversity
scheme. For the simulation, the environment of Fig. 5 [4] is considered. This
ﬁgure illustrates the moving of the mobile node from region 1 to region 2. In
addition, 2.4 GHz ﬂat fading and additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) are
assumed as the channel environments for the simulation.
For the performance evaluation of the location detection based on the optimal diversity scheme, the mean squared error (MSE) values between exact and
estimated location position are given in Fig. 6. As shown in Fig. 6, the location
detection with the optimal diversity achieves the gain of about 1 dB over the
location detection without the diversity. For investigating the eﬀects of the optimal transmitter diversity in the location tracking, Fig. 7 exhibits the updated
coordinates that the central node decodes after receiving the coordinate signals

R1

R3

Region 2

Region 1

R2

R5

R4

R6

Fig. 5. The mobile node in ubiquitous networks

642

S. Yang and S. Chang
−28
Without Diversity
With Diversity
−30

−32

MSE (dB)

−34

−36

−38

−40

−42

−44

−46

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

SNR (dB)

Fig. 6. The MSE performances for the location detection

8

7.5

y−position

7

6.5

6

Exact Coordinate
Tracked Coordinate (without Diversity)
Tracked Coordinate (with Diversity)
5.5

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

x−position

Fig. 7. The updated coordinates that the central node decodes

from the mobile node in motion under the environment of Fig. 5. As illustrated
in Fig. 7, the decoded coordinates with the optimal diversity are much closer to
the exact coordinates than those without the diversity.

5

Conclusion

In this paper, an optimal diversity scheme is proposed to improve the performances in locating and tracking the mobile node under ubiquitous networks. To
acquire the diversity, the mobile node performs the antenna switching between
two antennas, which considerably reduces the complexity overhead due to multiple antennas. For the performance enhancement in the location detection, the
mobile node performs the optimal diversity combining based on the proposed
message format. In addition, for more reliable transmission of the updated coordinates in the tracking, the mobile node utilizes the optimal transmitter diversity.

An Enhanced Positioning Scheme Based on Optimal Diversity

643

The simulation results also reveal that the proposed diversity scheme can signiﬁcantly enhance the detection and the tracking performances. For our further
research, we will evaluate our proposed scheme in the real environments.

References
1. I. Akyildiz, W. Su, Y. Sankarasubramaniam, and E. Cayirci, Wireless Sensor
networks: A Survey. Journal of Computer Networks 38 (2002) 393–422
2. N. S. Correal, and N. Patwari, Wireless Sensor networks: Challenges and Opportunities. Proc. of Virginia Tech Symp. Wireless Personal Comm. (2001) 1–9
3. E. H. Callaway Jr., Wireless Sensor networks: Architectures and Protocols. Auerbach. (2003)
4. P. Kim and S. Chang, An intelligent positioning scheme for mobile agents in
ubiquitous networks for u-city. KES AMSTA 2007
5. C. M. Cordeiro and D. P. Agrawal, Ad Hoc & Sensor Networks: Theory and Applications. World Scientiﬁc. (2006)
6. J. Lee and S. Chang, An Intelligent diversity scheme for accurate positioning of
mobile agents for u-city. KES AMSTA 2007
7. IEEE Std 802.15.4: Wireless medium access control (MAC) and physical layer
(PHY) speciﬁcations for Low-Rate Wireless Personal Area Networks (LR-WPANs).
(2003)
8. N. Patwari, J. N. Ash, S. Kyperountas, A. O. Hero III, R. L. Moses, and
N. S. Correal, Locating the nodes: cooperative localization in wireless sensor networks. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine (2005) 54–69
9. S. Haykin, Adaptive Filter Theory, 4th Edition. Prentice-Hall. (2001)
10. G. L. St¨
uber, Principles of Mobile Communication, Second Edition. Kluwer
Academic Publishers. (2001)

