Multi-level Coupling of Dynamic Data-Driven
Experimentation with Material Identiﬁcation
John G. Michopoulos1 and Tomonari Furukawa2
1

Computational Multiphysics Systems Laboratory
Special Projects Group, Code 6390.2
Center for Computational Material Science
Naval Research Laboratory, USA
john.michopoulos@nrl.navy.mil
2
ARC Centre of Excellence in Autonomous Systems
School of Mechanical and Manufacturing Engineering, J17,
The University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia
t.furukawa@unsw.edu.au

Abstract. We describe a dynamic data-driven methodology that is capable of simultaneously determining both the parameters of a constitutive model associated with the response of a composite material, and the
optimum experimental design that leads to the corresponding material
characterization. The optimum design of experiments may contain two
parts. One involving the identiﬁcation of the parameters that are tunable
prior to performing the experiment such as specimen characteristics and
a priori loading path. The other is involving the parameters characterizing the experiment during the experiment itself such as the directionality
of the loading path for the case of multi-axial loading machine. A multilevel coupled design optimization methodology is developed and applied
to demonstrate the concept. Essential to the process is the development
of objective functions that express the quality of the experimental procedure in terms of the uniqueness and distinguishability associated with
the inverse solution of the constitutive model determination. The examples provided are based on the determination of the linear constitutive
response of a laminate composite material.

1

Introduction

The advent of dynamic data driven application systems (DDDAS) and associated
technologies, as they have been evolving rapidly during the past ﬁve years [1]
has stimulated us to explore various areas beyond the realm of how data can be
used to dynamically drive computational model formation or drive the associated
simulations. The opportunity to explore the feasibility of designing experiments
-before and during the time of their execution- necessary for the collection of
data needed for characterizing a material system, deﬁnes the focus and goal of
this paper as a natural extension of our ongoing DDDAS eﬀorts [2,3].
Utilization of data-driven design optimization practices to determine constitutive behavior parameters of materials under mechanical loadings has been
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part I, LNCS 4487, pp. 1180–1188, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Multi-level Coupling of Dynamic Data-Driven Experimentation

1181

traditionally based on experimental procedures with ﬁxed architectures and no
regard to how experimental designs may aﬀect the quality of the material parameter estimation processes. However, the advent of multi-degree of freedom
mechatronic systems capable of multidimensional mechanical loading [4,5,6], has
introduced the potential of multiple designs for experimental processes to acquire
the necessary behavioral data.
In the present paper we are proposing a multi-level design optimization
methodology that intertwines three successive and dynamic design optimization
subprocesses and is based to information theoretic grounds. One is responsible
for the traditional material identiﬁcation associated with the linear or nonlinear constitutive behavior; the other is responsible for the characterization of the
proper loading path followed by a multidimensional loading frame online with
the previous state of material characterization. The third is responsible for characterizing aspects of the experiment prior to conducting the experiment (i.e.
oﬄine). These aspects can be the geometrical characteristics of the shape of the
specimen, lamination characteristics of it as well as the loading path itself as
well.
Here we introduce the idea of a meta-objective functions that are constructed
to express the performance of the constitutive model characterization optimization subprocess employed in the material identiﬁcation level. Thus, the experimental design both in the oﬄine and online senses, is generated dynamically
as data are being acquired in a fashion that optimizes the performance of the
optimization employed for the material parameter estimation.
The paper continues with a section that deﬁnes the proposed methodology.
Subsequently, an application related to characterizing the elastic response of
a composite material is described where the performance of the characterization process is deﬁned in terms of the uniqueness and distinguishability of the
obtained parameter set as solution of a singular value decomposition (SVD)
problem. An application example is described and the paper concludes with a
short discussion of the ﬁndings and the plans.

2

Multi-level Approach

The approach followed employs a process that involves multi-level design optimization that relates three stages or levels of intervention. The ﬁrst stage involves
the material model parameter characterization that occurs at has associated with
it the master time marching loop. The second stage involves the determination
of parameters that characterize the experiment during its exercise and therefore
it is a real-time activity (online) relative to the experimental process intended
for data acquisition. Its time marching loop is in parallel to that of the material
identiﬁcation one of stage one. The third stage is concerned with determining
the parameters describing the experiment prior to actually performing the experiment. This stage oﬄine stage has a time marching loop that is completely
independent of the previous two.

1182

J.G. Michopoulos and T. Furukawa

Fig. 1. Flow Chart of the interacting optimization levels or stages

A schematic representation of the linking of these stages is reﬂected by the
block diagram in Fig. 1 where the ﬂow chart of the interacting levels of design
optimization are depicted.
As shown in Fig. 1 the online material identiﬁcation (OMI) level contains the
task of identifying the parameters associated with the behavior model in general,
and the material constitutive model in particular. The branching node implies
the existence of an optimizer that eﬀectively implements the minimization of
the diﬀerence between the behavior of the analytical model of the system that
is under determination and the physical system itself as it is measured by the
experimental frame tasked to expose it to the widest possible variety of excitation conditions. Then, a performance speciﬁcation for the OMI is used to form
the objectives of another optimizer in the level of the online path-planning level
(OPP). The result of this optimization is the determination of the parameters
describing the evolution of the loading path. Similarly, but separately in time, a
performance speciﬁcation for the OMI is used to form the objectives of the last
optimizer in the level of the oﬄine planning of specimen and loading (OPSL).
From an information theoretic perspective levels OMI and OPP are using empirical knowledge derived from measured behavior of the respective systems and

Multi-level Coupling of Dynamic Data-Driven Experimentation

1183

are producing ﬁnal knowledge (identiﬁed behaviors) while they are building it
iteratively trough successive stages of intermediate post knowledge. In the OPSL
level prior knowledge based entirely on a priori considerations (like the initial
geometric speciﬁcation of the specimen) is used to feed the process and produce virtual empirical prior knowledge through various stages of intermediate
knowledge.

3

Composite Material System Application

A linear anisotropic material with four moduli expressing its constitutive characteristics is considered as the system to be determined in level OMI. We have
already demonstrated [7,8] that this problem can be reduced to the following
linear (with respect to the unknown parameter vector) relation
G (θ) qM = wk ,

(1)

T

ˆn (θ)] is a m × 4-dimensioned array that contributes
where G (θ) = [ˆ
g1 (θ) , ..., g
the ﬁnite element approximation of the internal energy stored in the system
from an increment of strain from point K − 1 to point K in a manner that
does not contain the material moduli since that is contributed by the 4x1 array
qM of the unknown parameters on the left side of Eq. (1). In the right side the
m-dimensioned array wK contains the scaled external work that is applied as
excitation into the system for all loading increments.
In Eq. (1) the right side represents the measured output of the system, while
the left hand side represent the corresponding changing inside the system due
to all possible excitation inputs. Its solution can be achieved by using any of the
three methods available for implementation of least squares approximation [9].
Here we will focus on using SVD for the purpose of determining the parameters
of the material model associated with level-OMI. We will also neglect additional
computational performance criteria and focus only on potential measures of performance of the SVD implementation from an algorithmic perspective.
The solution containing the identiﬁed parameters according to Eq. (1) can be
written in the form [7,8].
+
(2)
qM = G (θ) wk
where
G (θ)+ = G (θ)T G (θ)

−1

G (θ)T

(3)

is the pseudoinverse of G (θ) and it exists uniquely only when n ≥ 4 or when
the system of linear equations represented by Eq. (2) is over-determined.

4

Performance Measures

What determines the quality of solving Eq. (1) is now reduced to determining
the quality of applying Eq. (2) and therefore the quality of the process associated
with establishing the pseudoinverse array deﬁned by Eq. (3).

1184

J.G. Michopoulos and T. Furukawa

We have identiﬁed [6,7] that the concepts of “uniqueness” and “distinguishability” of the obtained solution, can be used as performance metrics for the
quality of the determination of the parameter column array qM .
The uniqueness of the solution depends not only on the size of G (θ) but also
T
on whether G (θ) G (θ) in Eq. (3) has and inverse matrix (or this matrix is
fully ranked (r = 4 )). In order to guarantee the uniqueness and further prepare
for designing optimal experiments via OPP or OPSL optimization, the proposed
technique obtains the singular values of the matrix as a result of singular value
decomposition (SVD) [10] as they express the factorization of in the form:
G (θ) = USVT

(4)

where U ∈ n×n and V ∈ 4×4 are orthogonal to each other and S ∈ n×4
is a diagonal array with real, non-negative singular values si , ∀i ∈ {1, ..., 4}.
These singular values can be used to deﬁne the two measures characterizing
parameter identiﬁcation, one being the distinguishability and the other being
the uniqueness of the solution and are described as follows.
Distinguishability can be deﬁned as the property of the obtained solution
to provide the largest possible variation of the measured response of two systems when their material parameters are very close to each other. It has been
demonstrated that when two materials systems exhibit a small diﬀerence in their
properties, then the diﬀerence of the values of their corresponding responses (observed experimentally) depend linearly on S [10]. Thus, any expression of the
combined eﬀect of the elements of S as it increases, has the ability to distinguish
two materials that are seemingly close to each other from a properties perspective, by producing exaggerated energy responses that are scaled values of these
property variations.
We have deﬁned distinguishability as the product of all singular values, and
+
uniqueness as the inverse of the condition number of G (θ) according to
n

Fd ≡

si

and F u ≡

i=1

smin
1
=
≤1
c
smax

(5)

where smin , smax are the minimum and maximum of the four singular values
involved, respectively.
T
Uniqueness has been deﬁned as the measure of whether G (θ) G (θ) in Eq.
−1
as
(3) has an inverse matrix or not, is equivalent to the existence of ST S
shown by substituting Eq. (4) into Eq. (3) that yields
+

G (θ) = V ST S

−1

ST UT .

(6)

The necessary and suﬃcient condition for this to occur is that ST S = s21 s22 s23 s24 =
0 i.e., si = 0, ∀i ∈ {1, ..., 4}. It is important to underscore here that distinguishability increases as any of the si increases, while uniqueness increases as the
condition number decreases to unity.

Multi-level Coupling of Dynamic Data-Driven Experimentation

5

1185

Loading Path Optimization

If in addition to determining the material parameters we require that this is
achieved such as distinguishability and uniqueness are as high as possible, then
we have deﬁned the goals of the optimization involved in levels OPP and OPSL.
The design variables at OPP level have to therefore be connected with what is
controllable in an experimental setup used to acquire experimental data used for
identifying the material parameters at OMI. Such parameters can be those that
deﬁne the evolution of the loading path, such as total number of increments,
loading path increment magnitude, and loading path increment orientation. For
the case of a displacement controlled two degree of freedom (2-DoF) testing machine used for experimentation the parameter vector to be identiﬁed per loading
increment could be could be formed by the measure of displacement increment
and the angle denoting the change orientation of the loading path between to
successive increments deﬁned according to
ΔuK = uK+1 − uK ,

ΛK,K+1 = tan−1 (

uy|K+1 − uy|K
),
ux|K+1 − ux|K

(7)

with the total boundary displacement vector deﬁned by its components along
the two axes according to the usual deﬁnition uk ≡ [ux , uy ]k = [ux|k , uy|k ]. Since
increased uniqueness and distinguishability express a sense of reliability of the
SVD process used for determining the material parameters in level OMI, we can
deﬁne a vectorial objective function that needs to be maximized for maximum
d
u
, JK,K+1
that represent
reliability and is formed from two components JK,K+1
the corresponding increments of distinguishability and uniqueness along an increment of loading [10]. However, the solution of the two objective functions
problem is not given by a single point but by a space satisfying the Paretooptimality, which is often referred to as Pareto-optimal front [10]. To avoid the
computational cost associated with this approach the problem is reformulated
in a manner that only one scalar objective function is constructed according to
the following generalized form
d
u
+ μJK,K+K
→
JK,K+1 ≡ (1 − μ)JK,K+K
n
n

max

ΛK,K+Kn

(8)

where each objective function is given by the scaled increment:
α
≡
JK,K+K
n

α
α
F¯0,K+K
− FK
n
, ∀α ∈ {d, u}
α
FK

(9)

and μ ∈ [0, 1]is a weighting factor that controls the bias towards one or the
other component of the objective function. The formulation expressed by Eqs.
(8,9) avoids the computational tedious derivation of the Pareto-front. This scalar
objective function can be extended beyond the algorithmic eﬃciency measures
utilized up to now to capture computational eﬃciency metrics such as speed of
computation.

1186

6

J.G. Michopoulos and T. Furukawa

Numerical Application

10

10

10

10

0.1

9

Q11
Q22
Q66
Q12

8

0.05
uy

Material parameters

To demonstrate the proposed concepts the material selected for generating the
necessary simulated experimental data is a typical laminate constructed from an
epoxy resin/ﬁber laminae system of type AS4/3506-1 with a balanced +/- 30
degrees stacking sequence.
All subsequent computational results have been produced by the implementation of the analysis presented earlier within MATLAB [11].
Figure 2 shows the resulting laminate material parameters evolution as a function of the number of the experimental points from the optimization conducted
at level OMI.
The solution for the optimization at level OPP or OPSL is expressed in terms
if the loading path deﬁned on the ux − uy plane as shown in Fig. 3.

-0.05

7

-0.1
6

0

5

10
Step

15

20

Fig. 2. Fig. 1 Evolution of determined
material moduli from stage OMI

7

0

-0.15
-1

-0.5
ux

0

Fig. 3. Fig. 2 Evolution of loading path
from stage OPP

Conclusions

The preliminary framework of a multi-level methodology was proposed; this
methodology can succeed in both the determination of the parameters characterizing the response of a system, as well as characterizing the design parameters of an experiment required to collect data necessary for the systemic
characterization.
The approach was applied in the context of an anisotropic material system.
The systemic constitutive response of a linear anisotropic behavior to be identiﬁed was selected to be the elastic system fully deﬁned from its ﬁve elastic
moduli. These were the design variables for the OMI level of optimization. The
experimental model considered for the OPP level of optimization was chosen
to represent the description of a loading path in a 2-dimensional loading space.
Implied here is the existence of a 2-degree of freedom loading frame, capable of
applying such a loading path and measure both the path and reaction mechanical
load characteristics for each increment.

Multi-level Coupling of Dynamic Data-Driven Experimentation

1187

To achieve a deﬁnition of the objective function at OPP level the quantities
of distinguishability and uniqueness were introduced as performance metrics of
the design optimization process at level-2 that quantiﬁes the performance of
the SVD process employed. To achieve this, a two-component meta-objective
function was constructed to be maximized. Maximization of this dual objective
function leads to determines dynamically (for the OPP case) and in prior time
(for the OPSL case) the experimental design speciﬁcation in terms of loading
path direction parameter.
Numerical simulation of the entire process was performed to demonstrate its
feasibility. We demonstrated that the material moduli unknowns can be determined simultaneously to the loading path characteristics needed to design the
necessary experiment.
Various extensions of this work will be attempted in the future, while simulation as the activity of exercising the determined model will also be added to
complete the essential triad (dynamic and simultaneous physical model identiﬁcation, design of experiments and design of simulation) of activities associated
with a DDDAS [1].
Acknowledgement. The ﬁrst author acknowledges the support by the National
Science Foundation under grant 0540419 and the support of NRL’s 6.1 corefunding program. Both authors acknowledge also the support by the Oﬃce of
Naval Research.

References
1. Darema,F., Introduction to the ICCS2006 Workshop on Dynamic Data Driven Applications Systems. International Conference on Computational Science (3), (2006),
375–383
2. Michopoulos, J., Tsompanopoulou, P., Houstis, E., Farhat, C., Lesoinne, M., Rice,
J., Joshi, A., On a Data Driven Environment for Multiphysics Applications, Fut.
Generation Comp. Sys., 21(6), (2005), 953–968.
3. Farhat, C., Michopoulos, J. G., Chang, F. K., Guibas, L. J., Lew, A. J., Towards
a Dynamic Data Driven System for Structural and Material Health Monitoring.
International Conference on Computational Science, (3) (2006), 456-464.
4. Mast, P. W., Michopoulos, J. G., Thomas, R. W., Badaliance, R., and Wolock I.,
Characterization of strain-induced damage in composites based on the dissipated
energy density: Part I - basic scheme and formulation. Int. Jnl. of Theor. and
Applied Fract. Mech., 22, (1995), 71-96.
5. Michopoulos,J., Computational and Mechatronic Automation of Multiphysics Research for Structural and Material Systems, in ”Recent advances in Composite
Materials”, Kluwer Academic publishing, (2003), 9–21.
6. Michopoulos, J., Mechatronically automated characterization of material constitutive respone. in: Proc. of the 6th World Congress on Computational Mechanics
(WCCM-VI), (2004), 486-491.
7. Michopoulos, J.G., Furukawa, T., Kelly, D.W., A Continuum Approach for Identifying Elastic Moduli of Composites, Proceedings of the 16th European Conference
of Fracture, Alexandroupolis, Greece, July 3-7, 2006 July 2006, Springer 2006. L,
1416 (2006).

1188

J.G. Michopoulos and T. Furukawa

8. Michopoulos, J.G., Furukawa, T., Eﬀect of Loading Path and Specimen Shape
on Inverse Identiﬁcation of Elastic Properties of Composites, Proceedings of
IDETC/CIE 2006 ASME 2006, Paper DETC-2006-99724, CD-Rom ISBN: 0-79183784-X, (2006).
9. Lawson C.L., R.J. Hanson R.J., Solving Least Squares Problems, Prentice-Hall,
Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ, (1974). Reprinted by SIAM Publications, Philadelphia, PA,
(1996).
10. Michopoulos, J.G., Furukawa, T., Design of Multiaxial Tests for Characterizing
Anisotropic Materials, Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng., In print.
11. The Mathworks, Matlab , http://www.mathworks.com

