Integration of Biological, Psychological, and Social Aspects
in Agent-Based Simulation of a Violent Psychopath
Tibor Bosse, Charlotte Gerritsen, and Jan Treur
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Department of Artificial Intelligence
De Boelelaan 1081a, NL-1081 HV, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
{tbosse,cg,treur}@few.vu.nl
http://www.few.vu.nl/~{tbosse, cg, treur}

Abstract. In the analysis of criminal behaviour, a combination of biological,
psychological and social aspects may be taken into account. Dynamical
modelling methods developed in recent years often address these aspects
separately. This paper contributes an agent-based modelling approach for
behaviour of a certain criminal type, the violent psychopath, in which these
aspects are integrated in one dynamical system. It is shown how within a certain
social context, an interaction between biological factors and cognitive and
emotional factors can lead to a crime committed when an opportunity is
perceived.
Keywords: simulation, violent behaviour, BDI-models, integration of
biological, psychological and social aspects.

1 Introduction
Analysis of criminal behaviour is a central issue in Criminology. Such an analysis
involves different types of aspects, such as biological, psychological, and social
aspects, and their mutual interactions; e.g., [2, 5, 8, 10, 12]. Usually such analyses are
made by criminologist researchers or practitioners in a nonexact manner, without
using any formalisation or computer support.
In recent years, much progress has been made in biological, cognitive, and social
complex dynamical systems modelling within areas such as Artificial Intelligence,
Computational Biology and Computational Cognitive Science. The methods
developed in these areas usually address one of the disciplines separately. However,
when an integrated modelling approach is applied, this opens the perspective to
address the analysis of criminal behaviour in more exact, formalised and computer
supported manners. Thus, the way is paved to a more solid basis and computer
support for simulation and analysis in the area of Criminology. The research
discussed here explores this potential. It identifies on the one hand useful knowledge
from the literature in Criminology and the different disciplines underlying it e.g.,
[6, 8, 10], and on the other hand it exploits dedicated agent-based and dynamical
systems modelling techniques [3]. The aim is, by combining these, to develop an
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part II, LNCS 4488, pp. 888–895, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Integration of Biological, Psychological, and Social Aspects

889

integrated computer-supported method for the analysis of certain criminal behaviour
types, in this case the violent psychopath, as described in the literature.
To model all of the aspects mentioned above in an integrated manner, both
qualitative aspects (e.g., beliefs, desires, intentions, certain brain deviations, and the
presence of certain agents), and quantitative aspects (e.g., hormone levels, distances
and time durations) have to be addressed. The modelling language LEADSTO [3]
fulfils these desiderata. In LEADSTO, basic (atomic) state properties can have a
qualitative, logical format, such as an expression desire(d1), expressing that desire d1
occurs, or a quantitative, numerical format such as an expression has_value(x, v) which
expresses that variable x has value v. Such atomic state properties can be combined to
more complex state properties by taking conjunctions by means of the logical
operator ‘and’. Based on these state properties, dynamic properties can be expressed
as follows. Let α and β be state properties of the form ‘conjunction of ground atoms
→e, f, g, h β,
or negations of ground atoms’. In the LEADSTO language the notation α →
means:
If
then

state property α holds for a certain time interval with duration g,
after some delay (between e and f) state property β will hold
for a certain time interval of length h.

In this paper, Section 2 discusses a specific type of criminal used as a case study:
the violent psychopath. In Section 3 the simulation model based on LEADSTO is
presented. Section 4 discusses some of the simulation results for the case study.
Finally, Section 5 is a discussion about the approach and its possible applications.

2 Case Study: Violent Psychopath
The case study made in this paper focuses on a specific kind of violent offender: the
violent psychopath, e.g., [2, pp. 87-120; 8, pp. 123-183; 9; 10; 12, pp. 193-207]. In
this section, this type of criminal is briefly introduced, by subsequently addressing
psychological, social and biological aspects.
Psychological Aspects. Psychopaths do not show feelings like the rest of us. They
lack the normal mechanisms of anxiety arousal, which ring alarm bells of fear in most
people. Confronted with trial and danger, even their skin does not sweat and become
clammy like the skin of normal people [8, p.157]. Violent psychopaths, who are
almost always males, can be described as predators and are usually proud of it. Their
kind of violence is similar to predatory aggression, that is accompanied by minimal or
no sympathetic arousal and is planned, purposeful, and without emotion. This is
correlated with a sense of superiority; they like to exert power and have unrestricted
dominance over others, ignoring their needs and justifying the use of whatever they
feel compelling to achieve their goals and avoid adverse consequences for their acts.
An important trigger for psychopathic violent behaviour is the use of drugs and/or
alcoholism. They are more likely to turn to drink and drugs and their brain reacts in a
different way to the effects of drugs and alcohol. For a psychopath, using drugs or
alcohol can become a compulsion and, through a genetic and neurological
mechanism, result in violent behaviour [8, p.201].
Social Aspects. Psychopaths are characterised by a disregard for social obligation and
a lack of concern for the feelings of others. They display pathological egocentricity,

890

T. Bosse, C. Gerritsen, and J. Treur

shallow emotions, lack of insight and remorse, anxiety or guilt in relation to their
antisocial behaviour. They are usually callous, manipulative individuals, incapable of
lasting friendship and of love. They use charm, manipulation, intimidation and
violence to control others and to satisfy their own selfish needs. Lacking in
conscience and in feelings for others, they violate social norms and expectations
without the slightest sense of guilt or regret.
Biological Aspects. Psychopaths have a specific deviation in the brain: the frontal
lobes are disconnected from the limbic area. The frontal lobes are the area of the brain
that is concerned with conscience, guilt and remorse and is the residence of our
morality. The limbic area generates feelings [8, p.157]. Because of the disconnection,
psychopaths cannot express their emotions in terms of feeling. They know the
difference between right and wrong, but the difference does not matter for them. It is
hard for a psychopath to understand or imagine the pain of other people [8, p.158].
Furthermore, violent psychopaths have a high level of testosterone, which makes
them more aggressive in their behaviour, and low levels of serotonin, which makes
them easily bored and impulsive, and stimulates them to seek sensation. Once they
reach adulthood, their condition is incurable. However, only a fraction of psychopaths
develops into violent criminals [8, p. 267].

3 The Integrated Simulation Model
In this section, the integrated simulation model that has been developed is described
in more detail. The agent-based model has been built by composing four submodels
for different aspects. The first submodel is a model that bases the preparation and
performing of actions on beliefs, desires and intentions (BDI); e.g., [11]. Some of
the relations within this BDI-model (as depicted by arrows in graphical format in
Figure 1) can be specified in formal LEADSTO format as follows:
desire(d1) ∧ belief(satisfies(a1, d1)) →
→0.2, 0.2, 1, 1 intention(a1)
intention(a1) ∧ belief(opportunity_exists_for(a1)) →
→0.2, 0.2, 1, 1 to_be_performed(a1)

desire

?
observed
stimuli

intention

action
belief in reason
belief in
opportunity

Fig. 1. Structure of the Generic BDI-model

Integration of Biological, Psychological, and Social Aspects

891

Note that the beliefs used here both depend on observed stimuli, as shown in
Figure 1. Furthermore, ∧ stands for the conjunction operator (and) between the atomic
state properties (depicted below by an arc connecting two (or more) arrows).
A second submodel is used to determine desires, needed as input for the BDImodel. This submodel incorporates various biological and psychological aspects and
their interactions. The biological and psychological aspects involved are of different
types. On the one hand there are qualitative aspects, such as anatomical aspects
concerning brain deviations (e.g., the absence of certain connections). On the other
hand there are quantitative aspects, such as biochemical aspects concerning
testosterone levels. To model these, both logical relations (as in qualitative modelling)
and numerical relations (as in differential equations) have been integrated in one
modelling framework.
A third submodel determines how observations lead to beliefs in an opportunity as
needed as input for the BDI-model. The notion of opportunity is based on criteria as
indicated in the Routine Activity Theory by [5]: a suitable target and the absence of a
suitable guardian. This was specified by the following dynamic property in
LEADSTO format:
∀a1,a2:AGENT ∀l:LOCATION
observes(a1,agent_of_type_at_location(a1,criminal,l))∧
observes(a1,agent_of_type_at_location(a2,passer_by,l)) ∧
[ ∀a3:AGENT not observes(a1,agent_of_type_at_location(a3,guardian,l)) ]
→
→ belief(opportunity(assault))

A fourth submodel is a physical and social environment model of the world
involving an environment (modelled here as a graph with 8 nodes, called location A
though H) in which a number of agents move around and sometimes meet at the same
location. One of the agents represents the criminal type that is considered (violent
psychopath), the other agents represent potential victims (passers-by) and guardians.
At some locations a suitable target can be found, for example an agent that looks rich
and/or weak. However, as also the guardians are moving around, such targets may be
protected, whenever at the same location a guardian is observed by the criminal. This
models the aspect of social control. To model the dynamics of the agents moving
around in the environment, a number of dynamic properties are used that relate
successive states to each other.
Note that the first three submodels describe the internal processes of the agent
representing the criminal type considered: the violent psychopath. The other
submodel describes the physical and social environment.

4 An Example Simulation Trace
A number of simulation traces have been generated for the behaviour of the agent
representing the considered violent psychopath criminal type under different
circumstances. In this section, one specific simulation trace is described in detail. For
this trace, the following initial state properties have been chosen for the violent
psychopath agent: the testosterone level during pregnancy is high, the basic adrenalin
level is medium (value 5), the basic level of serotonin is low (value 3), the basic level
of oxytocine is low, and the person’s thymus gland is not developed properly.

892

T. Bosse, C. Gerritsen, and J. Treur

Moreover, the brain is configured for the following characteristics: a sensitivity for
alcohol, a high anxiety threshold (value 8), a high excitement threshold (value 8), a
low positive emotional attitude towards others and a low negative emotional attitude
towards others. In addition, some inputs for the model over time are provided:
initially there is a rather neutral stimulus present, which is not very dangerous nor
exciting (both aspects have value 2), alcohol is used during the whole scenario, no
Prozac is taken and no Ritalin is taken. Finally, the initial characteristics of the
environment are: the violent psychopath agent is at location A, there is a guardian at
location C, and one at location E and there is a passer-by at location F, and one at
location G.
In Figure 2, the results of the chosen example simulation trace (run) for the
behaviour of the violent psychopath agent are shown. In these pictures, time is on the
horizontal axis; the state properties are on the vertical axis. A dark box on top of
the line indicates that the property is true during that time period, and a lighter box
below the line indicates that the property is false. Figure 2 depicts the
biological/psychological aspects of the behaviour of the violent psychopath agent
within the example simulation trace, such as change of serotonin levels, and the
generation of beliefs, desires and intentions. Due to space limitations the
environmental aspects are not shown in Figure 2.
As can be seen in Figure 2, the initial settings mentioned above lead to the
following characteristics in the psychopath criminal type agent: the insulin level is
high, the anxiety threshold is high (value 8), the excitement threshold is high (value
10), the person is sensitive for alcohol, and his emotional attitude towards others, both
positive and negative, is low. In addition, he has a low neural self. This leads to a low
me-other differentiation, a low empathy, and eventually, a low theory of mind. His
high initial level of testosterone leads to a high current level of testosterone, which in
turn leads to high aggressiveness. Moreover, the medium level of initial adrenalin
leads to a medium current level of adrenalin (value 5). This current level of adrenalin,
combined with a low level of oxytocine, leads to a low desire to cope anxiety and a
low desire to ignore anxiety. Furthermore, the low initial serotonin level (value 3)
leads to a low current level of serotonin (also value 3). This current level of serotonin
combined with sensitivity for alcohol and taking alcohol leads (at time point 2) to a
decreased level of serotonin (value 0). The current serotonin level also leads to an
increased excitement threshold (from value 10 to value 13). The high insulin level
leads to a low blood sugar level and a high impulsiveness.
When the excitement threshold is higher than the strength of the observed stimuli,
then the violent psychopath agent will become bored. This leads to the desire for
actions with strong stimuli at time point 4. As a result of this desire and several other
characteristics mentioned above, the agent eventually (time point 5) develops a desire
for an action that is characterised by the following aspects: a low theory of mind, high
aggressiveness, a low desire to cope with anxiety, a low desire to ignore anxiety, a
high desire for actions with strong stimuli, high impulsiveness, a low positive attitude
towards others and a low negative attitude towards others. This desire, combined with
the belief that assaulting someone will lead to the satisfaction of such a desire, leads
to the intention to assault someone at time point 6.

Integration of Biological, Psychological, and Social Aspects

893

Fig. 2. The example simulation trace: biological and psychological aspects

In the meantime, the criminal agent has started to move around in the world. In
total, in this example trace, which was kept simple for reasons of presentation, there
are 5 agents in the world: agent 1 representing the considered criminal type (i.e., the
violent psychopath agent described in Figure 2, agents 2 and 3 are guardians, and
agents 4 and 5 are passers-by (i.e., potential victims). These agents are moving
through the world. For example, agent 1 starts at location A (time point 0), then
moves to location B (time point 4), and so on. When the criminal agent meets a
passer-by without a guardian present then the criminal agent will believe that there is
an opportunity to assault the passer-by. There is an opportunity to assault a passer-by
at time point 15. This opportunity has arisen because agent 1 is at location G and
agent 5 is also at this location, and there are no guardians present (agents 2 and 3 are
respectively at location E and H). At time point 43 there is another opportunity for

894

T. Bosse, C. Gerritsen, and J. Treur

agent 1 to assault someone. This is because agent 1 is at location H together with
agent 5, and agents 2 and 3 are not present.
In Figure 2, the psychopath agent’s beliefs about opportunities are also depicted.
When such a belief is present, together with the intention to assault someone, the
actual action to assault the passer-by is performed. This happens twice in the trace: at
time point 16 and 44. Finally, note that, when a violent psychopath agent assaults
someone, this significantly raises the level of stimuli he experiences. The values of
these stimuli are shown in the bottom part of Figure 2. When this value passes his
excitement threshold, he will stop being bored. As a consequence, also his desire for
actions with strong stimuli will be fulfilled, and his desire and intention for an action
that is characterised by this desire (among others) will disappear. However, after a
while, the increased value of the experienced stimuli will gradually decrease and the
psychopath agent will be bored again. This will lead to new desires, new intentions,
and eventually (at time point 44), to a new assault.

5 Discussion
This paper proposes a method to analyse the behaviour of certain criminal types as
described in the literature, based on integrated dynamic modelling. As a case study,
this method has been applied to analyse the behaviour of the violent psychopath
criminal type. It has been found that the model indeed shows the behaviour as
described for this criminal type. The model takes into account a cognitive modelling
approach to the preparation of actions based on beliefs, desires and intentions (BDI)
in a more or less standard manner e.g., [11]. However, for this standard BDI-model,
desires and beliefs about opportunities are required as input. Concerning the former,
additional biological, cognitive, and emotional aspects have been used as a basis to
generate desires. For the latter, additional social aspects have been used to generate
beliefs on opportunities based on two specific criteria (suitable target, presence of
guardian) as indicated by the Routine Activity Theory in [5]. For the generation of
desires various other aspects as described in the literature are taken into account,
varying from specific types of brain deviations, and serotonin and testosterone levels,
to the extent to which me-other differentiation and a theory of mind were developed.
Thus the model integrates biological, cognitive and socially related aspects in the
process of desire generation, as extracted from literature, in particular [6, 8, 10].
These involve both qualitative aspects (such as the anatomy of brain deviations, and
presence or absence of agents at a specific location in the world), and quantitative
aspects (such as distances and time durations in the world and hormone ands
neurotransmitter levels).
To achieve the integration of different aspects, the proposed modelling approach
(based on the LEADSTO language) integrates qualitative, logical aspects and
quantitative, numerical aspects. This integration allows one to exploit techniques from
both areas. As the latter type of aspects are fully integrated in the former, this results
in a declarative specification for which automated methods for logical analysis can be
exploited. Conversely, as the former types of aspects are fully integrated in the latter,
a simulation environment is offered that extends the usual possibilities to simulate
dynamical systems using numerical methods, by incorporating qualitative elements.

Integration of Biological, Psychological, and Social Aspects

895

Only few papers on simulation of criminal behaviour can be found in the literature,
and they usually address a more limited number of aspects than the modelling
approach presented in this paper. For example, Brantingham and Brantingham, [4]
discuss the possible use of agent modelling approaches to criminal behaviour in
general, but do not report a specific model or case study. Moreover, in [1] a model is
presented with emphasis on the social network and the perceived sanctions. However,
this model leaves the psychological and biological aspects largely unaddressed. The
same applies to the work reported in [7], where the emphasis is on the environment,
and police organisation.

References
1. Baal, P.H.M. van (2004). Computer Simulations of Criminal Deterence: from Public
Policy to Local Interaction to Individual Behaviour. Ph.D. Thesis, Erasmus University
Rotterdam. Boom Juridische Uitgevers.
2. Bartol, C.R. (2002). Criminal Behavior: a Psychosocial Approach. Sixth edition. Prentice
Hall, New Jersey.
3. Bosse, T., Jonker, C.M., Meij, L. van der, and Treur, J. (2005). LEADSTO: a Language
and Environment for Analysis of Dynamics by SimulaTiOn. In: Eymann, T. et al. (eds.),
Proc. of the 3rd German Conference on Multi-Agent System Technologies, MATES'05.
LNAI 3550. Springer Verlag, 2005, pp. 165-178. Extended version to appear in
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence Tools, 2007.
4. Brantingham, P. L., & Brantingham, P. J. (2004). Computer Simulation as a Tool for
Environmental Criminologists. Security Journal, 17(1), 21-30.
5. Cohen, L.E. and Felson, M. (1979). Social change and crime rate trends: a routine activity
approach. American Sociological Review, vol. 44, pp. 588-608.
6. Delfos, M.F. (2004). Children and Behavioural Problems: Anxiety, Aggression,
Depression and ADHD; A Biopsychological Model with Guidelines for Diagnostics and
Treatment. Harcourt book publishers, Amsterdam.
7. Melo, A., Belchior, M., and Furtado, V. (2005). Analyzing Police Patrol Routes by
Simulating the Physical Reorganisation of Agents. In: Sichman, J.S., and Antunes, L.
(eds.), Multi-Agent-Based Simulation VI, Proceedings of the Sixth International Workshop
on Multi-Agent-Based Simulation, MABS'05. Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, vol.
3891, Springer Verlag, 2006, pp 99-114.
8. Moir, A., and Jessel, D. (1995). A Mind to Crime: the controversial link between the mind
and criminal behaviour. London: Michael Joseph Ltd; Penguin.
9. Quay, H.C. (1965). Psychopathic Personality: Pathological Stimulation-Seeking. American
Journal of Psychiatry, vol. 122, pp. 180-183.
10. Raine, A. (1993). The Psychopathology of Crime: Criminal Behaviors as a Clinical
Disorder. New York, NY: Guilford Publications.
11. Rao, A.S. & Georgeff, M.P. (1991). Modelling Rational Agents within a BDI-architecture.
In: Allen, J., Fikes, R. and Sandewall, E. (eds.), Proceedings of the Second International
Conference on Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning, (KR’91). Morgan
Kaufmann, pp. 473-484.
12. Turvey, B. (1999). Criminal Profiling: an Introduction to Behavioral Evidence Analysis.
Academic Press.

