Real-Time DOP Ellipsoid in Polarization Mode
Dispersion Monitoring System by Using PSO Algorithm
Xiaoguang Zhang 1,2, Gaoyan Duan 1,2, and Lixia Xi 1,2
1

Department of Physics, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing
100876, P.R. China
zhang.x.g@263.net
2
Key Laboratory of Optical Communication and Lightwave Technologies Ministry of
Education Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, P.R. China

，

，

Abstract. In high bit rate optical fiber communication systems, Polarization
mode dispersion (PMD) is one of the main factors to signal distortion and
needs to be compensated. PMD monitoring system is the key integral part of
an adaptive PMD compensator. The degree of polarization (DOP) ellipsoid
obtained by using a polarization scrambler can be used as a feedback signal
for automatic PMD compensation. Generally, more than several thousands of
sampling data of states of polarization (SOP) must be collected to insure
getting a correct DOP ellipsoid. This would result in an unacceptable time
consuming for adaptive PMD compensation. In this paper, we introduce the
particle swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm in determining the real-time
DOP ellipsoid with high precision, requiring only 100 sampling data of SOPs.
Experimental results confirm that the PSO algorithm is effective for ellipsoid
data fitting with high precision within 250ms using our hardware
environment.
Keywords: polarization mode dispersion, monitoring techniques, degree of
polarization ellipsoid, particle swarm optimization algorithm.

1 Introduction
Polarization mode dispersion (PMD) is one of the main factors to signal distortion and
one of the main limiting factors preventing capacity increase of optical fiber
communication systems. PMD compensation has become one of hot topics in recent
years [1-5]. An ordinary automatic PMD compensator can be divided into three
important subparts: the PMD monitoring unit, the compensation unit and the control
algorithm. An effective PMD monitoring system allows its monitoring signal to be
highly correlated to PMD. An ideal PMD monitoring technique can reveal as much
information as possible about the PMD vector, such as both the differential group delay
(DGD), which is the magnitude of the vector, and the principal states of polarization
(PSPs), the direction of the vector. The DOP ellipsoid obtained by using a polarization
scrambler can determine both the DGD and PSP orientation by its three radii and the
orientation angle of ellipsoid [2]. The polarization scrambler placed at the fiber input
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 1091–1098, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

1092

X. Zhang , G. Duan, and L. Xi

makes the input random states of polarization (SOPs) of light distribute uniformly over
the whole Poincaré sphere in Stokes space. After propagation in a fiber link with PMD,
all the output SOP points of light will constitute in Stokes space an ellipsoid (DOP
ellipsoid) whose shape is determined by DGD and PSP of the fiber link. In order to
extract the PMD information such as DGD or PSP, we need to get the analytical DOP
ellipsoid equation from all these measured discrete points of output SOPs. The more
points of the output SOPs we measure, the more accurate ellipsoid equation we get, and
much time elapse. Generally, an ellipsoid can be distinguished after several thousands
of SOPs points are measured, whereas the real-time adaptive PMD compensator
requires a real-time feedback signal. In this paper we introduce the particle swarm
optimization (PSO) as a powerful data fitting algorithm for getting a precise analytical
DOP ellipsoid equation from only 100 measured SOP samples with fast speed, and
getting real-time characteristic information of PMD such as DGD and PSP.

2 A Brief Introduction to Polarization Mode Dispersion and PMD
Compensation
2.1 Polarization Mode Dispersion
Polarization mode dispersion has its origins in optical birefringence [3]. In a single
mode fiber, an optical wave traveling in the fiber can be represented as the linear
superposition of two orthogonal polarized HE11 modes. In an ideal fiber, with a
perfect circular symmetric cross-section, the two modes HE11x and HE11y are
indistinguishable (degenerate) with the same time group delay. However, real fibers
have some amount of asymmetry due to imperfections in manufacturing process or
mechanical stress on the fiber after manufacture as shown in Fig. 1. The asymmetry
breaks the degeneracy of the HE11x and HE11y modes, resulting in birefringence with a
difference in the phase and group velocities of two modes.

Fig. 1. Asymmetry of a real fiber and degeneracy of two orthogonal HE11 modes

If a pulsed optical wave that is linearly polarized at 45° to the birefringence axis is
launched into a birefringent fiber, the pulse will be splitted and separated at output
end of the fiber due to the different group velocities between two HE11 modes, as
shown in Fig. 2, resulting in a signal distortion in optical transmission system. The
time separation between two modes is defined as differential group delay (DGD) Δτ,
which is the magnitude of PMD vector. Roughly speaking, the fast and slow axes are

Real-Time DOP Ellipsoid in Polarization Mode Dispersion Monitoring System

1093

called principal states of polarization, one of which is defined as the direction of the
PMD vector. This phenomenon is called polarization mode dispersion.

Fig. 2. Pulse splitting due to fiber birefringence

2.2 The PMD Compensator and Monitoring Technique

Fig. 3 shows a PMD compensation system. The optical signal is generated by the
transmitter. The polarization scrambler placed just after the transmitter generates the
random SOPs distributed over the whole Poincaré sphere in Stokes space. The optical
signal will be distorted because of PMD in transmission fiber or made by PMD
emulator. The control unit in PMD compensator makes the PMD compensation by
adjusting the compensation unit according to the feedback signal generated by the
PMD monitoring unit.

Fig. 3. The PMD compensation system

The PMD monitoring system is the key integral part of an adaptive PMD
compensator. The degree of polarization (DOP) ellipsoid obtained by using a
polarization scrambler can be used as a feedback monitoring signal for automatic
PMD compensation.
2.3 The Theory of DOP Ellipsoid

DOP is defined by the four intensity related Stokes parameters S0, S1, S2, S3 according
to the following equation:

DOP =

S12 + S22 + S32
S0

(1)

The states of polarization (SOP) of the optical signals in the fiber link are
represented by their Stokes parameters. The DOP ellipsoid obtained by using a
polarization scrambler can determine both DGD and PSP orientation [5]. The

1094

X. Zhang , G. Duan, and L. Xi

polarization scrambler placed at the fiber input generates the random input SOP
uniformly distributed over the whole Poincaré sphere. If there is no PMD in the
transmission fiber link, the Stokes parameters of the output signals satisfy the relation
S02 = S12 + S22 + S32 , and hence DOP=1. All the output SOPs form a perfect ball sphere
in Stoke space with unity radius. In the case of first-order PMD in the fiber link, the
Stokes parameters satisfy the relation S02 > S12 + S22 + S32 , and DOP<1, except that
when the input SOP is aligned with one of the PSPs (at this point DOP=1). So all the
output SOPs form an ellipsoid whose longest radius has a length of unity and point
into the direction of the PSPs.
For a system with only a first-order PMD, a DOP ellipsoid whose major axis is
aligned with the PSP can be described as follows [5]
S12 +

S 22 + S32
=1
R 2 (τ )

(2)

where τ is the DGD and R(τ) is the normalized autocorrelation of the signal. Also its
longest axis points along the S1 axis. For general case, first-order PMD with PSP
pointing in an arbitrary direction, have an ellipsoid with unity value for the longest
radius ( rmax =1 ) and the same value of R(τ) for the shortest radius ( rmid = rmin ), and
with its longest axis oriented in the corresponding direction in Stokes space, is shown
in Fig. 4.

Fig. 4. The orientation of DOP ellipsoid in Stokes space

From the discussion above, we can see that the DOP ellipsoid is a good PMD
monitoring signal, from which we can read out the detailed information related to
PMD. Thus it can be used in feedback PMD compensation systems.

3 PSO Technique Used to Obtain Real-Time DOP Ellipsoid
The characteristic parameters for a given ellipsoid are its three radii and its orientation
angles. We can get only the discrete sampling data of output SOPs from experiments.
It is important to find a good algorithm to get the analytical ellipsoid equation from
measured discrete data of output SOPs as fast as possible, in order to obtain instantly
the parameters of the DOP ellipsoid such as the three radii of the ellipsoid rmax, rmid,
rmin and its orientation angles α, β, γ, as shown in Fig.4. The angles α and β determine

Real-Time DOP Ellipsoid in Polarization Mode Dispersion Monitoring System

1095

the direction of the longest axis, γ determines the rotation angle around ellipsoid axis
itself. This algorithm to be found is required to determine the correct ellipsoid with
high precision using the fewest amounts of data, thus ensuring the speed requirement
of PMD compensation to be satisfied.
We have previously introduced the particle swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm
into automatic PMD compensation as a feedback control algorithm [4]. The PSO
algorithm can be described as a procedure aimed at finding the global maximum or
global minimum of a function in a multi-dimensional hyperspace by adjusting multicontrol parameters, shown mathematically as follows

MAX ( function)

(3)

MIN ( function)

(4)

parameters

or
parameters

where the number of parameters is the number of dimensions of hyperspace.
In this paper we describe how, by introducing PSO technique into the PMD
monitoring unit, we constructed an experiment for obtaining a real-time DOP
ellipsoid by using the PSO algorithm in the form of expression (4).
A normal ellipsoid without tilt in the principal axis coordinate S1′′′ − S2′′′ − S3′′′
satisfies
S1′′′2 S2′′′2 S3′′′2
+ 2 + 2 =1
r12
r2
r3

(5)

In order to obtain a correct DOP ellipsoid, we firstly transform the measured
sample data of Stokes parameters S1n, S2n, S3n that constitute a tilt ellipsoid into the
′′′ , S3n
′′′ that are related to a normal ellipsoid in the principal axis coordinate, by
S1n′′′ , S2n
three rotations −α, −β, −γ. Secondly, we will continually adjust 6 parameters ( r1, r2,
r3, α, β, γ ) until following function in bracket is minimized:
⎛ N S1′′′n 2 S2′′′n2 S3′′′n2
⎞
+ 2 + 2 −1 ⎟
⎜
∑
2
⎟
( r1 , r2 , r3 ,α , β ,γ ) ⎜
r2
r3
⎝ n =1 r1
⎠
MIN

(6)

where N is the number of sampling data points used for ellipsoid data fitting. Once the
global minimum of the function in the bracket is found, we obtain the correct ellipsoid
parameters ( r1, r2, r3, α, β, γ ). This is a global minimum searching problem in the 6dimentional hyperspace. High number of degree of freedom will let us encounter the
problem of being trapped in local sub-minima, which will result in the wrong
ellipsoid. With the PSO algorithm, we can easily tackle the problem at a fast speed.
The detail of the process of implementation of PSO can be found in reference [6].

4 The Experiment and Results
Fig. 5 shows the experimental setup for obtaining the DOP ellipsoid. The laser pulses
with linear polarization state were generated by a fiber ring laser. The pulsewidth is

1096

X. Zhang , G. Duan, and L. Xi

7-ps, and the central wavelength is 1560.5-nm. A polarization controller controlled by
the computer was used as a polarization scrambler to randomly transform the SOPs of
the laser signal to be uniformly distributed on entire Poincaré sphere, by randomly
adjusting the three cells of the polarization controller. A computer controlled air gap
time delay line was used as the first-order PMD emulator. A polarimeter detected the
SOPs of the output optical signals, by getting the Stokes parameters S0, S1, S2, S3, and
fed them into the computer through a 4-channel A/D. In the computer, the program
with PSO algorithm performed the data fitting from sampled data, in order to obtain
the DOP ellipsoid and hence the PMD information.

Fig. 5. Experiment scheme for DOP ellipsoid collection

Fig. 6 shows the 8000 sampling point graphs demonstrating the SOPs of the
output optical signals obtained in our experiment, with various DGD values. These
graphs just show the 8000 discrete output SOPs without any data fitting. It can be
seen that, all the output SOPs form a ball sphere in Stokes space with zero DGD
(Fig.6(a)), and a needle-like spheroid is formed with larger DGD (Fig.6(c)). The
larger DGD is, the smaller value of the minimum radius of the ellipsoid is.
Furthermore, according to the PMD theory, the PSPs of the PMD vector do not
change for the first-order case. This accords with the results in Fig. 6(b) and Fig.
6(c) which show that the longest radius of ellipsoid remains oriented in the same
direction with various DGDs.
Generally, the greater the size of the sampling data, the more accurate the data
fitting ellipsoid is. But getting 8000 sampling data points combined with the 6dimentional adjusting parameter data fitting would be too time consuming using the
hardware in our experiment (such as the scrambler, the 4-channel A/D, computer,
etc), which is not acceptable for real-time PMD compensation. Just getting 8000
sampling points without any ellipsoid data fitting already consumed the time of
3815-ms in the experiment. In order to get the right PMD information at a instant
time, it is necessary to obtain a precise analytical ellipsoid equation to get the three
radii rmax, rmid, rmin and the orientation angles α, β , γ through data fitting from as
little data sampling as possible. In this experiment, we made the data fitting from
only 100 data samples using the PSO algorithm, and obtained the DOP ellipsoid
shown in Fig. 7.

Real-Time DOP Ellipsoid in Polarization Mode Dispersion Monitoring System

(a) DGD=0ps

(b) DGD=4ps

1097

(c) DGD=10ps

Fig. 6. 8000 sampling points of output SOPs with various DGD values

Fig. 7. Data fitting ellipsoid from 100 sampling SOP data using PSO algorithm

Comparing Fig. 6 and Fig. 7, we can see that, the data fitting ellipsoids with 100
samplings nearly fit the ellipsoids formed by 8000 sampling points with high
precision. It can be concluded that the PSO algorithm is a powerful one to do the job
of data fitting with multi-adjusting parameters, without being trapped in local suboptima. The whole procedure of getting 100 sampling points and ellipsoid data fitting
using the PSO algorithm consumed less than 250-ms. The time can be shorter when
using higher speed hardware.

Fig. 8. The length of radius rmin vs. DGD

1098

X. Zhang , G. Duan, and L. Xi

We also recorded the relationship between the shortest radius of ellipsoid rmin
(minimum DOP) and DGD as shown in Fig. 8. It can be seen that rmin decreases
nearly monotonically as DGD increases. So it can be used as the feedback signal for
PMD compensation.

5 Conclusion
Using the PSO algorithm, we have realized an experiment for determination of the
DOP ellipsoid by data fitting using a small number of sampled SOP data. By using
the PSO algorithm we can determine the DOP ellipsoid from only 100 samplings with
high precision. The 100 data sampling and fitting were achieved within 250ms. The
experiment showed that minimum DOP of the ellipsoid decreased monotonically with
DGD, and the direction of ellipsoid orientation was unchanged for the first-order
PMD, in accordance with the fact that the PSPs of the PMD vector remain unchanged.
Acknowledgement. This work was supported partly by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (No. 60577046), and Corporative Building Project of Beijing
Educational Committee (No. XK100130637).

References
1. Noé, R., Sandel, D., Yoshida-Dierolf, M., Hinz, S., Mirvoda, V., Schöpflin, A., Glingener,
C., Gottwald, E., Scheerer, C., Fischer, G. Weyrauch, T., Haase, W.: Polarization Mode
Dispersion Compensation at 10, 20, and 40Gb/s with Various Optical Equaliziers. J.
Lightwave Technol. 17 (1999) 1602-1616
2. Rosenfeldt, H., Knothe, Ch., R. Ulrich et al.: Automatic PMD compensation at 40Gbit/s and
80Gbit/s using a 3-dimentional DOP evaluation for feedback. OFC2001, (2001)
Postdeadline paper PD27-1
3. Kogelnik, H., Jopson, R. M., Nelson, L.: Polarization-Mode Dispersion, In: Kaminow, I. P.,
Li, T. (eds): Optical Fiber Telecommunications, IV B. Academic Press, San Diego San
Francisco New York Boston London Sydney Tokyo, (2002) 725-861
4. Zhang, X., Yu, L., Zheng, Y., Shen, Y., Zhou, G., Chen, L., Xi, L., Yuan, T., Zhang,
J., Yang, B.: Two-Stage Adaptive PMD Compensation in 40Gb/s OTDM Optical
Communication System Using PSO Algorithm. Opt. Quantum Electron. 36 (2004)
1089-1104
5. Zheng, Y., Zhang, X., Chen, L., Yang, B.: Analysis of degree of polarization ellipsoid as
feedback signal for polarization mode dispersion compensation in NRZ, RZ and CS-RZ
systems. Opt. Commun. 234 (2004) 107-117
6. Kennedy, J., Eberhart, R. C.: Paticle Swarm Optimization. In: Proc. of IEEE International
Conference on Neural Networks. Piscataway, NJ, USA, (1995) 1942-1948

