Enhanced Situational Awareness: Application of DDDAS
Concepts to
Emergency and Disaster Management*
Gregory R. Madey1, Albert-László Barabási2, Nitesh V. Chawla1,
Marta Gonzalez2, David Hachen3, Brett Lantz3, Alec Pawling1,
Timothy Schoenharl1, Gábor Szabó2, Pu Wang2, and Ping Yan1
1
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA
{gmadey, nchawla, apawling, tschoenh, pyan}@nd.edu
2 Department of Physics
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN. 46556, USA
{alb, m.c.gonzalez, gabor.szabo, pwang2}@nd.edu
3
Department of Sociology
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA
{dhachen, blantz}@nd.edu

Abstract. We describe a prototype emergency and disaster information system
designed and implemented using DDDAS concepts. The system is designed to
use real-time cell phone calling data from a geographical region, including calling activity – who calls whom, call duration, services in use, and cell phone location information – to provide enhanced situational awareness for managers in
emergency operations centers (EOCs) during disaster events. Powered-on cell
phones maintain contact with one or more within-range cell towers so as to receive incoming calls. Thus, location data about all phones in an area are available, either directly from GPS equipped phones, or by cell tower, cell sector,
distance from tower and triangulation methods. This permits the cell phones of
a geographical region to serve as an ad hoc mobile sensor net, measuring the
movement and calling patterns of the population. A prototype system, WIPER,
serves as a test bed to research open DDDAS design issues, including dynamic
validation of simulations, algorithms to interpret high volume data streams,
ensembles of simulations, runtime execution, middleware services, and experimentation frameworks [1].

1 Introduction
For disaster and emergency response managers to perform effectively during an
event, some of their greatest needs include quality communication capabilities and
high levels of situational awareness [2-4]. Reports from on-scene coordinators, first
responders, public safety officials, the news media, and the affected population can
*

The material presented in this paper is based in part upon work supported by the National
Science Foundation, the DDDAS Program, under Grant No. CNS-050312.

Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part I, LNCS 4487, pp. 1090 – 1097, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Enhanced Situational Awareness

1091

provide managers with point data about an emergency, but those on-scene reports are
often inaccurate, conflicting and incomplete with gaps in geographical and temporal
coverage. Additionally, those reports must be fused into a coherent picture of the
entire affected area to enable emergency managers to effectively respond.
The prototype Wireless Phone Based Emergency Response System (WIPER) is
designed using the concepts of Dynamic Data Driven Application Systems (DDDAS)
with the goal of enhancing situational awareness of disaster and emergency response
managers [5, 6]. The subsequent sections review open research issues with the
DDDAS concept and design and development features of the WIPER prototype that
address some of those open issues. Those features include an analysis of the local and
the global structure of a large mobile communication network, several algorithms for
detecting anomalies in streaming data, agent-based simulations for classification and
prediction, a distributed system design using web services, and the design and implementation of the WIPER DSS interface.

2 Dynamic Data Driven Application Systems
Dynamic data driven application systems (DDDAS) were explored in detail in two
NSF workshops: one in early 2000 [7] and one in 2006 [1]. The first workshop concluded that the DDDAS concept offered the potential of greatly improving the accuracy and efficiency of models and simulations. The workshop final report identified
more research in the areas of 1) dynamic, data driven application technologies, 2)
adaptive algorithms for injecting and steering real-time data into running simulations,
and 3) systems software that supports applications in dynamic environments. At following conferences, initial research and applications exploring these research areas
were reported [8]. A fourth area of research important to the DDDAS concept
emerged, that of measurement systems; the dynamic steering of the data collection
needed by the simulations may require improvements in measurement, observation
and instrumentation methods. In 2004, Darema described the DDDAS concept as:
Dynamic Data Driven Application Systems (DDDAS) entails the ability to
incorporate additional data into an executing application - these data can be
archival or collected on-line; and in reverse, the ability of applications to
dynamically steer the measurement process. The paradigm offers the promise of improving modeling methods, and augmenting the analysis and prediction capabilities of application simulations and the effectiveness of
measurement systems. This presents the potential to transform the way science and engineering are done, and induce a major impact in the way many
functions in our society are conducted, such as manufacturing, commerce,
hazard management, and medicine [8].
The second major NSF workshop on DDDAS (2006) highlighted progress to date,
and research yet to be conducted on open issues in the DDDAS concept [1, 9]. The
prototype WIPER system explores all four research areas relevant to the DDDAS
concept [5, 6] and many of the open DDDAS research issues. Those open DDDAS
research areas include: 1) Dynamic and continuous validation of models, algorithms,
systems, and system of systems: WIPER uses an ensemble of agent-based simulations

1092

G.R. Madey et al.

to test hypothesis about the emergency event, dynamically validating those simulations against streaming data, 2) Dynamic data driven, on demand scaling and resolution – the WIPER simulations request detailed data from the data source, providing
higher resolution where needed to support dynamic validation, 3) Data format: collections taken across different instrument types can range in format and units – the
WIPER data source includes multiple types of data, including location and movement,
cell call data, service type, e.g., voice, data, SMS, 4) System Software, especially
runtime execution, and middleware service and computational infrastructure –
WIPER is employing a novel application of web services (SOA), messaging, and
asynchronous Javascript and XML (AJAX) to integrate heterogeneous services and
user displays, 5) Mathematical and Statistical Algorithms, especially advances in
computational simulation tools for modeling, and system and integration of related
algorithms – WIPER includes new algorithms for monitoring streaming data [10, 11]
and new insight from mobile phone call data that will be incorporated into planned
algorithms for anomaly detection [12, 13].

3 Data
The WIPER system uses both actual call and location data provided by a cellular
carrier and synthetic data to simulate emergencies. The actual data is used to calibrate
the generation of synthetic data and to help design the anomaly detection algorithms.
An anomaly, a possible indication of an emergency, triggers the execution of an ensemble of simulations, each dynamically validated against new streaming data. All
data is anonymized to protect privacy. During development, testing and evaluation,
800
700

Call Activities

600
500
400
300
200
100
0
0

5

10

15

20

25

Hour

Fig. 1. Actual mobile phone calling activity per hour from a small city (20,000 population) for
a 24 hour period starting at midnight. The four data series are associated with 4 different cell
towers (all cell sectors combined for each tower). This data is used to calibrate synthetic data
and to validate anomaly detection algorithms.

Enhanced Situational Awareness

1093

the data is stored in a database with software modules streaming the data to simulate
the real-time data streams the system would see if deployed. The data that the WIPER
system uses is aggregate in nature, does not track individual cell phones by actual user
ID, and does not include the content of phone calls or messages. An example of the
call activity over a 24 hour period or a small city with 4 cell towers is shown in Fig. 1.
The synthetic data is validated against such data.

4 Design
The design and operation of the WIPER DDDAS prototype is shown schematically in
Fig. 2. The system has five components: 1) Data Source, 2) Historical Data Storage,
3) Anomaly Detection and Alert System (DAS), 4) Simulation and Prediction System
(SPS), and 5) Decision Support (DSS) with Web Interface. Additional details about
the operation of each component can be found elsewhere [5, 6]. The Simulation and
Prediction System is triggered by the detection of an anomaly and an alert signal from
the DAS. An ensemble of agent-based simulations evaluates possible explanations for
the anomaly and alert. The dynamically validated simulation is used to classify the
event and to predict its evolution. This and other WIPER provided information is
displayed on a web-based console to be used by emergency managers for enhance
situational awareness as shown in Fig. 3.

Fig. 2. Architecture of the WIPER DDDAS system: Either synthetic data or actual data from
the cell phone providers is used for training, real time anomaly detection and dynamic validation of the simulation and prediction system

1094

G.R. Madey et al.

Fig. 3. The WIPER DSS console is web based, using asynchronous Javascript and XML
(AJAX). Emergency managers can view streaming call activity statistics from the area of an
incident, maps, weather information, GIS visualizations, and animations derived from agentbased simulation used to predict the evolution of an incident.

5 Data, Algorithms and Analysis
The DDDAS concept is characterized by dynamic data, the first two D’s in DDDAS.
In the WIPER system the dynamic data is cell phone activity: temporal calling patterns, statistics, locations, movement, and the evolving social networks of callers. In
order to improve the detection and classification of anomalies and to dynamically
validate predictive simulations, the WIPER project has conducted to date, five different, but complementary investigations. Each contributes understanding and methods
for anomaly detection on streaming cell phone activity data.
5.1 Structure and Tie Strengths in Mobile Communication Networks
Cell phone calling activity databases provide detailed records of human communication patterns, offering novel avenues to map and explore the structure of social and
communication networks potentially useful in anomaly detection. This investigation
examined the communication patterns of several million of mobile phone users, allowing the simultaneous study of the local and the global structure of a society-wide
communication network. We observed a coupling between interaction strengths and
the network's local structure, with the counterintuitive consequence that social

Enhanced Situational Awareness

1095

networks are robust to the removal of the strong ties, but fall apart following a phase
transition if the weak ties are removed [13].
5.2 Anomaly Detection Using a Markov Modulated Poisson Process
Cell phone call activity records the behavior of individuals, which reflects underlying
human activities across time. Therefore, they appear to have multi-level periodicity,
such as weekly, daily, hourly, etc. Simple stochastic models that rely on aggregate
statistics are not able to differentiate between normal daily variations and legitimate
anomalous (and potentially crisis) events. In this investigation we developed a framework for unsupervised learning using Markov modulated Poisson process (MMPP) to
model the data sequence and use the posterior distribution to calculate the probability
of the existence of anomalies over time [11].
5.3 Mapping and Visualization
The cell phone calling data currently includes user locations and activity at a cellsized level of resolution. The size of a wireless cell can vary widely and depends on
many factors, but these can be generalized in a simple way using a Voronoi diagram.
A Voronoi lattice is a tiling of polygons in the plane constructed in the following
manner: Given a set of points P (in our case, a set of towers) construct a polygon
around each point in P such that for all points in the polygon around p0, the point is
closer to p0 than to any other point in P. Thus we can construct a tiling of a GIS space
into cells around our towers. We build a 3D image based on the activity at the site of
interest as shown in Fig. 4. This 3D view gives a good representation of the comparative activity levels in the cells [6, 14].
5.4 Hybrid Clustering Algorithm for Outlier Detection on Streaming Data
We developed a hybrid clustering algorithm that combines k-means clustering, the
leader algorithm, and statistical process control. Our results indicate that the quality of
the clusters produced by our algorithm are comparable to, or better than, those produced by the expectation maximization algorithm using sum squared error as an
evaluation metric. We also compared the outlier set discovered by our algorithm with
the outliers discovered using one nearest neighbor. While our clustering algorithm
produced a number of significant false positive and false negatives, most of the outlier
detected by our hybrid algorithm (with proper parameter settings) were in fact outliers. We believe that our approach has promise for clustering and outlier detection on
streaming data in the WIPER Detection and Alert System [10].
5.5 Quantitative Social Group Dynamics on a Large Scale
Interactions between individuals result in complex community structures, capturing
highly connected circles of friends, families, or professional cliques in social networks. Although most empirical studies have focused on snapshots of these communities, because of frequent changes in the activity and communication patterns of
individuals, the associated social and communication networks are subject to constant
evolution. Our knowledge of the mechanisms governing the underlying community

1096

G.R. Madey et al.

dynamics is limited, but is essential for exploiting the real time streaming cell phone
data for emergency management. We have developed a new algorithm based on a
clique percolation technique, that allows, for the first time, to investigate in detail the
time dependence of overlapping communities on a large scale and to uncover basic
relationships of the statistical features of community evolution. The focus of this
investigation on the networks formed by the calls between mobile phone users, observing that these communities are subject to a number of elementary evolutionary
steps ranging from community formation to breakup and merging, representing new
dimensions in their quantitative interpretation. We found that large groups persist
longer if they are capable of dynamically altering their membership, suggesting that
an ability to change the composition results in better adaptability and a longer lifetime
for social groups. Remarkably, the behavior of small groups displays the opposite, the
condition for stability being that their composition remains unchanged [12].

Fig. 4. A 3D view of activity in mobile phone cells. Each polygon represents the spatial area
serviced by one tower. Cell color and height are proportional to the number of active cell phone
users in that cell for a unit of time.

6 Summary
WIPER is designed for real-time monitoring of normal social and geographical communication and activity patterns of millions of cell phone users, recognizing unusual
human agglomerations, potential emergencies and traffic jams. WIPER uses streams

Enhanced Situational Awareness

1097

of high-resolution data in the physical vicinity of a communication or traffic anomaly,
and dynamically injects them into agent-based simulation systems to classify and
predict the unfolding of the emergency in real time. The agent-based simulation systems dynamically steer local data collection in the vicinity of the anomaly. Distributed
data collection, monitoring, analysis, simulation and decision support modules are
integrated to generate traffic forecasts and emergency alerts for engineering, public
safety and emergency response personnel for improved situational awareness.

References
[1] NSF, "DDDAS Workshop Report," http://www.dddas.org/nsf-workshop2006/-wkshp_
report.pdf, 2006.
[2] J. Harrald and T. Jefferson, "Shared Situational Awareness in Emergency Management
Mitigation and Response," in Proceedings of the 40th Annual Hawaii International Conference on Systems Sciences: Computer Society Press, 2007.
[3] Naval Aviation Schools Command, "Situational Awareness," http://wwwnt.cnet.navy.
mil/crm/crm/stand_mat/seven_skills/SA.asp, 2007.
[4] R. B. Dilmanghani, B. S. Manoj, and R. R. Rao, "Emergency Communication Challenges
and Privacy," in Proceedings of the 3rd International ISCRAM Conference, B. Van de
Walle and M. Turoff, Eds. Newark, NJ, 2006.
[5] G. Madey, G. Szábo, and A.-L. Barabási, "WIPER: The integrated wireless phone based
emergency response system," Proceedings of the International Conference on Computational Science, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 3993, pp. 417-424, 2006.
[6] T. Schoenharl, R. Bravo, and G. Madey, "WIPER: Leveraging the Cell Phone Network
for Emergency Response," International Journal of Intelligent Control and Systems,
(forthcoming) 2007.
[7] NSF, "Workshop on Dynamic Data Driven Application Systems," www.cise.nsf.gov/
dddas, 2000.
[8] F. Darema, "Dynamic Data Driven Application Systems: A New Paradigm for Application Simulations and Measurements," in ICCS'04, Krakow, Poland, 2004.
[9] C. C. Douglas, "DDDAS: Virtual Proceedings," http://www.dddas.org/virtual_proceeings.
html, 2006.
[10] A. Pawling, N. V. Chawla, and G. Madey, "Anomaly Detection in a Mobile Communication Network," Proceedings of the NAACSOS, 2006.
[11] Y. Ping, T. Schoenharl, A. Pawling, and G. Madey, "Anomaly detection in the WIPER
system using a Markov modulated Poisson distribution," Working Paper, Notre Dame,
IN: Computer Science & Engineering, University of Notre Dame, 2007.
[12] G. Palla, A.-L. Barabási, and T. Viscsek, "Quantitative social group dynamics on a large
scale," Nature (forthcoming), 2007.
[13] J.-P. Onnela, J. Saramäki, J. Hyvönen, G. Szabó, D. Lazer, K. Kaski, J. Kertész, and A.L. Barabási, "Structure and tie strengths in mobile communication networks," PNAS
(forthcoming), 2007.
[14] T. Schoenharl, G. Madey, G. Szabó, and A.-L. Barabási, "WIPER: A Multi-Agent System for Emergency Response," in Proceedings of the 3rd International ISCRAM Conference, B. Van de Walle and M. Turoff, Eds. Newark, NJ, 2006.

