Research on Personalized Community E-Learning
Recommendation Service System by Using Adaptive
Filtering Algorithm
Liang Zhao1 and Qi Luo2,3
1

School of Mechanical and Electronic Engineering, Wuhan University of Technology,
Wuhan 430070, China
2
Information Engineering school,
Wuhan University of Science and Technology and Zhongnan Branch,
Wuhan 430223, China
3
College of Engineering and Technology, Southwest University,
Chongqing 400715, China
Hejm2000@163.com, Ccnu_luo2008@yahoo.com.cn

Abstract. To meet the needs of education in the learning community, an adaptive filtering algorithm for teaching resources based on vector space model was
proposed in the paper. First, feature selection and pseudo feedback were used to
select the initial filtering profiles and thresholds through training algorithm.
Then user feedback was utilized to modify the profiles and thresholds adaptively through filtering algorithm. The algorithm had two advantages, the first
was that it could carry on self-study to improve the precision; the second was
that the execution did not need massive initial texts in the process of filtering.
The result manifested that the algorithm was effective.
Keywords: Adaptive Filtering Algorithm, Vector Space Model, Personalized
Community E-learning Recommendation Service.

1 Introduction
With the increase of computers and network, people pay more and more attention in
community E-learning. E-learning can break through the limit of space and time,
reduce learning cost and improve learning efficiency. Therefore, many community
websites based on E-learning have also been constructed; community residents can
get some information or some study courses. But the application of these websites is
difficult to attract community resi-dents’ initiative participation [1]. The investigation
indicates that personalized recommendation service system is imperfect. If the community E-learning wants to attract residents, the idea of personalized design should be
needed. It means that the personalized knowledge and information service should be
recommended according to residents’ needs.
At present, many scholars have carried on a great deal of researches on filtering algorithms, such as traditional batch filtering algorithm [2].But those algorithms have
some disadvantages, For example, it needs massive initial training texts, yet the preciY. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part III, LNCS 4489, pp. 583–586, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

584

L. Zhao and Q. Luo

sion and the recall is low [3]. According to this, an adaptive filtering algorithm for
teaching resources based on vector space model is proposed in the paper. It has improved the traditional algorithm and introduced adaptive feedback study mechanism
in intelligence control. The advantage of the algorithm is that it can carry on selfstudy to improve the precision, and the execution does not need massive initial texts
in the process of filtering.

2 Adaptive Filtering Algorithm
Adaptive filtering algorithm based on vector space model is composed of two steps.
Step1: training phase. The task of training stage is to get the initial filtering profile
and set the initial threshold.
Step2: adaptive filtering phase. In adaptive filtering, the main task is to modify the
profile and threshold adaptively.
2.1 Training Stage
Fig.1 shows the architecture of the training stage. At first, feature vectors are extracted from positive and pseudo-positive documents. The pseudo-positive documents
are those that have high similarity with the topic but haven’t been labeled as positive
documents in the training set. The pseudo-positive documents can be obtained by
several ways. We can get pseudo-positive documents by pseudo feedback. We also
can get the pseudo-positive documents by using the hierarchy of categories: a topic’s
pseudo-positive documents are those that have the same high-level categories provided by the training set.
To get the feature vectors, we first remove stop-words and do morphological
analysis on remaining words. Then, we compute the logarithm mutual information
between words and topics [4]. The formula 1 is shown as follows:

log MI ( wi .T j ) = log(

p ( wi T j )
p( wi )

)

(1)

Where wi is the i-th word and T j is the j-th topic. Higher logarithm mutual information means wi and T j are more relevant. p( wi T j ) and p( wi ) are estimated by
maximal likelihood method.
After gotten the feature vectors of positive and pseudo-positive documents, we
merged them into the initial profile. The initial profile is the weighted sum of positive
and pseudo-positive feature vectors. Then we should set initial threshold for each
topic. The initial threshold is set based on the similarity of each document in the training set . The similarity between a profile and training document is computed by the
cosine formula 2.
Sim(di , p j ) = cos θ =

∑d

ik

p jk

k

∑d ∑ p
2
ik

k

k

(2)
2
jk

Research on Personalized Community E-Learning Recommendation Service System

585

Where p j is the profile vector of the j-th topic and d i is the vector representation of
the i-th document. dik is the weight of the k-th word in d i . dik is computed as formula 3.
dik = 1 + log(tf ik avdl / dl )

(3)

Where tf ik is the term frequency of the k-th word in the i-th document, the dl is the
document length counted by tokens in the document after morphological processing
and stop-words removal, the avdl is the average document length gotten from training set. According to the similarities of training documents, each initial threshold is
set to get the best filtering performance.

Fig. 1. Architecture of the training stage

2.2 Adaptive Filtering Architecture

Fig.2 shows the architecture of adaptive filtering. When a document arrives, its similarity with the topic profile is calculated. If its similarity is higher than the current
threshold, then this document is retrieved and the user’s relevance judgment is gotten.
If the document is really relevant to the topic, it will be considered as positive
sample, otherwise negative sample. The vectors of positive and negative samples will
be used to modify the topic’s profile, which is shown in formula 4.

p 'j = p j + α p j ( pos ) + β p j (neg )

(4)

Where p 'j is the topic’s profile after modification, p j is the topic’s profile before
modification, p j (cos) is vector of positive samples gotten at this updating interval
while p j (neg ) is vector of negative samples; α and β are the weight of positive and
negative vectors respectively.

586

L. Zhao and Q. Luo

Fig. 2. Architecture of the adaptive filtering

3 Conclusion
In summary, a new adaptive filtering algorithm for community E-learning based on
vector space model is proposed in the paper. The results manifest that the algorithm is
effective through testing in personalized recommendation service system based on
community E-learning.

References
1. Yanwen W. and Zhonghong W.: Knowledge Adaptive Presentation Strategy in E-Learning.
Proceedings of Second International Conference on Knowledge Economy and Development
of Science and Technology, Beijing, 2004, 6-9.
2. Lawrence R D, Almasi G S, Kotlyar V, et al.: Personalization of Supermarket Product Recommendations. Special Issue of the International Journal Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, Vol.5, 2001, 11-32.
3. Nie Xin.: Take about the Digital Individualized Information Service of Library. Information
Science Journal, vol.23, 2005, 1-5.
4. Robertson S and Hull DA.: The TREC-9 filtering track final report. Proceedings of the 9th
Text Retrieval Conference. Gaithersburg, 2001, 25-40.

