Integrated Decision Algorithms for Auto-steered Electric
Transmission System Asset Management
James McCalley, Vasant Honavar, Sarah Ryan, William Meeker, Daji Qiao,
Ron Roberts, Yuan Li, Jyotishman Pathak, Mujing Ye, and Yili Hong
Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011, US
{jdm, honavar, smryan, wqmeeker, daji, rroberts, tua, jpathak,
mye, hong}@iastate.edu

Abstract. Electric power transmission systems are comprised of a large number
of physical assets, including transmission lines, power transformers, and circuit
breakers, that are capital-intensive, highly distributed, and may fail. Managing
these assets under resource constraints requires equipment health monitoring
integrated with system level decision-making to optimize a number of various
operational, maintenance, and investment-related objectives. Industry processes
to these ends have evolved ad-hoc over the years, and no systematic structures
exist to coordinate the various decision problems. In this paper, we describe our
progress in building a prototype structure for this purpose together with a
software-hardware environment to deploy and test it. We particularly focus on
the decision algorithms and the Benders approach we have taken to solve them
in an integrated fashion.
Keywords: asset management, Benders decomposition, condition monitoring,
decision algorithms, electric transmission, optimization, service-oriented
architecture, software-hardware.

1 Introduction
There are three interconnected electric power transmission grids in North America: the
eastern grid, the western grid, and Texas. Within each grid, power supplied must equal
power consumed at any instant of time; also, power flows in any one circuit depend on
the topology and conditions throughout the network. This interdependency means that
should any one element fail, repercussions are seen throughout the interconnection,
affecting system economic and engineering performance. Overall management
requires decision in regards to how to operate, how to maintain, and how to reinforce
and expand the system, with objectives being risk minimization and social welfare
maximization. The three decision problems share a common dependence on equipment
health or propensity to fail; in addition, their solutions heavily influence future
equipment health. As a result, they are coupled, and optimality requires solution as a
single problem. However, because network size (number of nodes and branches)
together with number of failure states is so large, such a problem, if solved using
traditional optimization methods, is intractable. In addition, the three decision
problems differ significantly in decision-horizon, with operational decisions
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part I, LNCS 4487, pp. 1066 – 1073, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Integrated Decision Algorithms

1067

implemented within minutes to a week, maintenance decisions within weeks to a
couple of years, and investment decisions within 2-10 years. Therefore, excepting the
common dependence and effect on equipment health, the coupling is sequential, with
solution to latter-stage problem depending on solution to former-stage problems.
Because of this, the industry has solved them separately, with the coupling represented
in a very approximate fashion via human communication mechanisms. We conjecture
that resulting solutions are not only suboptimal, but they are not even very good
solutions, a conjecture which motivates the work reported here.
A previous paper [1] described an initial design for a hardware-software prototype
capable of auto-steering information-decision cycles inherent to managing operations,
maintenance, and planning of the high-voltage electric power transmission systems.
Section 2 of this paper describes a refined version of this overall design together with
progress in implementing it. Section 3 summarizes the various optimization problems,
providing problem statements when solved individually. Section 4 provides a new
formulation, based on Benders decomposition, for a subgroup of problems, an
approach that we eventually intend to apply to the entire set. Section 5 concludes.

2 Overall Design and Recent Progress
Figure 1 illustrates design of our prototype system for auto-steering informationdecision processes for electric transmission system asset management. This section
overviews intended implementation and recent progress of the 5 different layers.
Layer 1, The power system: The prototype centers on a continuously running model
of the Iowa power system using network data provided by a local utility company
using a commercial-grade operator training simulator (OTS). The OTS is provided by
ArevaT&D (www.areva-td.com) and comprises the same energy management
software system used by many major transmission control centers all over the world.
The dataset on which this software system runs is the same dataset used by the utility
company at their control center. This presents information security requirements that
must be satisfied in our lab, since the data represents a critical national infrastructure.
The work to implement this is intensive and is being supported under a cost-sharing
arrangement between ArevaT&D, ISU, and the utility company.
Layer 2, Condition sensors: Transformers are the most expensive single transmission
asset, with typical costs between $1-5M. The utility company has over 600 of them
some of which have well exceeded their ~40 year design life. All units undergo
yearly dissolved gas-in-oil analysis (DGA) which, similar to a human blood test,
provides information useful for problem diagnosis and prediction. We have obtained
this data for all units and are using it to perform life prediction of the units. In
addition, we are installing a real-time DGA monitor (www.kelman.co.uk) in one of
the largest and oldest units and have been working on methods of transforming this
data into health indicators that can be used in our decision algorithms.
Layer 3, Data communication and integration: The transformer monitor is equipped
with a cellular modem provided by Cannon (www.cannontech.com) that
communicates the real-time data to our lab. A federated data integration system has
been designed to provide efficient, dependable, and secure mechanisms for
interfacing Layer 4 data transformation algorithms with the data resources [2].

1068

J. McCalley et al.

Layer 4, Data processing and transformation: The data available for equipment health
prediction includes transformer monitoring and test data and weather/vegetation data
which is useful for estimating probabilistic failure indices of transformers and
overhead transmission lines [3].

Fig. 1. Prototype system design

Layer 5, Simulation and decision: This layer utilizes probabilistic failure indices from
layer 4 together with short and long-term system forecasts to drive integrated
stochastic simulation and decision models. Resulting operational policies,
maintenance schedules, and facility expansion plans are implemented on the power
system (as represented by the ArevaT&D simulator). The decision models are also
used to discover the value of additional information. This valuation will be used to
drive the deployment of new sensors and redeployment of existing sensors, impacting
Layer 2. The integration of decision models is further described in Section 3.
A service-oriented architecture (SOA) is used for this software system. This
framework, PSAM-s, for Power System Asset Management employs a Web servicesbased SOA . The core of the framework is the PSAM-s engine comprised of multiple
services responsible for enabling interaction between users and other services that
offer specific functionality. These services are categorized into internal services (part
of the PSAM-s engine) and external services. The internal services include
submission, execution, brokering, monitoring, and storage. The external services
include data provision and information processing. These services and their overall
architecture are illustrated in Fig. 2; additional description is provided in [4].

Integrated Decision Algorithms

PSAMPSAM-s
Framework
Executes
job request
(workflow)

Handles job
requests
from users

Monitors execution
of info-processing
services registered
with broker

1069

Establishes dynamic data links
between info-processing & data
providing services

Domain
Specific
Ontologies

Stores results of computation
after job is executed; enables
users to retrieve results

Equipment
data: nameplate& oprtng,
cndtn, maint.
histories

Data analysis logic: Communicates
with data-providing services in
federated fashion.
14

Fig. 2. A Service-Oriented Architecture

3 Layer 5: Simulation, Decision and Information Valuation
There are 6 basic risk-economy decision problems associated with power systems
operation, maintenance, and planning, as illustrated in Table 1. The table illustrates
the sequential coupling between the various problems in terms of information that is
passed from one to the other. Information required to solve a problem is in its
diagonal block and in the blocks left of that diagonal. Output information from
solving a problem is below its diagonal block and represents input information for the
lower-level problems. We briefly summarize each of these problems in what follows.
Operations: There are three operational sub-problems [5, 6].
• Unit commitment (UC): Given an hourly total load forecast over the next day or
week, identify the hourly sequence of generation commitments (which generators
are interconnected to the grid?) to maximize welfare (minimize costs) subject to
the requirement that load must be satisfied, and also subject to physical limits on
each generator associated with supply capability, start-up, and shut-down times.
• Optimal power flow (OPF): Given the unit commitment solution together with load
requirements at each bus, and the network topology, determine the allocation of
load to each generator and each generator’s voltage set point to maximize social
welfare, subject to Kirchoff’s laws governing electricity behavior (encapsulated in
a set of nonlinear algebraic “power flow” equations) together with constraints on
branch flows, node voltages, and generator supply capability.

1070

J. McCalley et al.
Table 1. Summary of Power System Risk-Economy Decision Problems
Operations
T=1-168 hrs

From

Maintenance
T=1-5 yrs

Planning
T=5-10 yrs

To
Unit
commit
(UC)

Optimal
power
flow
(OPF)

Security Shortterm
Assessmnt maint
(SA)

Longterm Investment
maint
planning

Planning

Maintenance

Operations

Unit commit Total load
(UC)
Optimal
power flow
(OPF)
Security
Assessment
(SA)

Bus loads,
Units
committed topology

Units
Operating Weather,
committed condition failure data
inst. cndtn
data
Operating Operating Maint effcts,
Shortterm Units
committed condition (risk)
failure data,
maint
history
cdt history,
resources
Operating Operating ST maint
Cost of
Longterm Units
committed
condition
(risk)
schedule, ST capital,
maint
history
eqp deter rate failure data
cdt history
Operating Operating ST maint
LT maint Cost of
Investment Units
committed condition (risk)
schedule, ST schedule, capital,
planning
failure data,
history
eqp. deter
LT eqp.
rate
deter rate cdt history

• Security assessment (SA): Given the operating condition (which is economically
optimal), find the best tradeoff between minimizing supply costs and minimizing
risk associated with potential failures in the network. Presently, the industry solves
this problem by imposing hard constraints on risk (or conditions associated with
risk), thus obtaining a single objective optimization problem, but it is amendable to
multiobjective formulation.
Maintenance: There are two maintenance-related sub-problems [7, 8].
• Short-term maintenance: Given a forecasted future operating sequence over an
interval corresponding to a budget period (e.g., 1 year), together with a set of
candidate maintenance tasks, select and schedule those maintenance tasks which
most effectively reduce cumulative future risk, subject to resource (budget and
labor) and scheduling constraints.
• Long-term maintenance: For each class of components, given a future loading
forecast, determine an inspection, maintenance, and replacement schedule to
maximize its operational reliability and its residual life at minimum cost. This
multiobjective problem is typically addressed with the single objective to
maximize residual life subject to constraints on operational reliability and cost.
Planning [9, 10]: Given a set of forecasted future load growths and corresponding
operating scenarios, determine a network expansion plan that minimizes investment
costs, energy production costs, and risk associated with potential failures in the
network, subject to Kirchoff’s laws together with constraints on branch flows, node
voltages, and generator physical supply capabilities. This problem is often solved by
minimizing investment and production costs while imposing constraints on risk.

Integrated Decision Algorithms

1071

4 Benders Decomposition and Illustration
Benders decomposition is an appropriate method for problems that are sequentially
nested such that solution to latter-stage problems depends on solution to former-stage
problems. Mixed integer problems can be posed in this way as can stochastic
programming problems. The operational problem described in Section 3, consisting of
the sequence of UC, OPF, and SA, is both. To illustrate concepts, consider:
Min : z = c ( x ) + d ( y )

Problem P

s.t .

(1)

≥b

(1a)

E ( x) + F ( y) ≥ h

(1b)

A( x )

This problem can be represented as a two-stage decision problem [11]:
Stage 1 (Master Problem): Decide on a feasible x* only considering (1a);
Min : z = c ( x ) + α ' ( x )

(2)

≥b

(2a)

s.t .

A( x )

where α ' ( x) is a guess of stage 2 regarding stage 1 decision variable x, to be updated
by stage 2.

Stage 2 (Subproblem): Decide on a feasible y* considering (1b) given x* from stage 1.

α ( x*) = Min d ( y )

(3)

F ( y ) ≥ h − E ( x*)

s.t.

(3a)

The partition theorem for mixed-integer programming problems [12] provides an
optimality rule on which Benders decomposition is based. If we obtain optimal
solution (z*, x*) in the first stage and then obtain optimal solution y* in the second
stage, if c(x*)+d(y*)=z*, then (y*, x*) is the optimal solution for Problem P. The
interaction between stages 1 and 2 is shown in Fig. 3.
The procedure of Benders decomposition is a learning process (try-fail-tryinaccurate-try-…-solved). In the left part of Fig. 3, when the stage 1 problem is
solved, the optimal value is then sent to stage 2. Stage 2 problem has two steps: 1)
c(x*)

c(x*)
+

x*
STAGE 2

Min

STAGE 1
Constraint
generation

Constraint
generation

STAGE 1

+

x*
STAGE 2

d(y*)

y*

Left: deterministic problem.
Right: stochastic problem (P1 is
probability of stage 2 scenario 1).

(Scenario 1)

P 1d(y 1*)

y1 *
x*
STAGE 2
(Scenario 2)

P 2d(y 2*)

y 2*

Fig. 3. Benders decomposition (modified from [11])

Min

1072

J. McCalley et al.

Check if the optimal solution from stage 1 is feasible. If it is not feasible, the stage 2
problem sends feasibility cuts back to stage 1 to be repeated under the additional
constraints found in stage 2 to be in violation. 2) Check if the optimal guess of stage 2
from stage 1 is accurate enough. If it is not, a new estimation of α’(x) is sent to stage
1. If the optimal rule is met, the problem is solved. This process is easily expanded to
the stochastic programming case, as illustrated in the right part of Fig. 3 where the
optimal value from stage 1 is sent to stage 2, which has multiple scenarios. The
process is exactly the same as the deterministic case, except that all constraint cuts
and the optimal value from stage 2 are weighted by the probability of the scenario.
A 6-bus test system, Fig. 4, is used to illustrate. Generators are located at buses 1, 2,
6; loads at buses 3, 4, 5. Possible contingencies considered include any failure of a
single circuit. Detailed data for the system are provided in [5]. Figure 5 plots total cost
of supply against time for a 24 hour period for two different scenarios: “average” uses
contingency probabilities under normal weather, and “10*average” uses contingency
probabilities under stormy weather. We observe in Fig. 5 the increased cost required to
reduce the additional risk due to the stormy weather. Although the UC solution is the
same in the two cases illustrated in Fig 5, it changes if the contingency probabilities
are zero, an extreme situation which in fact corresponds to the way UC is solved in
practice where UC and SA are solved separately. This is evidence that better solutions
do in fact result when the different problems are solved together.
G

L1

G

Bus 1

Bus 2
Circuit 1

3500
Average
10*Average

Bus 3
Circuit 3

3000

Circuit 4

Bus 4

Circuit 6

L2

Circuit 5

Bus 5

Bus 6

$

Circuit 2
2500

2000

Circuit 7
L3

G

1500
0

5

10

15

20

25

Hours

Fig. 4. 6-bus test system

Fig. 5. Effect of contingency

5 Conclusions
Aging, capital intensive equipment comprise electric power grids; their availability
largely determines the economic efficiency of today’s electricity markets on which a
nation’s economic health depends; their failure results in increased energy cost, at best,
and widespread blackouts, at worst. The balance between economy and reliability, or
risk, is maintained via solution to a series of optimization problems in operations,
maintenance, and planning, problems that traditionally are solved separately. Yet,
these problems are coupled, and so solving them together necessarily improves on the
composite solution. In this paper, we described a hardware-software system designed
to address this issue, and we reported on our progress in developing this system,

Integrated Decision Algorithms

1073

including acquisition of a real-time transformer monitor and of a commercial-grade
power system simulator together with corresponding data modeling the Iowa power
system. We also designed a service-oriented architecture to guide development of our
software system. Finally, we implemented an optimization framework based on
Benders decomposition to efficiently solve our sequential series of decision problems.
This framework is promising; we expect it to be an integral part of our power system
asset management prototype as we continue to move forward in its development.

Acknowledgments
The work described in this paper is funded by the National Science Foundation under
grant NSF CNS0540293.

References
1. J. McCalley, V. Honavar, S. Ryan, W. Meeker, R. Roberts, D. Qiao and Y. Li, “Autosteered Information-Decision Processes for Electric System Asset Management,” in
Computational Science - ICCS 2006, 6th International Conference, Reading, UK, May 2831, 2006, Proceedings, Part III, Series: Lecture Notes in Computer Science , Vol. 3993, V.
Alexandrov, G. van Albada, P. Sloot, J. Dongarra, (Eds.), 2006.
2. J. Pathak, Y. Jiang, V. Honavar, J. McCalley, “Condition Data Aggregation with
Application to Failure Rate Calculation of Power Transformers,” Proc. of the Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences, Jan 4-7, 2006, Poipu Kauai, Hawaii.
3. F. Xiao, J. McCalley, Y. Ou, J. Adams, S. Myers, “Contingency Probability Estimation Using
Weather and Geographical Data for On-Line Security Assessment,” Proc. of the 9th Int.
Conf. on Probabilistic Methods Applied to Pwr Sys, June 11-15, 2006, Stockholm, Sweden.
4. J. Pathak, Y. Li, V. Honavar, J. McCalley, “A Service-Oriented Architecture for Electric Power
Transmission System Asset Management,” 2nd International Workshop on Engineering ServiceOriented Applications: Design and Composition, Dec. 4, 2007, Chicago, Ill.
5. Y. Li, J. McCalley, S. Ryan, “Risk-Based Unit Commitment,” to appear in Proc. of the
2007 IEEE PES General Meeting, June, 2007, Tampa Fl.
6. F. Xiao, J. McCalley, “Risk-Based Multi-Objective Optimization for Transmission
Loading Relief Strategies,” to appear, Proc. of the 2007 IEEE PES Gen Meeting, June,
2007, Tampa Fl.
7. J. McCalley, V. Honavar, M. Kezunovic, C. Singh, Y. Jiang, J. Pathak, S. Natti, J. Panida,
“Automated Integration of Condition Monitoring with an Optimized Maintenance
Scheduler for Circuit Breakers and Power Transformers,” Final report to the Power
Systems Engineering Research Center (PSerc), Dec., 2005.
8. Y. Jiang, J. McCalley, T. Van Voorhis, “Risk-based Maintenance Optimization for
Transmission Equipment,” IEEE Trans on Pwr Sys, Vol 21, I 3, Aug. 2006, pp. 1191 – 1200.
9. J. McCalley, R. Kumar, O. Volij, V. Ajjarapu, H. Liu, L. Jin, W. Zhang, Models for
Transmission Expansion Planning Based on Reconfigurable Capacitor Switching,” Chapter
3 in “Electric Power Networks, Efficiency, and Security,” John Wiley and Sons, 2006.
10. M. Ye, S. Ryan, and J. McCalley, “Transmission Expansion Planning with Transformer
Replacement,” Proc. of 2007 Industrial Engr. Research Conf, Nashville, Tn, May 20-22, 2007.
11. S. Granville et al., “Mathematical decomposition techniques for power system expansion
planning,” Report 2473-6 of the Electric Power Research Institute, February 1988.
12. J. Benders, “Partitioning procedures for solving mixed-variables programming problems,”
Numerische Mathematik 4: 238–252, 1962.

