An Incremental Topology Control Algorithm for
Wireless Mesh Networks*
Mani Malekesmaeili1,**, Mehdi Soltan2, and Mohsen Shiva3,***
1,3

School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Tehran, Tehran 14399, Iran
2
STAR Lab., Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
m.malekesmaeeli@ece.ut.ac.ir, msoltan@wireless.stanford.edu,

mshiva@ut.ac.ir

Abstract. Wireless Mesh Networks (WMNs) with a promising future in wireless backhauling applications have attracted the attention of many network
research centers and academic researches. High throughput and low delay as essential requirements of a wireless back-bone network demand new topology
control algorithms as well as new optimization metrics. In this paper, a topology control algorithm compliant with the structure of WMNs is proposed, as
well as a new metric combining the characteristics of different network layers.
The proposed metric is compared with the conventional ones such as distance
and interference where even an increase of over 100% in the capacity of the
network is presented by applying this metric.
Keywords: Ad-hoc networks, collision domain, collision domain based topology control, topology control, wireless mesh networks, wireless backbone.

1 Introduction
Recently, Wireless Mesh Network (WMN) [1], as a promising newcomer in wireless
access technology, has caught the attention of networking industries. Constructing a
wireless backbone that provides access to Internet (or any database) is probably the
most prominent application of WMNs. Large capacity and low delay as the two
essential requirements in WMNs, as well as any backhaul network, demand new
approaches for Topology Control (TC) and routing other than the ones available for
ad-hoc wireless networks. In this paper, we focus on topology control in WMNs and
introduce a new metric compliant with the needs of WMNs.
Considering the traffic pattern of WMNs, the existing TC algorithms do not suit
WMNs in terms of throughput and fairness. The need for new algorithms, conforming
to the requirements and characteristics of WMNs, is, therefore, perfectly felt. Other than
the algorithms, the existing metrics such as the average link length, mean power, or
even the number of interfering nodes, do not practically aim at fairness and throughput
maximization. In conventional TC algorithms, for ad-hoc networks, direction of data
streams on a link affects neither the metric nor the algorithm’s procedure. While data
*

This work was supported by Iran Telecommunication Research Center (ITRC).
Student Member IEEE.
***
Member, IEEE.
**

Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 490–497, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

An Incremental Topology Control Algorithm for Wireless Mesh Networks

491

directions are randomly distributed and are not of importance in ad-hoc networks, data
streams in backbone WMNs [1] are mainly from gateways to end users. Considering
this fact, directions of data streams are of great importance in WMNs; so either the existing TC algorithms should change to match the WMN applications or new TC algorithms should be developed. A change in a conventional algorithm can be a change in its
metric. In this paper, we introduce a new metric called the Collision Domain (CD). In
[2], CD is introduced as a tool for estimating the capacity of WMNs. It is shown that
with certain modifications, CD can be used as a metric for TC to optimize the WMNs’
performance. Thus, in so doing a new algorithm should also be developed.
The paper is organized as follows: in Section 2, we briefly refer to TC in ad-hoc
networks. In Section 3, CD is firstly introduced (with certain changes to the original
definition in [2]) and later the CD based topology control algorithm (CDTC) is presented. In Section 4, the simulation results are given, and finally the paper is concluded in Section 5.

2 Topology Control in Ad-Hoc Networks
The term of topology control has not been precisely defined in wireless networks;
however, any algorithm that deals with the various aspects of the topology of a network, including nodes’ positioning, network construction, link adoption, channel assignment, power control, antenna beam-forming, and even routing can be counted as
topology control. Finally, a TC algorithm, directly or indirectly, provides the prerequisites for having a connected network.
There exists lots of works and papers on topology control for multi-hop wireless
networks, and many different algorithms corresponding to their special requirements
are developed. These requirements stem from the specific applications of the network,
e.g. sensor networks or peer-to-peer, and vary from low power consumption and low
number of hops to low congestion, and low delay. Full connectivity is a must in almost all of these algorithms, i.e. these algorithms aim at a full connected network with
the minimum delay or the minimum average number of hops, etc. A great number of
topology control algorithms for ad-hoc networks are developed to reduce transmission
power in the network. Most of these algorithms take link lengths as a metric (as it is
related to power with an exponent factor of 2 to 4) and claim they reduce interference
implicitly. Local Minimum Spanning Tree [3], cone-based [4], and relay region based
topology control [5] are among the known examples of these algorithms. It is pointed
out, in [6] and [7], that reducing power does not necessarily decrease interference;
they have attempted to enter interference directly into TC. These two papers and some
others have each proposed a method for measuring the interference of a link. A basic
model for measuring the interference of a link as a metric for TC is simply the number of active nodes in the transmission range of either ends of that link. In [8], a robust interference model is proposed for wireless ad-hoc networks. For more details on
the models, and also the algorithm procedures one can refer to [6, 7, and 8]. While interference is a suitable metric for most ad-hoc networks, however, it does not match
the properties of WMNs completely. Although there have been some researches in TC
for WMNs, nonetheless they are mostly involved with either the channel assignment
[9] or the directional antennas. The existing commercial wireless network interfaces
support one channel per radio; so for a multiple channel network, the number of

492

M. Malekesmaeili, M. Soltan, and M. Shiva

network interfaces should be as many as the number of the channels in a node, thus
raising the cost of its implementation. Directional antenna designs have not only increasing costs, but also their dynamic pattern forming techniques have not been fully
developed yet. Considering the above, a practical TC algorithm for current WMNs,
should focus on the link adoption and the power control on single channel networks.
To the best of our knowledge, there has not been any attempt for TC devoted to
WMNs in single channel, omni-directional networks (a common case in the existing
wireless multi-hop networks). This paper may be the first of its own in topology control for single-channel WMNs. In the next section, the collision domain (CD) load as
a new metric that is well suited for a backbone WMN is introduced.

3 Topology Control in WMNs
3.1 Collision Domain Load
The idea of collision domain has stemmed from a paper by Jangeun et al [2]. Authors
introduced the concept of collision domain for predicting the capacity of WMNs,
wherein a unidirectional traffic from nodes to gateways on the network is assumed
and the capacity of a WMN is estimated. In a backbone WMN, traffic is mostly from
gateways to nodes (download traffic). In the following we introduce CD [2] with certain changes to have it well-matched to the characteristics of WMNs infrastructure.
CD of a link is an area where all other nodes or links should be silent (idle) for a
successful transmission on that link. The CD load of a link is the total amount of data
that is to be transmitted on that domain including the link itself. This load is simply
referred to as the CD in the rest of the paper. The maximum available download rate
can be estimated by the maximum existing collision domain load. As downloading
from gateways (file downloading, web browsing, watching videos online, and etc.) is
the dominant traffic load in an access network, like WMN, the maximum available
download rate can be counted as the nominal capacity of a wireless network. The
lower is the maximum CD, the larger will be the capacity of the network. Rightfulness of the above statement is proved in [2] by the simulations. It is shown that the
network capacity can be precisely estimated using the maximum CD. For more information on assumptions and conclusions one can refer to [2]. CD not only shows
the interference but also represents the load of the interfering nodes. For a WMN
backhaul network, power consumption is not of much importance, thus, a minimum
power TC algorithm does not suit these networks. Considering the above, it can be
concluded that CD is superior to any of the other metrics proposed so far. It states the
characteristics of a link more comprehensively by combining the Media Access Control (MAC) characteristics (like collision), with the amount of load obtained from the
application layer, and routing rules (the network layer characteristics).
From the above it can be inferred that CD itself is dependent on the topology and
the route that transfers the load to a specific node. Therefore, the existing TC algorithms cannot be employed for a topology construction with CD as the metric. It
seems that because of CD’s dependency on the TC result, there exists no direct optimal solution to the problem. Heuristic methods like the Genetic Algorithms or Ant
Colony can be considered as sub-optimal solutions to this kind of ”result depends on
procedure” problem. For limited area low density networks, with a logically small

An Incremental Topology Control Algorithm for Wireless Mesh Networks

493

number of available links, these methods are fine and will generate near optimal results; but for larger areas and a high number of links, as the number of variables grow,
these methods will become almost impractical. Number of local minima or maxima of
a real world problem (including TC) grows almost exponentially with the number of
the variables. This causes an exponential increase in the complexity and run-time of a
heuristic optimization problem along with a decrease in the optimality of its algorithm
due to the increase in the probability that the algorithm gets stuck in a local extreme.
An important characteristic of a wireless mesh backbone (and also generally any adhoc network) is its self-reconfiguration, self-healing, and self-reconstruction abilities.
This means that in the case that a route (e.g. a link,) or a node, (e.g. a router) fails, the
network should be able to reconstruct itself and the services should not be interrupted.
Therefore, a TC algorithm used in WMN should be able to be run many times, fast
enough, and with the least change. This is not the case in time-consuming heuristic
methods, which even for identical cases may generate totally different results.
In the next section, we introduce a new TC algorithm that uses CD as a metric. In
addition to the above, the algorithm itself is devoted to WMNs. Other metrics like
transmission power, interference, etc. can be used with this algorithm. The developed
algorithm is sub-optimal, but runs fast enough and the result of the algorithm does not
change fundamentally with small changes. The results in Section V show the superiority of CD to the other available metrics.
3.2 Collision Domain Based Topology Control (CDTC)
As pointed out in Section 2, for a TC algorithm to be practical, it should consider link
adoption and power management for single channel multi-hop wireless networks. A
new metric conforming to the characteristics of a wireless backhaul network based on
the collision domain of links was proposed in the previous section. Here, we present a
TC algorithm based on CD. It was mentioned before that CD is itself dependent on
routes and topology; so, developing a topology control algorithm that minimizes the
maximum collision domain load for any topography is impossible. A practical way
for handling such a problem is to ignore optimality and look for the best sub-optimal
practical algorithm. Our proposed algorithm is also a suboptimal one shown in Fig.1.
The proposed algorithm not only determines the links to be used, but also designates
the routes from any node to gateways. Therefore, other than TC it can perform routing
and can eliminate the need for a routing algorithm for download traffic.
The proposed algorithm, as shown in Fig. 1, assumes an initial local-weight for
non-gateway nodes. This local-weight is a nominee of the local traffic of each node;
assuming all nodes request (can request) the same amount of traffic (this is fairness by
some means), the weight of unity is applied to all nodes except the gateways. This
weight can be refined further in an operating network using a feedback from the
application layer.
For the proposed algorithm to be more compatible with specific traffic pattern
protocols of higher levels, the required load can be estimated and sent to TC as its
local-weight. The topology refreshes as significant changes occur in local-weights.
The other optimization parameter, the transient-weight of a node, is an accumulation
of the local-weight of nodes that receive their traffic through this node. This weight
distinguishes CD from interference.

494

M. Malekesmaeili, M. Soltan, and M. Shiva

n = number of nodes
G = set of gateway nodes
available-links = an n×n matrix of existing links in the network

{

1,i∉ G

loacl-weight(i) =

0,i∈ G

;1 ≤ i ≤ n

transient-weight(i) = 0 ;1 ≤ i ≤ n
CD(i,j) = Set of nodes that should be silent when i-j is active ;1 ≤ i,j ≤ n
cost(i,j) =

∑

(local-weight(k) + transient-weight(k)) ;1 ≤ i,j ≤ n

k ∈ CD(i,j)

1 Sort nodes according to thier increasing distances from their nearest gateways (call it list_)
2 Adopt the first member of list_ [that has the minimum distance] (call it node_)
3 If node_ is itself a gateway or is connected to any gateway delete it from list and go to 2
4 Determine eligible links for node_ according to following limitations (call it EL)
→ The link is a member of available-links
→ The other end of the link is connected to a gateway
→ There is no existing route between the other end of link and node_
7 Calculate cost of each EL member (The direction is always away from node_)
8 Adopt the member with minimum cost
9 Delete node_ from list
10 Update transient-weight vector (according to existing routes)
11 If list_ ≠ ∅ , go to 2

Fig. 1. Collision Domain based Topology Control (CDTC)

This algorithm is designed for WMNs and aims at a topology with the maximum
available capacity. It uses CD as its optimization metric, however, any other conventional metric that is used for TC can also be used in this algorithm. For other metrics
only the cost function should change. If distance is the metric, cost of a link between
nodes “i” and “j” [cost (i,j)] will be simply the distance between these two nodes; and
the interference can be simply calculated by omitting the transient-weight factors from
the formula in Fig.1. Whatever the metric, the algorithm will generate a topology that
connects each router to a proper gateway. It dictates both the links and routes to be chosen for connecting a router to its gateway, but it does not generate routes for connecting
any arbitrary pair of nodes. So, peer to peer traffic that has a small share in the traffic
pattern of backhaul networks can be handled using the existing ad-hoc routing algorithms. As we have only considered the unidirectional download traffic from gateways
to nodes, the maximum CD in the network determines the nominal capacity of the network. It is proved in [2] that under certain conditions, which are also fulfilled in our
network, the nominal capacity of a WMN can be calculated as the nominal MAC layer
capacity divided by the maximum CD in the network. Thus, minimizing the maximum
CD will maximize the capacity. In the section that follows, the superiority of the proposed metric to distance and interference in terms of the maximum CD is presented.

4 Simulation Results
In this section, we compare the proposed metric (CD) is compared to two other
metrics, namely interference and power (distance), using the algorithm shown in

An Incremental Topology Control Algorithm for Wireless Mesh Networks

495

Fig. 1. In the simulations we have considered the download traffic. As mentioned in
the previous sections, in a backbone WMN, download traffic dominates the other
types of traffic such as the peer-to-peer traffic. It is this traffic pattern that
differentiates WMNs from stationary ad-hoc multi-hop networks. So, for an algorithm
to be suitable for WMNs this type of traffic should be considered. In [2], a method is
proposed and confirmed to estimate the nominal capacity of a WMN. As our
simulations match the assumptions of the said paper, we use the method proposed
there to calculate the nominal capacity of our presented topologies.
Simulations are done for backbone WMNs, i.e. clients of the final hop are not
considered. Since each router acts as an access point for its clients, and all clients of a
specific router can only communicate with other clients using their access point, the
responsibility of a backbone WMN is to deliver data packets of any client to their
corresponding access point. This is why considering or not considering the last hop
(from access point to client) does not affect the performance of a WMN. Fig. 2 shows
a sample topology resulted from CDTC. 49 nodes (routers) are distributed distancing
120 to 200 meter from adjacent nodes in a square shaped area.
1100
1000
900
800

m

700
600
500
400
300
200
100
100

200

300

400

500

600
m

700

800

900

1000 1100

Fig. 2. CDTC result for a 40 node network with 4 gateways in the corners

The performance of the proposed metric in terms of the maximum CD is compared
to the other metrics in Fig. 3. As pointed out before, for the specific conditions of our
simulations, this load is a direct indicator of the nominal capacity of the network, in
which the capacity will be the nominal MAC layer capacity divided by this load. So,
if the maximum CD is minimized, the capacity (the maximum download rate) of the
network will be maximized. The graphs in Fig. 3 show the maximum CD for different
number of nodes. The area is again square shaped, and the density of the nodes in the
area is constant, i.e. increasing the number of nodes equals to increasing the area that
is covered by the WMN. For each number of nodes, the maximum CD is the result of
the average of 10 different node position simulations (again nodes are placed randomly distancing 120 to 200 meters from their neighbors). In Fig. 3, results are shown
for two different scenarios, in (a) the center node is the gateway and in (b) the 4 corner nodes are gateways.

496

M. Malekesmaeili, M. Soltan, and M. Shiva

450

180
Distance
Inteference
Proposed metric

400

140
Capacity Devision Factor

Capacity Devision Factor

350
300
250
200
150

120
100
80
60

100

40

50

20

0

Distance
Inteference
Proposed metric

160

0

20

40

60
80
Number of nodes

100

120

0

140

(a) 1 gateway in the center

0

20

40

60
80
Number of nodes

100

120

140

(b) 4 gateways in the corners

Fig. 3. Maximum CD of the three metrics

If we assume that the nominal capacity of MAC layer is B [10], we can say that the
capacity (here, the maximum download rate) is B/max(CD) (as stated in [2]). So, we
can calculate the increase in the capacity of the network (when CD is the metric as
compared to when interference or distance are) simply as: (max (CDother metricsmax(CDCD))/max(CDCD). In Fig. 4, the percentage of increase in capacity (of Fig. 3
networks) using CD with respect to interference and distance is shown. We can see
that in both cases CD outperforms the conventional metrics, and even in some cases
the capacity using CD is more than twice the capacity obtained from the other metrics. From the above graphs we can also conclude that in most cases interference
works better than distance. The figures also highlight the efficiency of the algorithm
in using CD as the optimization metric.
160

180
Distance
Interference

120
100
80
60
40
20
0

Distance
Interference

160
% of increase in network capacity

% of increase in network capacity

140

140
120
100
80
60
40
20

9

25

49
Number of nodes

81

(a) 1 gateway in the center

121

0

9

25

49
Number of nodes

81

121

(b) 4 gateways in the corners

Fig. 4. Percentage of increase in capacity using CD compared to Interference and distance

5 Conclusion
In this paper, a new metric compliant with the needs of WMNs is proposed as well as
an algorithm designed for download traffic in backbone WMNs. The proposed metric
is tested within the algorithm and it is shown that the proposed metric outperforms the
conventional metrics like distance and interference. Other than link adoption, the

An Incremental Topology Control Algorithm for Wireless Mesh Networks

497

proposed metric defines the direction of data in the links, being bi-directional with the
route for each node to its corresponding neighbor indicative of the possibility of its
use as a routing algorithm.

References
1. I.F. Akyildiz and W. Xudong: A survey on wireless mesh networks, Communications
Magazine, IEEE, Volume 43, Issue 9, (Sept. 2005) 23 - S30.
2. J. Jangeun and M.L Sichitiu: The nominal capacity of wireless mesh networks, Wireless
Communications, IEEE, Volume 10, Issue 5, (Oct 2003) 8 – 14.
3. N. Li, J. Hou, and L. Sha: Design and Analysis of an MST-Based Topology Control Algorithm, Wireless Communications, IEEE Transactions on, Volume 4, Issue 3, (May 2005)
1195 - 1206.
4. L. Li, J.Y. Halpern, P. Bahl, Y.-M. Wang, and R. Wattenhofer: A Cone-Based Distributed
Topology Control Algorithm for Wireless Multi-Hop Networks, IEEE/ACM Transactions
on, Volume 13, Issue 1, (Feb. 2005) 147 - 159
5. V. Rodoplu, T. H. Meng: Minimum energy mobile wireless net-works, Selected Areas in
Communications, IEEE Journal on, Volume 17, Issue 8, (Aug. 1999) 1333 - 1344.
6. M. Burkhart, P. v. Rickenbach, R. Wattenhofer, and A. Zollinger. : Does Topology Control
Reduce Interference?, Proceedings of the 5th ACM international symposium on Mobile ad
hoc networking and computing, Session: Geometry and positioning (2004) 9 - 19.
7. K. Wu, W. Liao: Interference Efficient Topology Control in Wireless Ad Hoc Networks,
IEEE CCNC 2006, Volume 1, 8-10 (Jan. 2006) 411 - 415.
8. P.V. Rickenbach, S. Schmid, R. Wattenhofer, A. Zollinger: A Robust Interference Model
for Wireless Ad-Hoc Networks, Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium, 2005.
Proceedings 19th IEEE International, (April 2005) 8
9. M. K. Marina, S. R. Das: A Topology Control Approach for Utilizing Multiple Channels
in Multi-Radio Wireless Mesh Networks, Broadband Networks, 2005 2nd International
Conference on, Volume 1, (Oct. 2005) 381 - 390.
10. J. Jun, P. Peddabachagari, and M. L. Sichitiu: Theoretical maximum throughput of IEEE
802.11 and its applications, IEEE International Symposium on Network Computing and
Applications (NCA 2003) (Apr. 2003) 249–256

