Network Structure and Knowledge Transfer
Fangcheng Tang1,2
1

2

School of Economics and Management, Tsinghua University
Beijing 100084, P.R. China
School of Economics and Management, Xi’an Technological University
Xi’an 710032, P.R. China
fctang@163.com

Abstract. This study employs single layer perceptron model (SLPM)
to explore how the topological structure of intra-organization networks
aﬀects knowledge transfer. The results demonstrate that in the process of
knowledge transfer, both the disseminative capacity of knowledge senders
and the absorptive capacity of knowledge receivers should be taken into
consideration. While hierarchical networks can enable greater numbers of
organizational units to acquire knowledge, they reduce the speed and efﬁciency of knowledge transfer, whereas scale-free networks can accelerate
transfer of knowledge among units.
Keywords: Knowledge transfer, Hierarchical network, Scale-free
network.

1

Introduction

This paper utilizes a single-layer perceptron neural network model (SLPM) [1][2]
to simulate the knowledge transfer process in two network topologies of an organization. Speciﬁcally, our study focuses on the potentially diﬀerent performance of knowledge transfer between two organizational network topologies:
hierarchical and scale-free network which represent informal and formal structures in an organization. We argue that the nature of knowledge transfer within
intra-organizational networks can be modeled with the tools of computational
learning theory (CLT) as developed by computer scientists to study learning
and problem-solving by machines. As the knowledge is transferred within an
intra-organizational network, network nodes learn from their senders and become proﬁcient at recognizing new and related knowledge.

2
2.1

Virtual Experiment Design
The Structure of Intra-organization Networks

An intra-organization network can be described by a graph theoretic approach
in this form: G=(V ,E), where V denotes the set of units and E is sets of the relationships in the networks.Let V =1,...,N denote a ﬁnite set of units.for ∀ i, j ∈V ,
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 170–173, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Network Structure and Knowledge Transfer

171

deﬁne the binary varible χ(i, j) taking value χ(i, j) = 1 if there is a connection
between i and j, otherwise χ(i, j) = 0.
Thus, a symmetrical hierarchical structure for vertical organizations where
the number of layers, the number of nodes in the ﬁrst layer and the number of
connections from each node to the next layer are set. A scale-free model which is
deﬁned by the Watts and Strogatz [3]. The network evolves into a scale-invariant
state, the probability that a vertex has k edges following a power law with an
exponent γmodel = 2.9 ± 0.1[4].
2.2

Node Status Variables

We assuming that individual in the organization can be characterized by three
variables α, β, ρ. The ﬁrst is a signal variable α, which demonstrates whether
individual acquired speciﬁc knowledge, and value 1 means the individual successfully gets access to the knowledge and 0 means the opposite. The second
variable β, which is independent randomized uniformly distributed on [0, 1],
represents the capacity of the individuals to learn and absorb speciﬁc knowledge. Larger values mean substantial capacity, which can be determined by the
genetics, background, or experience of these members. The last variable ρ shows
the disseminative capacity of one member to transfer knowledge to others. Variable ρ is also random uniformly distributed on [0, 1] and members who have
strong capacity to spread knowledge get high numerical values.
2.3

Interaction Mechanism and NN Model

Here we use the SLPM of neural network to simulate the knowledge transfer.
Every node in the network is regarded as a threshold logical cell, input X =
(X1 , X2 , ..., XN ) , each Xi equals to the output Ωi of vertex i, shows the variable
S of node i, W = {ω1j , ω2j , ..., ωvj } and ωij comes from the variable Fi , θ is the
threshold value which is derived from the ingredients variable D of the node. This
model can be interpreted as that a node which has diﬃculty D in comprehending
the knowledge can only learn the knowledge under the condition that the sum
of the F of the input node which already has the knowledge is bigger than D of
this node, so output Ωi = {0, 1} is calculated as:
n

ωij Xi − θi ), f (ui ) =

Ωj = f (
i=1

3

0
1

if σi ≤ 0,
if σi > 0.

(1)

Results

A comparison of results of the computational experiments is summarized in Fig. 1
and Fig.2. In Fig1 (a) and (b), as the disseminative capacity of the dominant
individual is set at 1, the average number of knowledge-acquired individuals
is increased, and the number of knowledge-acquired nodes is more with higher

172

F. Tang

absorptive capacity (dashed line) than that with lower absorptive capacity (solid
line) in hierarchical and scale-free network. Regardless of high or low disseminative capacity, the frequency of KSC tends to increase at ﬁrst and then decline as
the number of knowledge-acquired individuals increases. But the extent of frequency of KSC increases with low absorptive capacity is less than that with high
absorptive. High absorptive capacity enables the number of knowledge-acquired
individuals to increase more, and it seems that the frequency of scale-free network follows the assumption of normal distribution.

(a) hierarchical network

(b) scale-free network

Fig. 1. The relationship between the frequency of KSC and acquired knowledge member with diﬀerent disseminative capabilities of knowledge holders

(a) Hierarchical Network

(b) Scale-free Network

Fig. 2. Relationship between the frequency of KSC and acquired knowledge member
with absorptive capacity

Fig. 2 shows that, regardless of the higher or lower absorptive capacity, the frequency of KSC of knowledge-acquired units in hierarchical and scale-free network
increases. Simultaneously, the extent of frequency of KSC with high absorptive
capacity increases is more than that with low absorptive capacity. In hierarchical
networks, average knowledge state change with high absorptive capacity tends to
be stable at interval 0.60 ∼ 0.80. In scale-free networks, however, the tendency
to increase will reach the maximum value 1.00. In addition, the frequency of
KSC with low absorptive capacity in scale-free networks tends to be more than
that of hierarchical networks. Therefore, as an important channel to knowledge
transfer, scale-free networks enable knowledge transfer to be more eﬃcient than
does hierarchical networks.

Network Structure and Knowledge Transfer

4

173

Conclusions

This study demonstrated that eﬃcient and eﬀective knowledge transfer must
consider two important aspects: knowledge senders’ disseminative capacity and
knowledge receivers’ absorptive capacity. Cohen and Levinthal argue that organizations have to build speciﬁc absorptive capacity to identify, assimilate, and
exploit external knowledge [5]. But an organizations also need to build strong disseminative capacity to communicate their knowledge in such a way that knowledge workers in the network can easily understand and thus assimilate the required knowledge, hence to maximize the value of knowledge. A corollary of
this ﬁnding is to understand the role of the dominant knowledge holder in the
knowledge transfer process. Also, an interesting eﬀect of the model is that 100
per cent knowledge transfer in an intra-organizational network is never reached.
We believe that this situation is the result of interaction of nodes with diﬀerent
disseminative capacity and absorptive capacity. The implication for multiunit
organizations is that 100 per cent knowledge sharing in work-teams or groups is
rarely achieved.
But current study has never considered the diﬀerent types of knowledge, e.g.,
tacit and explict knowledge. In addition, the strength of ties between the players
is not considered. These interesting problems will be remained as future research.
Acknowledgments. I would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their
insightful comments on previous versions of this manuscript.I was also grateful
to the funding of National Science Fund of China under contract No. 70602004
and Postdoctoral Foundation of China under contract No. 2005038072 for their
general support.

References
1. Hertz J., Krogh, A., Palmer, R. G. Introduction to the theory of neural computation.
Redwood City: Addison-Wesley (1991).
2. Lippman, R. P. An introduction to computing with neural nets. IEEE ASSP Magazine 4 (1987) 4-22.
3. Watts, D.J., Strogatz, S. H. Collective dynamics of small world networks. Nature
393 (1998) 440-442.
4. Barab´si, A-L., Albert, R., Jeong, H. Scale-free characteristics of random networks:
the topology of the world-wide web. Physica A 281 (2000) 69-77.
5. Cohen, W., Levinthal, D. Absorptive capacity: A new perspective on learning and
innovation. Administrative Science Quarterly 35 (1990) 128-152.

