Coupling Atomistic and Continuum Models for
Multi-scale Simulations of Gas Flows
Vladimir Kolobov, Robert Arslanbekov, and Alex Vasenkov
CFD Research Corporation, 215 Wynn Drive,
Huntsville, AL , 35803, USA
{vik, rra, avv}@cfdrc.com

Abstract. This paper describes two computational tools linking atomistic and
continuum models of gaseous systems. The first one, a Unified Flow Solver
(UFS), is based on a direct Boltzmann solver and kinetic CFD schemes. The
UFS uses an adaptive mesh and algorithm refinement procedure for automatic
decomposition of computational domain into kinetic and continuum parts. The
UFS has been used for a variety of flow problems in a wide range of Knudsen
and Mach numbers. The second tool is a Multi-Scale Computational
Environment (MSCE) integrating CFD tools with Kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC)
and Molecular Dynamics (MD). The MSCE was applied for analysis of
catalytic growth of vertically aligned carbon nanotubes (CNT) in a C2H2/H2
inductively coupled plasma. The MSCE is capable of predicting paths for
delivering carbon onto catalyst/CNT interface, formation of single wall or
multi-wall CNTs depending on the shape of catalyst, and transition from
nucleation to the steady growth of CNTs.
Keywords: Rarefied Gas Dynamics, Boltzmann solver, Kinetic Monte Carlo,
Molecular Dynamics, carbon nanotubes, Unified Flow Solver.

1 Introduction
The need for computational analysis at different scales appears in different fields of
science and engineering ranging from aerospace applications to material processing.
Recent advances of nanotechnology demand understanding of manufacturing
processes at atomistic scales for design smart materials and structures. The
development of hybrid solvers combining kinetic and fluid models has been an
important area of research over the last decade (see Refs. [1,2] for reviews). The
challenges of developing multi-scale methods are physical and numerical. Refining
computational mesh in continuum simulations down to the atomic scale results in the
time step governed by the smallest element of the mesh. Using such small time steps
in large cells result in an enormous waste of computing time since continuum
dynamics usually evolves on a much larger time scale. Efficient multiscale methods
should use different time steps in atomistic and continuum regions. Another major
problem in coupling atomistic and continuum models appears in pathological wave
reflections at an interface between kinetic and continuum regions, induced by high
frequency processes in the kinetic regions.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part I, LNCS 4487, pp. 858–865, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Coupling Atomistic and Continuum Models for Multi-scale Simulations of Gas Flows

859

This paper describes two computational tools linking atomistic and continuum
models for gaseous systems. The first one is a Unified Flow Solver (UFS) for
simulations of rarefied, transitional and continuum flows. The UFS solves the
Boltzmann and continuum equations in appropriate parts of computational domain.
Domain decomposition and coupling algorithm are based on the adaptive mesh and
algorithm refinement methods. The computational mesh in physical space is
dynamically adapted to the solution and geometry using a tree-based data structure.
The UFS separates non-equilibrium and near-equilibrium domains using continuum
breakdown criteria and automatically selects appropriate continuum and kinetic
solvers. The UFS was used for a variety of flow problems in a wide range of Knudsen
and Mach numbers and has recently been extended to multicomponent mixtures of
molecular gases with internal degrees of freedom.
The second tool is a Multi-Scale Computational Environment (MSCE) integrating
CFD tools with Kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) and Molecular Dynamics (MD) tools
[3]. The atomistic KMC and MD solvers are used in regions where atoms selfassemble into molecular structures. For coupling atomistic and continuum models,
macroscopic fluxes from the CFD solver are transferred to KMC, which calculates
velocity distributions of gas species near surfaces for nanomaterial fabrication. The
MD simulations are used for calculation of surface reaction rates used in KMC. The
MSCE was applied for analysis of catalytic growth of vertically aligned carbon
nanotubes (CNT) in a C2H2/H2 inductively coupled plasma. We have demonstrated
that MSCE is capable of predicting paths for delivering carbon onto catalyst/CNT
interface, formation of single wall or multi-wall CNTs depending on the shape of
catalyst, and transition from nucleation to the steady growth of CNTs [4].

2 Unified Flow Solver
The development of hybrid solvers combining kinetic and continuum models for gas
flows has been an important area of research over the last decade. The key parameter
defining the choice of the appropriate physical model is the local Knudsen number,
Kn, defined as the ratio of the mean free path to the characteristic size of the system.
Particle methods such as DSMC or Molecular Dynamics are used in regions with
strong deviations from equilibrium, and continuum (Euler or NS) solvers are used
elsewhere. Statistical noise inherent to DSMC has been identified as an obstacle for
the development of hybrid solvers [5]. Direct methods of solving Boltzmann equation
have recently emerged as a viable alternative to the particle methods [6-8]. They are
preferable for coupling kinetic and continuum models because similar numerical
techniques are used for solving both the Boltzmann and continuum equations. The
Unified Flow Solver (UFS) uses the direct Boltzmann solver and kinetic schemes for
the continuum solvers to facilitate coupling of the solutions based on continuity of
half-fluxes in the finite volume approach.
2.1 UFS Solution Procedure
The UFS architecture is described in details in [9]. Here, we only briefly outline some
important features. Geometry of the problem is defined using standard files and a

860

V. Kolobov, R. Arslanbekov, and A. Vasenkov

Cartesian mesh is generated automatically around objects embedded in computational
domain. A continuum solver is running first and the computational grid is
dynamically adapted to the solution. Kinetic domains are identified using continuum
breakdown criteria, and the Boltzmann solver replaces the continuum solver in the
kinetic domains. The coupling of kinetic and continuum solvers at the interface occurs
seamlessly based on the continuity of half-fluxes.
For solving the Boltzmann equation, a Cartesian mesh in velocity space is
introduced with a cell size Δξ and nodes ξ β . Using this velocity mesh, the
Boltzmann equation for each gas component is reduced to linear hyperbolic system of
transport equations in physical space with a nonlinear source term

∂f β
∂t

+ ∇r ⋅ (ξ β f β ) = I ( f β , f β )

(1)

The solution of the system (1) can be found by standard CFD methods for arbitrary
mesh in physical space. We use efficient conservative methods of calculating the
Boltzmann collision term I ( f , f ) developed by Tcheremissine [10] using Korobov's
sequences [11] for the evaluation of multi-dimensional integrals.
The parallel version of the UFS enforces a dynamic load balance among
processors. The procedure of domain decomposition is performed using space-filling
curves. Different weights are assigned to kinetic and continuum cells depending on
CPU time required for performing computations in the cells [12]. Figure 1 illustrates
an example of 3D simulations of the Inflatable Reentry Vehicle Experiment (IRVE)
[13] for Kn = 0.01 and M = 3.94 performed on an 8 node cluster.

Fig. 1. Streamlines, Mach number, and computational mesh (on the left). Gas temperature in
the vertical plane, kinetic (light) and continuum (dark) domains in the horizontal plane (on the
right).

2.2 Molecular Gases and Gas Mixtures
The UFS has been extended to molecular gases and gas mixtures. Figure 2 shows an
example of supersonic flow of a binary mixture over a cylinder at M=2, for 3

Coupling Atomistic and Continuum Models for Multi-scale Simulations of Gas Flows

861

Knudsen numbers. Two species with the mass ratio of 2 with no chemical reactions
are considered. The Hard Sphere model of molecular interactions is used for the
Boltzmann solver. The domain decomposition is performed using continuum
breakdown criterion based on the gradient of the total gas density. The temperatures
of species become different in the kinetic domains while they are equal in the
continuum domains. For these simulations, the typical number of velocity nodes (in
each direction) is 15-20 depending on the Mach number and mass ratio of gas species.

Fig. 2. The computational mesh and kinetic/continuum domains for binary mixture of
monatomic gases at M=2, for Kn numbers 0.125, 0.025, and 0.0125

The kinetic solver has been extended to molecular gases with internal degrees of
freedom following the work [14]. Figure 3 shows the shock wave (SW) structure in
Nitrogen at M=12.9 with the center of SW located at X=0. On the left are distributions
of gas density, translational and rotational temperatures, on the right are rotational
spectra for 25 levels at different points along the wave front. On the x-axis is the
rotational number; on the y-axis is the population of the rotational levels. It is clearly
seen that the rotational equilibrium inside the SW does not exist for such a high Mach
number. The typical CPU time for these SW simulations is about 30 hours on an
AMD64 3000 processor. Although accurate calculations require considerable CPU
time that can be reduced by using crude discretization of the velocity space and
reduced number of levels of the rotational energy spectrum [15].
We have also extended the kinetic solver for vibrationally excited molecules. For
future development of the UFS, we plan to take into consideration that vibrational
equilibration in VT and VV collisions occur considerably slower compared to

862

V. Kolobov, R. Arslanbekov, and A. Vasenkov

Fig. 3. SW structure in Nitrogen at M=12.9: gas density and temperatures (left) and rotational
spectra at different points (right)

translational and rotational equilibration. As a result, in most cases, it is adequate to
model computational domains where vibrational relaxation and chemical reactions
take place using continuum models.

3 Multi-scale Models for Computational Material Science
Computational material science deals with strongly coupled processes occurring at
disparate length and time scales at an interface between gaseous and solid phases.
The gas-phase processes (chemical reactions, heat transfer, etc.) are typically several
orders of magnitude slower than the surface processes. Continuum models or
atomistic models are used for simulations of reactive gas flows at the reactor scale.
These models are not appropriate for modeling fast surface processes such as surface
diffusion of adsorbed molecules, chemical reactions or atomic relaxation occurring
with characteristic times of 0.1 ns and spatial scales of 0.1 nm. Such processes are
modeled using atomic-scale models such as Kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) or
Molecular Dynamics (MD). Over the last several years, there has been a rapidly
growing interest in the development of computational tools with different levels of
detail. The major challenge here is the development of algorithms capable of bridging
atomistic and continuum models working on disparate time and length scales.
3.1 Bridging Disparate Length and Time Scales
For bridging disparate spatial scales, Kevrekidis et al. [16] introduced the “Gap-tooth”
method involving atomistic modeling in tiny teeth, defined as regions where
continuum models are not available or are invalid, and a less detailed continuum
simulation within large gaps referred to as regions where nanoscale phenomena are
not important. This method is designed to approximate a so-called “time-stepper” for
an unavailable macroscopic equation in a macroscopic domain. The authors have
demonstrated the ability of this model to solve selected multiscale hydrodynamic

Coupling Atomistic and Continuum Models for Multi-scale Simulations of Gas Flows

863

problems such as boundary layer behavior and shock formation. It was also shown
that it is possible to obtain a convergent scheme without constraining the microscopic
code, by introducing buffer regions around the computational boxes. The Gap-tooth
approach was successfully adapted for integrating KMC modeling with CFD reactorscale simulations in the MSCF described in the next section.
Bridging the time scales is an equally difficult and fundamentally different
problem than bridging the length scales. The major issue here is that the dynamics of
complex systems is often driven by rare but important events [17]. The simulations of
these events often require long run times, and rapidly become prohibitively expensive
due to the exponential scaling with inverse temperature. Several groups reported
significant progress in the development of new techniques for accelerated modeling of
rate events [18,19]. Kevrekidis et al. introduced a coarse model for mapping a
mesoscopic description onto atomistic description [20]. They assumed that a coarse
model (e.g. continuum model) exists in closed form for the fine scale simulator (e.g.
KMC model). Based on this assumption, a Coarse Controller was constructed for
KMC simulator, and the developed framework was applied for a simple surface
catalyst. In subsequent studies, this group further developed the Coarse Controller
and used it to accelerate MD modeling. The projection operator formalism was
introduced to integrate the dynamics of rare events with fastest molecular processes of
bond vibration and atomic collisions [21]. This was achieved by estimating both the
thermodynamic driving forces for slow motions and their dynamic properties.
Information about the slow coarse dynamics was extracted from the projected motions
of many, appropriately initialized, but otherwise independent and unbiased replica
simulations. The advantage of the coarse MD is that it can be used for any type of
intermolecular potentials and for a wide range of temperatures.
3.2 Multi-scale Computational Framework
The Multi-Scale Computational Framework (MSCF) has been developed for material
processing applications [3]. The MSCF integrates continuum models with atomistic
KMC and MD models, using the coarse timestepper and gap-tooth modules as
bridging algorithms. The reactor-scale continuum simulator is used in large gaps
where details of atomic motion are not important, while atomistic KMC and MD
solvers are applied to tiny regions, teeth, defined as areas where atoms self-assemble
into molecular structures. Macroscopic fluxes from the continuum solver are
transferred to the gap-tooth module for estimating microscopic fluxes towards the
substrate. These microscopic fluxes are used in the KMC solver for prescribing
velocity distributions of ions and neutrals at the source plane. The gap-tooth module
also accounts for the influence of KMC modeling in one tooth on those in the
neighboring teeth by establishing a relationship between incoming microscopic fluxes
to each tooth and outgoing fluxes from the neighboring teeth. The velocity
distributions of neutral species in KMC are chosen as isotropic Maxwellian
distributions; the ions are launched with mono-directional and mono-energetic
distributions. The Coarse Timestepper module projects, in time, the rates and
probabilities of chemical reactions computed by the MD solver. Figures 4 and 5
illustrate the MSCF application to analysis of catalytic growth of vertically aligned
carbon nanotubes (CNT) in a C2H2/H2 inductively coupled plasma [4].

864

V. Kolobov, R. Arslanbekov, and A. Vasenkov

Fig. 4. Transition from nucleation to steady growth of Fig. 5. The growth of single wall
CNTs is illustrated by time-dependent incorporation and multi-wall CNTs on the
probabilities for the tall and short catalyst
catalysts of different shape

4 Conclusion
We have described two computational tools linking atomistic and continuum models
of gaseous systems. The UFS was originally developed for aerospace applications.
We believe that with additional physical models and further improvements, the UFS
will be valuable for a wide range of applications from trans-atmospheric flights to
low-pressure material processing and semiconductor manufacturing. The MSCF,
originally developed for CNT applications, will be further extended into processing of
biocompatible polymers and other applications.
Acknowledgments. The UFS was developed in collaboration with Drs. V.V. Aristov,
A.A. Frolova, S.A. Zabelok, and F.G. Tcheremissine from the Russian Academy of
Sciences. The work is partially supported by USAF and NSF SBIR Projects

References
1. Wijesinghe, H.S., Hadjiconstantinou, N.G.: A discussion of hybrid atomistic-continuum
methods for multiscale hydrodynamics. Int. J. Multiscale Comput. Eng. 2 (2004), 189
2. Kolobov, V.I., Bayyuk, S.A., Arslanbekov R.R., Aristov, V.V., Frolova, A.A., Zabelok,
S.A.: Construction of a Unified Continuum/Kinetic Solver for Aerodynamic Problems,
AIAA Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets 42 (2005), 598-605
3. Vasenkov, A.V., Fedoseyev, A. I., Kolobov, V. I., Choi, H.S., Hong, K.-H., Kim, K.,
Kim, J., Lee, H. S., Shin, J. K.: Computational Framework for Modeling of Multi-Scale
Processes, J. Comput. Theor. Nanoscience 3 (2006), 453-458

Coupling Atomistic and Continuum Models for Multi-scale Simulations of Gas Flows

865

4. Vasenkov, A.V., Kolobov, V. I.: Modeling of multi-scale processes during the growth of
carbon nanotubes, in: Technical Proceedings of the 2006 NSTI Nanotechnology
Conference and Trade Show. Vol. 1 (2006), 617-621
5. Carlson, H.A., Roveda, R., Boyd, I.D., Candler, G.V.: A Hybrid CFD-DSMC Method of
Modeling Continuum-Rarefied Flows, AIAA Paper 2004-1180 (2004)
6. Rogier, F., Schneider, J.A.: A direct method for solving the Boltzmann equation. Transport
Theory Stat. Phys. 23 (1994), 313-338
7. Aristov,V.V.: Direct Methods for Solving the Boltzmann Equation and Study of NonEquilibrium Flows, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, (2001)
8. Tcheremissine, F.G.: Direct Numerical Solution of the Boltzmann Equation, in:
M.Capitelli (ed.) Rarefied Gas Dynamics, AIP Conference Proceedings, N.Y. vol. 762
(2005), 677-685
9. Kolobov, V.I., Arslanbekov, R.R., Aristov, V.V., Frolova, A.A., Zabelok, S.A.: Unified
solver for rarefied and continuum flows with adaptive mesh and algorithm refinement, J.
Comput. Phys. (2006), doi:10.1016/j.jcp.2006.09.021
10. Tcheremissine, F.G.: Solution to the Boltzmann kinetic equation for high-speed flows.
Comp. Math. Math. Phys. 46 (2006) 315
11. Korobov, N.M.: Exponential Sums and Their Applications, Springer, (2001), 232p
12. Zabelok, S.A, Aristov, V.V., Frolova, A.A., Kolobov, V.I., Arslanbekov, R.R.: Parallel
implementation of the Unified Flow Solver. in: Rarefied Gas Dynamics, AIP Conference
Proceedings (2007)
13. Moss, J.N. et al.: Low-Density Aerodynamics of the Inflatable Reentry Vehicle
Experiment (IRVE), AIAA Paper 2006-1189 (2006)
14. Tcheremissine, F.G.: Solution of the Wang-Chang-Uhlenbeck master equation. Doklady
Physics 47 (2002), 872-875
15. Tcheremissine, F.G., Kolobov, V.I., Arslanbekov, R.R.: Simulation of Shock Wave
Structure in Nitrogen with Realistic Rotational Spectrum and Molecular Interaction
Potential. in Rarefied Gas Dynamics, AIP Conference Proceedings (2007)
16. Samaey, G., Kevrekidis, I.G., Roose, D.: in Multiscale Modeling and Simulation, Springer,
Verlag, (2004), 93
17. Hanggi, P., Talkner, P., and Borkovec, M.: Reaction-rate theory: fifty years after Kramers.
Rev. Mod. Phys. 62 (1990), 251-341
18. Sorensen, M. R., Voter, A.F.: Temperature-accelerated dynamics for simulation of
infrequent events. J. Chem. Phys. 112 (2000), 9599-9606
19. Dellago, C., Bolhuis, P. G., Chandler, D.: Efficient transition path sampling: Application
to Lennard-Jones cluster rearrangements. J. Chem. Phys. 108 (1998), 9236-9245
20. Siettos, C. I., Armaou, A., Makeev, A. G., Kevrekidis, I. G.: Microscopic/stochastic
timesteppers and coarse control: A KMC example. AIChE Journal 49 (2003), 19221926
21. Sriraman, S., Kevrekidis, I. G., Hummer, G.: Coarse Master Equation from Bayesian
Analysis of Replica Molecular Dynamics Simulations. J. Phys. Chem. B 109 (2005),
6479-6484

