A Low Complexity Intrusion Detection Algorithm
Lin Yao1 and Kai Yao2
1

Software College of Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116023, China
lin_yao@eyou.com
2
Library Information Center of Shenyang University of Technology, Shenyang
150001, China
frantodd2002@yahoo.com.cn

Abstract. A low complexity clustering algorithm for intrusion detection based
on wavecluster is presented. Using the multiresolution property of wavelet
transforms, we can effectively identify arbitrarily shaped clusters at different
scales and degrees of detail, moreover, applying wavelet transform removes the
noise from the original feature space and make more accurate cluster found.
Experimental results on KDD-99 intrusion detection dataset show the efficiency
and accuracy of this algorithm. A detection rate above 98% and a false alarm
rate below 3% are achieved. The time complexity of the wavecluster algorithm
is O(N), which is comparatively low than other algorithms.

1 Introduction
Network Intrusion detection is the process of monitoring the events occurring in a
computing system or network and analyzing them for signs of intrusions, defined as
attempts to compromise the confidentiality, integrity, availability, or to bypass the
security mechanism of a computer or network. Recently, many researchers turned into
data mining techniques to attack the problem. Data mining can improve variants
detection rate, control false alarm rate, and reduce false dismissals. A wide variety of
data mining techniques has been applied to intrusion detections. In data mining,
clustering is the most important unsupervised learning process used to find the
structures or patterns in a collection of unlabeled data. Until now, the clustering
algorithms can be categorized into four main groups: partitioning algorithm,
hierarchical algorithm, density-based algorithm and grid-based algorithm[1],[2],[3].
Gholamhosein proposed wavecluster approach, which is a grid-based approach, and
successfully used in image processing[4].We extend wavecluster to use in intrusion
detection, but traffic in a network is never stagnant, for example, new services can be
activated, work patterns can change as projects start or finish, and so on.
Consequently, an intrusion detection system needs to be able to adapt to these
changing traffic patterns while still maintaining a high level of detection accuracy. To
deal with these issues, we modify wavecluster and develop a low complexity
wavecluster algorithm with little prior knowledge, the proposed method allows the
discovery of clusters of any shape and can detect timely not only the known intrusion
types, but also their variants.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part III, LNCS 4489, pp. 461–464, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

462

L. Yao and K. Yao

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the low
complexity wavecluster method, in section 3, we present the experimental evaluation
of the wavecluster method using KDD-99 intrusion detection dataset. Finally, we
present concluding remark and suggestions for future study.

2 Low Complexity Wavecluster Algorithm
Given a set of spatial objects, the goal of the adaptive algorithm is to detect cluster
and assign labels to the objects based on the cluster that they belong to, thus it can
detect whether there is intrusion exists. Applying wavelet transform to transform the
original feature space and then find the dense regions in the new space. It yields sets
of clusters at different resolutions and scales, which can be chosen based on user
needs. The main step of adaptive wavecluster algorithm are shown in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1.
Input: Multidimendional data objects feature vectors
Output: clustered objects
1. Quantize feature space, then assign objects to the cells.
2. Apply wavelet transform on the quantized feature space.
3. Find the connected components in the subbands of transformed feature space.
4. Assign labels to the cells
5. Map the objects to the clusters
The first step of the adaptive wavecluster algorithm is to quantize the feature space,
where each dimension Ai in the d-dimensional feature space will be divided into mi
intervals. Then, corresponding cell for the objects will be determined based on their
feature values. A cell Ci=[ci1,ci2,...cid]contains an object Oi=[ok1,ok2,...okd].
We recall that cij is the right open interval in the partitioning of Aj. For each cell,
we count the number of objects contained in it to aggregation of the objects. The
quantization mi effect the performance of this algorithm, we set the correct value of
mi for intrusion detection dataset by simulation. In the second step, discrete wavelet
transform will be applied on the quantized feature space. Applying wavelet transform
on the cells in {Cj:1<j<h} results in a new feature space, that is new cells. Given the
set of new cells, wavecluster detects the connected components in the transformed
feature space. Each connected component is a set of new cells and is considered as a
cluster. For finding the connected components, we define that a new neighborhood for
intrusion detection application, that is ,the neighborhood is defined in Euclidean
space, a significant cell a in the transformed feature space is neighbor of another cell
b if a lies within one of the four grid cells surrounding cell b,with the shortest
Euclidean distances is defined to be its nearest neighbors. With an indexing scheme
such as an R-tree, it is very easy to find the neighborhoods in short time.
Each cluster w will have a cluster number wn, the adaptive wavecluster algorithm
labels the cells in each cluster in the transformed feature with its cluster number.
Calculate the mean of every cluster, remark as xn. The clusters that are found are in
the transformed feature space and are based on wavelet coefficients. Thus, they
cannot be directly used to define the clusters in the original feature space. We make a
lookup table to map the cells in the original feature space. Each entry in the table

A Low Complexity Intrusion Detection Algorithm

463

specifies the relationship between one cell in the transformed feature space and the
corresponding cell in the original feature space. Finally, the algorithm assigns the
label of each cell in the feature space to all the objects whose feature vector is in that
cell, and thus the cluster as determined.
When the objects are assigned to the cells of the quantized feature space at step 1
of the algorithm, the final content of the cells is independent of the order in which the
objects are presented performed on these cells. Hence, the algorithm will have the
same results for any different order of input data, so it is order insensitive with respect
to input objects.

3 Experimental Results
In order to evaluate the low complexity wavecluster algorithm, we test the algorithm
on a benchmark dataset, the network traffic data from the KDD Cup 1999 dataset. In
the experiments, the values of each features are normalized with the minimum and
maximum values of that features so that they fall in the range of [0,1]. In our
experiment, beside the normal instances, instances of three popular attacks are
involved: ipsweep, smurf, neptune. For each type, only one seed point is labeled at
the beginning, and four nearest neighbors are defined as the nearest neighborhood of
each instance. As shown in Table I, most attacks can be distinguished from the
normal activities and the detection rate is as high as 98.3%. At the same time, the
false alarm rate is approximately 1.8%. Assuming m cells in each dimension of
feature space, there would be K=md cells. Complexity of applying wavelet transform
on the quantized feature space will be O(dK).Since we assume that the value of d is
low, we can consider it as a constant, thus O(dK)=O(K).Making the lookup table
requires O(K) time. The time complexity of last step of our low complexity
wavecluster algorithm is O(N). Since this algorithm is applied on very large databases
with a low number of dimensions, we can assume that N>K.Thus, based on this
assumption, the overall time complexity of the algorithm will be O(N).
Table 1. Experiment Result

Experiment

Detection Rate

False Alarm Rate

First

98.3%

1.8%

Second

98.7%

1.7%

4 Conclusion
In this paper, we present a low complexity wavecluster algorithm for intrusion
detection, which can adapt to changes in normal traffic. Experimental results on a
subset of KDD-99 dataset showed the stability of efficiency and accuracy of the
adaptive wavecluster algorithm. With different setting, the detection rate stayed

464

L. Yao and K. Yao

always above 98% while the false alarm rate was below 3%. The time complexity of
adaptive wavecluster is low, which is O(N),N is the number objects in the database.

Acknowledgment
The authors are gratefully acknowledge support from NSF grants 60673046,and thank
Professor Mingchu.Li for providing helpful comments and information.

References
1. Pauwels EJ, Fiddelaers P,Van Gool L. DOG-based unsupervised clustering for CBIR. In
Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Visual Information Systems, Vol.2, San
Diego,Calif (2003) 137-145.
2. Wang W, Yang J,Muntz R.STING: A Statistical Information Grid Approach to Spatial Data
Mining. In Proceedings of the 23rd VLDB Conference, Athens, Vol.30, Greece(2000) 186195.
3. Xu X,Ester M,Kriegel H. A distribution-based clustering algorithm for mining in large
spatial database. In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Data Engineering,
Vol.41,Orlanda,Fla.(2002)324-331.
4. Gholamhosein S. et al, WaveCluster: a wavelet-based clustering approach for spatial data in
very large databases. Journal of VLDB(2000) Vol.33, 289-294.

