Mobile Peer-to-Peer Technology Used in Mobile
Education Field
Liang Ye and Ci Lin-lin
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing
100081, China
Liang ye@sohu.com,cilinlin@263.net

Abstract. Mobile Education is a new way of using wireless and mobile
technologies for education, and it usually applies to nature-based ﬁeld
study. However, the fee of use is so high that few people could accept this
new learning method. But we take note of that the message, required by
users coming from the same group with wireless communication equipments, usually focuses on a certain area. So, we could use the mobile
peer-to-peer (MP2P) technology to resolve this conﬂiction. MP2P network can let messages be transferred in the group instead of in the whole
communication system, and this could save the messages in the group
and meet the need of other users through storage and transmitting. So
the users could cut down the fee of using mobile education system.
Keywords: Mobile P2P, Mobile Education, Wireless Communication.

1

Introduction

Mobile Education, or M-Education, is a new way of using wireless and mobile
technologies for education by extending access to a desktop-based online virtual
environment called MOOsburg [1] to handheld devices used as part of a mobile
collaborative community. That means, we can get knowledge all over the time,
and be not limited by where we are. In mobile education ﬁeld, the handheld
mobile devices, i.e. mobile phone, could help us to get information. At the same
time, numerous schools begin to build resource servers and provide education resources for their students, especially the resources which may be used in the ﬁeld
study. When the students take part in a nature-based ﬁeld study, for example,
the geology ﬁeld course, they usually come to be perplexed by a lot of nature
phenomena. And they also want to share their discovery with their classmates,
so that they could collaborate with each other. In this case, they need use the
phones to download or upload the message with the ﬁxed server in the school.
But we know that, the fee of using those mobile equipments is very high, so
we couldn’t use them for all things we want, and this may aﬀect the eﬀect of this
geology ﬁeld course. In order to reduce the fee for communication, the mobile
peer-to-peer (MP2P) technology is proposed. Using MP2P technique, we can
reduce the rate of communication. That is, the fee for communication is low,
and we can use mobile devices for study on a larger scale.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part III, LNCS 4489, pp. 539–542, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

540

Y. Liang and L.-l. Ci

This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we brieﬂy summarize related
work. In Section 3 we present the technique of organizing a MP2P network.
Comparing results and conclusions are reported in Section 4.

2

Related Work

Numerous eﬀorts are being made in the direction of using handheld mobile devices for the purposes of sharing educational resource. Some technologies simply
store the shared educational resources in the database server, and distribute
these resources through browser / server (B/S) mode or client / server (C/S)
mode to users’ handheld devices. Other technologies plan to realize the function
of sharing resources by means of the third generation mobile phone. By examining a few related applications and concepts, we shall see how MP2P makes mobile
education technologies using wireless and mobile devices one step further.
Now, most people get information using the traditional network technique,
which base on B/S or C/S network mode. But there are two disadvantages to
this technique: On the one hand, the bandwidth of wireless link is a major
performance bottleneck. The more users want to get the similar resource from
server at the same time, the more response time is needed for each user. On
the other hand, wireless communication is very expensive, and the burden of fee
would fell to the users after they use this kind of application for a long time.
There are some technologies designed for the third general mobile phone.
These technologies mainly concentrate on how to use P2P technique in the mobile communication ﬁeld. But yet, P2P technique can’t be used on the mobile
phone of 2.5G networks generation, in which an IP address, unlike the third
generation mobile phone, can’t be distributed for each, the research on P2P for
mobile phone only has theoretic value.
In the interest of the users, we propose a new technique, MP2P technique,
for mobile education. Through the MP2P technique, we can get the education
resource we need with shorter response time and lower fee via our mobile phone.

3

Organizing a MP2P Network

In mobile environment, handheld mobile devices are always moving; signal might
break oﬀ frequently; the bandwidth of wireless link is narrow[2]. As a result,
we need to design a new network organizing technique to suit for it. It consists of group management technique, resource management technique, and pipe
technique.
3.1

Group Management Technique

Group management technique includes creating, entering, and exiting group.
At ﬁrst, all the handheld mobile devices use Bluetooth module or Ad hoc
module to connect with each other and buildup a local MP2P network, and all

Mobile Peer-to-Peer Technology Used in Mobile Education Field

541

of them makeup a basic group. When a task, for instance, downloading a map
all about them, is brought forward in the basic group, a device which could do it
immediately is selected to buildup a new sub-group by the mobile agent running
in the MP2P network, and this device is called leader of the new group.
After the leader device builds up a new group, the devices which maybe use
the same resource join into the group one by one. But how to decide whether a
device needs to enter the group? In order to explain the regulation in detail, we
put forward some deﬁnitions.
Deﬁnition 1 Relativity: Suppose there are two devices named NA and NB respectively, the aggregate of attributes for NA is Aattribute , and for NB is Battribute ,
the correlation coeﬃcient could be expressed by RAB , then RAB = (Aattribute ∩
Battribute )/(Aattribute ∪ Battribute ). According to the deﬁnition, RAB ∈ [0, 1], if
the value of RAB is high, the attributes of NA and NB are similar.
Deﬁnition 2 Threshold: When a device wants to join into a group, it need calculate the correlative degree with the devices in the group. If all values are higher
than a certain value, it will be allowed to enter the group, and this certain value
is called Threshold(T). So, if the leader device NA creates a new group G, and all
the devices in the group G are denoted as NG , that is NG 1. When a new device NB want to enter the group, if NG > 1, and |NC |RBC ≥ T, NC ∈ NG | ≥ 2,
or |NG | = 1, and RAB ≥ T , the new device could enter this group.
If a device doesn’t need the sharing resource again, and it wants to get a new
kind of resource from another group, it could apply to exit current group. If the
leader device needs to exit the group, the mobile agent of managing group must
select a new leader for the group.
3.2

Resource Management Technique

After creating a group, the mobile agent needs to control the distribution of
resource. To describe the resource management technique better, we put forward
some deﬁnitions and theorems.
Deﬁnition 3 Atomic resource message: It is also called atomic message (AM)
for short. It is the minimum block of message which could be cut into, but still
could be used in the future. Only AM could be allowed to transfer in the group
at MP2P network. We use the mark R∗ to denote it.
Deﬁnition 4 Combinative resource message: It is also called combinative message (CM) for short. It makes up of a serial of AM. The method of combination
concludes combination on diﬀerent dimension, combination on the same dimension, and both of above. We use the mark R to denote it. Then R=nR∗ (n ≥ 2).
Deﬁnition 5 Resource binary tree (RBT): It is used to record a certain resource
of group. In binary tree, the node represents the handheld mobile device, and
the branch represents the two devices with a direct communication link. The
leaf of tree represents the AM of group at a certain device.
In RBT, there is a branch between two nodes. This represents they could
share resource with greater eﬃciency and speed, and the nodes connected by
left branch are better than the nodes connected by right branch. According to

542

Y. Liang and L.-l. Ci

the deﬁnition, only the AM could be represented by RBT, but we usually need
CM as we work. So we must ensure that they could transform into each other.
Theorem 1: In MP2P network, CM could be combined by AM.
Proof. Let A, B, C, D are AMs, A, B at the same dimension, C, D at the diﬀerent
∗
∗
+ RB
,
dimension, and A, B could not be combined with C, D, Then RAB = RA
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
RCD = RC ∪ RD . So, RABCD = RAB + RCD = (RA + RB ) + (RC ∪ RD ) That
is the AMs could transform into a CM.
Theorem 2: In MP2P network, AM could be transformed by CM and AMs.
Proof. Let A, B, C, D are AMs, RABCD is a CM, which is combined by A, B, C,
∗
∗
∗
∗
D. With theorem 1, we know:RABCD = (RA
+RB
)+(RC
∪RD
). If we want to get
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
A or B, Then, RA = RABCD −RB −(RC ∪RD ) or RB = RABCD −RA
−(RC
∪RD
).
We obtain that A or B could be transformed. If we want to get C or D, Then,
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
∪ RD
) = RABCD − RA
− RB
. That is RC
= (RABCD − RA
− RB
)/RD
or
(RC
∗
∗
∗
∗
RD = (RABCD − RA − RB )/RC . We obtain that C or D could be transformed.
So, AM could be transformed by a CM and the other AMs.
Using the RBT, according to theorem 1 and 2, we can buildup a route from the
user to the resource or part of the resource meeting the request.
3.3

Pipe Technique

Deﬁnition 6 Pipe technique: In MP2P network, pipe technique is that a device
could get a resource from another group directly.
In MP2P network, pipe technique is a core technique of mobile education
ﬁeld, and we will introduce it in next paper in detail.

4

Conclusions

In geology ﬁeld course, the resources only are saved on the server, so anything
must be got from it. In MP2P network, we suppose the server is a number of
the group, and call it A0. A1, A2, A3, A4 all could get the resources from A0
through the index of RBT if they need. So, no matter which method is used to
get the map, the fee is equal. However, after anyone of them gets the map from
A0, the others don’t need get the map from A0, and they could get it via the
MP2P network, so the fee for communication is descended.
With MP2P, any group that requires a collaborative channel for achieving an
educational goal could be brought to success with less time and money. So, the
MP2P technique has a broad prospect at M-Education ﬁeld.

References
1. Carroll, J.M. Rosson, M.B. Isenhour P.L. : Designing Our Town: MOOsburg, International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, Vol.54, No.5, pp. 725-751.
2. Liang, Y. Ci, L. Su, F. : Dynamic Location Service Based on Measurement of Moving
Regularity in Mobile Computing Environment[C]. 6th International Symposium on
Test and MeasurementVol. 8, Jul. 2005: pp.7987-7990.

