Data Forest: A Collaborative Version
Ronan Jamieson, Adrian Haﬀegee, Priscilla Ramsamy, and Vassil Alexandrov
Advanced Computing and Emerging Technologies Centre,
The School of Systems Engineering, University of Reading,
Reading, RG6 6AY, United Kingdom
r.jamieson@reading.ac.uk

Abstract. As we increase our ability to produce and store ever larger
amounts of data, it is becoming increasingly diﬃcult to understand what
the data is trying to tell us. Not all the data we are currently producing
can easily ﬁt into traditional visualization methods. This paper presents
a new and novel visualization technique based on the concept of a Data
Forest. Our Data Forest has been developed to be utilised by virtual reality (VR) systems. VR is a natural information medium. This approach
can easily be adapted to be used in collaborative environments. A test
application has been developed to demonstrate the concepts involved
and a collaborative version tested.
Keywords: Data Forest, collaborative virtual environments, data visualization.

1

Introduction

The search to eﬃciently extract information and meaning from data has preoccupied mankind. It has lead humans to try many diﬀerent methods of presenting
the data from hieroglyphics to printed tables, but they mainly rely on our primary sense which is sight. This is due to the fact that humans have a highly
developed visual system, that has evolved over time from the need to survive
(i.e. tracking food sources) to more complex requirements like entertainment
(e.g. pattern matching on Rubik’s cubes). Humans excel at pattern recognition
and are capable of gaining a better insight and understanding from this. Based
on this ability, we ﬁnd it possible to make intuitive decisions even if there is
incomplete or missing data. Any method that uses a 3D object approach will be
more eﬀective, due to the fact that it is more natural and intuitive considering
this is how humans view near objects.
Current methods used to extract knowledge from variable data sets that do
not ﬁt into traditional structures do not necessarily scale well to large multidimensional levels. Therefore a new approach is required that overcomes this
problem and utilises the recent advances in computer and graphics technology.
A VR Data Forest fulﬁls this requirement. VR is a discipline that enables users to
view large complex data sets in an intuitive and natural manner. For example a
3D object can be a graphical representation of a particular data value. Immersive
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part II, LNCS 4488, pp. 744–751, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Data Forest: A Collaborative Version

745

Projection Technology (IPT) systems like CAVEs[3] or powerwalls, are becoming
increasingly popular VR systems for high-end visualization and analysis of large
multi-parameter data sets. The feeling of immersion, coupled with natural forms
of interaction are particularly useful when using data sets.
VR is currently being utilised by a wide range of industries to gain an insight
into their data sets, these industries range from gas and oil (e.g. seismic data)
to the medical profession (e.g. pre-surgery planning). Using VR it is possible to
network Virtual Environments (VE) together and create a Collaborative Virtual
Environment (CVE). This has be been deﬁned as ”a software system in which
multiple users interact with each other in real time, even though those users may
be located around the world”[11].
This ability to collaboratively work with others has expanded the skill base
that can become involved in a project, by allowing the location barrier to be removed. Now experts from diﬀerent locations can eﬃciently and eﬀectively work
on collaborative projects. Therefore it is becoming a more common project requirement. The next section describes the related work in collaborative environments and data visualization, Section 3 gives a detailed explanation of the
concepts involved. Section 4 examines some of the potential application area.
Then Section 5 outlines the conclusions and discusses any future work.

2

Related Work

The most common approach to developing CVE that allow users to interact
with other users and data, has been to build applications on top of diﬀerent networking platforms and protocols. In VR this has been with either COVEN[8],
DIVE[1] or CAVERN[6]. COVEN has it roots in DIVE, as it took lessons learned
from that eﬀort and other collaborative environments. DIVE uses a peer to peer
approach to networking the environments, this platform allows for the creation of
interactive environments, but uses other software to enable its rendering. CAVERN has an eﬃcient database/network library, but needs additional applications
to create a CVE (e.g. CoAnim[2]) which then limits its functionality.
The scientiﬁc community have been developing diﬀerent approaches to analysing and exploring large multi-dimensional data sets for a number of years. These
have resulted in highly advanced tool sets for their needs, for example application like VTK[9], AVS[12] and Open DX[7] are available and widely used. Other
communities have relied on traditional methods, namely data mining techniques.
These rely on statistical techniques, genetic algorithms and neural networks to
uncover the relevant data. Then the data is usually visualized using 2D graphs,
spread sheets, or quasi-3D structures but using a 2D medium (e.g. desktop monitor or projector). A further disadvantage to data mining techniques is the lack
of interaction and rapid feedback to the user. Examples of data mining applications that take advantage of visualization techniques are MineSet[10] and Iris
Explorer[4],but they use 2D & quasi-3D structures to represent the data. Furthermore these methods do not scale well to the large multi-dimensional data
set. New methods are required that utilise the advantages of new technology
(e.g. VR).

746

3

R. Jamieson et al.

A Data Forest

A Data Forest is a graphical representation of complex data using the concept of
data trees (see Figure 1 (a) & (b)) to represent the data. Each data tree consists
of a trunk and crown; these represent diﬀerent parameters of the data set that
has been chosen. Dependant on which type of VR system the user has access to,
the user can then walks and/or navigate through the forest. This will allow that
user to eﬀectively spot trends, discover relationships or uncover unusual patterns
in the trees. This can then lead to further examination of the underlying data. To
increase the ﬂexibility of this approach the forest can either be static or dynamic,
this will be depend on the nature of the data to be visualized. A dynamic forest
will allow for the use of time variant information. A data tree has been chosen
due to the fact that it is a simple object that people are familiar with. People can
relate to making decision on the size and shape of a tree relative to another tree.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 1. Data Forest - (a) Flying over (b) Inside Forest

Up to eight diﬀerent parameters can be visualized in any one data tree. This
number can be achieved by matching the physical properties of the tree (i.e.
trunk and crown) to diﬀerent parameters within the data set,
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

position of the tree
height of trunk
width of trunk
colour of trunk
transparency of the trunk
radius of crown,
colour of crown
transparency of crown

It is possible to expand the number of parameters even further by using all
axis of the tree position and inverting the tree (i.e. crown below the trunk).

Data Forest: A Collaborative Version

747

Therefore we do not have to have a ﬂat forest; the trees could be positioned at
various heights and depths.
Graphically a tree is a simple object, as it just consists of two primitive objects
a sphere and cylinder. Simple objects are desirable due to the fact that they
retain their shape if a low graphical computation is required (i.e. a tree with
a low numbers of polygons will still resemble a tree object). Therefore when
required to render large numbers of them, it is still possible to retain a fast and
smooth environment. This is an important feature that allows our approach to
be used by a wider range of hardware platforms. By using VR we are able to
develop an interactive VE, this gives us the ability to interact with the data in a
more natural manor, especially if we are using an Immersive VR system. From
this interaction it is possible to represent diﬀerent level/layers of abstraction
of the data, by creating diﬀerent Data Forests. “Drilling down” is a common
term in mentioned in data mining techniques, but we have taken the approach
of “exposing the roots” of the data tree. Users can choose a particular tree
that they are interested by using their input device, then using a 3D menu (see
Figure 3(a)) choose to further examine the related data. This gives the users an
opportunity to examine in a more detailed fashion the data that is relevant to
the chosen tree (see Figure 3(b)). It is possible to return to the original Data
Forest or descend to a lower layer (i.e. assuming there are further layers below
the current layer) by using the 3D menu.
Figure 2 (see below) outlines a simple overview of the test application that
has been developed. The networking of the Data Forest VEs was a logical step,
which beneﬁts the users. This has been achieved using the structure proposed in
Collaborative Virtual Visualization (CVV)[5], this also allows us to be hardware
and platform independent. By using the CVV approach we will represent our
remote users as avatars, communicate with them via audio and video links.
The avatars will be mapped to the remote users position and orientation, so we
will be capable of determining gestures (e.g. pointing to a particular tree) and
location within the Data Forest. User decisions in each environment (i.e. remote
and local) will be reﬂected in the connected environment by the use of event
messages.
A data ﬁlter can be applied to the input data to check the validity of the
data; this ﬁlter is in the form of a reference table. Once the data has been
veriﬁed a data structure for each tree is created containing all the data that is
relevant to that tree (e.g. trunk size, tree name, etc). These data structure are
used in the rendering of the CVE, event messages that allow the environments
to be updated to reﬂect the user’s activities will be passed over the network, e.g.
when a user chooses a tree to examine further. An event message will be passed
to the other remote users application with the all the relevant information to
inform the application that a change has occurred. The application will update
the remote users VE to reﬂect this decision. A design aim has been to create a
modular application that will easily allow speciﬁc functionality can be added,
depending on the data type to be analysed. An example of this is discussed in
the application section concerning Stock Market Data.

748

R. Jamieson et al.

Fig. 2. Overview of Data Forest Structure

4

Application Areas

There are numerous areas that would beneﬁt from using a Data Forest approach.
The following areas were chosen due to their diversity of data, and in which
further work is taking place.
4.1

Stock Market Data

The daily movement of the stock market, with its wide range of diﬀerent parameters produces a vast amount of time dependant data. The ability to analyse this
movement correctly and predict future changes has the potential to generate a
considerable amount of money. Therefore this data is subject to many diﬀerent
traditional visualization techniques (e.g. 2D graphs, spreadsheets). Our approach
is more suited to what would be considered oﬀ-line (i.e. non real-time) studies,
but with some of the improvements mentioned in the future work it could then
have the potential to move to real time use.
The test application was developed to visualize this type of data. This example
was chosen to generate the forest, due to the diﬀerent number of parameters that
would be found in the data set. An example of some of the potential parameters
that could be in the data set are share price, volume of trades, whether the share
provides a dividend and how much, the percentage yield, the capital appreciation
of the company, total number of shares in company, etc. Some of these parameters
are highly dynamic (e.g. share price, volume of trades), but others are of a static
nature for a long period of time (e.g. total number of share, amount of dividend).
Therefore it is possible to match the movement of share prices with the changing
shape/growth of the forest.
By utilising the structure proposed in CVV a collaborative version has been
developed, remote users are represented by avatars and changes in one environment are then reﬂected in the other users environment by using event messages.
A text grid is laid over the forest so that it is possible to associate each tree

Data Forest: A Collaborative Version

749

with a particular company (i.e. a tree with a NGC text label above it is referring
to the National Grid Company). The forest is laid out alphabetically grid to
ensure easier navigation if a user is interested in a particular company. The main
methods of interaction with the Data Forest environment are through the use of
3D menus and an input device (e.g. a wand in an immersive environment). The
use of 3D menus allows the user to easily interact with the data and environment.
Currently the menus contain the following functionality:Stop/Start Simulation. Changing the forest from static mode to a dynamic
or simulation mode (e.g. steps through the time dependant data). In simulation
mode the forest is changed every set time period to reﬂect the new time variant
data. It is possible to pause/stop the simulation at any time; also there is a
step forward/back one time period function. This can be useful when the user
discovers an interesting feature in the forest.
Increase/Decrease Size. Scaling the size of the forest to allow for diﬀerent
methods of analysis, scaling down gives the users a better overview of the complete forest while scaling up allows for more natural interaction and exploration
of the data (i.e. the trees could be made life size).
Examine Tree. If the user decides to examine a particular data tree in more
detail (i.e. exposing the roots of the tree), all that is required in that the user
touches the desired tree with their input device (see Figure 3(a)) and then selects
the examine function on the 3D menu. A new forest is rendered based on any
related data to that tree. Once the user is ﬁnished with this requirement (see
Figure 3(b)), they can return to the previous forest.
Predict Tree. While in the examine mode it is possible to carry out further
analysis, with modules such as the predict tree function. This calculates an
average crown and trunk value for this particular forest and then creates a tree
based on these values. This is then added to the forest. Currently this is a very
simple mathematical approach, but this could easily become a more complex
algorithm.
4.2

Network Data

Computer networks are constantly being monitored and analysed to ensure the
eﬃcient transfer of data over the network. The data produced requires a method
of visualization that will allow for time dependant analysis. By changing the axis
of the Data Forest from vertical to horizontal we can use the forest to represent
a computer network. The diﬀerent parameters that could create a data tree are
diﬀerent network bandwidths, number of servers on the system, number of users
connected to a server, load on server, amount of memory available and consumed
at any one time by a server. This could be visualized in real time as discussed
in the previous section or used for historical analysis. Another area of use can
be as a forensic tool to simulate network conditions at the time of failure, so
the user could navigate around the forest and examine all the factors that could

750

R. Jamieson et al.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 3. (a) User selecting tree 3D menu (b) Underlying Data

have contributed to the problem. Companies are always interested in maximising
their network usage; therefore they must visualize their current structure and
ﬂows. Similar functionality used in the stock market application could be reused
here via the 3D menus.
4.3

Marketing Data

Consumers are continually producing data of interest through their shopping
habits and preferences, to manufacturing companies who collect and store the
data. Advances in methods of gathering this data, like the use of radio frequency
ID (RFID) tags on products has increased the availability and complexity of
this data. Therefore the data is extremely large and multi-variable. Analysing
this is the focus of marketing departments within these companies. The data is
extremely important to them, but it also has a very short life span. This is due
to the short time to market of products and a fast changing customer demand.
Therefore any insights into the shopping behaviour of customers is vital. An
example of this could be point of sale data, it would produce parameters that
would consist of frequency of purchase, cost of purchase, number of associated
purchases, proﬁt margin on purchase, purchased from and many more. This data
is not as time dependant as the other examples but analysing the purchasing
decision of customers using traditional methods is complex and not intuitive.
Therefore this is another area that could use a Data Forest, with similar features
developed in the test application.

5

Conclusion and Future Work

This paper has successfully outlined the concept of a Data Forest, which is a
new and novel approach that uses VR to visualising data that does not easily
ﬁt traditional methods. A test application has been developed utilising stock
market data and a collaborative version has been successfully incorporated into
the collaborative structure proposed by CVV. Our modular approach is ﬂexible

Data Forest: A Collaborative Version

751

and allows for the reuse of diﬀerent function within diﬀerent contexts, by just
changing modules, diﬀerent types of data sets could be loaded into our environment.
Future work will include incorporating Really Simple Syndication (RSS) feeds
directly in the collaborative environment in the form of a scrolling text bar. The
option to extract this data from the RSS feed and utilise it in updating the
relevant data trees accordingly will be investigated. This will allow for real-time
information to be incorporated into our Data Forest. The inclusion of virtual
maps of the forest for large environments so the users can see the position of the
remote user (i.e. out of visual range of the user), therefore allowing a larger user
search area will be researched. We aim to investigate allowing the user to specify
how they would like the forest to be arranged to enable greater ease in searching
the forest for particular areas of interest (e.g. in the stock market application
the user could group the trees according to industries).

References
1. C.Carlsson et al, “DIVE: a platform for multi-user virtual environment”, Computer
& Graphics, 1993, p663-669, Vol .17, No.6.
2. Coanim, “Electronic Visualisation Laboratory (EVL), University of Illinois at
Chicago”, 2005, http://www.evl.uic.edu/cavern/agave/coanim.html.
3. C.Cruz-Neria et al, “The CAVE: audio visual experience automatic environment”,
Communication of the ACM, 1992, p64-72, Vol.35, No.6.
4. D. Foulser, “Iris Explorer - a framework for investigation”, Computer Graphics,
1995, 29(2):13-16
5. R. Jamieson et al, “Collaborative Virtual Visulaization”, First Austian Grid Symposium, Austira, 2005
6. J.Leigh et al, “CAVERN: A Distributed Architecture for Supporting Scalable Persistence and Interoperability in Collaborative Virtual Environments”, Journal of
Virtual Reality Research, Development and Applications, 1997, p261-296, Vol.2.2.
7. B. Lucas et al, “An architecture for a scientiﬁc visualization system”, Proceddings
of Visualization ’92, 1992, p107-114
8. V.Normand et al, “Collaborative Virtual Environments: the COVEN Project.”,
Proc.of the Framework for Immersive Virtual Environments Conf. (FIVE), 1996.
9. W.J. Schroeder et al. “The design and implementation of an object-oriented toolkit
for 3d graphics and visualization.” Proc. of Visualization,ACM, 1996, p93-100.
10. SGI Inc, “MineSet: a system for high-end data mining and visualization”, Int.Conf.
On Very Large Databases (VLDB’96), Bombay, India, 1996, p595
11. S.Singhal et al, “Networked Virtual Environments: Design and Implementation”,
ACM Press, 1999.
12. C. Upson et al. “The Application Visualization System: a computational environment for scientiﬁc visualization”, C omputer Graphics and Applications, 1989,
9(4):30-42

