A Power Saving Scheme for Heterogeneous
Wireless Access Networks
SuKyoung Lee, LaeYoung Kim, and Hojin Kim
Dept. of Computer Science, Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea
sklee@cs.yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract. In integrated WLAN and cellular networks, we propose a
power saving scheme that completely turns oﬀ WLAN interface in the
idle state and wakes it up when there is incoming data from long-lived
traﬃc. We also develop a Mobile IPv6 (MIPv6)-based signaling to turn
on the WLAN interface only for long-lived traﬃc. It is shown via simulations that the proposed power saving scheme improves power eﬃciency
over typical WLAN system.
Keywords: heterogeneous networks, power saving, MIPv6.

1

Introduction

In the integrated Wireless LAN (WLAN) and cellular networks, power eﬃciency
is still one of the most important aspects as in existing wireless networks. To
keep the WLAN card operating, mobile nodes (MNs) with dual interfaces have
to remain on, but in idle state. In [1], although the WLAN interface can be
turned oﬀ in the idle state, MNs should still listen to the lower-power radio for
the idle state. In [2], a power saving scheme is proposed to completely turn oﬀ
the WLAN interface, nevertheless, this scheme cannot easily support third-party
WLAN since it is based on tightly-coupled interworking architecture. Therefore,
we propose a power saving scheme based on loosely-coupled interworking architecture to completely turn oﬀ WLAN interface of dual-mode MN and wake
it up when there is a need to receive data. Further, a MIPv6-based signaling
is developed to turn on the WLAN interface only for long-lived traﬃc so that
the WLAN interface should not be turned on and oﬀ repeatedly for a momentary traﬃc, dissipating power. We show via simulations that the proposed power
saving scheme improves power eﬃciency over existing WLAN.

2

Idle Power Saving Scheme

A typical WLAN interface has active and idle states. In idle state with powersave mode, power consumption level for the WLAN interface is several times
as high as that of cellular interface [1]. In our scheme, to save the power in idle
This work was supported by grant No.R01-2006-000-10614-0 from the Basic Research
Program of the Korea Science & Engineering Foundation.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 865–868, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

866

S. Lee, L. Kim, and H. Kim
Long-lived Short-lived traffic Long-lived
TCP traffic
UDP traffic
Active state
Idle state
Inactive state
(a) Proposed power saving scheme in WLAN
Active state
Idle state
Inactive state
(b) Typical scheme in WLAN

Fig. 1. Idle power saving for WLAN interface

state (so called “idle power”), WLAN interface is turned oﬀ without any periodic
wake-up during the idle state, that is called “inactive” state in this paper and
is woke up when there is incoming data from long-lived traﬃc depending on
the duration and amount of data (e.g., ﬁle transfer, streaming service). Once
the WLAN interface is turned on, it enters active state to receive the data and
then returns to inactive state after the data session is completed as shown in
Fig. 1. In this study, we focus on downlink traﬃc since it is envisioned that
4th generation wireless system’s traﬃc pattern will be highly asymmetrical. Our
proposed scheme targets on the loosely-coupled interworking (based on MIP)
the cost of which is lower compared to the tightly-coupled interworking because
WLAN is deployed as an independent operator connected to the Internet.
In our system model, the cellular interface is assumed to be able to detect
Access Points (APs) by listening to paging channel. Basing our system on 3GPP
system, Gateway GPRS Support Node (GGSN) is responsible for controlling IP
connections between users and external data networks (i.e. Internet) with its
own buﬀer. To reduce the time taken to wake up the WLAN interface, each AP
is conﬁgured with a special Service Set Identiﬁer (SSID) string which provides
preﬁx information of the attached 802.11 gateway as in [3], resulting in fast
conﬁguration of MN’s new Care-of-Address (CoA). The SSID ﬁeld in beacon
message consists of preﬁx of WLAN gateway’s IP address, slash, preﬁx-length,
one blank and identity of service set (e.g., 2001:1302:A83B:1104/64 AP1). As
shown in Fig. 2, the developed signaling procedures proceed as follows :
1. When a Correspondent Node (CN) has a long-lived traﬃc, it sets the ﬂow
label ﬁeld in the IP packets to one (i.e., 0x00001) and two (i.e., 0x00002) for
UDP and TCP traﬃcs, respectively.
2. When the GGSN receives the packet whose ﬂow label ﬁeld is not zero, it
sends a WAKEUP WLAN message to the MN. This message is introduced
as a new MIPv6 message whose Mobility Header (MH) type is 10. The
GGSN keeps all the TCP packets of loss-sensitive application, destined to
the MN in its buﬀer to prevent the packet loss while switching to the WLAN
interface. On the other hand, the GGSN continuously sends the UDP packets
of delay-sensitive application to the MN.
3. On receiving the WAKEUP WLAN message, the MN turns on its WLAN
interface and is associated with an appropriate AP by performing beacon

A Power Saving Scheme for Heterogeneous Wireless Access Networks

GGSN

CN

SGSN

MN

AP

867

802.11 GW

Flow Label=0
No

Yes
Flow Label=1
Yes

No

Keep the packets in an per-user-buffer

WAKEUP_WLAN
Acquire new CoA

Turn on WLAN IF
Beacon

REQ_TUNNELING
Data

Tunnel the packets to the MN’s new CoA

MIP
signaling
WLAN
signaling

Binding Update

Fig. 2. MIPv6-based signaling procedures for incoming data traﬃc

scanning. Then, the MN conﬁgures a new CoA based on the preﬁx of the
gateway’s IP address obtained from the SSID ﬁeld in the beacon message.
4. Once the new CoA is conﬁgured, the MN sends an REQ TUNNELING message containing the new CoA, to the GGSN. This message is carried in a
new MIPv6 message whose MH type is 11. The MN also sends a Binding
Update (BU) message to inform the CN and its home agent of the new CoA.
5. On receiving the REQ TUNNELING message, the GGSN tunnels on-the-ﬂy
packets as well as the buﬀered packets (if there is any) to the new CoA.
6. When the CN receives the BU, it sends the packets to the MN’s new CoA
indicated in the BU.

3

Performance Evaluation

Simulation experiments are carried to evaluate the performance of the proposed
scheme by using ns-2 with wireless extensions. The data session holding time is
exponentially distributed with means of 5min and 1min for long-lived and shortlived traﬃcs, respectively. Fig. 3 shows the network topology and the powers (W)
32Kbps
10ms

622Mbps
15ms
BS

622Mbps
0.4ms

RNC

622Mbps
10ms

SGSN

10Mbps
15ms

GGSN

MN(UE)

,QWHUIDFH

6WDWH

:/$1

DFWLYH



LGOH



DFWLYH



LGOH



CN

&HOOXODU

802.11 GW

AP
400Kbps
10ms

10Mbps
15ms

(a) Network Topology

10Mbps
15ms

Traffic
sessions

3RZHU:

(b) Power Consumption

Fig. 3. Network topology and power consumption parameters

868

S. Lee, L. Kim, and H. Kim
1.4

1.2
Typical WLAN (idle time=1min)
Proposed (idle time=1min)
Typical WLAN (idle time=10min)
Proposed (idle time=10min)

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

2

4

6

8

10

Data Session Arrival Rate
(a) When average idle time is 1 min and 10 min

Power Consumption(W)

Power Consumption(W)

1.4

1.2
Typical WLAN (R=70%)
Proposed (R=70%)
Typical WLAN (R=40%)
Proposed (R=40%)

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

2

4

6

8

10

Data Session Arrival Rate
(b) When R is 70% and 40%

Fig. 4. Total power consumption versus data session arrival rate

consumed by WLAN and cellular network interfaces in active and idle modes,
which are obtained from [1] and [4].
Fig. 4 (a) shows the total power consumption (W) versus data session arrival
rate when the average idle time is 1min and 10min. The power consumption for
our scheme is less than the typical WLAN over all the ranges of data session
arrival rate. The performance improvement by our scheme is higher when the
average idle time is 10min than when 1min. Fig. 4 (b) shows the total power
consumption versus data session arrival rate for the portion of long-lived traﬃc
among total data sessions, R = 70% and 40%. The proposed scheme achieves
better power eﬃciency than the typical WLAN for the two values of R. However,
the average improvement by the proposed scheme over the typical WLAN for
R = 70% is smaller than that for R = 40% because the larger the portion of
long-lived traﬃc is, the longer our scheme has to keep the WLAN interface on.

4

Conclusion

The simulation results showed that the proposed power saving scheme outperforms typical WLAN with respect to power saving by completely turning oﬀ
the WLAN interface of dual-mode MN for the idle state and waking it up for
long-lived traﬃc.

References
1. Shih, E., Bahl, P., Sinclair, M.: Wake on Wireless: An Event Driven Energy Saving
Strategy for Battery Operated Devices. Mobicom, (Sep. 2002) 160-171.
2. Lee, S., Seo, S., Golmie, N.: An Eﬃcient Power-Saving Mechanism for Integration
of WLAN and Cellular Networks. IEEE Commun.Letters, Vol.9, No.12 (Dec. 2005)
1052-1054.
3. Jordan, N., Poropatich, A., Fleck, R.: Link-layer Support for Fast Mobile IPv6
Handover in Wireless LAN based Networks. IEEE LANMAN, (Apr. 2004) 139-143.
4. Baiamonte, V., Chiasserini, C.: Investigating MAC-layer Schemes to Promote Doze
Mode in 802.11-based WLANs. IEEE VTC, Vol.3 (Oct. 2003) 1568-1572.

