An Accurate and Fast WLAN User Location
Estimation Method Based on Received Signal Strength
Minghua Zhang and Shensheng Zhang
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
{zhangmh, sszhang}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract. Location estimation is a crucial component of location-aware
applications. Positioning based on received signal strength (RSS) in wireless
networks is considered a promising and inexpensive solution. Existing
techniques only use RSS from some fixed access points (APs) deployed within
the area of interest to estimate user location. Through experiments on the
properties of RSS, it is found that RSS from far access points can distinguish
different locations more easily. In this paper, we propose to introduce RSS from
APs outside of the area to increase location estimation accuracy. We also present
an online maximum matching method to select the most possible locations first,
thus reducing the computational cost incurred by using more RSS values and
improving the speed of location estimation. Our new location estimation method
is implemented and compared with related work in a practical wireless network.
Experimental results illustrate that the proposed method can give a higher degree
of accuracy.
Keywords: User location estimation; Received signal strength; Wireless local
area network; Maximum matching; Location estimation speed.

1 Introduction
Location estimation is an important task in today’s pervasive computing applications
[1] that use location information on objects or human beings to provide services
without user intervention. A typical positioning system is the Global Positioning
System (GPS) [2], yet it doesn’t work well in indoor environments or urban areas
where high buildings shield the satellite signals. As the proliferation of wireless local
area network (WLAN) and the declining cost of mobile devices, great attention have
been paid to the received signal strength (RSS)-based location estimation techniques.
Such positioning systems build on an already existing, widely available wireless
network infrastructure and work indoors as well as outdoors.
RSS-based positioning techniques usually work in two phases: radio map building
phase and location determination phase. During the first phase, the received signal
strength from observed access points (APs) together with the corresponding sampling
position are saved, resulting in a so-called radio map. During the location
determination phase, the real-time signal strength measurements are compared to data
in the radio map and the nearest match is returned as the estimated user location. In
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part III, LNCS 4489, pp. 58–65, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

An Accurate and Fast WLAN User Location Estimation Method

59

indoor environments, the propagation of radio signals suffers from severe multi-path
effects, noise and interference [3]. RSS-based location estimation techniques need to
deal with the noisy characteristics of the wireless channel. Those characteristics cause
the real-time signal strength samples measured in the location determination phase to
deviate significantly from those stored in the radio map, thereby limiting the accuracy
of such systems.
Current RSS-based techniques can be broadly divided into two categories:
deterministic techniques [4, 5, 6] and probabilistic techniques [7, 8, 9]. Our work lies
in the first category. However, none of the previous positioning systems take into
account the role of access points outside the area of interest. The RADAR system [4]
uses the k-NNSS (k-nearest neighbor in signal space) algorithm. They collect signals
from three fixed access points which can be observed in all predetermined locations.
The Horus [8] system improves upon the performance of RADAR by using their Joint
Clustering technique. Roos [7] adopts RSS from 10 access points deployed within
their testbed. In [10], Kaemarungsi investigated the properties of received signal
strength reported by IEEE 802.11b wireless network interface cards. His experimental
results indicate that the RSS values from the same AP at two different locations may
be difficult to distinguish for positioning purposes when the RSS level is high in
which case it tends to have a large degree of variation. To distinguish locations
efficiently and improve location estimation accuracy, this finding inspires us to use
RSS from the access points deployed not only within the area of interest but also
outside of the area. We also propose an online maximum matching method in which
the set of observed APs is used to choose possible locations first, alleviating the
burden of computation incurred by adopting more RSS values. We test our new
location estimation method in a practical wireless network and compare with other
work. Experimental results show that the method can achieve a higher degree of
accuracy.
The rest of the paper is constructed as follows. Section 2 illustrates the fluctuation
of the radio signal strength in WLAN, which is affected by many disturbances. In
section 3, we elaborate on our location estimation methodology including the online
maximum matching method. We perform experiments and compare our method with
others in section 4. Section 5 concludes the paper and describes some potential future
work.

2 Propagation of Radio Signals in WLAN
The propagation of radio signals is affected by many disturbances [11]. The IEEE
802.11b standard uses license-free 2.4GHz band to communicate with each other such
that other devices using the same band like Bluetooth devices, microwave ovens will
be a source of interference. Moreover, 70% part of a human body is water, and the
2.4GHz is the resonance frequency of water. Thus human body is an absorber of radio
signals.
Multi-path fading [12, 13] is another common phenomenon in radio signal
propagation. A transmitted signal can reach the receiver through different paths, each
having its own amplitude and phase. These different components combine and produce
a distorted version of the transmitted signal.

60

M. Zhang and S. Zhang

Fig. 1 gives a typical example of the normalized histogram of the signal strength
received from an access point at a fixed location. People walk in the area, and doors
open and close. Such changes in the environment can explain the fluctuation of signal
strength shown in the figure.

Fig. 1. An example of normalized signal strength distribution

3 Proposed Location Estimation Method
3.1 Radio Map Building Phase
Suppose the location area A has N selected sampling positions, A = {positioni | 1 ≤ i ≤
N}. A RSS sample in our experiment is a 6-tuple: (Id, Time, RSS, SSID, BSSID,
Position), whose elements are explained in detail in Table 1.
Table 1. Explanation of a RSS sample vector
Element name
Id
Time
RSS
SSID
BSSID
Position

Explanation
Example
Sequence number of detected access point
1, 2, 3, …
Sampling date
2006-05-23 18:43:03
Received signal strength in dBm
-76, -81, …
Service Set Identifier
1x.net.sjtu
MAC address of the access point
00-13-C3-59-14-72
2-dimension coordinates and orientation of the (12.386, 1.54, south)
sampling location

In each sampling position positioni, several RSS samples are collected in order to
represent the fluctuation of radio signal strength. Then the average value of signal
strength avgrssij received from each observed AP, whose MAC address is bssidj, is
computed. With the information the radio map is built up. Records in the radio map

An Accurate and Fast WLAN User Location Estimation Method

61

can be described in (1), where L is the number of observed APs in each sampling
position.

r = ( positioni , avgrssij , bssid j ),
(1)

1 ≤ i ≤ N,
1 ≤ j ≤ L.
3.2 Location Determination Phase

During the location determination phase, suppose the real-time RSS samples are
represented by (2), where L’ is the number of access points detected by user.

U = {(m _ avgrssi , m _ bssid i ) | 1 ≤ i ≤ L' }

(2)

Before search the nearest location in the radio map, we use an online maximum
matching method to choose a subset of radio map containing the possible locations
first. As each AP has its own signal’s coverage area, the set of observed APs are not
totally the same for different locations. Based on the APs in the real-time RSS
samples, the positions in the radio map associated with a maximum intersection of the
same APs form the sub set P’. It can be described formally as:
P' = { positioni | (∀positionr )(| APm ∩ APi | > | APm ∩ APr |)
∧ 1 ≤ i ≤ N ∧ ( positionr ∈ A − P ' )},
APm = {U n .m _ bssid | 1 ≤ n ≤ L'},

(3)

APi = {rxy .bssid | rxy . position = positioni ∧ 1 ≤ y ≤ L},
APr = {rxy .bssid | rxy . position = positionr ∧ 1 ≤ y ≤ L}.
Then the simple and efficient Euclidean distance is selected as matching metric
between real-time RSS samples and RSS data saved in the radio map. The position in
P’, which has a minimum Euclidean distance in signal space is considered as the
estimated user location. Euclidean distance is computed by (4):
L'

min( D j =

∑ (U .m _ avgrss − r .avgrss)
i

i =1

U i .m _ bssid = rij .bssid ,

ij

2

),
(4)

rij . position ∈ P'.

4 Experimental Results and Analysis
4.1 Experimental Testbed

We perform our experiments in the second floor of the third building of the Electronic
Information and Electrical Engineering School buildings. The layout of the floor is

62

M. Zhang and S. Zhang

shown in Fig. 2. The area has a dimension of 100 meters by 20 meters. It includes a
long hallway, a meeting room, lots of offices and labs.
To measure the RSS from different APs, we use an ASUS pocket PC with an
embedded wireless Ethernet card to capture the signal. We use WRAPI [14], a third
party library for retrieving the signal strength.
There are altogether 30 access points that can be detected. They are deployed not
only in the second floor, but also in other floors or in neighboring buildings. For
building up the radio map, we take the sampling locations along the hallway on a grid
with cells of 5 2 meters (the hallway width is 2 meters). For each location, 10
samples are collected for each orientation.

×

Fig. 2. The layout of the second floor of the third building of the Electronic Information and
Electrical Engineering School buildings

4.2 Experimental Results

In this section, we evaluate the performance of our proposed method. An independent
test set collected on different time and day from that for the radio map building phase
is used. We conduct experiments and compare with other methods. In the first
experiment, we only use the RSS values from access points deployed within the
testbed. The method is just like the 1-NNSS method in the RADAR system, so we
call it the RADAR method in Fig. 3. In the second experiment, we only adopt the RSS
data from three strongest APs in each sampling position, which is called as the 3strongest AP method. This method is similar to the technique in [8] on the selection of
RSS data. In the last experiment, we use RSS data from all observed APs.
Experimental results are illustrated in Fig. 3. Location estimation error is defined
as the Euclidean distance between the real position and its estimated position. The
results of our proposed method are quite positive, for it is more accurate than the
other two methods. Fig. 4 gives the cumulative distribution of error distance in the
three experiments. Using the proposed method, over 73 percent positions are located
within 5 meters, which is higher than the other two methods. This demonstrates that
more RSS data can improve the location estimation accuracy.

An Accurate and Fast WLAN User Location Estimation Method

63

Fig. 3. Comparison of location estimation error in the three experiments

Fig. 4. Error distance CDF of the three experiments

Since we use RSS from more access points to estimate user location, it is possible
that the calculating time will increase. Therefore we also perform an experiment to
measure the locating time. The personal computer is configured with 512MB of
RAM, Intel(R) Pentium(R) M processor 1.5GHz. The three methods are implemented
in MATLAB and Table 2 lists the CPU time each method uses. In general, the more
access points’ signal strength information is used, the more locating time is needed.
Although the number of access points used in our method is much more than the
RADAR method, yet the difference of CPU time needed is very small (0.13 seconds).
However the average error of the RADAR method is about two times that of our
proposed method. Therefore it is a tolerable compromise for the improvement of
location estimation accuracy. In the Table 2, the tremendous increase of CPU time
spent on the 3-strongest AP method is due to the sort operation to choose the first
three strongest access points. On the location estimation accuracy, it is very close to
the RADAR method.

64

M. Zhang and S. Zhang
Table 2. Compare locating time of the three experiments

Comparison Items
Number of access points matched
Average error (m)
CPU time (s)

Proposed Method
15
3.74
0.86

RADAR
3
7.43
0.73

3-Strongest AP Method
3
7.29
1.15

5 Conclusion and Future Work
Mobile user’s current location is one of the most important and frequently-used
contexts in pervasive computing environments. Positioning based on received signal
strength is considered a promising and inexpensive solution. However, received
signal strength especially in indoor environments is interfered by many disturbances.
This paper proposes a new user location estimation method to improve accuracy,
which uses RSS data from access points deployed not only within the area of interest
but also outside of the area. RSS data from the far APs are used to better distinguish
locations. Moreover an online maximum matching method is presented to quickly get
the most possible locations in order to improve the speed of location estimation.
Experimental results show that, with the 2×5 meters sampling grid, our method can
estimate user location to within 5 meters with over 73% accuracy. In the same
testbed, the proposed method is better than the methods used in other work on
accuracy. It is also remarkable that the sampling grid in the proposed method is bigger
than that in the related work, which means fewer calibration efforts are needed.
Furthermore, through another experiment the increase of locating time by using more
access points is negligible relative to the improvement of location estimation
accuracy.
In this paper, the proposed method belongs to the deterministic technique. But the
idea of using more RSS data from far APs and the online maximum matching method
are not limited to it. They can also be used in the probabilistic technique. In the future,
we would like to do more extensive experiments, studying the effect of parameters
such as the size of sampling grid, the number of access points and try to prove our
idea in a formal way.
Acknowledgments. This research is supported by Shanghai Commission of Science
and Technology Grant (05SN07114, 03DZ19320). The authors would like to thank
Haibin Mei for his valuable advice. Thanks also to anonymous reviewers for their
perspicacious comments.

References
1. Hazas, M., Scott, J., Krumm, J.: Location-Aware Computing Comes of Age. IEEE
Computer, Vol. 37, No. 2, (2004) 95-97.
2. Enge, P., Misra, P.: Special Issue on GPS: The Global Positioning System. Proceedings of
the IEEE, Vol. 87, No. 1, January (1999) 3-172.
3. Hashemi, H.: The Indoor Radio Propagation Channel. Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 81,
No. 7, (1993) 943-968.

An Accurate and Fast WLAN User Location Estimation Method

65

4. Bahl, P., Padmanabhan, V. N.: RADAR: An In-building RF-based Location and Tracking
System. In: Proceedings of the IEEE INFOCOM 2000, Tel-Aviv Israel, March (2000)
775-784.
5. Ahmad, U., Gavrilov, A., Sungyoung Lee, Young-Koo Lee: Modular Multilayer
Perceptron for WLAN Based Localization. In: Proceedings of 2006 International Joint
Conference on Neural Networks, Vancouver BC, Canada, July (2006) 3465-3471.
6. Smailagic, A., Kogan, D.: Location Sensing and Privacy in a Context-Aware Computing
Environment. IEEE Wireless Communications, Vol. 9, No. 5, October (2002) 10-17.
7. Roos, T., Myllymaki, P., Tirri, H., Misikangas, P., Sievanen, J.: A Probabilistic Approach
to WLAN User Location Estimation. International Journal of Wireless Information
Networks, Vol. 9, No. 3, July (2002) 155-164.
8. Youssef, M., Agrawala, A., Shankar, A. U.: WLAN Location Determination via Clustering
and Probability Distributions. In: Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on
Pervasive Computing and Communications. IEEE Computer Society (2003) 23-26.
9. Castro, P., Chiu, P., Kremenek, T., Muntz, R.: A Probabilistic Location Service for
Wireless Network Environments. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on
Ubiquitous Computing. Springer LNCS 2201, Berlin Heidelberg (2001) 18-24.
10. Kaemarungsi, K., Krishnamurthy, P.: Properties of Indoor Received Signal Strength for
WLAN Location Fingerprinting. In: Proceedings of the First Annual International
Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Systems - Networking and Services. IEEE Computer
Society (2004) 14-23.
11. Ladd, A. M, et al.: Robotics-Based Location Sensing using Wireless Ethernet. In:
Proceedings of the 8th Annual International Conference on Mobile Computing and
Networking. ACM Press (2002) 227-238.
12. Stallings, W.: Wireless Communications and Networks. First Edition. Prentice Hall
(2002).
13. Youssef, M., Agrawala, A.: Small-Scale Compensation for WLAN Location
Determination Systems. In: Proceedings of the IEEE WCNC 2003, Vol. 3. March (2003)
1974-1978.
14. WRAPI. Website: http://ramp.ucsd.edu/pawn/wrapi/.

