Discussion on the Spike Train Recognition
Mechanisms in Neural Circuits
Yan Liu1 , Liujun Chen1, , Jiawei Chen1 , Fangfeng Zhang1 , and Fukang Fang2
1

Department of Systems Science, School of Management, Beijing Normal University,
Beijing 100875, P.R.China
chen1j@bnu.edu.cn
2
Institute of Non-equilibrium Systems, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875,
P.R.China
bnuliuyan@163.com, bnuchenlj@163.com

Abstract. The functions of neural system, such as learning, recognition
and memory, are the emergences from the elementary dynamic mechanisms. To discuss how the dynamic mechanisms in the neurons and
synapses work in the function of recognition, a dynamic neural circuit
is designed. In the neural circuit, the information is expressed as the
inter-spike intervals of the spike trains. The neural circuit with 5 neurons can recognize the inter-spike intervals in 5-15ms. A group of the
neural circuits with 6 neurons recognize a spike train composed of three
spikes. The dynamic neural mechanisms in the recognition processes are
analyzed. The dynamic properties of the Hodgkin-Huxley neurons are
the mechanism of the spike trains decomposition. Based on the dynamic
synaptic transmission mechanisms, the synaptic delay times are diverse,
which is the key mechanism in the inter-spike intervals recognition. The
neural circuits in the group connect variously that every neuron can join
in diﬀerent circuits to recognize diﬀerent inputs, which increases the information capacity of the neural circuit group.
Keywords: spike train, inter-spike intervals, response delay time, neural
circuit.

1

Introduction

As a complex system, the functions of the neural system, such as learning, recognition and memory, are the emergences from the elementary dynamic mechanisms. Simulating by the complex networks is a common method to discuss the
emergences from the complicated structure of the neural system. In the complex
networks, the number of neurons could be as similar as in the neural system
and the structure could be various[1]. We focus on the properties emerging from
the complex structures, so the nodes and edges in the networks often have little dynamics. While in the real neural system, the neurons (the nodes) and the
synapses (the edges) have plentiful dynamic mechanisms[2,3,4,5,6], which have
Corresponding author.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 59–66, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

60

Y. Liu et al.

been proved to be the substrate for the functions in brain, such as learning and
memory[7,8,9]. To analyze these neural and synaptic dynamic mechanisms in
large networks may be diﬃcult, so that some simple neural circuits are developed to discuss the dynamic mechanisms in the neural system [10,11,12,13].
In the neural system, sensory systems present environmental information to
central nervous system as sequences of action potentials or spikes. So it is considered that the information is expressed as the inter-spike intervals of the spikes
[11,14,15,16,17]. In this paper, to discuss how the dynamic mechanisms in the
neurons and synapses work in the recognition in the neural system, a neural circuit is designed to recognize the inter-spike intervals and the spike trains. Several
dynamic neural and synaptic mechanisms are analyzed in the recognition.

2

Inter-spike Intervals Recognition

In the neural system, the environmental signals are expressed and transferred
among the neurons as the type of spikes. When the input to a Hodgkin-Huxley
neuron is a spike train composed of two spikes, the response property of the
neuron will be of four kinds as follows:
(1)Responds to both of the spikes.
(2)Only responds to the ﬁrst spike, but not responds to the second one. Because
the neuron is in refractory period at the time of the second spike.
(3)Not responds to the ﬁrst spike, but responds to the second one. Because under
its parameters, at least two spikes could make the membrane potential of the
neuron integrate to the threshold.
(4)Not responds to either of the spikes.
In details, the neurons satisfy the Hodgkin-Huxley equation[5],
C

dV
= gN a m3 h(EN a − V ) + gK n4 (EK − V ) + gL (EL − V ) + Isyn
dt

(1)

in which V is the membrane potential. m, n, h are the gating variables, which
satisfy dX
dt = −(αX +βX )X +αX for X = m, h, n. αm = −0.1(25−V )/[exp((25−
V )/10) − 1], βm = 4 exp(−V /18), αh = 0.07 exp(−V /20), βh = 1/[1 + exp((30 −
V )/10)], αn = 0.01(10 − V )/[exp((10 − V )/10) − 1], βn = 0.125 exp(−V /80). The
parameters are C = 1μF/cm2 , EN a = 120mV , EK = −12mV , EL = 10.6mV ,
gN a = 120mS/cm2, gK = 36mS/cm2, gL = 0.3mS/cm2. Isyn is the synaptic
current,
Isyn = gsyn r(t)(V − Esyn )
(2)
wheregsyn is the maximal synaptic conductionit also shows the synaptic strength.
r(t) is the amount of neurotransmitter released from the pre-synapse, which is
also the input signal here. Figure 1 shows that the responses of the neurons
depend on the parameter of g syn and the input inter-spike interval T . In the
region 1, the neurons respond to both of the spikes. In the region 2, the neurons
only respond to the ﬁrst spike. In the region 3, the neurons only respond to the
second spike. In the region 4, the neurons do not respond to either of the spikes.

Discussion on the Spike Train Recognition Mechanisms in Neural Circuits

61

Fig. 1. The responses of the Hodgkin-Huxley neurons vary upon the g syn

Based on the characters above, a neural circuit is designed to recognize the
inter-spike interval of the two input spikes (Fig.2). The circuit includes three
layers. The ﬁrst layer is the input neuron X, which ﬁres two spikes as the input
signal and the inter-spike interval is T1 . Suppose that the input spikes are at the
time of t0 and t1 = t0 + T1 . The second layer includes neurons α, β and γ. The
input spikes from neuron X are transferred to the neurons α and γ through the
synapses. The neuron α, with g α
syn in the region 2, only responds to the ﬁrst
spike (the spike at t0 ) and the response delay time is τα . So the neuron α ﬁres at
the time of tα = t0 + τα . The neuron γ, with gγsyn in the region 3, only responds
to the second spike (the spike at t1 ) and the response delay time is τγ . So the
neuron γ ﬁres at the time of tγ = t1 + τγ = t0 + T1 + τγ .The neuron β, with gβsyn
in the region 1, receives the spike from the neuron α and the response delay time
is τβ . So the neuron β ﬁres at the time of tβ = t0 + τα + τβ . The output layer
neuron Y is a detect neuron, which receives the spikes from the neurons β and
γ, and ﬁres only when two spikes arrive within a time window of εms. Thus,
when the neuron Y ﬁres, means that |tβ − tγ | = |(τα + τβ ) − (T1 + τγ )| < ε.
β
The response delay times of the neurons α, β and γ are related with g α
syn , g syn
df
β
1
and g γsyn that τα = f1 (g α
< 0, and τγ = f2 (g γsyn , T ),
syn ), τβ = f1 (g syn ), dg
syn

∂f2
∂gsyn

< 0,

∂f2
∂T

β
> 0. So when Y ﬁres, it means the parameters g α
syn , g syn and

Fig. 2. The neural circuit structure for an inter-spike interval recognition

62

Y. Liu et al.

gγsyn in the neural circuit match the input interval T that |tβ − tγ | = |(τα + τβ ) −
β
γ
(T1 + τγ )| < ε, which equals to |[f1 (g α
syn ) + f1 (g syn )] − [T + f2 (g syn , T )]| < ε.
α
β
γ
Therefore, under diﬀerent parameters of g syn , g syn and g syn , the neural circuits
could recognize the corresponding inter-spike intervals as T ± ε.
However, a neural circuit recognizing only one inter-spike interval is not actual in the neural system. In fact, much experiments show that the neurons in
brain join in diﬀerent groups under diﬀerent stimuli. As shown in Fig. 3, several
neural circuits make up a large group. Not only the neurons αi → βi and γi in
the same circuit have an output neuron, but also the neurons αi → βi and γj in
diﬀerent circuits connect to an output neuron. Such kind of structure optimizes
the whole circuit group. For the delay times in diﬀerent circuits are distributing
in a wide range that any neurons αi → βi and γj may combine to form a circuit,
the whole circuit group can recognize the input intervals by choosing diﬀerent
circuit combinations. Thus, with the same number of neurons, the circuit group
can process more information. For example, the group of 5 neural circuits may
have 25 diﬀerent combinations, which can recognize 25 diﬀerent intervals.

Fig. 3. The neural circuit group for inter-spike intervals recognition

Fig. 4 shows a group of 5 neural circuits recognizes the inter-spike intervals
of 5ms, 10ms and 15ms. The vertical axis is the 25 output neurons. The dot,
cross and circle express the corresponding neurons ﬁre at that time, with dot
for the ﬁred neuron responding to the input interval of 5ms, and cross for 10ms,
circle for 15ms respectively. As in Fig. 4, when the input inter-spike intervals are
diﬀerent, the circuit group would choose diﬀerent circuit combinations to transfer
the signals, and the output neurons would ﬁre as diﬀerent spatial patterns.

3

Spike Trains Recognition

Generally, a spike train includes several spikes and the information is expressed
by a string of inter-spike intervals. A neural circuit is designed to recognize the
spike train with more than one inter-spike interval (Fig. 5). Consider the simplest
spike train including three spikes, with two inter-spike intervals of T1 and T2 .

Discussion on the Spike Train Recognition Mechanisms in Neural Circuits

63

Fig. 4. Responding to the diﬀerent input intervals, the output neurons ﬁre as diﬀerent
spatial patterns

The circuit has three layers. The ﬁrst layer is the input neuron X, which ﬁres
at t0 , t1 = t0 +T1 and t2 = t1 +T2 . The second layer is composed of neurons α, β,
γ and η. The input spikes from neuron X are transferred to the neurons α and γ
through the synapses. The neuron α, with g α
syn in the region 2, only responds to
the ﬁrst and the third spikes (the spikes at t0 , and t2 = t1 + T2 ) and the response
delay time are τα0 and τα2 . So the neuron α ﬁres at the time of t1α = t0 + τα0 and
t2α = t2 + τα2 . The neuron β, with g βsyn in the region 1, receive the spike from the
neuron α and the response delay time is τβ . So the neuron β ﬁres at the time of
t1β = t0 + τα0 + τβ and t2β = t2 + τα2 + τβ . The neuron γ, with gγsyn in the region 3,
only responds to the second spike (the spike at t1 ) and the response delay time
is τγ . So the neuron γ ﬁres at the time of tγ = t1 + τγ . The neuron η, with gηsyn
in the region 1, responds to all spikes from the neuron γ and the response delay
time is τη . So the neuron η ﬁres at the time of tη = t1 + τγ + τη .The output layer
has two neurons Y 1 and Y 2 , which are the detect neurons. Neuron Y 1 receives
the spikes from the neurons β and γ, and ﬁres when two spikes arrive within a
time window of εms. Neuron Y 2 receives the spikes from the neurons α and η,
and ﬁres when two spikes arrive within a time window of εms.
As shown in Fig. 5, the neural circuit has two sub-circuits to transfer the
input spike train. One sub-circuit is composed of the neurons α, β, γ and
Y 1 ,which recognize the ﬁrst inter-spike interval T1 in the spike train. The other
is sub-circuit is composed of the neurons γ, η, α and Y 2 , which recognize
the second inter-spike interval T2 in the spike train. The structure of the two
sub-circuits is same with the circuit in Fig. 2, and they have the same interspike interval recognition mechanisms. So the whole neural circuit of Fig. 5
can recognize a spike train with two inter-spike intervals. In details, the output

64

Y. Liu et al.

Fig. 5. The neural circuit structure for a spike train recognition

Fig. 6. The neural circuit group for spike trains recognition

Fig. 7. Responding to the diﬀerent spike trains, the output neurons ﬁre as diﬀerent
spatial patterns

Discussion on the Spike Train Recognition Mechanisms in Neural Circuits

65

neuron Y 1 receives the spikes from the neuron β and the neuron γ at the
times of t1β , t2β and tγ . Only when |t1β − tγ | = |(τα0 + τβ ) − (T1 + τγ )| < ε, the
neuron Y 1 responds to ﬁre. Similarly, the output neuron Y 2 receives the spikes
from the neuron η and the neuron α at the times of tη and t1α , t2α . Only when
|tη − t2α | = |(τγ + τη ) − (T2 + τα2 )| < ε, the neuron Y 2 responds to ﬁre. Thus,
according to the output neurons Y 1 and Y 2 ﬁre or not, the neural circuit
recognizes whether the input spike train includes the inter-spike intervals of
T 1 and T 2 .
Several such neural circuits make up a large group. As shown in Fig. 6, not
only the neurons αi → βi and γi → ηi in the same circuit have the output
neurons, but also the neurons αi → βi and γj → ηj in diﬀerent circuits connect
the output neurons. Fig. 7 shows a group of 10 neural circuits with 50 output
neurons recognizes three diﬀerent spike trains.
The input spike trains are all composed of three spikes with inter-spike intervals of 5ms-10ms, 10ms-5ms and 10ms-15ms respectively. In Fig. 7, the vertical
axis is the 50 output neurons. The dot, cross and circle express the corresponding
neuron ﬁres at that time, with dot for the neuron responding to the input spike
train of 5ms-10ms, and cross for 10ms-5ms, circle for 10ms-15ms respectively.
When the input spike trains are diﬀerent, the circuit group chooses diﬀerent circuits combinations to transfer the signals, and the corresponding output neurons
ﬁre. Therefore, the whole circuit group recognizes the input spike trains with the
diﬀerent output spatial patterns.

4

Conclusion

In this paper, the dynamic mechanisms in the neurons and the synapses in the
learning and recognition are discussed. A neural circuit is designed to recognize
the inter-spike intervals and the spike trains. There are several dynamic neural
mechanisms in the recognition processes. When the input signal is a train of two
spikes, the Hodgkin-Huxley neuron with dynamic synapses will response variously. With the diﬀerent parameters, the response delay times are also diﬀerent.
Under this mechanism, the neural circuit with 5 neurons can recognize interspike intervals in 5-15ms. The synaptic delay time is one of the key variables in
the recognition. Several neural circuits with 6 neurons make up a large group.
The result shows that a group of neural circuits can recognize a spike train with
three spikes. When the input signals are diﬀerent, every neuron can join in different circuits and the output neurons form a spatial pattern. This structure
increases the information capacity of the neural circuit, which is diﬀerent with
the common neural network. For the neural circuit here is still a small one, with
no more than 50 neurons in each layer, the parameters and the number of neurons in the circuit are ﬁxed. In the future work, a larger neural network will
be developed, in which the parameters of neurons may be not ﬁxed before the
recognition.

66

Y. Liu et al.

Acknowledgement
This work is supported by NSFC under the grant No.60534080, No.60374010
and No.70471080.

References
1. Strogatz S. H., Exploring complex networks. Nature, 2004, 410:268-276.
2. Izhikevich E. M., Dynamical systems in neuroscience: the geometry of excitability
and bursting. MIT, 2005.
3. Hebb D. O., The Organization of Behavior. Wiley: New York, 1949.
4. Bliss T. V.,Collingridge G. L., A synaptic model of memory: long-term potentiation
in the hippocampus. Nature, 1993, 361: 31-39.
5. Hodgkin A. L., Huxley A. F., A quantitative description of ion currents and its
applications to conduction and excitation in nerve membranes. J. Physiol, 1952,
117: 500-544.
6. Izhikevich E. M., Dynamical systems in neuroscience: the Geometry of excitability
and bursting. MIT, 2007.
7. Abbott L. F., Regehr W. G., Synaptic computation. Nature, 2004, 431:796-803.
8. Mark F. B., Barry W. C., Michael A. P., Neuroscience: exploring the brain, 2nd
ed. Lippincott Williamsand Wilkins, 2001.
9. Oswald A. M., Schiﬀ M. L., Synaptic mechanisms underlying auditory processing.
Curr. Opin. Neurobiol., 2006, 16: 371-376.
10. Abarbanel H. D. I., Talathi S. S., Neural circuitry for recognizing interspike interval
sequences. Phys Rev Lett, 2006, 96: 148104.
11. Jin D. Z., Spiking neural network for recognizing spatiotemporal sequences of
spikes. Phys Rev E, 2004, 69: 021905.
12. Mauk M. D., Buonomano D. V., The neural basis of temporal processing. Ann Rev
Neurosci, 2004, 27: 307-340.
13. Large E. W., Crawford J. D., Auditory temporal computation: Interval selectivity
based on post-inhibitory. J. Comput. Neurosci., 2002, 13: 125-142.
14. Buonomano D. V., Merzenich M. M., Temporal information transformed into a
spatial code by a neural network with realistic properties. Science, 1995, 267:
1028-1030.
15. Lisman J. E., Bursts as a unit of neural information:making unreliable synapses
reliable. Trends Neurosci., 1997, 20: 38-43.
16. Izhikevich E. M., Polychronization: Computation with Spikes. Neur Comp, 2006,
18: 245-282.
17. Buonomano D. V., Decoding temporal information: a model based on short-term
synaptic plasticity. J. Neurosci, 2000, 20(3): 1129-1141.

