Cross-Layer Enhancement of IEEE 802.11 MAC for
Mobile Ad Hoc Networks*
Taekon Kim1, Hyungkeun Lee2, Jang-Yeon Lee3, and Jin-Woong Cho3
1

Department of Electronics & Information Engineering, Korea University
2
Department of Computer Engineering, Kwangwoon University
3
Korea Electronics Technology Institute, Korea
taekonkim@korea.ac.kr, hklee@kw.ac.kr
{jylee136,chojw}@keti.re.kr

Abstract. In mobile ad hoc networks, the large amount of control overheads associated with discovering and maintaining end-to-end routing path information
may not be tolerable. In this paper, we present the design and simulation of a
new approach for IEEE 802.11 MAC based on the multipath routing information for ad hoc networks. The routing information about multiple paths discovered in the network layer is exploited by the MAC layer in order to forward a
frame over the best hop out of multiple hop choices. The performance of our
approach is compared with the one of the IEEE 802.11 MAC protocol via simulation. The results show that our proposed scheme exhibits a remarkable performance improvement over the IEEE 802.11 MAC protocol in terms of packet
overhead and end-to-end throughput.
Keywords: IEEE 802.11, MANET, Cross-layer enhancement.

1 Introduction
A mobile ad hoc network (MANET) is a collection of mobile nodes dynamically
organizing themselves for communication without requiring existing infrastructure.
Each node in such a network operates not only as an endpoint but also as a router that
has the functionality to forward data over the next hop while maintaining the route
information. In MANETs, multiple network hops may be needed for communication
between two distant nodes, due to the limited range of radio transmission. Therefore,
the delivery of data between two nodes is much more complex and challenging in
MANETs. For successful communications in such a network, a routing protocol
should deal with the typical characteristics of these networks, such as limited bandwidth, high error rate, limited power capacity and node mobility. In this paper, we
address a cross-layer technique between the MAC layer and routing layer and develop
a new approach of IEEE 802.11 MAC that exploits such a cross-layer interaction.
*

This work is supported by the ubiquitous Autonomic Computing and Network Project, the
Ministry of Information and Communication (MIC) 21st Century Frontier R&D Program in
Korea, and the Research Grant of Kwangwoon University in 2006.

Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 482–489, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Cross-Layer Enhancement of IEEE 802.11 MAC for Mobile Ad Hoc Networks

483

In MANETs, the state of a link between two nodes is governed by the channel
impairments such as the interference and fading at the receiver as well as the noise.
The channel impairments could be time-varying, and significant changes in fading
and interference levels may lead to a transient link failure. This link failure is often
sufficient for routing and transport protocols to react, which causes operational inefficiencies. Therefore, there is a need to devise a data-forwarding mechanism that can
tolerate this type of link failure at short time-scales. Furthermore, intermediate nodes
shared by others may cause data transmission to defer or even fail, called link blocking. The effect of link blocking as well as link failure can be alleviated by forwarding
frames via an alternative path reaching the destination. An example is shown in
Figure 1. The routing protocol decides a transmission path between the nodes A and
E, while the node B is being accessed by another node F and the link, A-D, is temporally broken due to the high level of fading. The transmission via the B or D node
leads to transmission retries, deferring transmission, increasing delay, and wasting the
bandwidth as a result. An improved approach would be choosing the next hop, A-C,
on an alternate possible path, A-C-E, by the cross-layer coordination between the
routing and MAC layers.

Fig. 1. Adaptive MAC protocol based on path-diversity routing

We present a new approach called anycasting [1], where multiple route information
is provided to the MAC layer which is in charge of the decision on which link to forward the frame and the MAC layer must take advantage of a multiple path routing
protocol. Typically, the routing protocol in the network layer decides one route out of
the several paths for data forwarding, and then the MAC layer is responsible to deliver frames to the next hop along the decided route. However, let the network protocol compute multiple routing paths from the source and also from the intermediate
nodes to the destination. A better approach in the MAC layer is to decide the next hop
among the multiple next hops by the link status. In [2], we proposed a new dataforwarding protocol in MAC layer for vehicular ad hoc networks, where frames are
forwarded to the next intermediate node without intervention of the network layer. To
improve the data-forwarding performance exploiting the link status in MANETs,
however, the MAC protocol requires some operational coordination between the routing and MAC layers [3]. The goal of this paper is to develop a cross-layer technique
of the MAC layer, where multipath routes are discovered in the routing protocol and
the virtual carrier sense mechanism is improved in the MAC protocol.

484

T. Kim et al.

Our routing protocol is based on the Signal Power Adaptive Fast Rerouting
(SPAFAR) protocol [4] which consists of two phases namely the route discovery
phase and the route maintenance phase. We modify a route discovery algorithm to
find multiple paths at the source and the intermediate nodes. While such a MAC layer
protocol can be designed in many ways, a proper way to design is an extension of the
widely-used IEEE 802.11 [5] MAC protocol.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the background information such as the multi-path routing protocol based on SPAFAR and the
overview of the IEEE 802.11 MAC protocol. The scheme of the proposed cross-layer
enhancement of the IEEE 802.11 MAC protocol in MANETs is described in Section
3. In Section 4, the simulation results for performance comparison are shown. Finally,
concluding remarks are given in Section 5.

2 Preliminaries
In this section, we start by briefly reviewing the multipath routing protocol to design a
cross-layer enhanced protocol of IEEE 802.11 MAC based on multipath routing information. Then, the distributed coordination function (DCF) of IEEE 802.11, the
MAC layer functionality, is briefly described.
2.1 Multiple-Path Routing Protocol Based on SPAFAR
Each node of ad hoc networks keeps a Neighbor_Table (NT) which has an updated list
of its neighbors. The NT can be easily obtained by periodic broadcasts of the beacon.
Each node also keeps a Routing_Table (RT) which has an updated list of all the possible routes to all the potential destinations. The RT is constructed by an on-demand
routing algorithm. Each element in the RT is a five-tuple of the form <src, dst, nxt1,
cnt1, nxt2, cnt2, …>. The src and dst fields contain the unique addresses of the source
and the destination node, respectively. The nxt field contains the address of the
neighbor node to which data packets need to be forwarded. The cnt field contains the
number of intermediate nodes from the source to the destination node on this route.
The SPAFAR protocol consists of two distinct phases, the route discovery and maintenance phases. We modify the route discovery mechanism to find multiple paths from a
source and intermediate nodes to a desired destination node. When a source wants to
send data to a destination and its RT does not have route information to the destination,
the source initiates the route discovery mechanism to find all possible paths to the destination. The route discovery mechanism is based on request-reply operations.
An R_Request packet is used for the request operation from the source node and
carries <src, dst, rq_id, int_node, hop_cnt> information. The src and dst fields contain
the addresses of the source and destination respectively. The rq_id field contains a
unique identifying number generated locally to distinguish it from the other Route
Request packets. The int_node field keeps a sequence of all the intermediate nodes
from the source to destination, while the packet traverses to the destination. The
hop_cnt field contains the number of intermediate nodes between the source and destination. In response to a R_Request packet, a R_Reply packet is sent from the destination node and carries <src, dst, rq_id, int_node, hop_cnt> information. The source

Cross-Layer Enhancement of IEEE 802.11 MAC for Mobile Ad Hoc Networks

485

field contains the address of the node that sends the R_Reply packet. The destination
field contains the address of the node which sent the R_Request packet. The fields,
rq_id, int_node and hop_cnt, contain the packet identifier, sequence of nodes from the
destination to the source and the number of hops, respectively. The int_node field in
the R_Reply packet is the reverse of that received in the R_Request packet. The detailed operation of the routing protocol is described in [4] and [6].
2.2 IEEE 802.11 Distributed Coordination Function
The IEEE 802.11 MAC protocol defines two modes of operation: Distributed Coordination Function (DCF) which allows contention access for wireless media and
Point Coordination function (PCF) which requires centralized access points. DCF
uses a channel access mechanism known as Carrier Sense Multiple Access with Collision Avoidance (CSMA/CA). Carrier sense is performed by a combination of physical and virtual carrier sense mechanisms. A node with packets to transmit first senses
the medium. If the medium is idle for at least a certain period, DIFS, it will immediately request the channel by sending a control frame, Request to Send (RTS), to the
receiver node. If the receiver correctly receives RTS, it will reply with a short control
frame Clear to Send (CTS). Once the transmitter receives CTS, it will start to transfer
a data frame. After the successful reception of the frame, the receiver sends an ACK
to the transmitter. The exchange of RTS/CTS prior to the actual data transmission
reduces the collision probability in a distributed manner and copes with the hidden
terminal problem [5].

Fig. 2. Operation of IEEE 802.11 DCF

3 Next-Hop Selection Utilizing Multi-path Information
The MAC layer can acquire the information about possible next-hop options from the
upper layer, and its responsibility is to transmit frames to any one of these receivers
successfully. The modification of 802.11 DCF still uses the CSMA/CA algorithm, but
takes advantage of multiple receivers to transmit the frame to any one of them. The
routing protocol computes multiple routes between the source and destination. At
each hop, the routing layer passes on the multiple next hop information to the MAC
layer. The transmitter multicasts the RTS (MRTS) to these multiple receivers, and it

486

T. Kim et al.

Fig. 3. First receiver’s response in the cross-layer enhanced protocol of IEEE 802.11

Fig. 4. Third receiver’s response in the cross-layer enhanced protocol of IEEE 802.11

contains all the MAC addresses of next-hop multiple receivers. Because of practical
implementation considerations, we may limit the number of next receivers to a maximum of three as shown in Figure 3 and Figure 4.
By positioning the addresses of three next receivers onto the MRTS frame, we can
assign a priority order to each next hop. The priority can come from the routing or any
lower layer. In the case that a shorter path to the destination gets higher priority, the
routing decision in the network layer is the crucial metric for the priority. On the other
hand, the information from the physical layer can be utilized to decide the priority
based on the next hop that has less number of packets waiting in the queue or that has
better signal strength. A combination of the above can also be used.
When the MRTS frame is broadcast to all the neighbors and all intended receivers
receive the MRTS packet, the receivers respond by CTS. These CTS transmissions
are intentionally delayed in time according to their priorities. The first receiver in the
priority order tries to transmit the CTS after an SIFS if possible as shown in Figure 3.
The second transmits the CTS after the period equal to the time to transmit a CTS, an
SIFS and a PIFS if there is no transmission on the channel from the transmitter. The

Cross-Layer Enhancement of IEEE 802.11 MAC for Mobile Ad Hoc Networks

487

third receiver transmits the CTS after the period equal to the time to transmit a CTS,
two SIFSs and two PIFSs as shown in Figure 4. When the transmitter receives the
CTS from the first receiver in the priority order, the transmitter transmits the DATA
frame after an SIFS interval to the sender of this CTS, as shown in Figure 3. This
ensures that other, lower priority receivers hear the DATA before they send CTS and
suppress any further CTS transmissions. If the first and second receivers fail to transmit the CTS and the third receiver transmits the CTS, the transmitter finally forwards
the DATA frame to the third receiver as shown in Figure 4.
All the receivers hearing a CTS from any intended receiver then set their NAV until the end the ACK instance. These receivers successfully sense the carrier with the
exact value of NAV. Any receiver hearing only the MRTS set the maximum NAV
value with the MRTS, because the total time to deliver a DATA frame cannot be
guaranteed. This duration depends upon the number of receivers (a maximum of three
in this paper) to which MRTS is being sent. The value of NAV set by MRTS is updated by the DATA frame which has the exact value of NAV. Furthermore, the usage
of both MRTS and CTS help any other receivers identify themselves the exposed
nodes or hidden nodes, and the any other receivers hearing only the MRTS set the
NAV value by the DATA frame.
If none of the CTSs are received successfully, the transmitter goes into a random
backoff and then retries again with the same receivers as in IEEE 802.11. Note that
the protocol reduces to IEEE 802.11 when there is only one next hop receiver, and
that when multiple next hops are indeed available and the CTS from the highest priority receiver is received successfully, this would be exactly the same as IEEE 802.11.

4 Performance Evaluation
For the simulation, the network consisting of 25, 50, 75 and 100 mobile nodes over a
fixed size 100m × 100m terrain was considered. The maximum transmission power
range is assumed to be 20m between nodes. A two-state Markov model [7] is used to
represent the error behavior of slowly fading channels in wireless networks. The
channel of bit-error rates from 10-6 to 10-3 is applied to the above simulation environment. The traffic model uses constant bit rate (CBR) traffic along with randomly
chosen source-destination pairs. A traffic rate of 1 packet/sec (512 byte packet) per
flow was used in the simulation. Load is varied by varying the number of traffic.
Nodes were initially placed randomly within the fixed-size physical terrain. They
move to a randomly selected destination within the terrain with a constant speed
(1 meter/sec). The source and destination are selected randomly, and they also move
and stop continuously in random directions during the whole simulation.
The priority is decided according to the number of hops from the source and the
destination. The next hop link on the shortest path has highest priority. In order
to consider the temporal changes of link status, a link is marked down and the next
shortest alternative is used when the number of transmissions on the link exceeds
the maximum retry count. A route error is generated only when all alternatives are
exhausted.

488

T. Kim et al.

30

100

;) 25
psb20
k(
da15
eh
re10
v
O

)
%
(t 80
up 70
do
o 60
G

90

50

5
0

40

1.E-06

1.E-05

1.E-04

1.E-03

1.E-06

1.E-05

Cross-layer w/ 10 traffic
Cross-layer w/ 20 traffic

1.E-04

1.E-03

BER

BER
Cross-layer w/ 10 traffic
Cross-layer w/ 20 traffic

802.11 w/ 10 traffic
802.11 w/ 20 traffic

(a)

802.11 w/ 10 traffic
802.11 w/ 20 traffic

(b)

Fig. 5. Simulation Results – (a) Overhead vs. BER (b) Goodput vs. BER
20

95

.)
sp15
bk
(
da10
eh
re
v 5
O

) 85
%
(t
up80
do75
oG
70

0

90

65
60
25

50
75
Number of Nodes

Cross-layer w/ 10 traffic
Cross-layer w/ 20 traffic

(a)

100

802.11 w/ 10 traffic
802.11 w/ 20 traffic

25

50
75
Number of Nodes

Cross-layer w/ 10 traffic
Cross-layer w/ 20 traffic

100

802.11 w/ 10 traffic
802.11 w/ 20 traffic

(b)

Fig. 6. Simulation Results – (a) Overhead vs. Node density (b) Goodput vs. Node density

Figure 5 and 6 represents the simulation results in terms of the overhead and
goodput according to the bit-error rate and the number of nodes, respectively. In
Figure 5-a, it is shown that the proposed MAC protocol based on path-diversity
remarkably reduce the overhead generated by RTSs and CTSs. In particular, the improvement increases under worse channel conditions with higher bit-error-rates.
Figure 5-b also represents that the proposed MAC protocol outperforms the IEEE
802.11 MAC protocol in terms of the goodput. The metric, goodput, is defined as
Number of received frames in sequence
follows; Goodput =
Number of transmitted including retransmissions .
Furthermore, the performance improvement becomes larger with more traffic
sources, that is, when the network is highly loaded. We can conjecture that pathdiversity alleviates the congested situation in the network.
Through the simulation, we can see the IEEE 802.11 MAC protocol exploiting the
multipath routing information improves the network performance especially when the
qualities of channels are quite low and the network is highly loaded. The performance

Cross-Layer Enhancement of IEEE 802.11 MAC for Mobile Ad Hoc Networks

489

improvement stems from the reduction of interactions between the MAC and network
layers, and simultaneous routing deployments of multiple traffic sources.

5 Conclusion
We have proposed an enhanced IEEE 802.11 MAC protocol based on the cross-layer
coordination to improve the performance of MANETs. The proposed protocol requires the cross-layer interaction between the MAC and network layers, and a routing
protocol which discovers multiple paths from a source to the destination such as
SPAFAR. The routing protocol in the network layer provides multipath information
to leave the forwarding decision to the MAC layer. This cross-layer coordination
increases the network performance with a reduced overhead cost.
The cross-layer enhancement of IEE 802.11 protocol we have proposed here can be
applied to wireless sensor networks where the node density is quite high and node
failures occur very often. Furthermore, the idea may be applied to wireless mesh networks where multipath routing information can be combined with an opportunistic
routing protocol.

References
1. Choudhury, R., Vaidya, N., MAC-layer anycasting in ad hoc networks. ACM SIGCOMM
Computer Communication Review, Vol. 34, 1(2004)75-80
2. Lee, W., Lee, H., Kim, K.: Packet forwarding based on reachability information for
VANETs. ICOIN, 1(2007)
3. Jain, S., Das, S.: Exploiting Path Diversity in the Link Layer in Wireless Ad Hoc Networks.
IEEE WoWMoM, 6(2005)22-30
4. Hwang, Y., Lee, H., Varshney, P.: An adaptive routing protocol for ad-hoc networks using
multiple disjoint paths. IEEE VTC, 5(2001)2249-2253
5. IEEE Wireless LAN medium access control (MAC) and physical layer (PHY) specifications, IEEE standard 802.11–1997,(1997)
6. Lee, H., Lee, J., Cho, J.: An adaptive MAC protocol based on path-diversity routing in ad
hoc networks. IEEE ICACT,2(2007)
7. Gilbert, E.N.: The Capacity of a Burst-Noise Channel. Bell System Technical Journal,
9(1960)1253–1265

