Social Mediation for Collective Intelligence
in a Large Multi-agent Communities:
A Case Study of AnnotGrid
Jason J. Jung and Geun-Sik Jo
Department of Computer and Information Engineering
Inha University, Republic of Korea
j2jung@intelligent.pe.kr, gsjo@inha.ac.kr

Abstract. Collective intelligence is a key issue for efficient collaborations on
semantic grid environment. Through interactions among agents on the semantic
grid, we want to discover social centralities underlying on agent communities. In
this paper, we propose an ontology mapping approach to build collective intelligence based on social mediation. As a case study, we demonstrate AnnotGrid
platform to support manual annotation tasks of image dataset.

1 Introduction
Collective intelligence is regarded as one of the important processes for collaborations
between people, in order to solve a very complicated problem. They can share their
own knowledge (or experiences) with each other, access the knowledge in the individual viewpoint, and integrate some relevant knowledge with theirs. Originally, this
mechanism has been studied in the communities of social science and pedagogical science. In the context of computational and information science, we want to automatically
build the collective intelligence among information systems (e.g., virtual organizations),
and then, to provide meaningful services (e.g., recommendation) to people [1]. Particularly, the individuals are represented as not human actors but software agents, which
are working on behalf of the corresponding persons [2]. The agents however have some
drawbacks to communicate with others. Such problems are i) lack of computational
power, ii) lack of information and knowledge, and even more seriously, iii) semantic
heterogeneities.
For overcoming these problems, the agents can be reinforced with semantic grid
computing [3]. The semantic grid is an extension of the current grid in which information and services are given well-defined meaning through machine-processable descriptions which maximize the potential for sharing and reuse. The existing grid environments suppose that the power of agents should be simply identical. We are motivated from the naive assumption. Depending on the ontological structure of agents, the
semantic information provided during cooperations might be different from the agents.
In this paper, as shown in Fig. 1, we have investigated three-layered architecture
for the semantic grid, which is composed of social, ontology, and resource layers. We
propose a novel approach to integrate the intelligence reasoning capabilities based on
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part II, LNCS 4488, pp. 704–711, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Social Mediation for Collective Intelligence in a Large Multi-agent Communities

A

O4

O1

O2

B

Social Layer

O3

Ontology Layer

705

Resource Layer

Fig. 1. Three-layered semantic grid architecture

social network analysis and co-occurrence analysis (i.e., extended TF-IDF) methods of
the resources. The semantics delivered from an agent is applied to measure the strength
of social ties with neighboring agents, because we have no idea about the relationship
between two agents A and B on social layer.
The outline of this paper is as follows. In Sect. 2, we will define some notation and
explain our ontology mapping algorithm for collecting the social ties among agents.
Sect. 3 will propose community-based approach for social mediation on multi-agent
environment. In Sect. 4, we demonstrator our AnnotGrid environment to support semantic collaboration. Finally, Sect. 6 give a conclusion and future work.

2 Constructing Social Network
Now we want to define agents and their community model. Social ties between the
agents are discovered, so that they are aggregated to construct a weighted social network. The weighted link between two agents are computed from two steps; i) semantic
similarity between ontologies that they are using, and ii) co-occurrence patterns of resources that they are possessing.
Definition 1 (Agent). An agent Ai in a social grid SG is composed of three modules;
i) inference engine, ii) a set of ontologies Oi , and iii) local resources Ri where each
element rα ∈ Ri is annotated with Oi .
In this paper, the inference engine is regarded as an annotation (or classification) system for local resources. Thereby, each agent can build his own “local” ontologies, and
also he can exploit the “standard” ontologies such as OpenCyc [4] and SUMO1 . For
convenience, Oi = { cα , rel, cβ |cα , cβ ∈ Annot(rx ), rx ∈ Ri }.
2.1 Semantic Similarity by Ontology Mapping
We can measure similarity between two agents SimO (Ai , Aj ) by similarity measurement strategy on [5,6], which defines all possible similarities between classes SimC ,
1

Suggested Upper Merged Ontology, http://ontology.teknowledge.com

706

J.J. Jung and G.-S. Jo

relationships SimR , attributes SimA , and instances SimI . For simplicity, we need to
use only SimC . Given a pair of classes from two different ontologies, the similarity
measure SimC is assigned in [0, 1]. The similarity (SimC ) between cα ∈ OA and
cβ ∈ OB is defined as
C
πF
M SimY (F (cα ), F (cβ ))

SimC (cα , cβ ) =

(1)

F ∈N (C)

where N (C) is the set of all relationships in which the classes participates, and function
F can measure label similarities (it can be replaced to string matching algorithms, e.g.,
C
C
edit distance). The weights πF
are normalized (i.e., F ∈N (C) πF
= 1).
In this paper, hence, we consider three relationships in N (C), which are the superclass (SU P ), the subclass (SU B) and the sibling class (SIB), and Eq. 1 has to be
extended to
C
SimC (cα , cβ ) = πL
simL (F (cα ), F (cβ ))

S
+ πSU
P M SimSU P (SUP(cα ), SUP(cβ ))
C
+ πSU B M SimSU B (SUB(cα ), SUB(cβ ))
C
+ πSIB
M SimSIB (SIB(cα ), SIB(cβ )).

(2)

where the set functions M SimY is formulated for comparing the two sets of entity
collections. According to the characteristics of the sets, it is differently given by two
equations
M SimSU P,SU B (S, S ) =

max<c,c >∈P airing(S,S ) (SimC (c, c ))
,
max (|S|, |S |)

1−

<c,c >∈P airing(S,S )

(3)

(SimC (c, c ))

(4)
max (|S|, |S |)
where P airing is a simple matching function for generating all possible pairs from
both sets. These equations express either positive or negative influences on semantic
relationships between classes. It means that the more matched super- and subclasses
can imply the corresponding classes are more similar, as shown in Eq. 3. In contrast,
the sibling classes (Eq. 4) reflect the negative effect, because they make the semantics
dispersed and the degree of similarity decreased.
M SimSIB (S, S ) =

2.2 Co-occurrence Patterns
Finally, we can construct a weighted social network as a set of agents by referring to
the resource layer. In this paper, we assume that when agents annotate a resource with
semantically similar classes, they are strongly correlated, i.e., the strength of social tie
might be high. Thus, the strength of social tie between Ai and Aj is given by
cα ∈Annoti (rx ),cβ ∈Annotj (rx )

weij =
rx ∈Ri ∩Rj

SimC (cα , cβ )

Annoti (rx ) × Annotj (rx )

and the normalized strength is easily computed by weij =

we

ij

|Ri ∩Rj | .

,

(5)

Social Mediation for Collective Intelligence in a Large Multi-agent Communities

707

Furthermore, there is another issue to enhance the weights between agents. This is
an inactivation process by using conflicted annotation semantics. When SimC between
annotations of a resource is very low, the strength of the social tie is supposed to be
decreased. We want to discuss this issue for future work.

3 Community-Based Social Mediation
A set of agents which is participating to a semantic grid should be organized as agent
communities.
Definition 2 (Agent community). An agent community ACs is represented as ACs =
N , E where N is a set of agents {A1 , A2 , . . . , A|N | }, and E is a set of relations
between the agents
E ⊆ |N | × |N |.
(6)
Each element is represented as eij , weij ∈ E where weight weij ∈ [0, 1] indicates the
strength of a social link between two agents Ai and Aj .
Property 1 (Degree of cohesion COH). A set of agents in an agent community ACs
have to be highly cohesive with each other. It is similar to subgroup identification. Based
on [7,8], this constraint is simply formulated by
COH(ACs ) =
where

COH

Ai ,Ai ∈ACs
|N | C2

weij

≥

COH

(7)

is a predefined threshold value.

Based on the social ties between two agents, we can apply a non-parametric approach,
e.g., nearest neighborhood method [9]. As extending [10], this task is to maximize “semantic” modularity function Q on the social network of agents. Given the number of
agent communities S from a set of agents, a social network of SG can be partitioned
into a set of agent communities (or subgroup) {AC1 , AC2 , . . . , ACS }. The agents can
be involved in more than one community. It means that an agent in ACk can also be
taken as one of members of ACk . Based on Equ. 7, the modularity function Q is
formulated by
S
COH(ACi )
(8)
Q (SG) = i=1
S
where all possible pairs of agents should be considered. Thus, the optimal formation
of SG is discovered when Q (S) is maximized. For computing this, in this paper, we
applied k-nearest neighborhood methods.
Within a certain AGi , the centrality of agents can be considered to find out which
agent is more semantically powerful, i.e., which agents is the most relevant to make two
heterogeneous agents be able to communicate and understand with each other.
Definition 3 (Centrality CT R). From a set of agents AC x , the centrality of an agent
Ai is given by

708

J.J. Jung and G.-S. Jo

Aj ∈AC x

CT R(Ai ) =

weij

(9)

|N | − 1

where Aj can be in either the same agent community or not. Because the network of the
agents are fully connected, it is based on closeness centrality [11] rather than others
(e.g., betweenness and stress centralities).
Given the agents whose centralities is highest in the corresponding agent communities,
We have to repeat the cohesion evaluation process. As repeating this centrality computing process, the SG is hierarchically built for efficient social mediation. For the social
mediation based on semantic grid environment, we have to find out whether two agents
are involved into a same agent community or not. The reason is because the centrality is available only in the same community. There are two cases, i.e., two red arrows
meaning communications i) between heterogeneous agents A1 and B1 , ii) between A1
and A3 , as shown in Fig. 2. Within an agent group, the social mediation can be done
AgentCommunity1

AgentCommunity2
AgentCommunity3

C2

A1

A3
C1

C3

B1

Fig. 2. Two kinds of social mediation based on centrality; Three agent communities are built,
and agents C1 , C2 , and C3 are assigned with the highest centrality in the agent communities,
respectively

by the agent whose centrality is highest. For example, we can figure out that the communications between A1 and B1 in AgentCommunity1 is possibly supported by C1 . On
the other hand, for communication between A1 and A3 , we need to know which collective intelligence should be integrated. In this case, agents C1 , C2 , and C3 are possibly
cooperating to integrate their semantic information to mediate between A1 and A3 .

4 Experimentation: A Case Study of AnnotGrid Environment
We have been implementing a semantic grid environment based on multi-agent systems,
called AnnotGrid. Sharing a bunch of image files is usually regarded as a serious hurdle
in distributed environment. In semantic web era, rather than content-based analysis, a
variety of studies have been focusing on image annotation. The annotation is basically
generated by human experts (or end-users). They have to put in some description about
the images (somehow, they can refer to knowledge-based systems.).

Social Mediation for Collective Intelligence in a Large Multi-agent Communities

709

The goal of this system is to support the annotation tasks to save their time and
increase the precision of their descriptions. Basic scheme of AnnotGrid is as follows
(For more details, see the project web pages2 );
1. Building social grid with initial annotations; it is an initialization step of semantic
grid.
2. Loading a new image ri
3. Retrieving a set of existing annotation from other users; the agent can get the existing annotations about ri from the other agents in both the same agent community
and different ones.
– local searching by himself
– global searching by social mediator
4. Translating the retrieved annotation; The corresponding social mediators provide
translation service to make the annotations understandable.
For evaluating this system, we invited 32 college students to annotate an image
dataset3 . Above all, because the class similarities built during annotating the images
should become relatively large, we recommended to use some “’standard’ ontologies
such as
– Suggested Upper Merged Ontology (SUMO)
– WordNet (http://wordnet.princeton.edu/), and
– CIDOC CRM (CIDOC4 Conceptual Reference Mode, http://cidoc.ics.forth.gr/).
Each person had to initially annotate five images randomly selected by his own preferences, so that four communities had been built ( COH = 0.35). As keeping annotating
the imaged, the students were able to obtain annotations recommended by AnnotGrid,
and feedback their opinions whether the recommendation is relevant or not.
Table 1. Experimental results on annotation recommendation by AnnotGrid
Index

User number

Community1
Community2
Community3
Community4
Average

4
12
9
7

Number of annotation
Local
Global
19
97
93
124
58
137
52
94

Accuracy of annotation (%)
Local
Global
72.5
78.6
68.4
81.2
62.5
75.0
69.1
81.6
68.1
79.1

As shown in Table 1, global searching facility has shown better performance than local one by approximately 11%. It proves our social mediations has been working properly. Especially, the users in Community1 got the largest social mediation, even though
the number of users are smallest. In case of large communities (2nd , 3rd , 4th communities), the users had acquired quite higher precision. We think that enough amount
of semantic information in these communities make ontology matching process more
precise.
2
3
4

http://intelligent.pe.kr/AnnotGrid/
http://intelligent.pe.kr/AnnotGrid/images/
http://www.willpowerinfo.myby.co.uk/cidoc/

710

J.J. Jung and G.-S. Jo

5 Related Work
There have been various annotation systems for not only images but also bookmarks and
other multimedia [12,13,14]. Especially, many collaborative tagging systems, called
Folksonomy, like del.icio.us and Bibsonomy (http://www.bibsonomy.org) have been
trying to share the semantic tags with others. But, they do not have any facilities to
analyze social features and automated recommendation process. Then, people have to
directly inspect which tags (or semantics) can be exploited. In the aspect of computing
architectures, SOA (service-oriented architecture) systems have been applied to data
annotation [15]. Particularly, semantic overlay architecture for P2P network [16] is very
similar to our scheme, because it can also hierarchical organize the linkage structure
among peers.

6 Concluding Remarks and Future Work
In conclusion, we claim that the social relationships between agents should be discovered to support efficient cooperations on semantic grid environment. The proposed
method are able to build hierarchical formation of people in a social network. For the
practical experimentation, this paper demonstrates AnnotGrid system, which is capable
of recommending semantic information for manual annotation task of photos.
As future work, we are planning to apply consensus method [17] to our system, in
order to deal with conflicts between ontology mapping.

References
1. Jung, J.J.: Ontological framework based on contextual mediation for collaborative information retrieval. Information Retrieval 10(1) (2007) 85–109
2. Maes, P.: Agents that reduce work and information overload. Communication of the ACM
37(7) (1994) 30–40
3. Gil, Y.: On agents and grids: Creating the fabric for a new generation of distributed intelligent
systems. Journal of Web Semantics 4(2) (2006) 116–123
4. Lenat, D., Guha, R.: Building Large Knowledge-Based Systems: Representation and Inference in the Cyc Project. Addison-Wesley (1989)
5. Euzenat, J., Valtchev, P.: Similarity-based ontology alignment in OWL-Lite. In de M´antaras,
R.L., Saitta, L., eds.: Proceedings of the 16th European Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(ECAI). (2004) 333–337
6. Jung, J.J., Euzenat, J.: Measuring semantic centrality based on building consensual ontology
on social networks. In: Proceedings of the Workshop on Semantic Network Analysis (colocated in ESWC 2006). (2006)
7. Wasserman, S., Faust, K.: Social Network Analysis. Cambridge University Press (1944)
8. Jung, J.J., Euzenat, J.: From personal ontologies to socialized semantic space. In: Poster of
the 3rd European Semantic Web Conference. (2006)
9. Gowda, K.C., Krishna, G.: Agglomerative clustering using the concept of mutual nearest
neighbourhood. Pattern Recognition 10(2) (1978) 105–112
10. Newman, M.E.J.: Fast algorithm for detecting community structure in networks. Physical
Review E 69 (2004) 066133

Social Mediation for Collective Intelligence in a Large Multi-agent Communities

711

11. Sabidussi, G.: The centrality index of a graph. Psychometrika 31 (1966) 581–603
12. Kiryakov, A., Popov, B., Ognyanoff, D., Manov, D., Kirilov, A., Goranov, M.: Semantic
annotation, indexing, and retrieval. In Fensel, D., Sycara, K.P., Mylopoulos, J., eds.: International Semantic Web Conference. Volume 2870 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science.,
Springer (2003) 484–499
13. Belhajjame, K., Embury, S.M., Paton, N.W., Stevens, R., Goble, C.A.: Automatic annotation of web services based on workflow definitions. In Cruz, I.F., Decker, S., Allemang,
D., Preist, C., Schwabe, D., Mika, P., Uschold, M., Aroyo, L., eds.: Proceedings of the 5th
International Semantic Web Conference (ISWC 2006). Volume 4273 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science., Springer (2006) 116–129
14. Jung, J.J.: Exploiting semantic annotation to supporting user browsing on the web.
Knowledge-Based Systems xx(x) (to appear) http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2006.08.003
15. Aurnhammer, M., Hanappe, P., Steels, L.: Augmenting navigation for collaborative tagging
with emergent semantics. In Cruz, I.F., Decker, S., Allemang, D., Preist, C., Schwabe, D.,
Mika, P., Uschold, M., Aroyo, L., eds.: Proceedings of the 5th International Semantic Web
Conference (ISWC 2006). Volume 4273 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science., Springer
(2006) 58–71
16. Aberer, K., Cudr´e-Mauroux, P.: Semantic overlay networks. In B¨ohm, K., Jensen, C.S., Haas,
˚ Ooi, B.C., eds.: Proceedings of the 31st International
L.M., Kersten, M.L., Larson, P.A.,
Conference on Very Large Data Bases (VLDB), ACM (2005) 1367
17. Nguyen, N.T.: Conflicts of ontologies - classification and consensus-based methods for resolving. In Gabrys, B., Howlett, R.J., Jain, L.C., eds.: Proceedings of the 10th International
Conference on Knowledge-Based Intelligent Information and Engineering Systems (KES
2006). Volume 4252 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science., Springer (2006) 267–274

