CARP: Context-Aware Resource Provisioning
for Multimedia over 4G Wireless Networks
Navrati Saxena1 , Abhishek Roy2 , and Jitae Shin1
1

School of Info. & Comm. Eng. Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Korea
2
WiBro System Lab, Samsung Electronics, Suwon, South Korea
{navrati,jtshin}@ece.skku.ac.kr, abhishek.roy@samsung.com

Abstract. In this paper a context-aware resource provisioning framework is developed for multi-system, heterogeneous 4G wireless networks.
The framework envisions that each individual sub-network is fairly
independent, and uses Bayesian learning scheme for capturing user’s mobility proﬁles. The concept of Asymptotic Equipartition Property (AEP)
helps to predict the most likely path-segments, that the mobile user
(MU) is going to follow in near future, with very good accuracy. This
helps in proactive resource management along the MU’s future paths
and locations providing the optimal resource (e.g., bandwidth) reservation. Simulation results on a synthetic wireless traces corroborate this
high prediction success and demonstrate suﬃcient improvement in delay, blocking and throughput of ongoing wireless multimedia sessions.
Keywords: 4G Heterogeneous wireless networks, Bayesian learning, resource management, Information Theory, mobile multimedia, AEP.

1

Introduction

The concept of packet-based, next-generation 4G wireless networks [2] lies in the
co-existence of multiple cellular access networks. These individual cellular networks might possess signiﬁcant diﬀerences in topology, coverage area and transmission range. However, by using multiple radio interfaces, future mobile nodes
can seamlessly switch between these technologies, thus achieving the ultimate
goal of global roaming. The 4G network can thus be conceptually visualized as a
collection of multiple independent access sub-networks, each of which has its own
cellular layout and separate location tracking technique. “Context-awareness” is
perhaps the key characteristic of these next-generation wireless networks and
associated applications. Mobility and location information is the most important “context” in these networks, because the information needed by the vast
majority of MUs depend strongly on their current or near future location.
In this paper we have developed a new Context-Aware Resource Provisioning
scheme CARP across mobile-user’s most frequent routes in heterogeneous 4G
cellular networks. Operating in symbolic space, CARP uses Bayesian algorithm
to capture the movement proﬁles of individual MU across such networks. Although, in such systems, there exists a wide number of possible routes from a
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part I, LNCS 4487, pp. 652–659, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

CARP : Context-Aware Resource Provisioning for Multimedia

653

particular source to a destination, a MU usually follows his/her most likely paths.
A similar analogy, dealing with the asymptotic equipartition property (AEP) [11]
states that among all the long-range sequences consisting of random variables,
there exists a fairly small typical set [11] which contains most of the probability
mass and controls the average behavior of all such sequences. Using this concept, CARP captures the MU’s typical path segments and reserves bandwidth
along the typical paths. This helps in seamless transmission of ongoing real-time
wireless communication with speciﬁc Quality of Service (QoS) guarantee. Using
a priority-based service classiﬁcation scheme CARP is also capable of guaranteeing signiﬁcant improvement in blocking of real-time multimedia sessions.
Section 2 reviews the major existing works in location and resource management in 4G networks. A symbolic domain description of such networks is
shown in Section 3. The new concept of capturing MU’s frequently used routes
is developed in Section 4. An eﬃcient resource reservation and admission control scheme based on this route formation is discussed in Section 5. Simulation
results in Section 6 demonstrates the improvement of QoS in ongoing wireless
sessions. Finally Section 7 concludes the paper.

2

Related Works: Mobility in 4G Wireless Systems

Given the large body of work on resource management in a single cellular access
system (e.g., PCS), we survey only the major contributions related to our context. The guard channel policy [8] and fractional guard channel policy [9] determine the number of guard channels for hand-oﬀs. The shadow cluster scheme [6]
estimates future resource requirements in a collection of cells in which a mobile
is likely to visit in the future. An eﬃcient scheme for mobility-based predictive
admission control is also proposed in [12] for single-system wireless networks.
Some recent work has reported on the problem of location and resource management in a multi-system environment. It is shown in [1] that an integrated
location management strategy can signiﬁcantly outperform an independent operation of each sub-system’s location management algorithm. Similarly recent researches have pointed out a signiﬁcant trend towards seamless inter-networking
of wireless LANs and cellular networks [3]. The issues of network selection [10]
in heterogeneous wireless networks are also under investigation. The problem
of optimal location management [7] in heterogeneous wireless networks is also
recently pointed out. However, the problem of resource reservation and management for guaranteed QoS in a generic multi-system environment is yet to be
eﬀectively addressed. This motivates the development of CARP.

3

Symbolic Representation of 4G Wireless Systems

Figure 1 shows an example of an integrated 4G wireless network, comprising a collection of satellite, PCS and campus area (IEEE 802.11 WLAN and Bluetooth)
based independent sub-networks. Clearly, the coverage area of each individual
sub-system can be discontinuous. Accordingly, the set of sub-networks that can

654

N. Saxena, A. Roy, and J. Shin

Fig. 1. A Multi-System Heterogeneous Wireless Network

be accessed concurrently by a mobile node is not constant but a function of its
current location. Let, the 4G network consists of N sub-networks, where each
sub-network is a collection of (either partitioned or overlapping) cells, such that
Cij represents the j th cell in the ith sub-network. If the mobile node is currently
out of range of sub-network Si , its location vector includes the cell Ciφ .
The movement pattern of the mobile node (M N ) can then be represented as a
¯ where the ith element of the vector corresponds
N -dimension random vector X,
¯
to the current cell of sub-network Si . For instance, if X(2)
= 4, the M N is
currently located in the 4th cell of sub-network S2 . Characterizing the mobility
as a probabilistic sequence suggests that it can be deﬁned as a stochastic, vector¯ n }. where the “. . .” imply that the corresponding random
valued process χ = {X
variable can take any possible value within its range.

4

Context-Awareness in Heterogenous Wireless Networks

The MU’s location uncertainty in heterogeneous wireless networks leads to uncertainty in the resources allocation and reservation policies. Once the location
is managed properly, only then the network will be smart enough to reserve suitable wireless bandwidth. While the existing shadow cluster [6] approach provides
the idea to preserve resources along the mobile’s surrounding cells, it fails to give
any generalized way to estimate these shadow clusters, and only assumes either
some deﬁnite knowledge of user mobility or totally random users. The novelty
of CARP lies in the fact that it not only captures the MU’s locations, but also
accumulates and predicts the user’s typical routes. Thus, eﬀectively CARP extends the concept of shadow cluster into heterogenous wireless networks to form
a more smart resource management scheme.
4.1

Probabilistic Estimation of User-Mobility

CARP uses an online Bayesian Aggregation technique [4] to make the system
knowledgeable enough about the MU’s mobility proﬁles. Figure 2 provides a
¯ i in the hetpseudo-code of our mobility prediction scheme. Each cell-vector X
erogenous wireless system is assigned to a weight wi . Initially, all the weights are

CARP : Context-Aware Resource Provisioning for Multimedia

655

Probabilistic Mobility Prediction
¯i ;
1. initialize m := 1; assign weight wi := 1/n to each instant X
3. repeat steps below until (Xp − Xa ≤ ε);
¯ p := n wi ×X¯ i ;
4.
predict the next cell-vector (location) X
i=1
wi
¯a ;
5.
continue it’s own movement; 6. Capture the actual location X
7.
compute the individual (li ) and overall (lo ) prediction inaccuracy
¯ a | ln |X
¯ i | − (1 − |X
¯ a |) ln(1 − |X
¯i |) and lo = n li ;
li = −|X
i=1
m+1
m −li
8.
update the weights as: wi
= wi e ;

È

È

Fig. 2. Bayesian Algorithm for Capturing User-Mobility

same, i.e., wi = 1/n. The mobile-node now estimates it’s own future-location by
computing a weighted measure of these individual instances of cell-vectors (lo¯ p is:
cations). Formally, the predicted location X
n
¯
i=1 wi × Xi
n
i=1 wi

¯p =
X

(1)

The objective of CARP is to predict the future location correctly, so that the
¯ a represents the actual location,
system becomes cognizant of user’s mobility. If, X
¯p = X
¯ a . The most
the objective is to make the system cognizant enough so that X
fair measure of the prediction-inaccuracy (error) associated with this process
is entropic loss [4]. This entropic loss li for each location and its cumulative
estimate in m iterations lic is given by
m

¯ a | ln |X
¯ i | − (1 − |X
¯ a |) ln(1 − |X
¯ i |), and lc =
li = −|X
i

li

(2)

i=1

At every iteration m, the weights associated with every time-instant Ti are now
updated as
(3)
wim+1 = wim e−li .
¯
¯
This procedure is iterated until Xi − Xa ≤ ε, where ε is a predeﬁned precision.
The eﬀects of locations far from accuracy are reduced by exponentially decreasing
¯ i approaches X
¯ a . The
their associated weights. In time the predicted location X
overall expected deviation form the optimality (lo ) is given by:
lo ≤ min lic + ln(m)
i

4.2

(4)

Context-Aware Route Collection

A close look into the life-style of a particular MU reveals that he/she typically
follows only a small subset of all the paths, which essentially is guided by his
life-style in the long run. The concept of typical set and asymptotic equipartition
property (AEP) from information theory helps in obtaining this small set of
highly probable routes maintained by a particular MU.

656

N. Saxena, A. Roy, and J. Shin

¯ = {¯
Deﬁnition 1. The type [4] of a vector-sequence x
x1 , x
¯2 , . . . , x
¯n } is the relative proportion of occurrences of each vector-symbol. Also, the set of all vectorsequences of a particular length and type is referred as the type class.
The essential power of the method of types arises from the fact that the number
of types is always at-most polynomial [11]. Hence, the crucial point to note
here is that, there are polynomial number of types, but exponential number of
sequences.
Result 1. If V¯1 , V¯2 , . . . , V¯n denotes the set of vector-sequences drawn according
to a speciﬁc distribution, then the probability of the sequence depends on relative
diﬀerence between the type and the original distribution.
Hence, the type classes and the corresponding sequences that are far from the
original distribution have exponentially smaller probabilities. This leads to the
concept of typical set :
Deﬁnition 2. For a given > 0, a typical set TQ of sequences for the distribution Qn is deﬁned as: Tv¯ = {¯
v : |T ype − Distribution| < }.
All we now need is the probabilistic estimation of these typical sequences. Fortunately, this is exactly what the Shannon-McMillan-Brieman theorem [4,11]
provides. According to this theorem, if H(χ) is the entropy of ﬁnite-valued stochastic ergodic process χ, then
1
(5)
− lg [ p (V¯0 , V¯1 , . . . , V¯n−1 )] → H(χ)
n
Equation 5 provides the basis of asymptotic equipartition property (AEP) [11]
for any stationary, ergodic, stochastic process.
Result 2. AEP states that for a ﬁxed

> 0, as n → ∞, P r{χ ∈ Tv¯ } → 1.

This is basically similar to the weak law of large numbers [4] for ergodic, stochastic sequences, assuring that asymptotically almost all the probability mass
of V is concentrated in the typical set. It encompasses the mobile user’s most
likely paths and determines the average nature of the large route-sequences.

5

Advanced Resource Provisioning

Resource reservation and admission control for multimedia services is a challenging research topic in the ﬁeld of current and future generation wireless
networks. The novelty of our approach lies in designing the bandwidth reservation scheme along the MU’s typical (most probable) set of routes to ensure strict guarantee of QoS parameters like delay, throughput and blocking
of real-time wireless applications; which had been missing from literature. The
wireless audio-video applications are now capable of following the MU along
his/her typical routes. Thus, the MU will be able to listen the news and watch
a streaming video as he/she moves from one location to another. An estimation
of reserved and free bandwidth in any heterogeneous cell z¯ is determined by:

CARP : Context-Aware Resource Provisioning for Multimedia

z)
¯ n ] × f (¯
P r[X
× Bm ,
¯
|X n |

Bres (¯
z , m) = P r[¯
z ] × Bm , =
¯ n ∈T Q
X

Bf ree (¯
z , m) = Btot − Bres (¯
z , m)

657

(6)
(7)

where, f (¯
z ) represents frequency of occurrence of z¯, Btot , Bm , Bresv and Bf ree
are respectively the total bandwidth requirement of the mobile m, bandwidth
requirement at z¯, bandwidth reserved at z¯ and free bandwidth at z¯.
On arrival of a particular media packet in any z¯, the bandwidth availability
in that zone is checked for admission of the real-time video and voice stream.
The unavailability of bandwidth leads to blocking of the media stream. On the
other hand, if the bandwidth is available, the availability is checked only along
the typical routes of the MU. The admission control of the multimedia packets
is determined by the following condition:
P r[¯
z ] × β (¯
z , Bm ) ≥ τ
z¯∈V n

β (¯
z , Bm ) =

P r[¯
z ],

(8)

z¯∈V n

1,
Bf ree (¯
z ,m)
,
Bm

Bf ree (¯
z ) ≥ Bm
otherwise

(9)

where τ is the admission threshold. Clearly, τ varies for voice, video and data
packets. The data packets are given lower priority, and are admitted only if
suﬃcient bandwidth is left (according to equations (6)–(9)) after admitting the
real-time voice and video traﬃc.

6

Simulation Results

We have developed an object-oriented, discrete-event simulation environment
for supporting MU’s movements, associated prediction of typical routes and
resource management for supporting location-aware multimedia services. The
wireless voice services is modelled with exponentially distributed ‘on’ and ‘oﬀ’
periods (mean lengths 0.6 sec and 0.8 sec respectively). We have taken ﬂuid
queues having Weibullian inter-arrivals with heavy tails. The video sequences,
are assumed to be encoded with ITU’s (International Telecommunication Unit)
H.264 [5] speciﬁcations with 176 × 144 pixel resolution and 7–30 frames/sec.
CARP reserves the highest bandwidth for ongoing voice (40%–45%-high priority) and the lowest for data traﬃc (10%–15%-low priority) along the MU’s
typical routes. Figure 3 demonstrates that the such a mobility-aware, proactive bandwidth reservation results in almost 50%, 65% and 30% improvements
respectively, in blocking of wireless voice, video and data streams, with increasing session arrival rates. In order to investigate into the mutual eﬀect of the
real-time voice and video streams over the other, we have looked into the throughput of voice and video traﬃc. Figure 4 shows that the with increasing session
arrival rate the throughput of voice and video traﬃc lies around 65%–85% of the
actual transmission data rate. Thus, we can conclude that such a location-aware

658

N. Saxena, A. Roy, and J. Shin
110

Video without Bandwidth Reservation
Video With Bandwidth Reservation
Voice without bandwidth reservation
Voice with bandwidth reservation
Data without bandwidth reservation
Data with Bandwidth Reservation

100

Multimedia Blocking Rate

90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

Multimedia Arrival Rate

Fig. 3. Gain in Blocking of Mobile Multimedia

Fig. 4. Throughput of Voice and Video Traﬃc

Fig. 5. Mutual Eﬀects of Voice and Data Traﬃc

bandwidth reservation scheme has the potential for providing steady throughput
of multimedia streams. Another point of concern is the mutual eﬀects of traﬃc
over the delay experienced by the MU in receiving the multimedia streams, while

CARP : Context-Aware Resource Provisioning for Multimedia

659

moving from one location to the another along the typical routes. Figure 5 shows
that using this delay can be kept quite low for voice (≈ 600 msec) services.

7

Conclusions

In this paper we have looked into the advanced resource reservation scheme
for location-aware multimedia in heterogenous wireless networks. The developed
system is quite cognizant about the MU’s daily movement patterns and is capable
of performing advanced reservation of wireless bandwidth along the MUs typical
routes. This proposed framework aids in development of location-oriented multimedia with speciﬁc QoS (delay and throughput) guarantee, reduced blocking
and seamless transmission along the MU’s typical routes.
Acknowledgments. This work was supported by the Korea Research Foundation Grant funded by the Korean Government (MOEHRD)(KRF-2006-331D00358).

References
1. I. F. Akyildiz and W. Wang, “A Dynamic Location Management Scheme for NextGeneration Multitier PCS Systems”, IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 178-189, Jan 2002.
2. R. Berezdivin, R. Breinig and R. Topp, “Next-Generation Wireless Communications Concepts and Technologies”, IEEE Comm. Mag., vol. 40, no. 3, March 2002.
3. D. Cavalcanti, D. Agarwal, C. Cordeiro, B. Xie and A. Kumar, “Issues in Integrating Cellular Networks, WLANS, and MANETS: A Futuristic Heterogeneous
Wireless Network”, IEEE Wireless Communications, pp. 30–41, 2005.
4. T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory, John Wiley, ’91.
5. ITU-T H.264; “Advanced video coding for generic audiovisual services”, ITUT
Speciﬁcations for Video Coding
6. D. A. Levine, I. F. Akyildiz and M. Nagshineh, “A resource estimation and call
admission algorithm for wireless multimedia networks using the shadow cluster
concept,” IEEE Transactions on Networking, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 1-12, February ’97.
7. A. Misra, A. Roy and S. K. Das, “An Information Theoretic Approach for Optimal
Location Tracking in Multi-System 4G Wireless Networks”, IEEE InfoCom, ’04.
8. E. C. Posner and R. Guerin, Traﬃc Policies in Cellular Radio that Minimize Blocking of Handoﬀ Calls,11th Intl. Teletraﬃc Conference, Kyoto, Japan, Sept. 1985.
9. R. Ramjee, R. Nagarajan and Don Towsley, On Optimal Call Admission Control
in Cellular Networks,Proceedings of IEEE INFOCOM, San Francisco, CA, 1996.
10. Q. Song and A. Jamalipour, “Network Selection in an Integrated Wireless LAN and
UMTS Environment Using Mathematical Modeling and Computing Techniques”,
IEEE Wireless Communications, pp. 42 - 48, 2005.
11. A. Wyner and Z. Ziv, “Some Asymptotic Properties of the Entropy of a Stationary
Ergodic Data Source with Applications to Data Compression”, IEEE Transactions
on Information Theory, vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 1250-1258, Nov. 1989.
12. F. Yu and V. Leung, “Mobility-based Predictive Call Admission Control and Bandwidth Reservation in Wireless Cellular Networks”, Computer Networks, vol. 38.

