A Study on the Aspects of Successful Business
Intelligence System Development
Il Seok Ko and Sarvar R. Abdullaev
Division of Computer and Multimedia, Dongguk University, 707 Seokjang-dong,
Gyeongju-si, Gyeongsangbuk-do, 780-714 Korea
isko@dongguk.edu

Abstract. Business Intelligence (BI) Systems are today considered as a major
strategic tool of many well-established companies like Lufthansa, TDC
Telecom and AT&T. Of course, the knowledge derived from the experience of
those companies could be helpful guide in building efficient BI Systems. Thus,
this study highlights the main points arisen from the worldwide practice of
building successful BI Systems. The managers usually expect from BI Systems
the acceleration of their decision-making process while keeping the quality of
each decision, the enhancement of their product development cycle, the
maximization of the profit from existing product lines and the discovery of new
opportunities, the establishment of better marketing with robust CRM.
However, more than 50% of BI projects fail to meet these requirements. So this
study investigates the critical mistakes commonly made by BI System
developers and suggests profound solutions from the best BI practices.
Keywords: business intelligence, failure of BI, successful BI cases.

1 Introduction
What made people build BI Systems? IBM gives the clear definition of BI: “Business
intelligence means using your data assets to make better business decisions. It is
about access, analysis, and uncovering new opportunities.” By the end of 90s, big
corporations found out that they have huge amount of unused historical data
accumulated from their daily activities. So the people started to mine that useless data
and consequently gained useful knowledge.
Generally speaking, we can split the BI evolution into 3 stages. Initially, there have
been business information systems aimed at accomplishing limited range of
operational business activities and, in the same way, storing the operational data.
Almost all decisions had to be made leaning on operational data and sometimes that
made a clash. At the second stage, the historical data has been separated from
operational data into data warehouses which are specially tailored to store and provide
quick access to such data. It also summarized the data in various cuboids and
consequently eased the decision making process. Finally, today’s BI systems have
been discovered by involving data mining techniques and artificial intelligence in
order to extract knowledge for decision making.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 729–732, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

730

I.S. Ko and S.R. Abdullaev

In this paper we will consider both successful cases of BI system deployment and
also study commonly made critical mistakes while building BI system.

2 Why Do BI Projects Fail?
More than half of BI projects fail to meet the requirements stated at the beginning
of the project. Commonly these are the requirements aimed at facilitating the process
of decision making and identifying new business opportunities by the utilization of
accumulated historical data. However these goals are not always met, and there are
several reasons for that.
Mostly BI projects considered to be the inner project which should meet the
company’s internal requirements. However it should reflect the needs of customers
and deal with external issues like market situation or customer’s behavior. On the
other hand, there is always gap between the actual implementers and the users of the
system, and sometimes it becomes technology oriented project which aimed at
outrunning in technological perspective. Nonetheless, it is a false ideology. BI should
be done toward business perspective of the company. As the BI project is
organization-wide project, it should involve members from each department
especially from Marketing and Sales departments who are appeared to be the
end-users of knowledge mined out from BI system.
BI projects are organization specific project, so they have to be unique
implementation methodology where the project deliverables and goals should be
stated clearly. BI development is an incremental process which never stops getting
improved. Unlike OLTP systems, BI system never reaches the end, as it continues
evolving and acquiring new functionalities. As BI used for achieving strategic goals,
there is no definite set of deliverables which constitute the completeness of BI system
and they always change. On the other hand, the project should be properly planned
before kicking it off. It include stages like requirements gathering, identifying the
condition of available data sources, cost estimation, risk assessment, identifying the
success factors, preparation of project charter and issuance of high-level project plan.
Also, the standardization of each process and data makes the things much
comprehensive and kills ambiguities. Therefore there should be a thorough standard
which makes the teamwork coherent. Along with unique standard, there should be data
quality control. As the quality of the knowledge directly connected to the quality of
inputted data, the rules on cleansing the dirty data should be accepted. Additionally,
there should be metadata repository which gives the context to stored data. We can
divide metadata into two types: technical and business. Technical metadata defines the
algorithms and the definition of database while business metadata gives unambiguous
definition of business elements like sales, products and etc.
BI developers usually strive to implement everything, but in many cases it is hardly
achieved and sometimes it causes many problems associated with the continuation of
the project or maintaining the bundle of tools which are not rather used. There are
three major applications should be included in any BI system:
1. ETL services
2. Data warehouse and integrated OLAP
3. Front-end application

A Study on the Aspects of Successful Business Intelligence System Development

731

It is worthwhile to say that if to take into account all issues that have been
mentioned above, the BI project is likely to payoff and to reach its ultimate goals like
increase in sales, efficient product development cycle, minimized expenses, better
loyalty of customers and, of course, discovery of new business opportunities.

3

Successful BI Cases

In this section, we will discuss a couple of different BI cases implemented on various
platforms.
3.1 Microsoft Case Study: TDC Telecom
TDC is the Denmark’s telecommunication leader with annual revenue of $8 billion is
spread over 12 countries. Recently it implemented SQL Server 2005 to integrate 6
terabytes of data from over 60 disparate sources into one data warehouse and to
harvest much knowledge from that data. The company was in need of Business
Intelligence system which would integrate the data from various sources and would
possess following features:
• Integrate all data into a data warehouse through ETL to provide a single
“version of the truth.”
• Create multidimensional cubes to support data analysis.
• Reduce the cost of analyzing disparate data.
The BI solution provided by Microsoft Corp. with the use of technologies such as
Microsoft SQL Server 2005 (64-bit) Enterprise Edition, Microsoft SQL Server
Analysis, OLAP and Reporting Services on the Microsoft Windows Server 2003
(64-bit) Enterprise Edition had a new name called CUBUS. Firstly, CUBUS adopted
single standard for interpreting the data and met the requirement of single “version of
the truth” which was stated above. It integrated the available data into one source
which, in turn, maintained the consistency of data. Also even the data is stored in one
source the views for that data could differ upon the analyst’s preference. The single
standard also included the definition of each data construct stored in separate metadata repository. That enabled business analysts to understand the context of each data
and consequently make appropriate decisions. Similarly, with help of
multidimensional cubes the terabytes of data has been efficiently stored and
summarized which led to 80% reduction of processing time. Moreover the success of
this BI project could be proven through high motivation of key business
representatives in building such system.
3.2 Oracle Case Study: Etos
Etos is the major supermarkets chain scattered over Neitherland with its 450 outlets.
Before it started to promote brands of other foreign stores, it had operated single
database. But with the integration of different foreign stores, its overall IT
infrastructure has become heterogeneous which consequently posed new challenges.
Etos needed a centralized collection point from which to gather information on pointof-sale purchases, product range, pricing, and special offers.

732

I.S. Ko and S.R. Abdullaev

The Oracle platform appeared to be the best choice as a ground for comprehensive
business intelligence environment. Setting up a data warehouse with Oracle
Warehouse Builder, Oracle Database, Oracle Portal, Oracle Reports and Oracle
Discoverer, made it possible to access business data in any required combination.
Now it has integrated data into one point and it could be viewed by means of graphs
and tables. It makes possible to store historical data and facilitates the job of analysts
while examining the precise trend.
The integration of information from procurement, logistics, and sales systems made it
possible to monitor the actual picture of how every part of the retail business is
performing. For example, BI discovered much knowledge about how particular
products are selling well in a particular region and how their shelf-position affects sales.

4 Conclusion
To sum up, there are several challenging points in developing BI and they are often
overlooked by BI developers which, in turn, could lead to failure of BI project. We
can summarize these points one more:
• Not internal requirements, but market and customer requirements.
• Dedicated business representation from each department.
• Availability of skilled team members.
• Unique BI development methodology.
• Thorough project planning.
• Data standardization.
• Date quality control.
• Existence of metadata.
• Implementation of only required tools.
On the other hand, some BI projects survive and meet their final requirements.
These BI projects usually accomplished by popular software vendors like Microsoft,
Oracle, SAP and etc. But on the bottom line, the success of BI project depends on
how BI team members cope with those challenging points mentioned above.

References
1. Shaku Atre, “The Top Ten Critical Challenges For Business Intelligence Success”,
Computerworld Custom Publishing, (2003).
2. Larissa T. Moss, Shaku Atre, “Business Intelligence Roadmap – The Complete Project
Lifecycle for Decision-Support Applications”, Addison Wesley, (2003)
3. Roman Bukary, “Top 10 BI Traps”, BI Strategic Directions, CIO, (2006)
4. Maria Sueili Almeida et al, “Getting Started with Data Warehouse and BI”, IBM, (1999)
5. Nils H. Rasmussen et al, “Financial Business Intelligence: Trends, Technology, Software
Selection, and Implementation”, Wiley, (2002)
6. www.oracle.com, “Etos Adopts Business Intelligence Approach for Its 450 Outlets”
(last accessed: 14.12.2006)
7. www.microsoft.com, “Denmark Telecom Leader Cuts with 6 Terabyte Data Warehouse on
SQL Server 2005” (last accessed: 14.12.2006)

