Web-Based Integrated Service Discovery Using Agent
Platform for Pervasive Computing Environments
Kyu Min Lee, Dong-Uk Kim, Kee-Hyun Choi, and Dong-Ryeol Shin
School of Information and Communication Engineering,
Sungkyunkwan University,
300 Cheoncheon-dong, Jangan-gu, Suwon, Gyeonggi-do 440-746, Korea
{kmlee, tonykim, gyunee, drshin}@ece.skku.ac.kr

Abstract. Although current service discovery protocols provide the same basic
function of service discovery, they differ significantly in architecture, message
exchange pattern, expected operating environment and service representation/description. These differences prevent service interoperability among
protocols. To solve this problem, we propose a web-based integrated service
discovery mechanism, using an agent platform to guarantee scalability of scope
of available services without modifying existing service discovery protocols.
The proposed web-based integrated service discovery mechanism provides users with a wider selection of services, and convenient search methods.

1 Introduction
The increase in the number of different services in pervasive computing environments
makes people need service discovery protocols, which help them conveniently find
the services they want. Representative service discovery protocols have been classified by academia (INS, INS/Twine, SSDS, Splendor) and industrial standardization
bodies (Bluetooth SDP, SLP, UPnP, Jini, Salutation ).
Although they provide the same basic function of service discovery, they differ
significantly in architecture, message exchange pattern, expected operating environment and service representation/description. These differences prevent service interoperability among protocols.
To solve this problem, several approaches [1] [2] [3] that support interoperability
among service discovery protocols, have been proposed. These approaches, however,
have limitations such as translation loss, high maintenance cost, high management
cost of service information, the complexity of development, and the modification of
existing service.
In this paper, we propose an integrated service discovery mechanism based on an
agent platform and the Web, to guarantee scalability of scope of available services
without modifying existing service discovery protocols.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our proposed mechanism and system architecture in detail. Section 3 presents the conclusion.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part II, LNCS 4488, pp. 952–955, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Web-Based Integrated Service Discovery Using Agent Platform

953

2 Proposed Mechanism and System Architecture
In this section, we explain integrated service discovery mechanism and system architecture in detail.
2.1 Integrated Service Discovery Mechanism
Integrated service discovery mechanism provides users with scalability of services,
without any modification of existing service discovery protocols. The key design of
the mechanism is that service discovery protocols multicast a state of services, such as
service registration and deregistration. Each protocol has a well-known IP and port, so
an exterior user or agent can detect the state of services if he joins in the IP and port,
i.e. 239.255.255.250:1900 on UPnP and 239.255.255.253:2427 on mSLP. Figure 1
shows the integrated service discovery mechanism.

Fig. 1. Integrated Service Discovery

The Message Monitoring module listens to the messages about services from each
service discovery protocol. It sends them to the Message Parser. The Message Parser
parses them and registers the parsed data to the Directory Facilitator (DF), which is
the agent that provides a yellow page service to the agent platform. Finally, agents
can freely use the services registered in the DF. In terms of agents, the scope of available services is extended. The following section provides a more detailed explanation
of this mechanism.

954

K.M. Lee et al.

2.2 System Architecture
Figure 2 shows the proposed system architecture for web-based integrated service
discovery using the Java Agent DEvelopment Framework (JADE), which is one of
the most popular FIPA-compliant agent platforms.

Fig. 2. System Architecture for Web-based Integrated Service discovery

The system consists of Agent Management System (AMS) and DF, which are essential agents of the FIPA-compliant agent platform; RMA, which monitors state of
agents; Discovery Agent, and Service Proxy Agent. The Discovery Agent is needed for
heterogeneous service discovery. The function of the Service Proxy Agent is to guarantee collaboration with a web server. System processing flow starts in the AP-to-Web
Communication module. It sends its host’s IP and port number to the web server.
When service search from the web server is requested, the Authentication module
judges whether a client using the web server has either view authority or invocation
authority. The Service Search module then searches available services, and transmits
the results to the web server. The Invocation Transmission module sends an invocation message about the service, from the web server requested by the client, to the
Remote Invocator module.
Figure 3 depicts the conceptual model of the web-based integrated service discovery system. The architecture is composed of three environments. First, there are domains connected with service discovery protocols such as UPnP, SLP and Jini. Second, there is a JADE environment, as shown in Figure 2, which detects messages of
services existing within each service discovery protocol. Finally, there is a web server
that supports the viewing of available services and invoking these services. The web

Web-Based Integrated Service Discovery Using Agent Platform

955

Fig. 3. The Conceptual Model

server requests an available service list to the pre-registered agent platform, according
to the clients’ request, and then presents the result as a web page.

3 Conclusion
This paper mainly contributes to present an integrated service discovery mechanism
for heterogeneous services. It is based on an agent platform and the Web, to guarantee
scalability of scope of available services, without modifying existing service discovery protocols. The proposed integrated service discovery mechanism provides users
with a greater variety of services and convenient search methods.

Acknowledgements
This research is supported by the ubiquitous Computing and Network (UCN) Project,
the Ministry of Information and Communication (MIC) 21st Century Frontier R&D
Program in Korea.

References
1. Erik Guttman and James Kempf. Automatic Discovery of Thin Servers: SLP, Jini and the
SLP-Jini Bridge. In Proceedings of the 25th Annual Conference of the IEEE Industrial Electronics Society, pages 722-727, 1999.
2. Hiroo Ishikawa et al. A Framework for Connecting Home Computing Middleware. In Proceedings of the IWSAWC2002, 2002.
3. J. Allard, V. Chinta, S. Gundala and G.G Richard. Jini Meets UPnP: An Architecture for
Jini/UPnP Interoperability. In Proceedings of the 2003 Symposium on Applications and the
Internet, Orlando, 2003.

