Automatic Generation of Virtual Computer
Rooms on the Internet Using X3D
Aybars U˘
gur1 and Tahir Emre Kalaycı2
1

Ege University, 35100 Bornova-Izmir, Turkey,
aybars.ugur@ege.edu.tr
2
tahir.kalayci@ege.edu.tr
http://yzgrafik.ege.edu.tr

Abstract. In this paper, some natural links between virtual reality and
interactive 3D computer graphics are speciﬁed and Web3D technologies especially VRML and X3D are brieﬂy introduced. Web-based tool
which is called EasyLab3D was designed and implemented using X3D.
This web-based tool is used to generate automatically 3D virtual computer rooms that can be navigated in. It is important for introduction
of departments, companies and organizations which have computer laboratories and for planning new computer rooms. As a result, state-of-the
art technologies and methods in development of automatic 3D scene and
model generation tools are discussed.

1

Introduction

Sherman and Craig[1] deﬁne VR (Virtual Reality) as “a medium composed of
interactive computer simulations that sense the participant’s position and actions and replace or augment the feedback to one or more senses, giving the
feeling of being mentally immersed or present in the simulation”. According to
them, the key elements to experiencing VR are a virtual world, immersion, sensory feedback, and interactivity. It is the use of computer graphics systems in
combination with various display and interface devices to provide the eﬀect of
immersion in the interactive 3D computer-generated environment. We call such
an environment a virtual environment[2].
High quality interactive 3D content on the web without bandwidth and platform limitations allows internet users to become fully immersed in realistic 3D
worlds. Many Web3D technologies have been developed to give people real-time,
three-dimensional and interactive computer graphics on the web.
In this study, we designed and implemented an X3D-based tool (EasyLab3D)
which is used to generate automatically and navigate in virtual computer rooms
on the web using state-of-the-art technologies.

2

Extensible 3D (X3D)

Web3D is simply 3D graphics on the web. VRML-NG (X3D) arises in 1999
as a result of eﬀorts to carry 3D to all environments. X3D which is developed
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part II, LNCS 4488, pp. 158–161, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Automatic Generation of Virtual Computer Rooms

159

by Web3D consortium is the ISO standard for real-time 3D computer graphics.
XML was adopted as syntax for X3D in order to solve a number of real problems
of VRML. According to Yumetech President, Alan Hudson the reasons to use
XML as syntax are to interoperate with the Web and to incorporate new graphics
technologies in a standardized way1 . Main X3D features are extensions to VRML
(e.g. Humanoid Animation, Nurbs, GeoVRML etc.), the ability to encode the
scene using an XML syntax as well as the Open Inventor-like syntax of VRML97,
and enhanced application programmer interfaces.
Blais et al.[3] present a Web3D application for military education and training.
Patel et al.[4] describe an innovative system designed for museums to create,
manage and present multimedia based representations of museum artifacts in
virtual exhibitions both inside and outside museums. Barbieri et al.[5] developed
computer science virtual museum which can be visited online, also which contains
simple interactive games that illustrate basic principles of computer science.
Some other projects based on X3D are explained in [6] and [7].

3

Automatic Computer Room Generation Tool

We developed Web-based Automatic Virtual Computer Room Generation Tool
(EasyLab3D2) using Java and Xj3D. Some features such as navigation in 3D
room scenes and realistic presentation are important for people to introduce
computer laboratories to visitors or internet users. This tool can also be used for
designing new labs by providing 3D previews. 3D model of a computer laboratory
(Ege Lab) is generated using EasyLab3D in a few seconds (Fig. 1).

Fig. 1. Ege Lab in our department generated by EasyLab3D (Perspective View)

3D models (table/desk, room) required by program were developed using Flux
Studio 2.0 Beta3 . All models were developed as prototype to reduce the ﬁle size
1
2
3

http://www.xml.com/pub/a/2003/08/06/x3d.html
http://yzgraﬁk.ege.edu.tr/projects/easylab3d/
http://www.mediamachines.com/make.php

160

A. U˘
gur and T.E. Kalaycı

and to use an object many times without coding same things repeatedly. Created
model prototypes are stored at web space4 for online use.
Scenes are generated using our layout algorithms and prototype instances are
created with calculated transformations and put in a temp ﬁle on the ﬂy. Thus
user can save the scene generated as a ﬁle and publish on the web site. User
can also examine these ﬁles later using other browsers and plug-ins. Scenes are
created on the ﬂy, shown on the Xj3D browser using Java programming language.
Xj3D provides to change X3D scenes dynamically using SAI5 (Scene Authoring
Interface) technology. Java Web Start technology6 is used to make easier run of
program and to be downloaded all required libraries automatically.
Automatic generation algorithms for most popular rectangular computer
room layouts are implemented in this project. Computers which are on the tables are placed in that order. Computer Room Layout 1 has equally sized gaps
between computer tables and Layout 2 includes one corridor has two computer
blocks – one at the left side of room and one at the right side shown in Fig. 2.
Room parameters given by the user are width (sizeX), length (sizeY), height
and distance to board (gapY, minimum feasible distance between board and
tables). Table/desk parameters are width (sizeX, width of table), length (sizeY)
and height. Some other parameters are Desk Count (room.tableCount), Sitting
Gap (table.gapY, feasible distance between tables that a computer user works
easily, in Y axis), Desk Gap (table.gapX, gap between tables in X axis).

Fig. 2. Computer Room Layout 1 (on the left) and Layout 2 (on the right)

Java-like Algorithm generates 3D model of computer room for Layout 1:
// Calculating table capacity of room width (X)
room.tCountX = (room.sizeX+table.gapX)/(table.sizeX+table.gapX);
// Calculating table capacity of room length (Y)
room.usableLength = room.sizeY - room.gapY;
4
5
6

http://yzgraﬁk.ege.edu.tr/elab/modeller/
http://www.xj3d.org/tutorials/general sai.html
http://java.sun.com/products/javawebstart/

Automatic Generation of Virtual Computer Rooms

161

room.tCountY = (room.usableLength+table.gapY)/
(table.sizeY+table.gapY);
room.maxTableCount = room.tCountX * room.tCountY;
if(room.tableCount>room.maxTableCount)
room.tableCount=room.maxTableCount;
// Placement
foreach(table in room) calculatePosition(table);
Tables and computers exceeding the room capacity are not inserted into the
scene as speciﬁed in the algorithm.

4

Conclusion

New generation 3D languages, APIs and key Web3D technologies (X3D, Java
3D) oﬀer possibilities for creating and manipulating with 3D objects and scenes
easily. X3D provides support to insert 3D shapes, text and objects into scene, to
transform objects, to modify attributes of objects and others such as grouping,
animation, illumination, etc. X3D also uses XML’s advantages such as rehostability, page integration, integration with the next-generation web technologies,
extensive tool chain support. Developments in Web3D technologies and authoring tools are important for the future of VR.
Increasing number of web-based 3D graphics projects easy to use like EasyLab3D will make 3D graphics natural part of web and will improve web quality.
3D interactive model of a computer lab is more than a series of 2D pictures and
also more enjoyable and realistic. Companies and organizations can use this tool
for generating 3D models of their labs only giving a few parameters. Internet
users can access and navigate in these lab models. This automatic generation
tool is also useful for interior designs of new labs by providing 3D previews.

References
1. Sherman, W.R., Craig, A.B.: Understanding Virtual Reality: Interface, Application,
and Design. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA (2002)
2. Sowizral, H.A., Deering, M.F.: The java 3d api and virtual reality. IEEE Computer
Graphics and Applications 19 (1999) 12–15
3. Blais, C., Brutzman, D., Horner, D., Nicklaus, S.: Web-based 3d technology for
scenario authoring and visualization: The savage project. In: I/ITSEC. (2001)
4. Patel, M., White, M., Walczak, K., Sayd, P.: Digitisation to presentation - building
virtual museum exhibitions. In: VVG. (2003) 189–196
5. Barbieri, T., Garzotto, F., Beltrame, G., Ceresoli, L., Gritti, M., Misani, D.: From
dust to stardust: A collaborative 3d virtual museum of computer science. In: ICHIM
(2). (2001) 341–345
6. Hetherington, R., Farrimond, B., Presland, S.: Information rich temporal virtual
models using x3d. Computers & Graphics 30 (2006) 287–298
7. Yan, W.: Integrating web 2d and 3d technologies for architectural visualization: applications of svg and x3d/vrml in environmental behavior simulation. In: Web3D ’06:
Proceedings of the eleventh international conference on 3D web technology, New
York, NY, USA, ACM Press (2006) 37–45

