Education–Oriented Virtual Environment for Clothing
Thermal Functional Performance
Xiaonan Luo1, Wenbang Hou1, and Yi Li2
1

Computer Application Institute, SUN YAT-SEN University,
Guang Zhou 510275, China
2
Institute of Textiles and Clothing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University,
Hung Hom, Hong Kong
lnslxn@zsu.edu.cn, houwenbang@yahoo.com.cn,
tcliyi@inet.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract. This paper presents a simulation environment for the education of
clothing thermal function. It allows learners in a virtual environment to learn
the clothing thermal comfort theory and identify the most important factors that
influence clothing thermal functional performance. The virtual wearing case is
defined with primary parameters and the numerical simulation results are
visualized with 3D virtual environment and 2D animation, which provide
virtual reality based interpretation of the thermal state and the dynamic thermal
processes of the human-clothing system. This system can also be used as an
effective visualization tool by textile researchers.
Keywords: Visualization; education oriented; clothing thermal functional
performance; virtual environment.

1 Introduction
The thermal functional performance is a critical aspect that is highly concerned in
clothing design. Especially during bad thermal conditions, the thermal protection of
clothing relates to the health and survival of human beings. Even in ordinary living
conditions, there are more and more consumers begin to concern the thermal comfort
performance of clothing.
To explore the factors and mechanisms that affect the thermal functional performance
of clothing, many advances have been achieved. In recent years, researchers have made
great efforts to develop numerical models such as the thermoregulation of human body,
the heat and moisture transfer behaviors of clothing material, as well as the dynamical
interaction between human, clothing and environment system [1], [2], [3]. Based on the
numerical models, Li et al proposed a virtual system for clothing thermal functional design
[4], which can design clothing and analyze its thermal functional performance effectively.
Although this system provides GUI interface and good 3D visualization for the result
dataset, it’s still very difficult and inconvenient for education of students and young
engineers in clothing industry because of so many kinds of professional terms and intrinsic
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part III, LNCS 4489, pp. 485–492, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

486

X. Luo, W. Hou, and Y. Li

complexity of numerical solver. It’s would be valuable to develop a learning tool that
can educate people for a dedicated clothing, what will the thermal effect like in
different wearing cases, how does the thermal processes interact in human-clothing
system, how does the temperature and dampness distribute in every clothing layers,
and what are the key factors that decide the thermal function of clothing.
In most cases, simulation environments are powerful learning tools and have been
used in many engineering fields successfully [5-7]. Such systems are generally based
on sophisticated didactical concepts and have used the modern technical possibilities
include 3D visualization and virtual reality technique. They can enable exploration by
allowing learners to manipulate parameters and visualize results in a virtual reality
environment. In general there are two basic kinds of such systems: inanimate (offline) and live (on-line, real-time) [8]. Inanimate simulators are used to evaluate
complex equations and models. They do not simulate real-time operations of physical
systems; therefore the user interaction is limited. While live simulators are highly
interactive and allowing learners to explore, they are always very complicated and
time-consuming. To overcome their shortcuts, it’s necessary to find an appropriate
approach that allows the utmost manipulation options and decreases the complexity
and time consumption simultaneously.
In this paper, we present a simulation based learning tool for clothing thermal
functional performance. It could be called “half-live” simulation because the
simulation is completed in advance and the result dataset is stored in database. By
reorganizing the input data of simulation cases, user can manipulate parameters and
explore situations in a more instinct and simple way as if by imitating a simulation
case. This program can visualize simulation datasets in a virtual environment, and
special attention is given to the design of a user interface being easy to learn and to
use. The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the numerical
model for clothing thermal function simulation, and section 3 presents the details of
the “half-live” simulation design. The visualization techniques are described in
Section 4, and examples are presented in Section 5. Finally, we conclude and point
out the future works.

2 Numerical Model for Clothing Thermal Function Simulation
The key factors that influence the thermal functional performance include the thermal
properties of clothing materials (Fiber, membrane, PCM et al.), and the structure
features of clothing assemblies. In the virtual design system, all materials can be
designed and stored in database, even include the human body and environment
conditions [4]. The specified human body, clothing and environment together consist a
simulation scenario, and one or more scenarios with respective phase time comprise a
simulation case. After all definition completed, the thermal processes in human bodyclothing-environment system, as shown in Fig. 1, are simulated, and the dynamic
thermal state of human body and clothing are calculated as the result datasets.

Education–Oriented Virtual Environment for Clothing Thermal Functional Performance

487

Fig. 1. Thermal processes in Human-Clothing- Fig. 2. Primary parameters used to define simulaEnvironment system
tion case

Fig. 3. System architecture of the half-live simulation

3 The Half-Live Simulation
As hereinbefore analysis, the numerical models have many kinds of parameters and
most of them are professional nomenclatures that are difficult and impossible to give
an instinct perception. To make the virtual environment as realistic as possible, only
the primary and perceptual parameters are used to construct the simulation cases.
These primary parameters are input by graphical icons to enhance the virtual
environment. To retrieve the relative simulation dataset with the input primary
parameters, the definition data of simulation cases are well organized. The primary
parameters and the simulation case definition are shown as in Fig. 2.

488

X. Luo, W. Hou, and Y. Li

Because this half-live simulation is based on the existed simulation result, it’s
significant to assure that all reasonable simulation cases can be retrieved. Considering
the fact that the available clothing materials, the effect clothing assemblies, the human
body properties and the typical environment conditions are all limited and predictable,
most of the meaningful simulation cases can be designed and calculated preliminarily.
In case that no exact matched cases can be found, it always can find the nearest case
and would not lead any big impact for learning purpose. The system is also designed
to be able to collect such case definitions for appending its simulation result
afterwards. The system architecture is shown as in Fig. 3.

4 Visualization Overview
4.1 Virtual Environment
In order to visualize the thermal state of a clothed human being as realistic as
possible, 3D real geometrical models are used to construct a virtual scene, and the 2D
animation as a supplement. Human bodies and clothing sets models exported from
Poser@ 5 are used to visual the clothed people. They can express some important
parameters such as body mass, surface area, clothing cover ratio and clothing style
approximately. The male character model is realistic enough with about 35,000
triangular faces. For environment visualization, a virtual climate chamber is designed
with wall color representing the air temperature, lighting on the wall representing the
radiant temperature, a hygrometer on the wall to reflect the relative humidity, and the
waving window curtain for air velocity.
The thermal state of a clothed human being include many kinds of parameters such
as human thermal comfort, body temperature, skin humidity, sweating rate, metabolic
rate and blood flow rate, as well as the temperature and humidity of each clothing
layer. It’s necessary to display these parameters simultaneously to explore the thermal
processes and thermal state more accurately. To achieve this aim, the 2D animation
and cross section view are provided additionally.
4.2 Perceptual Colormap
Visualization is a process of mapping data onto graphical primitives like colored sets
of lines or polygons. A proper selection of colormap is important to produce an
effective visualization. The most common rainbow colormap is typically the default
map. Although it has the problem that the minimum perceivable increment varies
widely over the range of the map [10,11], it is still ubiquitous in scientific
visualization for following reasons: It is attractive, colorful, with easy to discriminate
“regions” of the data which can then be associated with specific data values given a
colorbar key (low values with blue, medium-low with cyan, medium with green, etc.)
[12]. Therefore the rainbow colormap is used to map the temperature data with
improvement from 2 respects. One is the correction of using several piecewise linear
maps instead of a single linear map between blue-green-red color space. The other is
by fixing the scale points of temperature that reflect the human thermal sensations
such as hot, warm, cool and cold. In general, red is for hot, yellow to green for warm,

Education–Oriented Virtual Environment for Clothing Thermal Functional Performance

489

Fig. 4. Colormap examples, top – the improved rainbow colormap for temperature; bottomfrom left to right, color maps for hot, warm, cool and cold

green to light blue for cool, and blue for cold. For humidity, a luminance blue
colormap is used. The designed colormap examples are shown as in Fig. 4.
4.3 Adaptive Exploring for Time-Varied Data
In order to generate the virtual environment with maximum realistic, it’s necessary to
realize the real-time animation of the dynamic thermal processes in human-clothing
system, thereby it can help learners to sense the change speed of body thermal state in
a defined wearing case. On the other hand, the actual time period of the simulation case
maybe too long to wait, it’s will helpful to provide a flexible control on animation
speed.
Real-time animation. To realize real-time clock step, the clock event of windows
Timer control is used. The calculation formula for real time is

t = t 0 + (T − T0 ) * n .

(1)

where:
t – real simulation time.
t0 – previous end simulation time (considering the pause operation).
T – current computer system time.
T0 – computer system time when start.
n – animation speed, n = 1 means real time.
Adaptive time-varied data exploring. In most situations, the analysis may care more
on quick varying data zone instead of whole simulation period. To automatically
display those remarkable data zone, an adaptive algorithm is used. For a given
parameters, first a valve value is set, then for each time step the datum is compared
with this value, and is displayed only if it’s larger than the valve value.

5 Example
In order to illustrate the system functions and the evaluation process of clothing
thermal functional performance, a wearing case with contrastive definitions are
introduced. The dynamical thermal states are visualized and the traditional thermal

490

X. Luo, W. Hou, and Y. Li

comfort index – PMV index is calculated for reference. As shown in Fig. 5, the
wearing case definition interface consists of a tree structure navigator and a tree-node
context-sensitive detail form. Each wearing case is the root node, and some of the
sub-nodes can be added or deleted dynamically. When a sub-node is selected, the
relative detail definition form will be activated.

Fig. 5. Wearing case definition: left is the wearing case definition tree, right is a detailed
definition page that related to the selected tree node

The wearing case is for summer outdoor walking with three clothing layers, the
definition is as follows:
Human body specification: Resting (1 Met), walking (2 Met).
Environmental specification: 35 oC and 80% relative humidity, air conditional
room is 25 oC and 60% relative humidity.
Clothing design: three cotton fabrics layer.
Scenario: rest for 15 min. in room, then walking for 15 min.
Figure 6 shows snap shot from the thermal processing animation for summer
wearing case. Temperatures of body skin and the outside fabric layer are visualized in
virtual scene, the cross section view for displaying detail temperature distribution, and
the 2D animation for body thermal physiological parameters. It’s evident that the
clothing with three layers has hot thermal functional performance when walking in
summer thermal condition.

Education–Oriented Virtual Environment for Clothing Thermal Functional Performance

491

Fig. 6. Thermal state visualization: region 1 – 3D virtual scene; region 2 – 2D animation;
region 3 – cross section; region 4 – thermal comfort index; and region 5 – visualization control

6 Conclusions and Future Work
This paper reports the development of a virtual environment for the education of
clothing thermal function. The virtual wearing case is defined with primary
parameters and the numerical simulation results are visualized with 3D virtual
environment and 2D animation, which interpret the thermal state and the dynamic
thermal processes of the human-clothing system in a vivid mode. It allows learners in
a virtual environment to learn the clothing thermal comfort theory and identify the
most important factors that influence clothing thermal functional performance. This
virtual environment system is specially developed to help teaching clothing thermal
functional design for students and new designers, and it can also be used as a
visualization tool by textile researchers. The trial use proves that this system can
provide good demonstration of clothing thermal function model numerical simulation
result, giving user an intuitive and insightful understanding of clothing thermal
function and thermal comfort.
Further works are to implement the virtual reality scene and behavior animation,
and to develop an Internet application version using VRML models.

492

X. Luo, W. Hou, and Y. Li

Acknowledgments. This research is supported by the National Science Fund for
Distinguished Young Scholars (No.60525213) and the Key Project (No. 60533030) of
NSFC, and 973 Program of China (No.206CB303106).

References
1. Wang, Z., Li, Y.: An Integrative Adaptive Model for Simulating Human Dynamic Thermal
Comfort in the Body-Clothing-Environment System. Psychophysiology (2003)
2. Li, Y., Li., F., Liu, Y.X., Luo, Z.X.: An integrated model for simulating interactive thermal
processes in human-clothing system. Journal of Thermal Biology 29 (2004) 567-575
3. Gagge, A.P., Stolwilk, J.A.J., Nishh, Y.: An Effective Temperature Scale Based on a
Simple Model of Human Physiological Regulation Response. ASHRAE Trans. 77 (1971)
247-262
4. Li, Y. et al.: P-smart—a virtual system for clothing thermal functional design. ComputerAided Design 38 (2006) 726–739
5. Jentsch, M., Reimann, K.: E-Learning for Structural Analysis. Proceedings of the 20th
CAD-FEM Users’ Meeting 2002 International Congress on FEM Technology, Germany
(2002)
6. Ostermann, T. et al.: eLearning Platform with Microelectronic Contents. Proceedings of
the IASTED International Conference on WEB-BASED EDUCATION - WBE 2004,
Innsbruck, Austria (2004)
7. Mokhtar, A., Khan, M.: Education – oriented visualization model for buildings cross
ventilation. Proceedings of the 2nd international conference on Computer graphics and
interactive techniques in Australasia and South East Asia, Singapore (2004) 71-73
8. Nahvi, M.: Dynamics of student-computer interaction in a simulation environment:
Reflections on curricular issues. Proceedings of Frontiers in Education’96, IEEE, 13831386
9. ISO: ISO 7730 Moderate Thermal Environments - Determination of the PMV and PPD
indices and specification of the conditions for thermal comfort. 2nd ed. International
Organization for Standardization, Geneva, Switzerland (1995)
10. Rogowitz, B.E., Treinish, L.: Data Visualization: The End of the Rainbow. IEEE Spectrum
35 (1998) 52-59
11. Bergman, L.D., Rogowitz, B.E., Treinish, L.A.: A rule-based tool for assisting colormap
selection. Proceedings of IEEE Visualization (1995) 118-125
12. Kalvin, A. D., Rogowitz, B. E., Pelah, A., Cohen, A.: Building perceptual color maps for
visualizing interval data. Proceedings of SPIE Conference on Human Vision and
Electronic Imaging, San Jose, CA. (2000) 323–335

