Exploiting Morpho-syntactic Features for Verb Sense
Distinction in KorLex
Eunryoung Lee1, Ae-sun Yoon1, and Hyuk-Chul Kwon2
1

2

Pusan National University, Korean Language Processing Laboratory
Pusan National University, Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Jangjeon-dong, Geumjeong-gu, 609-735 Busan, S. Korea
{eunryounglee, asyoon, hckwon}@pusan.ac.kr

Abstract. Verb sense distinction is a basic principle in lexical knowledge
representation in wordnets. Starting from the results of automatic mapping of
English verb WordNet to Korean verb KorLex, the present study looks for a
syntactic and semantic verb sense interface using the morpho-syntactic features
of Korean verb and proposes a fine-grained verb sense distinction to make up
for the weak points of WordNet in NLP applications.
Keywords: WordNet, KorLex, Korean wordnet, verb sense distinction,
transitivity alternation, Korean middle verbs.

1 Introduction
A Korean verb wordnet named KoreLex was constructed based on the word-sense
mapping of English WordNet (Princeton, version 2.0, hereafter WN) to Korean 1
verbs. During semi-automatic translation, we noticed the following problems; (1) the
English verbs of accusative(acc)/inaccusative(inacc) alternation were mapped to two
or more morpho-syntactically different Korean lexical entities; (2) two English verb
senses were matched to a Korean middle verb(MV), having both acc/inacc features
but considered as having a unique sense in most Korean dictionaries. To cope with
these problems, the verb sense distinction in KorLex(KL) should be processed
primarily on the basis of coherent linguistic criteria. For this purpose, we explore
morpho-syntactic features that are strikingly marked at the lexical level in Korean,
and show how to apply them to KL’s hierarchical structure.
The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 consists of an overview of related
work in English and in Korean. In Section 3, we look at the translation results of
2,322 verb synonym sets (synsets) and analyze the types of mismatches. Section 4
proposes to allocate the distinguished verb senses according to their morpho-syntactic
properties in the Korean verb hierarchy.
1

Korean is an agglutinative language and the word order, as determined by case markers, is
partially free. A verb’s noun arguments, including the nominative and the accusative, can be
omitted according to the context, and the verb is always located in the final position.
Aspectual, modal markers as well as tense markers are postpositional morphemes
agglutinated to the verb radical.

Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part II, LNCS 4488, pp. 1170–1177, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Exploiting Morpho-syntactic Features for Verb Sense Distinction in KorLex

1171

2 Related Work
Effect of the syntactic features on the meaning of verbs has been the subject of
theoretical debate in linguistics and it is still a controversial issue in building a lexical
knowledge base or ontology. However, no concrete choice methodology, nor any
theoretical settlement for the syntactic-semantic interface, for wordnet purposes, has
been suggested. Languages differ in what syntactic features of verbs are encoded
morphologically, and thus lexical formation and its morphological rules for certain
syntactic phenomena should be considered as having a semantic effect, especially in
agglutinative languages including Korean.
2.1 Searching for Syntactic and Semantic Verb Sense Interface
According to [3] and [5], the semantic information of a verb must include both its
central meaning and the thematic grid it specifies, both of which determine the
syntactic construction of the verb. Even though the more specific syntactic features
and semantic role of English verbs are explored in the FrameNet and in VerbNet,
it is very difficult to apply such information WN-like hierarchical semantic
network.
Previous studies on WN’s verb sense distinction have attempted to complete WN
by integrating the syntactic properties into the verbs in order to extend the lexical
information. Consequently, questions regarding the means by which syntactic
information in a verb lexicon are arranged, and by which verb senses are
distinguished, are important issues. In this respect, grouping about 3,000 English
verbs according to diathesis alternation patterns, [9] is a pioneering work which led
also to a set of studies on verb polysemy.
Among a number of extensive studies on Levin’s work, [7] and [12] identifies
missing verb senses in transitive alternation and testing accuracy by mapping Levin’s
classification to WN. Although current researchers in the field of lexical semantics
have concluded that certain syntactic behavior traits of verbs are central to their
meaning, it has not been clearly established that the diathesis alternation results in a
change of meaning. Regarding this subject, [10] argues that case-alternated verbs
should be considered logically as polysemous and that therefore Levin’s verb class
can be used for verb sense disambiguation.
2.2 Case Alternation in Korean
Case alternation in Korean is characterized by (a) the position change of a noun
argument accompanying a change of its semantic role, (b) the reduction/ extension of
number of the noun argument, and (c) alternation of the case marker. It is generally
accepted that the case in Korean is determined by the case marker and according to
[4], case does not have the same grammatical properties as in English. [7] claims that
since case alternation has to be described additionally according to the semantic

1172

E. Lee, A.-s. Yoon, and H.–C. Kwon

property of a noun argument at the phrasal level, it is difficult to consider that the
meaning of a verb changes according to its case alternation. In this respect, the MV in
Korean might offer a theoretical basis for verb sense distinction in a wordnet; the verb
allows both acc and inacc frames on a verb radical and the acc noun argument in the
transitive frame can be alternatively, be the nominative noun in the intransitive frame.
Two syntactic realizations of the MV “baljok-hada (launch)” allow two different
senses, as in following example.
(1)

keu-neun sailoun hakheoi-leul
baljogha-yeoss-da
He-nominative new academic society-acc launch-past-final
(He launched a new academic society.)
sailoun hakheoi-ga
baljogha-yeoss-da
new society-nominative launch-past-final
(A new academic society was launched.)

In the acc frame, the MV has a causative synonymous form, and in the inacc
frame, it is passive. At this point, it is useful to explore the sense distinction of MVs
to be sub-categorized both for the lexicographical purpose and for a WN-like
linguistic NLP application resource.

3 Verb Sense Distinction for KorLex Verb
Semi-automatic translation using bilingual dictionary does not fully reflect the
meanings of English verbs in Korean verbs when they contain both acc and inacc
frames at the same time. It is remarkable that pairs of transitive/intransitive verbs and
transitive/passive verbs are subject to more refined sense distinction2 and modification
of hierarchical structure in KL. In KL, a synset is defined as a set of synonymous verb
senses that should be interchangeable in least one context, which means that the
syntactic behavior of a verb is considered to be the core element determining its
semantic relations in KL.
3.1 Verb Sense Linking
Here, we will examine the Korean counterparts of English {verbs.change} and
analyze the mapping result in accordance with transitivity alternation. As for the
translation process between the two languages, we first mapped 2,325 English synsets
to Korean verbs using an English-Korean dictionary, obtaining 3,184 senses. The
automatic mapping process failed to provide a full and correct translation into Korean,
thus manual verification and correction were necessary.
We chose only 972 English-Korean verb synsets (corresponding to 1,314 verb
senses). We did not take into consideration the rest of the 1,353 synsets, translated
into verb phrases. Therefore, for the Korean verbs, we selected 972 synsets
2

See [8] for the sense distinction in WN and KL.

Exploiting Morpho-syntactic Features for Verb Sense Distinction in KorLex

1173

(1,344 verb senses) including only those appearing as entries in the Standard Korean
Dictionary3. The following Figure illustrates the mapping result.
1 E nglish verb synset
w ith alternating frames

(I)

1 Korean verb

(II)

1 E nglish verb synset
without alternating
frames

(III)

2 m orphologically
different K orean verbs

(IV)

1 K orean m iddle verb

Fig. 1. Mapping matrix for English and Korean verbs

As shown in Fig.1, we find four types of mapping result. The two left boxes
indicate the syntactic status of the English verb synset; the upper box indicates the
verbs with acc and inacc frames. The lower box indicates the verbs having no
alternating frames.
Type (I) is the most common in our data, numbering up to 1,028 Korean verb
senses among which 129 verb senses were found to be erroneous. Wrong connections
and missing word senses were post-processed manually. After correction, since an
English verb has two frames, the matching Korean verb set contains two morpholexically different verbs. Thus the Korean verb sets found in Type (I) are subject to
the sense distinction.
According to Type (II), English synsets are mapped to two different verb senses
that are either transitive-intransitive (for 65 English synsets), or transitive-passive
pairs (for 34 English synsets). To check the translation accuracy for Type (II), we
examined whether the gloss of an English synset contained more than two senses. It
appears that in most cases the sentence frames distinguish the acc/inacc senses more
accurately rather than the gloss. The Korean verb sets in this type ultimately need to
be separated into an independent synsets.
According to Type (III), English transitivity-alternated verbs are mapped to a
Korean MV also having two alternating frames according to transitivity alternation.
However, only 8 Korean MVs were matched. Regarding Type (III), it is necessary
that the refinement of translation results goes through multiple post-processing.
Finally, according to Type (IV), 50 Korean MVs are matched to either English acc or
inacc form, which process reflects the necessity of verb sense distinction of Korean
MVs. In the following two subsections, 3.2 and 3.3, we discuss the necessity of
modifying verb sense distinction in KL focusing on Type (II) and Type (III).
3.2 Sense Distinction: Transitive/Passive Form
According to Type (II), one English verb synset having alternating frames is mapped
to either a transitive/intransitive verb pair (II-a) or a transitive/passive verb pair (II-b).
3

We used the Standard Korean Dictionary, which contains 58,815 Korean verb entries.
English-Korean bilingual dictionary we used contains 14,454 verb entries.

1174

E. Lee, A.-s. Yoon, and H.–C. Kwon

A translated set of verbs is subject to sense distinction in KL for two reasons, as
shown in the following examples.
(2) Na-neun gamja-leul jji-n-da
I-nominative potato-acc steam-present-final
(I steam the potatoes.)
(3) Gamja-neun
soss-eseo bbali jjyeo-ji-n-da
Potato-nominative pot-locative rapidly steam-passive-present-final
(The potato steams rapidly in the pot.)

First, “jji-da” to “jjy-eoji-da,” have different selectional restrictions and syntactic
distributions. The passivization of “jji-da” is realized by “-eojida” which is an
auxiliary verb. A passive verb in Korean is derived by postpositional morphemes in
the following three ways; (1) adhesion of a suffix (2) for verbs such as
<noun+hada(support verb)>, adhesion of morphemes such as –deo, -bad, or –dangha;
(3) adhesion of the auxiliary verb –jida. In Korean by contrast to English, the passive
voice does not necessarily presuppose a syntactic alternation, but it is realized at the
lexical level by the suffixation of a specific morpheme. Providing ten passive
sentence structure, [11] proves that the Korean passivisation is not a syntax-dependent
process and that it is rather a morpho-semantic feature.
Second, following the WN’s basic assumption, it is not possible in Korean to put
those verb forms in a synset. A synset is defined as a set of synonymous words that
are interchangeable in some context. But the Korean passive and transitive verb forms
cannot be substituted in any context.
3.3 Sense Distinction for Korean Middle Verbs
In Figure 1, Type (III) corresponds to the mapping between an English synset with
two alternating frames and a Korean synset with a MV. We believe that in KL, MVs
should be treated differently from the way they are treated in English WN.
As shown in Example (1), Subsection 2.2, the distributional trait of a Korean MV
provides a syntactic basis for semantic distinction. In addition, we think that semantic
features, even though they are not necessary and sufficient conditions for all MVs, are
inherent to MVs, and thus can provide linguistically positive arguments for the
polysemy of the MV, because (1) the acc frame of a MV is semantically identical to
its paraphrased sentence with a causative verb, and (2) the inacc frame of a MV is
semantically identical to its paraphrased sentence with a passive verb, especially
when the noun argument in the nominative case does not assume the agentive. The
disparity of semantic properties of MVs in acc/inacc constructions has not been
suggested in Korean linguistics as an argument for their sense distinction, since they
are used as additional criteria for identifying, on the syntactic basis, middle
constructions from other types of transitivity alternation. However, we argue that the
sense of a MV varies according to the syntactic construction and that different
semantic relations such as in the synonymy of a MV in two constructions are
footholds for sense distinction in KL Verb.

Exploiting Morpho-syntactic Features for Verb Sense Distinction in KorLex

1175

4 Building KorLex Verb Hierarchy
This section is devoted to the actual building of a KL verb hierarchy by applying the
verb sense distinction suggested in Subsections 3.2 and 3.3. Verb hierarchy in KL is
constituted with the troponymy(hyponym) relation which should be adequate for
representing the change of meaning according to the syntactic construction, allowing
for a fine-grained sense distinction useful to sentence parsing in NLP applications.
4.1 Passive Verb Classification and Its Place in KorLex
In KL, since verb hierarchy is biased according to the WN structure, it is efficient to
look for the appropriate place in relation to the top-hypernyms and their hyponyms in
WN. In Table 1, the top-hypernyms of Type A (pairs of acc and inacc concepts)
reflect the acc/inacc values independently; {change 0} is inacc and {change1, alter1,
modify 11}, accusative. Given the 35 top hypernyms of {verb.change}, we can
choose an appropriate place in the hierarchies for the Korean passive or transitive
verbs by following their syntactic and semantic features. The following Figure 2
represents the hierarchical structure of {bake 0}.
change0 ; byeonwha-deoda 0

change 0

change1, alter1, modify 11; byeonwha-sikida 0

change_integrity 0 ; eoiyangibagguida 0

change_integrity 0

eoiyaneul-bagguda 0

cook 0; ikda 0

ikhida 0
bake 0; guweojida 0

cook 0

gubda 0

bake 0
Mapping result

Fig. 2. Hierarchy of {bake 0}

Modification in KorLex

Fig. 3. Reconstruction of hierarchy for Passive/Transitive
verb “gubda”

In the hierarchy of {bake 0}, hypernyms are constituted of verb senses of inacc
frame. Thus we will use this structure to match the passive verb “gu-weoji-da” (bakepassive-final), and the Korean counterparts for the hypernyms of {bake 0} will be all
of passive value. Now, we can separately build the transitive and the passive forms of
“gub-da”(bake-final) as shown in Figure 3. The structure on the left is the hierarchy of
the passive form of the verb “guweojida” and its hypernyms of passive value. The
structure on the right represents the modified hierarchy of the transitive verb form and
its hypernyms of transitive value. Each counterpart of {bake 0} now has a different
semantic relation in KL. As a result, {bake 0} is mapped accurately to Korean
synonym “guweojida” and {cook 0} is mapped to “ikda”. The hierarchy on the right
also shows the additional nodes by which “gubda” is represented accusatively.
4.2 Middle Verb Sense Distinction and Its Place in KorLex
KL requires three different processes of MV sense distinction:
(1) separate the two senses of a MV and add them to appropriate existing KL
synset
(2) separate the two senses and create a node for a new sense in the KL hirerarchy
(3) separate the two senses and create both a node and a new hierarchy in KL

1176

E. Lee, A.-s. Yoon, and H.–C. Kwon

Process (1) is applied to verbs for which we can find an appropriate synset for the
two distinguished KL senses. For example, the sense of the MV ‘gwayeolhada
(overheat)’ was separated into ‘gwayeolhada 0 (be overheated)’ / ‘gwayeolhada1
(overheat)’ and added as a synonym to the existing synset node in KL, as shown in
Figure 4.
c h a n ge 1 , a lte r 1 ,
m o dify 1 1

c h a ng e 0

c ha ng e s ta te 0
tu rn 4

h e a t 1 , he a t
up 0
overheat 1
g w a y e olha d a

heat 0, hot up
2 , h e a t up 1
o v e r he a t 0
gw a y e o lh a d a

by e on h a d a 0 ,
b y e o n w ha h a d a 0

b y e o nw h a s ik id a 0

s a n gta e g a
b y e o n w ha h a d a 0

de ud a 0
tte o g e o bg e h a d a 0

tte o ge o w a jid a 0

g w a y e o lha d a 1

g w a y e o lh a da 0

M a p p in g r e s u lt

M od ific a tion in K o rL e x

Fig. 4. Sense distinction and position of ‘gwayeolhada’ in KL

Process (2) was applied, for example, to the MV ‘baigahada (multiply)’.
change 1, alter 1,
modify 11
byeonwhasikida 0
increase 2
jeunggasikida 0
multiply 0,
manifold 1
baigahada
baigasikida

byeonhada 0
byeonwhahada 0
keugiga
bakkwida

buleonada

byeonwhasikida 0

jeunggasikida 0
baigahada 1
baigasikida 0

byeonhada 0
byeonwhahada 0

keugiga
bakkwida 0
buleonada 0

baigahada 0
baegadoeda 0
Mapping result

Modification in KorLex

Fig. 5. Sense distinction of ‘baigahada’ in KL

move 3
umjikida
shake 1, agitate 5
heundeullida
tremble 1
tteollida

umjikida

heundeulda

tteolda

quiver 1, quake 1,
palpitate 2
beoleonggeolida

umjikida 0

heundeullida 3

tteolida 2

beoleonggeolida 0

Mapping result

umjikida 2

heundeulda 6

tteolda 5

beoleonggeolida 1

Modification in KorLex

Fig. 6. Sense distinction o‘beoleonggeolida’
in KL

In the mapping result, ‘baigahada (multiply)’ was mapped to the English synset
{multiply 0, manifold 1}, also subject to sense distinction. We distinguished
‘baigahada (multiply)’ according to ‘baigahada 0 (be multiplied)’ and ‘baigahada 1
(multiply).’ ‘baigahada 0’ was linked to {multiply 0, manifold 1}, and the new sense
‘baigahada 1’ was created as a troponym of ‘buleonada 2 as shown in Figure 5.
Process (3) is the same process but with the addition to KL of a new Korean verb
sense. Fig 6 shows process (3) applied to ‘beoleonggeolida (shake vigorously).’ In
consideration of the hypernyms, its sense has to be of inacc value. Therefore, after the
sense distinction of ‘beoleonggeolida’ according to ‘beoleonggeolida 0 (be shaken
vigorously) and ‘beoleonggeolida 1 (shake vigorously),’ the latter requires a new set
of hypernymys, which is also added to KL.

5 Conclusion
Semi-automatic construction of KL using WN as pivot requires elaborate linguistic
criteria determining the grain size of sense and semantic relation. KL verb is
constructed based on English WN, but its semantic relations and sense distinctions are
modified. In this study, focusing on the relatedness of morpho-syntactic features and
the verb meanings, we showed that the sense distinction can be manageable by

Exploiting Morpho-syntactic Features for Verb Sense Distinction in KorLex

1177

extracting a different pair of syntactic frames –acc/inacc – for polysemous verbs in
Korean. Moreover, we demonstrated that the morpho-syntactic-based sense
distinction can be applied in establishing the semantic relation of hypernymytroponymy, which has been considered difficult to achieve. We think that this is
useful to any verb wordnet applied to NLP.
The problem of sense distinction is directly connected to the question of polysemy
and word sense disambiguation. However, for verb sense distinction, linguistically
robust criteria are necessary with or without limitation of generalization, since there is
no single method applicable to all lexical acquisitions.

Acknowledgment
This work was supported by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF)
through the National Research Lab. Program funded by the Ministry of Science and
Technology (No. M10400000332-06J0000-33210).

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

8.
9.
10.
11.
12.

Cruse, D.A.: Lexical Semantics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1986)
Fellbaum, C.: WordNet- An Electronic Lexical Database. MIT Press, Cambridge (1998)
Grimshaw, J.: Argument Structure. MIT Press, Cambridge (1990)
Hong, J.S.: Nouns in Korean: Sai Kukeosaingwhal, Natioanl Institut of the Korean
Language vol.11-3, Seoul (2001), html version
Jackendoff, R.S.: Semantic Structures. MIT Press, Cambridge (1990)
Kim, M.L.: The Studies of Verbal Classes according to Case Mark-Alternation: Korean
Linguistics vol.25, Association for Korean Linguistics, Seoul (2004) 161-190
Kohl. T., Jones, D.A., Berwick, R.C. and Nomura, N.: Representing Verb Alternation in
WordNet: WordNet- An Electronical Lexical Database. MIT Press, Cambridge(1998)
153-178
Lee, E-R, Yoon, A-S and Kwon, H-C: Passive Verb Sense Distinction in Korean Wordnet:
Proceedings of the 3rd International WordNet Conference, GWC, Brno (2006) 211-216
Levin, B.: English Verb Classes and Alternations-A Preliminary Investigation. University
of Chicago Press, Chicago (1993)
Pustejovsky, J.: The Generative Lexicon. MIT Press, Cambridge, London (1998)
Yang, J-S: Semantic Analysis of Korean Verb and Linking Theory. Bakijeong, Seoul
(1995)
Zickus, W. M.: A Comparative Analysis of Beth Levin's English Verb Class Alternations
and WordNet's Senses for the Verb Classes HIT, TOUCH, BREAK, and CUT.:
Proceedings of The Post-Coling 94 International Workshop on Directions of Lexical
Research. Beijing, China: Tsinghua University (1994) 66-74

