Reliability of Wireless Sensor Network with
Sleeping Nodes
Vladimir V. Shakhov1 and Hyunseung Choo2,
1

2

Institute of Computational Mathematics and Mathematical Geophysics of SB RAS
Novosibirsk 630090, Russia
shakhov@skku.edu
School of Information and Communication Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University
Suwon 440-746, South Korea
choo@ece.skku.ac.kr

Abstract. Energy eﬃciency is an important technology of sensor networks development. In this paper we oﬀer a method of sensors lifetime
maximizing under required level of network reliability. The optimizing
statement is oﬀered. As example, we consider homogeneous sensor networks with topology like tree. Other example concerns ZigBee technology. It shown that heterogeneous network can be improved by power
elements reassignments. If a sensor network topology is ﬁxed then the
most critical nodes can be detected and improved.
Keywords: Wireless Sensor Networks, Reliability, and Sleeping Time.

1

Introduction

A cost of sensor components is a critical consideration in the design of practical sensor networks. A cost of sensor network increases with sensor battery
power. It is often economically advantageous to discard a sensor rather then
sensor recharging. By this reason a battery power is usually a scare component in wireless devices. On the other hand, sensor lifetime depends on battery
lifetime. Thus, energy eﬃciency is an important direction of sensor networks
investigations [1].
A widely employed energy-saving approach consists in placing sensors in sleeping mode. During sleeping time a sensor can be used for data transmission
or other services like environment monitoring. Hence, network reliability degrades. But sensor power consumption is very low under the mentioned mode.
Hence, sensors lifetime increases. Thus, it is necessary to ﬁnd a trade-oﬀ between
sleeping time and network reliability. Many researchers are currently engaged in
This research was supported by the MIC (Ministry of Information and Communication), Korea, under the ITRC (Information Technology Research Center)
support program supervised by the IITA (Institute of Information Technology
Assessment),IITA-2006-(C1090-0603-0046).
Corresponding author.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 530–533, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Reliability of Wireless Sensor Network with Sleeping Nodes

531

energy-saving mechanisms developing that are based on sleeping mode application. Investigations are focused on scheduling schemes for sensors lifetime maximization [2] or protocol for network throughput increasing [3]. An interrelation
of sensor battery lifetime and network reliability has not been considered. To ﬁll
this gap we oﬀer a method of sensors lifetime maximizing under required level
of network reliability.
The rest of paper is organized as follows. In section 2 we discuss a concept of
reliability and state an optimizing problem for sensor lifetime maximization. In
3.1, we propose the problem solution for homogenous sensor networks. In 3.2 we
produce some details for ZigBee technology (IEEE 802.15.4.) and consider the
problem for heterogeneous. Section 4 is the ﬁnal conclusion.

2

Sensor Reliability and Network Reliability

As it was said above a sensor network is a set of low-cost and low-power wireless
sensor. Let us designate the sensor lifetime as T and the total sensor sleeping
time as S. Thus, the duration of sensor active state is T − S. Assume that a
sensor is randomly switched from active state to sleep state and inversely. From
here, the probability p of single sensor availability can be calculated as
p=

S
T −S
=1− .
T
T

(1)

If a sensor network is modeled by a graph then the probability p is a reliability
of graph vertex. Thus, sensor networks with sleeping nodes are modeled by a
graph with unreliable vertices. Actually, a wireless channel is also unreliable due
to interference, fading, shading and so on. But a distance between sensors is
not large. So, not reduce generality, we assume that edges of graph above are
absolutely reliable. The probability of graph (network) connectivity is known
as network reliability, R. Let n is the total number of sensors in a network.
It can be shown in the trivial way that network reliability is a polynomial of
degree n in the variable p. Let us remark we consider the connection for active
nodes. Thus, the mentioned reliability reﬂects the connectivity probability of
non-sleeping nodes.
The wished sensor lifetime T is usually given. It is deﬁned by applications. But
if sleeping time is maximized then the capacity of sensor battery is reduced. It
also reduces a cost of sensor networks. But from (1) we can see that large sleeping time is a reason of network unreliability. Thus, it is necessary to minimize
sensor availability saving given level of network reliability, C. Here C ∈ [0, 1].
Continuing this line of reasoning, we get the following optimization problem
p → min

(2)

R(p) ≥ C

(3)

Let us remark the problem is formulated for homogeneous network nodes. The
parameter p is same for all sensors.

532

3

V.V. Shakhov and H. Choo

Reliability Calculations

3.1

Reliability of Homogeneous Sensor Network

In the optimization statement above the criterion is a monotone continuous growing function in p. It is obvious that a reliability polynomial monotonically grows
when p runs over the set [0 . . . 1]. Thus, the solution of considered optimization
problem is reached on area boundary deﬁned by the function R(p). Therefore,
the optimal p is a root of equation
R(p) = C.
Let us consider the following example. Two terminals are connected by n
sequential sensors. Thus, the sensor network topology is a tree then the function
of reliability (3) equals R(p) = pn , here we do not take into account failures of
terminals.
If we solve the equation pn = C then we ﬁnd an optimal solution of the
problem (2). Thus, the optimal parameter p is
1

popt = C n .
From here, the optimal sleeping time equals
1

S = T (1 − C n ).
In case of huge number of sensors and arbitrary network topology the exact
solution can be impractical. Numerical methods can be used.
3.2

Reliability of Heterogeneous Sensor Network

The approach above with insigniﬁcant modiﬁcation can be used for heterogeneous nodes. Now the function of reliability in (2) is a function on a few variables. In some practical cases the optimal topology has to be heterogeneous.
Actually, if a sensor network topology is ﬁxed then the most critical nodes can
be detected and improved. We demonstrate it on the following example. Let us
consider a Personal Area Network (PAN) technology known as ZigBee. A ZigBee
network consists of three types of logical units [4]. There are ZigBee Coordinator
(ZC), ZigBee Router (ZR) and ZigBee End Device (ZED). ZC is PAN coordinator. The coordinator functions depend on network applications. ZED is data
terminal equipment. ZR provides a connection of ZEDs and ZC.
Assume ZC and ZED are connected by three ZigBee Routers A,B, and C. Not
reduce generality we consider the case of absolutely reliable ZC and ZEDs and
unreliable ZR. Let a network topology be as shown on the adjacency matrix.
ZC
A
B
C
ZED

ZC A B C ZED
0 1 0 0 0
1 0 1 1 0
0 1 0 0 1
0 1 0 0 1
0 0 1 1 0

Reliability of Wireless Sensor Network with Sleeping Nodes

533

Let pA be the probability of active status of ZigBee Router A, pB be the
probability of active status of ZR B, and pC be the probability of active status
of ZR C.
The network reliability is
R(pA , pB , pC ) = pA (1 − (1 − pB )(1 − pC )).
Hence the equations (2),(3) look as follows
pA + pB + pC → min
pA (pB + pC − pB pC ) ≥ C
The expressions above can be simpliﬁed. From the reasons of symmetry we get
pB = pC . Now the reader will have no diﬃculty in ﬁnding the optimal solution.
It is easy to see that the optimal pA exceeds the probabilities pB and pC . Thus,
for considered network topology the optimal sleeping times of network nodes are
not the same. Hence, the optimal network structure are not homogeneous.

4

Conclusion

In this paper, we investigated one of the methods of cost reduction for sensors
network. The oﬀered technique allows to minimize battery capacity and calculate
the optimal sleeping time of sensors. At the same time the required level of
reliability is kept. The problem of sensor network reliability is reduced to an
optimizing problem with monotone and continuous functions. Solutions of the
problem can be calculated by Lagrange approach. In some cases a heterogeneous
assignment of power is preferable. Actually, if a sensor network topology is ﬁxed
then the most critical nodes can be detected. And a network topology can be
improved by power elements reassignments. In the future it is reasonable to
investigate the problem of reliability maximization under given cost of sensors.

References
1. Akyildiz, I., Su, W., Sankarasubramaniam, Y., Cayirci, E.: A survey on sensor
networks. Communications Magazine, Vol. 40, Issue 8. IEEE (2002) 102 - 114
2. Subramanian, R., Fekri, F.: Sleep scheduling and lifetime maximization in sensor
networks: fundamental limits and optimal solutions. Proceeding of IPSN. IEEE
(2006) 218 - 225.
3. Chiasserini, C.-F., Garetto, M.: An Analytical Model for Wireless Sensor Networks
with Sleeping Nodes. Transactions on Mobile Computing, Vol. 5, Issue 12. IEEE
(2006) 706 - 1718.
4. Vargauzin, V.: Wireless sensor networks based on IEEE 802.15.4, TeleMultiMedia,
Vol. 6. Telesputnik (2005) (in Russian).

