XML Based Semantic Data Grid Service
Hui Tan and Xinmeng Chen
Computer School, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China
journal@whu.edu.cn

Abstract. This paper introduces a novel wrapper-mediator based semantic data grid service mechanism to solve the problem of Semantic
heterogeneity and few compatible data sources. It uses ontology based semantic information to wrap the heterogeneous data source, and employs
mediator structure to supply accessing interface for the data sources, and
it extends semantic query, mapping and fusion languages to support semantic grid communication mechanism. The extension of XML algebra
with semantic query enhanced is discussed to enable semantic querying
on data gird environment.

1

Introduction

Data grid technology is the standard means of realizing the needs of integrating and querying distributed and heterogeneity information, especially semistructured and non-structured information. However, the studies in data grid
technology still have the shortcomings as follows: 1)The ﬂexibility of the grid
technology is limited. Taking OGSA-DAI[1] for example, it only supports the
limited related database and native XML database. However, most information
on Internet comes from web-based semi-structured data environment, such as
company web application and XML-based e-commerce platform; furthermore,
OGSA-DAI does not have the eﬀective mechanism for other data sources to be
integrated into the grid environment. 2) The individual node in the grid environment may exist in varied semantic environment; diﬀerent data resource is
constructed in accordance with diﬀerent semantic standard. The present data
grid does not take into consideration the semantic heterogeneity among diﬀerent nodes. Many projects are focusing on these two topics. GridMiner[2] and
OGSA-WEB[3] are two novel projects focusing on the ﬁrst one, and DartGrid
II[4] and SemreX[5] are excellent projects focusing on the second topic.
This paper focusses on these two topics too. It employs a mediator-wrapper
framework to support diﬀerent information sources and enable semantic information operation on diﬀerent grid nodes. And it uses XML query style language
to retrieve information from diﬀerent grid nodes, because XML is rapidly becoming a language of choice to express, store and query information on the web.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 gives the general discussion about framework of the mediator-wrapper based semantic data
grid. Section 3 discusses the knowledge communication mechanism to support
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part I, LNCS 4487, pp. 418–425, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

XML Based Semantic Data Grid Service

419

semantic querying and knowledge fusion. Section 4 discusses ontology enabled
querying rewriting on XML based grid nodes. Section 5 summarizes the whole
paper.

2

Mediator-Wrapper Based Semantic Data Grid Service

Semantic Data Grid (SDG) must satisfy the following requirements:
– The architecture must be opening and compatible with existing standard
such as the framework of OGSA[6] or WSRF[7] considering compatible with
OGSA-DAI;
– It must provide ﬂexible method for integrating various data sources including relational databases, Native XML databases, or Web based application
systems;
– It must support the global semantics to the users who access semantic data
grid.
This paper uses a semantic grid adapter service to support semantic operation
on the gird. This paper employs a mediator-wrapper method to construct the
adapter service, which can be expressed by ﬁgure 1(a). The function of the wrapper of local grid nodes is to describe its semantics and its mapping relationship
with other nodes, the information source of these nodes include both free and
commercial databases, ﬂat ﬁles services, web services or web based applications,
HTML ﬁles and XML ﬁles, and the semantic information of every local gird
node is described with the language based on its ontology. The mediator node
constructs the global semantics of the local nodes, the semantic communication
mechanism between the mediator and wrapper nodes is discussed in the following
section.

User Query

Results

Query

SDG Mediator

Wrapper
SDG Mediator

Result

Semantic Communication

SDG Mediator

Semantic based Mediator

Semantic based Query
Oracle
Query Optimizing

Wrapper

Wrapper

Wrapper

Wrapper

Source

Wrapper

Source

Query Planning
MySQL

CVS

Web Applications

˄a˅Mediator-wrapper based semantic data grid

Distributed Query

(b) Semantic Query mechanism with GAV style request

Fig. 1. Mediator-Wrapper based Semantic Data Grid

420

3

H. Tan and X. Chen

Communication Mechanism with Semantic Grid

It is very important to develop a knowledge communication and coordinating
mechanism to support the ontology fusion and semantic query on diﬀerent data
grid nodes. This paper employs a Knowledge Communication and Manipulation
Language for Semantic Grid, or KCML for short to support this mechanism,
which is an extension of the KGOL[8] language. One function of KCML is to
coordinate with each grid node to build the mediator-wrapper architecture dynamically. The other function is to build global knowledge on the mediator and
enable semantic query. The communication language is build on SOAP, supporting SOAP over HTTP, HTTPS or other rock-bottom communication protocol.
The language could describe as:
KCM L ::= V er|Operation|Sender|Receiver|Language|Content.
The ﬁeld Ver is for keeping Expanding, showing which version language was
used. The new version language has compatibility downwards, supporting the old
communication mechanism; Operation gives basic communication atom which
will be described next; Content describes what is communicated; Sender deﬁnes
sender’s information, including user, address (such as IP ,e-mail,URL, port);
Receiver deﬁnes receiver’s information (usually, receiver should be Web Service
or Grid Service), ,including type (HOST, Web Service or Semantic Web Service),
address(such as IP address, e-mail, URL, port, if receiver is Web Service, also
including service address), identiﬁer; language deﬁnes which language is used
this communication, including RDF/RDFs, DAML+OIL, OWL etc.
3.1

Basic Communication Atom

To illustrate the algorithm, we ﬁrst deﬁne the ontology based knowledge on the
mediators and wrappers.
Deﬁnition 1. A knowledge schema is a structure KB := (CKB , RKB , I, ιC , ιR )
consisting of (1) two sets CKB and RKB , (2) a set I whose elements are called
instance identiﬁers or instances, (3) a function ιC : CKB → (I) called concept
instantiation, (4) a function ιR : RKB → (I + ) called relation instantiation.
To simplify the content of this paper, we only discuss the atom of KCML language which support ontology fusion and semantic querying. The atom includes
query operation, join operation and union operation etc. as following[9]:
– Selection. σF (c) = {x|x ∈ ιC (c) ∧ F (x) = true} where F is composed of
logic expression, supporting logic operation ∧, ∨, ¬, ∀, ∃, <, >, ≤, ≥, =, =
and ∈. c is concept element of knowledge instance;
– Join. ✶ (c1 , p, c2 ) = {x, y|x ∈ ιC (c1 ) ∧ y ∈ ιC (c2 ) ∧ p(x, y) = true}, where p
is join condition, c1 and c2 is concept element;
– Union. c1 ∪c2 = {x|x ∈ ιC (c1 )∧x ∈ ιC (c2 )}, c1 and c2 is the same as above;
– Minus. c1 − c2 = {x|x ∈ ιC (c1 ∧ ¬c2 )}, c1 and c2 is the same as above;
– Projection. πP (c) =
{y|∃x, (x, y) ∈ ιR (pi ) ∧ x ∈ ιC (c)}, where c is
pi ∈P

concept element, P is a set of relationship and P = {p1 , p2 , . . . , pk };

XML Based Semantic Data Grid Service

3.2

421

Semantic Fusion Atom

The mediator node constructs the global semantics of the local nodes based
on ontology via ontology fusion mechanism[10] based on the ontology mapping
patterns in gird environment, the patterns of ontology mapping can be categorized into four expressions: direct mapping, subsumption mapping, composition
mapping and decomposition mapping[11], a mapping can be deﬁned as:
Deﬁnition 2. A Ontology mapping is a structure M = (S, D, R, v), where
S denotes the concepts of source ontology, D denotes the concepts of target ontology, R denotes the relation of the mapping and v denotes the conﬁdence value
of the mapping, 0 ≤ v ≤ 1.
The KCML language must support the mapping patterns between diﬀerent semantic nodes on gird, we use Match atom to support it, it can be deﬁned as
M (c, d, r) = {(x, y)|x ∈ ιC (c) ∧ y ∈ ιC (d) ∧ (x, y) ∈ ιR (r)}, where c is diﬀerent
concept from d, r is relationship of mapping. The knowledge stored at mediator
can be described as the ontology fusion connections list, which can be described
as deﬁnition 3.
Deﬁnition 3. Fusion Connection is a structure Fc (O1 : C1 , O2 : C2 , . . . , On :
Cn , M), where C1 denotes a concept or concept set of ontology O1 , C2 denotes a
concept or concept set of Ontology O2 , M denotes the mapping patterns between
C1 , C2 , . . . and Cn .

4

Semantic XML Query Rewriting

The semantic query in a mediator-based SDG can be express as ﬁgure 1(b).
The user’s request is rewritten and modiﬁed accordingly based on the global
semantics, and is due processed optimally. Corresponding operation plan is made
and passed by the wrapper to each data source node for operation. From above
description, we know that this paper employs the GAV(Global as View) method
to process the user’s query[12]. The query can be described as an XML query
with semantic enhanced, which can be described as an extension of XML algebra,
and it will be discussed in the following subsection. Because common XML query
languages such as XQuery and XUpdate can be transferred into XML query
algebra, so the extension is manageable.
This paper extended XML algebra TAX[13] to enable semantic querying on
mediated gird nodes, TAX uses Pattern Tree to describe query language and
Witness Tree to describe the result instances which satisfy the Pattern Tree. The
extension of XML query algebra is discussed in paper [14]. The query planning
is based on the semantic XML query rewriting technology. In order to simplify
the discussion, this paper just pays attention to the query planning mechanism
of the selection operation. Brieﬂy, a selection operation can be expressed as
σ(X : S, Y ) {X ⊆ Pi ∪ Po , Y ⊆ P E}, where Pi is the input pattern tree, Po is
output pattern tree, P E is predication list, S denotes the site in which the query
will be executed. We deﬁne two operators ∪ and ✶ to represent U nion and Join

422

H. Tan and X. Chen

operation separately, and deﬁne the operator ⇒ to represent the query rewriting
operation, and we use σ(X : S0 , Y ) or σ(X, Y ) to denote the user’s query from
the mediator site.
Firstly, we propose how to rewrite pattern tree (which is the X element of
expression σ(X, Y )), there maybe several cases as follows:
1. X is one of the elements of input pattern tree or output pattern tree, and
it is also a concept in the global ontology hierarchy. Xi (1 ≤ i ≤ n) are
the concepts for diﬀerent local ontologies. X and Xi were combined into
one concept in the integrated global ontology with strong direct mappings,
which means that X and Xi can match each other, then we can rewrite X
as X ∪
Xi . The responding selection rewriting can be expressed as:
1≤i≤n

σ(X, Y ) ⇒ σ(X, Y ) ∪ σ(X1 : S1 , Y ) ∪ σ(X2 : S2 , Y ) . . . ∪ σ(Xn : Sn , Y ) (1)
2. The concept of X is generated by the subsumption mapping or composition mapping of Xi (1 ≤ i ≤ n), then we can rewrite X as
Xi . The
1≤i≤n

responding selection rewriting can be expressed as:
σ(X, Y ) ⇒ σ(X1 : S1 , Y ) ∪ σ(X2 : S2 , Y ) . . . ∪ σ(Xn : Sn , Y )

(2)

And then, we propose how to rewrite the predication expressions (which is the
Y element of the expression σ(X, Y ), there are also several cases, which can be
described as follows:
1. If there are lots of concept Yi (1 ≤ i ≤ n) combined in the concept Y of global
Yi . The corresponding selection
Ontology, we can rewrite Y as Y ∪
1≤i≤n

rewriting can be described as:
σ(X, Y ) ⇒ σ(X, Y ) ∪ σ(X : S1 , Y1 ) ∪ σ(X : S2 , Y2 ) . . . ∪ σ(X : Sn , Yn ) (3)
2. If the concept Y is generated by the subsumption mapping of Yi (1 ≤ i ≤ n),
we can rewrite Y as
Yi . The corresponding selection rewriting can be
1≤i≤n

described as:
σ(X, Y ) ⇒ σ(X : S1 , Y1 ) ∪ σ(X : S2 , Y2 ) . . . ∪ σ(X : Sn , Yn )

(4)

3. If the concept Y is generated by the composition mapping of Yi (1 ≤ i ≤ n),
suppose the composition condition is F , we can rewrite Y as (Y1 + Y2 +
. . . Yn ) ∩ F . The corresponding selection rewriting can be described as:
σ(X, Y ) ⇒ σ(X : S1 , Y1 ∧F ) ✶ σ(X : S2 , Y2 ∧F ) . . . ✶ σ(X : Sn , Yn ∧F ) (5)

XML Based Semantic Data Grid Service

423

Algorithm 1. SEL Rewrite X(X)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17

Input: X is the pattern tree of selection query σ(X, Y ).
foreach x ∈ X do
switch Mappings of X node do
case f unsion node
x ←x∪
xi ;

Ë

1≤i≤n

σ(X, Y ) ⇒ σ(X, Y ) ∪ σ(X1 , Y ) ∪ σ(X2 , Y ) . . . ∪ σ(Xn , Y );
foreach xi do
SEL Rewrite X(xi );
end
case subsumption or composition
x←
xi ;

Ë

1≤i≤n

σ(X, Y ) ⇒ σ(X1 , Y ) ∪ σ(X2 , Y ) . . . ∪ σ(Xn , Y );
foreach xi do
SEL Rewrite X(xi );
end
end
end
end

It is worth to point out that rewriting process may require a recursion in the
transitivity property of semantic mapping. The process of rewriting pattern tree
and predication expressions can be described as algorithm 1 and 2.
The query planning is a sequence, each node of the sequence can be denoted
as Pn = (Qn , Sn , Cn , Fn ), where Qn is the query which is needed to rewrite,
Sn is a set of sub query executed on diﬀerent sites, Cn denotes the connection
operator, in most time, it is ∪ or ✶ operator, Fn is the predication which denotes
the connection conditions. Pn represents the query rewriting procedure of query
Qn . The query planning procedure of user’s query σ(X, Y ) can be expressed in
algorithm[14].

5

Discussion and Conclusion

Semantic data grid service mechanism we present in this paper wrapped various
information source through ontology semantic, and used Mediator-Wrapper to
support the heterogeneous data source, employed mediator structure to realize
virtual data gird service which supports semi-structured information retrieving
language. The extension of XML algebra with semantic query enhanced and
semantic grid communication mechanism are also discussed to enable semantic
accessing on data grid environment. However, query optimizing in distributed
web sites and the capability of diﬀerent nodes and network were not considered
in the query planning mechanism discussed in this paper, future research will be
focused on this topic.

424

H. Tan and X. Chen

Algorithm 2. SEL Rewrite Y(Y )
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23

Input: Y is the predication list of selection query σ(X, Y ).
foreach y ∈ Y do
switch Mappings of Y concept do
case f unsion node
y←y∪
yi ;

Ë

1≤i≤n

σ(X, Y ) ⇒ σ(X, Y ) ∪ σ(X, Y1 ) ∪ σ(X, Y2 ) . . . ∪ σ(X, Yn );
foreach yi do
SEL Rewrite Y(yi );
end
case subsumption
y←
yi ;

Ë

1≤i≤n

σ(X, Y ) ⇒ σ(X, Y1 ) ∪ σ(X, Y2 ) . . . ∪ σ(X, Yn ) ;
foreach yi do
SEL Rewrite Y(yi );
end
case decomposition
y ← (y1 + y2 + . . . yn ) ∩ F ;
σ(X, Y ) ⇒ σ(X, Y1 ∧ F ) ✶ σ(X, Y2 ∧ F ) . . . ✶ σ(X, Yn ∧ F ) ;
foreach yi do
SEL Rewrite Y(yi );
end
end
end
end

Acknowledgment
This work was partially supported by a grant from the NSF (Natural Science
Fundation) of Hubei Prov. of China under grant number 2005ABA235, and it
was partially supported by China Postdoctoral Science Foundation under grant
number 20060400275 and Jiangsu Postdoctoral Science Foundation under grant
number 0601009B.

References
1. Antonioletti, M., Atkinson, M., Baxter, R., et al.: The design and implementation
of Grid database services in OGSA-DAI. Concurrency and Computation: Practice
and Experience 17 (2005) 357–376
2. W¨
ohrera, A., Brezanya, P., Tjoab, A.M.: Novel mediator architectures for Grid
information systems. Future Generation Computer Systems 21 (2005) 107–114
3. Pahlevi, S.M., Kojima, I.: OGSA-WebDB: An OGSA-Based System for Bringing
Web Databases into the Grid. In: Proceedings of International Conference on Information Technology: Coding and Computing (ITCC’04), IEEE Computer Society
Press (2004) 105–110

XML Based Semantic Data Grid Service

425

4. Chen, H., Wu, Z., Mao, Y.: Q3: A Semantic Query Language for Dart Database
Grid. In: Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Grid and Cooperative Computing (GCC 2004), Wuhan, China, LNCS 3251, Springer Verlag (2004)
372–380
5. Jin, H., Yu, Y.: SemreX: a Semantic Peer-to-Peer Scientiﬁc References Sharing
System. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Internet and Web
Applications and Services (ICIW’06), IEEE Computer Society Press (2006)
6. Foster, I., Kesselman, C., Nick, J.M., Tuecke, S.: Grid Services for Distributed
System Integration. IEEE Computer 35 (2002) 37–46
7. Czajkowski, K., Ferguson, D.F., Foster, I., et al.: The WS-Resource Framework.
http://www.globus.org/wsrf/specs/ws-wsrf.pdf (2004)
8. Zhuge, H., Liu, J.: A Knowledge Grid Operation Language. ACM SIGPLAN
Notices 38 (2003) 57–66
9. Sheng, Q.J., Shi, Z.Z.: A Knowledge-based Data Model and Query Algebra for
the Next-Gereration Web. In: Proceedings of APWeb 2004, LNCS 3007 (2004)
489–499
10. Gu, J., Zhou, Y.: Ontology fusion with complex mapping patterns. In: Proceedings of 10th International Conference on Knowledge-Based, Intelligent Information
and Engineering Systems, Bournemouth, United Kingdom, LNCS, Springer Verlag
(2006) 738–745
11. KWON, J., JEONG, D., LEE, L.S., BAIK, D.K.: Intelligent semantic concept
mapping for semantic query rewriting/optimization in ontology-based information
integration system. International Journal of Software Engineering and Knowledge
Engineering 14 (2004) 519–542
12. Levy, A.Y., Rajaraman, A., Ordille, J.J.: Query heterogeneous information sources
using source descriptions. In: Proceedings of the 22nd VLDB Conference, Mumbai,
India, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc (1996) 251–262
13. H.V.Jagadish, L.V.S.Lakshmanan, D.Srivastava, et al: TAX: A Tree Algebra for
XML. Lecture Notes In Computer Science 2379 (2001) 149–164
14. Gu, J., Hu, B., Zhou, Y.: Semantic Query Planning Mechanism on XML based
Web Information Systems. In: WISE 2006 Workshops, LNCS 4256 (2006) 194–205

