Sender-Based TCP Scheme for Improving
Performance in Wireless Environment
Jahwan Koo, Sung-Gon Mun, and Hyunseung Choo
School of Information and Communication Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University
Chunchun-dong 300, Jangan-gu, Suwon 440-746, South Korea
jhkoo@songgang.skku.ac.kr, {msgon,choo}@ece.skku.ac.kr

Abstract. Conventional TCP in wireless environment has a lack of ability to diﬀerentiate the packet losses caused by network congestion from
those caused by wireless link error. When the packet losses are due to
wireless link error, TCP performance degradation occurs because of its
congestion control mechanism. This paper propose a sender-side TCP
scheme for discriminating the cause of packet losses. Simulation results
show that it outperforms existing TCP congestion mechanisms such as
WestwoodNR, TCP New Jersey, and TCP Reno in terms of goodput
performance in wireless links.
Keywords: TCP, congestion control, wireless environment.

1

Introduction

In wireless environment, conventional TCP is unable to diﬀerentiate the cause of
packet losses, resulting in severe performance degradation [1]. Many researchers
attempt to improve TCP performance in wireless networks [2]. Current research
work has been classiﬁed into two directions: the end-to-end TCP modiﬁcations
such as congestion control mechanism and link layer approaches that include
intermediate router mechanisms. However, TCP modiﬁcations do not distinguish
the cause of packet loss whether it is based on network congestion or wireless
link error. Link layer approaches require more time and cost to be deployed
in real wired and wireless networks. Therefore, discrimination of the cause of
packet loss using the modiﬁed end-to-end TCP mechanism, without supporting
the intermediate router mechanisms, is very important.
This paper propose WestwoodVT (WestwoodNR based on TCP Vegas buﬀer
Thresholds), a sender-side TCP scheme, which discriminates the cause of packet
loss and operates according to the cause when packet retransmission is required.
It uses the ﬂow control concept of TCP Vegas [3] so as to discriminate the
cause. If the cause is due to network congestion, it retransmits packets using the
available bandwidth estimator of WestwoodNR [4], which is an eﬃcient TCP
scheme in wired and wireless networks. Meanwhile, if the cause is due to wireless
link error, it ignores the loss and responses as if the packet loss has never been
occurred.
Corresponding author.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 538–541, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Sender-Based TCP Scheme for Improving Performance

2

539

Discriminating the Cause of Packet Loss

In this section, we present a novel scheme for improving TCP performance
in wireless environment. WestwoodVT investigates the buﬀer state of network
nodes between sender and receiver in order to discriminate the cause of packet
loss. The discrimination inherits from the concept of TCP Vegas. WestwoodVT
estimates the maximum Expected transmission rate and Actual transmission rate
when received every ACK. The Expected transmission rate is given by where
WindowSize is the size of the current congestion window, equal to the number of bytes in transit, BaseRTT is the minimum value of all measured RTT.
In addition, Actual transmission rate is given where WindowSize is equal to
WindowSize of Equation 1, RTT is the current calculated RTT.
Expected =

W indowSize
W indowSize
, Actual =
BaseRT T
RT T

(1)

Additionally, WestwoodVT deﬁnes is calculated by the diﬀerence of Actual
from Expected transmission rate. The value of presents the amount of current
existing data in buﬀer of network nodes. Namely,
indicates the state of the
current network. This is given by:
=(

W indowSize W indowSize
−
) × BaseRT T
BaseRT T
RT T

(2)

In addition, WestwoodVT deﬁnes the buﬀer thresholds, α and β. These values
indicate to the lower and upper bound of network nodes’s buﬀer. The discrimination of the cause of packet loss is operated in congestion avoidance (CA)
phase. In CA phase, the sender estimates
using Eq. 1, and 2 when it receives
3-DUPACK. WestwoodVT then compares
to the buﬀer thresholds α and β.
If
is smaller than the threshold α, WestwoodVT assumes that the current
buﬀer state of network nodes is loose, and decides that the packet loss is due to
wireless link error. If
is greater than the threshold β, the current buﬀer state
is tight. At this point, WestwoodVT assumes that the packet loss is caused by
network congestion. If
is greater than α and smaller than β, WestwoodVT
does not decide the cause of the packet loss. Due to the ambiguousness of the discriminating, WestwoodVT maintains the current state and then retransmits lost
packets as the standard sending. Therefore, WestwoodVT postpones the decision
of cause to the next it receives 3-DUPACK for the more accurate discriminating.

3

Performance Evaluation

The simulation environments are depicted in Figure 1(a) and Figure 1(b). In
Figure 1(a), a single TCP connection running a long-live FTP application delivers data from sender to receiver, with various wireless link errors: 0.1%, 1%, 2%,
3%, 4%, and 5%, respectively. In Figure 1(a), all network nodes retain the queue
size of 20 MSS. Furthermore, we construct a more complex topology, such as
Figure 1(b). In this case, all node’s queues are also set to 20 MSS. A single TCP

540

J. Koo, S.-G. Mun, and H. Choo

connection running a long-live FTP application delivers data from the sender to
the receiver with various wireless link errors: 0.1%, 1%, 2%, 3%, 4%, and 5%,
respectively. At the same time, cross-traﬃc ﬂows are generated: forward traﬃc
ﬂows from node1 to node2 via router1 and base station, and backward traﬃc
ﬂows from node3 to node4 via base station and router1, respectively.

Node 2

Node 1

100 MB, 10 ms

Sender

100 MB, 10 ms

Router 1

100 MB, 10 ms

Sender

Base
Station

100 MB, 10 ms

2 MB, 1 ms

Receiver

(a) Simulation topology

FTP Traffic

100 MB, 10 ms

Base
Station

100 MB, 20 ms

Receiver

2 MB, 1 ms

100 MB, 10 ms

FTP Traffic

Node 4

Node 3

(b) Complex topology with background
traﬃc

Fig. 1. Simulation topology

2.0

2.0
WestwoodVT

WestwoodVT

WestwoodNR

WestwoodNR

TCP New Jersey
TCP Reno

1.6

TCP New Jersey

1.6

)
B
M
(
t 1.2
u
p
d
o
o
G

TCP Reno

) 1.2
B
M
(
t
u
p
d
o 0.8
o
G

0.8
0.4

0.4

0.0

0

1

2

3

4

5

0

1

Wireless Link Error Rates (%)

(a) Wireless link error rates

2

3

4

5

Wireless Link Error (%)

(b) Wireless link error rates with background traﬃc

Fig. 2. Goodput performance

We setup the lower bound of WestwoodVT, α to 14. if < 14, the cause is due
to wireless link error. The upper bound, β is ﬁxed on 16, if
> 16, the cause is
due to network congestion. Finally, we run the simulation for WestwoodVT, WestwoodNR, TCP New Jersey, and TCP Reno, respectively. Figure 2(a)
demonstrates the result of simulation, an average of 10 times, over 200 seconds.
As the results of the ﬁrst simulation, WestwoodVT is superior over WestwoodNR and TCP Reno in every wireless link error rates. With wireless link
error rate of 1%, WestwoodVT outperforms WestwoodNR by 3% and TCP Reno
by 21%. WestwoodVT outperforms WestwoodNR by 11% and TCP Reno by 54%

Sender-Based TCP Scheme for Improving Performance

541

with wireless link error rate of 2%. Further, WestwoodVT is almost identical to
TCP New Jersey, until the wireless link error rate reaches 4%. WestwoodVT
achieves a maximum of 41% and 118% improvements in goodput over WestwoodNR and TCP Reno, in various wireless link errors rates, respectively.
Figure 2(b) depicts results of the second simulation over 200 seconds, an average of 10 times. The buﬀer thresholds, α and β of WestwoodVT are conﬁgured
to 14 and 16, respectively. These values are based on the queue size of network
nodes. The performance of TCP Reno is worst. WestwoodVT achieves 6% ∼
24% improvements in goodput over WestwoodNR, and it is overwhelming TCP
New Jersey, with every wireless error rates. In this simulation, TCP New Jersey experiences the decreasing of throughput with background traﬃcs. However,
WestwoodVT keeps its performance constantly, regardless of wireless link error
rates or background traﬃcs.

4

Conclusion

In this paper, we have proposed WestwoodVT which utilizes the sender-based
transmission window control mechanism for discriminating the cause of packet
loss. It checks the buﬀer state of network nodes between sender and receiver
using TCP Vegas operating mechanism and discriminates the cause of packet
loss based on the buﬀer state. When the packet loss is due to network congestion,
WestwoodVT uses the available bandwidth estimator of WestwoodNR for packet
retransmissions. Otherwise, it retransmits packets without congestion control
mechanism.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the MIC, Korea, under the ITRC support
program supervised by the IITA, IITA-2006-(C1090-0603-0046).

References
1. Xylomenos, G., Polyzos, G. C.:TCP Performance Issues over Wireless Links. IEEE
Communications Magazine, Vol. 39. (2001) 52–58
2. Tian, Y., Xu, K., Ansari, N.:TCP in Wireless Environments: Problems and Solutions. IEEE Radio Communications, Vol. 43. (2005) S27–S32
3. Brakmo, L. S., O’Malley, S. W., Peterson, L. L.:TCP Vegas: New Techniques for
Congestion Detection and Avoidance. ACM/SIGCOMM Computer Communication
Review, Vol. 24, (1994) 24–35
4. Casetti, C., Gerla, M., Mascolo, S., Sanadidi, M. Y., Wang, R.:TCP Westwood: Bandwidth Estimation for Enhanced Transport over Wireless Links.
ACM/Mobicom, (2001) 287–297

