Investigating Media Streaming in Multipath
Multihop Wireless Network
Binod Vaidya1 , SangDuck Lee2 , Eung-Kon Kim3 , JongAn Park2 ,
and SeungJo Han2,
1

Dept. of Electronics & Computer Eng., Tribhuvan Univ., Nepal
vaidyab@aol.com
2
Dept. of Information & Communication Eng., Chosun Univ., Korea
dandylsd@hanmail.net, japark@chosun.ac.kr, sjbhan@chosun.ac.kr
3
Dept. of Computer Science, Sunchon National Univ., Korea
kek@sunchon.ac.kr

Abstract. Mobile Ad hoc Networks (MANETs) are very attractive for
many applications. However, media streaming over MANET is quite challenging task. In this paper, we depict a framework for audio streaming over multihop wireless network. And we propose multipath routing
for MANET and investigated media streaming using diﬀerent scalable
speech coding techniques. With the simulation results, performance of
such a framework is evaluated.1

1

Introduction

As mobile ad hoc networks (MANETs) are self-organizing, rapidly deployable,
and have no centralized control and administration, they are very attractive for
many applications, such as battleﬁeld communication, personal area networking
and search-and-rescue. However, media streaming over MANET is quite challenging because of dynamic network topology, limited wireless bandwidth, and
high bit error rate of wireless links.
When real-time multimedia is streamed over MANET, packet loss rate can be
very high under adverse conditions, thus in turn, communication may be lost.
In this paper, we propose a multipath routing protocol for multihop wireless
network that can be used eﬃciently for media streaming. Till now, many multipath routing protocols have been proposed for wireless ad hoc networks. Some
of multipath protocols based on AODV [1] are AOMDV [2], NDMR [3], and
AODV-BR [4]. While streaming multimedia through multiple paths, the content
can be divided into multiple minor ﬂows and stream through available paths as
in MDSR [5]. A scalable speech coding technique [6] is considered as it is designed for adaptable real-time traﬃcs over lossy networks. Main intention of our
investigation is to show the eﬀect of diﬀerent scalable speech coding techniques
on MANET using proposed multipath routing protocol.
1

Corresponding author.
This study was supported (in part) by research funds from Chosun University 2006.

Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 717–720, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

718

2

B. Vaidya et al.

Multipath Routing for Media Streaming over MANET

Proposed multipath routing protocol for MANET is basically intended for highly
dynamic ad hoc networks in which communication faults frequently occur. It is
basically modiﬁcation of a single-path on-demand AODV routing protocol. As in
AODV, three control messages are route request (RREQ), route reply (RREP)
and route error (RERR). The proposed protocol has two basic phases, namely
route discovery and route maintenance.
First, to ﬁnd routes for a destination node D, a source node S broadcasts
RREQ packet. RREQ packet structure of the proposed scheme is same as that of
AODV, except presence of path accumulation list of the route path. The source
node appends own address to route path in RREQ. Further, when RREQ is
forward by intermediate nodes, each node appends its address to it. As RREQ
ID and source address form a unique identiﬁer for RREQ, a node checks a
received RREQ if it is from same source and with same RREQ ID. If a node
receives ﬁrst RREQ packet, it records a reverse route in its routing table. An
intermediate node receiving RREQ, replies by sending a RREP if it has a route to
the destination. In our proposed scheme, intermediate nodes forward duplicate
RREQs that came from at most two diﬀerent neighbors. This is essential to
discover a number of alternate route paths.
In this scheme, the destination is responsible for selecting multiple alternate
route paths. When receiving ﬁrst RREQ, the destination records route paths
of RREQ. Then after copying route paths of RREQ to a RREP packet, the
destination node sends it to source node via its route paths. When the destination
receives a duplicate RREQ, it will compare route paths of RREQ to that of the
routing table. If only source node and destination node are same between them,
a path is node-disjoint with primary path. If at least one of intermediate nodes
in route paths in the routing table is diﬀerent from all of nodes in route paths
of RREQ, a route is partially disjoint path, which is deﬁned as fail-safe [7].
Similarly, the destination sends RREP to the source along route path of RREP.
In case of route maintenance, the proposed scheme is capable of recovering
broken routes immediately. When a node fails to deliver data packets to the
next hop, it removes entries with broken link in its routing table and if it has
another entry for the destination, data packets is delivered through the alternate
route. If it has no another entry, it sends a RERR packet to the upstream node.
When the source has no entry for the destination, it would initiate a new route
discovery.
Scalable speech coding consists of a minimum rate bit stream that provides acceptable coded speech quality, along with one or more enhancement bit streams,
which when combined with a lower rate coded bit stream, provide improved
speech quality. The standards for scalable speech coding are G.727 [8], and
MPEG-4 speech coding [9]. The G.727 speech coding is based upon adaptive differential pulse code modulation (ADPCM) with data rates of 16kbps to 40kbps
[8]. The core bitrate is 16kbps, and up to three 8kbps enhancement layers can
be included. MPEG-4 Natural Speech Coding Tool Set [9] provides a generic
speech coding framework having bitrate from 2kbps to 23.4kbps. MPEG-4 speech

Investigating Media Streaming in Multipath Multihop Wireless Network

719

coding scheme uses CELP (Code excited linear predictive coding) for bitrates
higher than 3.85kbps. The bitrate scalability of the core layer bitrate is possible
up to three enhancement layers.
In this framework, we have evaluated G.727 scheme with 16kbps core layer
and one 8kbps enhancement layer, for a total of 24kbps and MPEG-4 CELP
scheme with a 6kbps core layer and one 2kbps enhancement layer, for a total of
8kbps. Since we use scalable speech coding for media streaming, the source node
begins to send core bit stream on primary path and enhancement bit stream on
node-disjoint path. Since primary path and node-disjoint path are not correlated,
source node uses node-disjoint path to provide load balancing. When forwarding
paths break, nodes receiving core bit stream or enhancement bit stream may use
diﬀerent paths in the routing table to forward packets. Generally, a multihop
wireless path is up or down for random periods of time, leading to bursty packet
losses. A core layer packet loss is likely to be experiencing packet loss burst. So
the proposed multipath protocol ﬁnds an alternate fail-safe path for each node
on primary path as it has higher packet delivery rate.

3

Performance Evaluations

In order to evaluate performance of the proposed framework for media streaming
over multipath wireless ad hoc network, we have designed experimental model
and simulated using OPNET Modeler [10]. In the simulation, MANET consists
of sixteen mobile nodes which are randomly placed inside a 600m x 600m region
initially. We consider that a mobile node moves around continuously with using
random waypoint mobility model with pause time of 0s and a maximum speed
of 5m/s. The channel has a bandwidth of 1Mbps. Transmission range is 250m.
Among these nodes, one is randomly chosen as a streaming source and another
as the destination. Five UDP traﬃc ﬂows are introduced as background traﬃcs.
Each of these ﬂows has traﬃc rate of four packets per second. Size of data
payload is 512 bytes. Each of nodes has queue size of 10 packets.
For the experimental purpose, two scenarios have been considered, that is,
a framework for audio streaming over MANET using G.727 scheme whereas
another using MPEG-4 speech coding technique; in both cases, the proposed
multipath routing scheme is used. Performance metrics computed during simulations are packet loss rate and end-to-end packet delay.
In order to analyze the simulation results for above framework, we compare
performance of two diﬀerent scalable speech coding techniques in terms of packet
loss rate with respect to bit error rate (BER) and end-to-end delay (latency).
Fig. 1 shows the packet loss rate for the both scenarios with respect to BER. It
can be seen that the packet loss rate in G.727 coding scheme increases rapidly
than in case of MPEG-4 CELP scheme. At BER of 10−3 , packet loss rate for
G.727 coding scheme is about 10% whereas for MPEG-4 CELP scheme it is
about 8.1%. Fig. 2 illustrates the end-to-end delay for scalable speech coding
techniques. It can be seen that end-to-end delay for G.727 coding scheme has
higher average end-to-end delay than that of MPEG-4 CELP scheme. It can

720

B. Vaidya et al.

Fig. 1. Packet loss rate

Fig. 2. End-to-end Delay

be derived that for the audio streaming over MANET, MPEG-4 CELP shows
better performance than with G.727 coding scheme.

4

Conclusions and Future Work

In this paper we have depicted a framework for media streaming over multipath
wireless ad hoc network. In order to investigate the performance of G.727 and
MPEG-4 CELP speech coding schemes, we have simulated above framework using proposed multipath routing in MANET. It can be seen that the performance
of MPEG-4 CELP scheme is much better that G.727 in terms of packet loss rate
and end-to-end delay. In the future work, we will investigate above framework
while applying selective encryption in scalable speech coding technique.

References
1. C. E Perkins, E. Royer: Ad-hoc on-demand distance vector routing, IEEE WMCSA
1999, Feb. 1999, pp 90-100
2. M.K Marina, S.R Das: Ad hoc on-demand multipath distance vector routing, Wiley
Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing, Vol 6(7), 2006, pp. 969-988
3. X. Li, L. Cuthbert: Stable node-disjoint multipath routing with low overhead in
mobile ad hoc networks, IEEE MASCOTS 2004, Oct 2004, pp. 184-191
4. S.J Lee, M. Gerla: AODV-BR: Backup routing in ad hoc networks, IEEE WCNC
2000, Vol 3, Sep 2000, pp. 1311-1316
5. S. Mao, et al.: Video transport over ad hoc networks: multistream coding with
multipath transport, IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, Vol
21(10), Dec. 2003, pp. 1721-1737
6. H. Dong, et al.: SNR and bandwidth scalable speech coding, IEEE ISCAS 2002.
Vol 2, pp. 859-862
7. L. R Reddy, S.V Raghavan: SMORT: Scalable multipath on-demand routing for
mobile ad hoc networks, Elsevier Ad hoc Networks, Vol 5(2), 2007, pp. 162-188
8. ITU-T, 5-, 4-, 3-, and 2-bit/sample embedded adaptive diﬀerential pulse code modulation (ADPCM), Dec. 1990
9. ISO/IEC JTC1 SC29/WG11, ISO/IEC FDIS 14496-3, “Coding of Audio-Visual
Objects Part 3: Audio”, Oct. 1998
10. OPNET Modeler Simulation Software, http://www.opnet.com

