Macro-micro Interlocked Simulation for
Multiscale Phenomena
Kanya Kusano, Shigenobu Hirose, Toru Sugiyama, Shinichiro Shima,
Akio Kawano, and Hiroki Hasegawa
The Earth Simulator Center,
Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology
3173-25 Showa-machi, Kanazawa-ku Yokohama, Kanagawa 236-0001,
Japan
kusano@jamstec.go.jp
http://www.es.jamstec.go.jp/esc/research/Holistic/index.en.html

Abstract. A new methodology for the simulation of multiscale processes, called Macro-Micro Interlocked (MMI) Simulation, is introduced.
The MMI simulation is carried out by the two-way connection of diﬀerent numerical models, which may handle macroscopic and microscopic
dynamics, respectively. The MMI simulation are applied to several multiscale phenomena, for instance, cloud formation, gas detonation, and
plasma dynamics. The results indicate that the MMI simulation provide
us an eﬀective and prospective framework for multiscale simulation.
Keywords: simulation, macro-micro Interlocked, multiscale, cloud formation, detonation, aurora, plasma, ﬂuid, super-droplet, DSMC.

1

Introduction

Multi-scale phenomena, in which the elementary process of micro-scale and the
system evolution of macro-scale are tightly connected to each other, quickly
comes up as a crucial issue in any state of the art research ﬁelds, such as material science, plasma physics, chemistry, astrophysics, geo-science, bio-science
and so on. Computer simulation is usually performed on basis of the theoretical
description like the partial diﬀerential equation, and thus the applicability of
simulation model has to be constrained by the limitation of the basic theory
behind. So far, the multi-scale simulations have been developed by the two different manners. The ﬁrst is the extension of macroscopic simulation, in which
the microscopic eﬀects are included as phenomenological parameters, just like
the anomalous resistivity caused by micro-scale turbulence in high-temperature
plasmas and the bulk cloud parameterization in atmospheric global circulation
model. However, since the phenomenological parameterization is not guaranteed to work well in unbeknown circumstances, the applicability of such a way
would be restricted particularly as an eﬀective tool for prediction of unknown
phenomena.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part I, LNCS 4487, pp. 914–921, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Macro-micro Interlocked Simulation for Multiscale Phenomena

915

Another approach is the large-scale microscopic simulation, whereby the
macroscopic phenomena are attempted to be built from the elementary block of
micro-scale. The large-scale molecular dynamics (MD) simulation is the typical
example of that. However, it is computationally so demanding, that the practical application is hardly feasible despite of the incredible capability of the latest
super-computers.
Macro-Micro Interlocked (MMI) Simulation is the new type of computation,
which is recently introduced by Sato [1]. MMI simulation consists of the macroand micro-simulation models, which are carried out simultaneously and interconnected to each other. The micro-model is performed under the environmental
condition controlled by the macro-model, and it feeds back the microscopic information to the macro-model. The fundamental principle of MMI simulation is
in common with that of the heterogeneous multiscale method (HMM) [2]. Furthermore, the way to interconnect macro- and micro-scales is similar to Equation-Free
approach [3], although, in MMI simulation, we have to adopt some macro-scale
model rather than using a coarse projective method. However, originally MMI
simulation has been proposed as a computational algorithm suitable to the hardware of heterogeneous architecture, called MMI simulator, in which diﬀerent types
of architecture ﬁtting respectively to the numerical models of macro- and microscales are interconnected. In particular, heterogeneous vector/scalar architecture
is the most promising design of the MMI simulator, and we have developed several
applications for that.
The objective of this paper is to demonstrate the applications of MMI simulation. For that, we will show the brief results of typical MMI simulations for
cumulus cloud formation, gas detonation, and plasma dynamics in the following
sections, and the prospects of the MMI simulation will be summarized in Sec.3.

2
2.1

Applications
Cloud Simulation

Although clouds play a crucial role in meteorological phenomena and climate
change like global warming, the numerical modeling of cloud is not well established yet. The reason of that is attributed to the fact that the formation of clouds
and the development of precipitation are essentially governed by mutiscalemultiphysics processes. The macro-scale processes such as the ﬂuid motion of
moist air associated with clouds is called ”cloud dynamics”, and the micro-scale
processes such as the condensation and coalescence of water droplets are called
”cloud microphysics”. These two processes mutually aﬀect each other. Numerical methods to simulate the interaction between them should be developed to
understand and predict cloud-related phenomena.
Cloud dynamics model to describe the ﬂuid motion of atmosphere has been
well developed so far. However, it is still diﬃcult to perform the accurate simulation of cloud microphysics, though several simulation methods, such as bulk
parameterization and spectral (bin) methods have been proposed.

916

K. Kusano et al.

We recently developed a novel simulation model of cloud microphysics, named
Super-Droplet Method (SDM) [4], which is a particle-based cloud microphysics
model. The super-droplet is deﬁned as computational particle representing multiple real droplets, which have common properties, e.g. position, velocity, cloud
condensation nuclear (CCN), and electric charge. The motion of each superdroplet is calculated by the equation of motion or by the assumption that each
droplet immediately attains terminal velocity. The condensation and the evaporation of droplets can be directly calculated based on K¨ohler’s theory using the
properties of super-droplet and the state variable of atmospheric environment.
The coalescence of droplet is handled in stochastic manner.
The cloud dynamics is simultaneously calculated with SDM using the nonhydrostatic model equations,
ρ

DU
Dt
P
Dθ
Dt
Dρ
Dt
Dqv
Dt

= −∇P − (ρ + ρw )g + λ∇2 U ,

(1)

= ρRd T,
L
=−
Sv + κ∇2 θ,
cp Π

(2)

= −ρ∇ · ρ,

(4)

= Sv + κ∇2 qv ,

(5)

(3)

where ρ is the density of moist air, ρw the density of liquid water, U the wind
velocity, P the pressure, λ the viscosity, Rd the gas constant for dry air, T the
temperature, θ the potential temperature, L the latent heat, qv the mixing ratio
of vapor, Sv the source of water vapor, and Π is the Exner function, respectively.
The density of droplets
ρw (x, t) =

ξi mi (t)w(x, xi ),
i

and the conversion ratio between vapor and liquid
Sv (x, t) = −

1 ∂ρw (x, t)
,
ρ(x, t)
∂t

are sent to the ﬂuid model, and used in the source terms, where i is the index of
super-droplet, ξi the multiplicity of super-droplet, mi the mass of droplet, and
w is the shape function of super droplet.
SDM is the hybrid model, in which the particle-based direct simulation MonteCarlo (DSMC) model and the ﬂuid model are coupled. By evaluating the integrated squared error for the distribution function in parameter space of droplet
properties, we can show that the computational eﬃciency of SDM is higher than
the spectral (bin) method, when more than four properties of cloud droplet are
taken into account. (Refer to [4] for further detail.) It implies that the particlecontinuum coupled model is more eﬀective for more complicated system, compared to the conventional methods.

Macro-micro Interlocked Simulation for Multiscale Phenomena

a

917

b

c
Fig. 1. The distribution of cloud droplets calculated by the coupled simulation of
the super-droplet method and non-hydrostatic model. Color represents the size of
droplet. (a) At t = 960sec after simulation starts, upwelling initiated by warm bubble
causes the condensation growth of cloud droplets (white particles). (b) At t = 1188sec,
droplets bigger than 10 microns in radius (blue particles) further grow due to collisioncoalescence. (c) At t = 1512sec, droplets (yellow particles), which are bigger than 100
micron, are precipitated as rain-drops. Inside the cloud, turbulence-like structure is
strongly driven by cumulus convection.

In order to demonstrate the feasibility of SDM, it has been applied to the
simulation of cloud formation and precipitation in maritime cumulus. The simulation system is given by 2-dimensional x − z domain just for simplicity. The
initial state consists of un-saturated stratiﬁed layer, which is slightly unstable
only under 2km in altitude, and number of tiny droplets, which contain soluble substance as Cloud Condensation Nuclear (CCN), are uniformly distributed
in the entire domain. As shown in Fig.1, the results indicate that the particlecontinuum coupled model may work to simulate the whole process from cloud
formation to precipitation without introducing any empirical parameterizations.
The new model may provide a powerful tool for the study of cloud-related various problems, although the predictability of SDM should be evaluated more
carefully.

918

2.2

K. Kusano et al.

Detonation Simulation

Combustion ﬂuid dynamics is a typical subject of multiscale simulation, in which
chemical reaction is mutually interacted with the macroscopic ﬂow dynamics. In
the conventional methods, the reaction is treated by the Arrhenius rate equation.
However, the reaction rate of the equation must be derived from the distribution
function assuming local thermal equilibrium (LTE). Although the assumption
could be satisﬁed in normal condition of ﬂuids, when the local Knudsen number,
deﬁned as the ratio of mean free path to characteristic length scale, is larger
than 0.01, the assumption of LTE may not be valid. In the case, the ﬂow should
be treated as rareﬁed one and we have to solve the Boltzmann equation.
Especially, detonation, which is sustained by shock wave driven by combustion
wave, is the case, because the thickness of detonation front may be comparable
to the mean free path. It implies that the Arrhenius rate equation may not be
valid on the detonation front.
So, we have developed a novel method for simulation of combustion by connecting a microscopic molecular model and a macroscopic continuum model,
those are based on the Boltzmann equation and the Navier-Stokes equation, respectively. We adopted non-steady DSMC method [5] for the molecular model,
and the continuum model is carried out by the HLLC method.
Our detonation model is an extension of Hybrid Continuum-Atomistic Simulation, which has been quickly developed by many authors [6,7,8]. The algorithm to
connect the molecular model and the continuum model is summarized as follows:
(1) Gradient of pressure is monitored during the simulation by the continuum
model, and the molecular model is embedded in the region where the steepness
exceed some threshold and the continuum model is failed. (2) Interlocking layers
are laid around the outer-most region of the molecular domains, where particles
are generated to let the distribution function be able to reproduce the macroscopic variables, density, velocity and pressure. Numerical ﬂux on the outer-most
boundary of the continuum domain is calculated from the particle motion.
Some test results of the two-dimensional detonation simulation are shown
in Fig.2. It represents the distribution of pressure on three diﬀerent snapshots.
The detonation front bounded by dotted line corresponds to the domain, where
the particle-based model is adopted. The smooth connection between ﬂuid and
particle-based models indicates that the continuum-atomistic simulation is applicable also to the combustion process.
2.3

Plasma Simulation

Plasma inherently forms a multi-scale system, in which there are diﬀerent characteristic scales related to electron and ions. The key issue in multiscale plasma
processes is how macroscopic magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) is related to microscopic particle kinetics. For instance, in magnetic reconnection that is responsible for explosive energy release in high-temperature plasmas, the kinetics
might be important especially in the restricted diﬀusion region, which is formed
when anti-parallel magnetic ﬂuxes collide each other [9].

Macro-micro Interlocked Simulation for Multiscale Phenomena

919

Fig. 2. The pressure distribution of the detonation simulation at three diﬀerent snapshots. The particle-based domain, which corresponds to the region bounded by dotted
lines, tracks the detonation front. The particle-based region at 5.975μs is zoomed-in
on right subset.

So, we have developed the new algorithm for such a multiscale plasma dynamics. Our model is constituted by the connection of the particle-in-cell (PIC)
model and the magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) model, the former of which is embedded in the MHD simulation domain[10]. This MHD-PIC interlocked model is
resembled to the hybrid continuum-atomistic simulation, which was explained in
the previous subsection. However, it should be mentioned that, in plasma simulation, several characteristics described by PIC model are negated in continuum
(MHD) model, in contrast to the hydrodynamic simulations. So, in order to make
the smooth interlocking between MHD and PIC models, we have to introduce
some special ﬁlter, which passes only the MHD mode from the PIC domain to
the MHD domain.
The ﬁltering process is actualized by the following procedure. First, the MHD
simulation is advanced from time tn to tn + Δt in the whole domain including
the PIC domain as the predictor phase (Fig.3a). Second, the PIC simulation is
advanced to tn + Δt only in the PIC domain, in which the boundary condition is
given by the MHD simulation of the predictor phase. Note that the time step in
PIC is much shorter than that of MHD, and the boundary condition in each PIC
step has to be interpolated. The electric ﬁeld and the electric current density
of the PIC result, E P IC and J P IC , and those of the MHD predictor results,
E MHD and J MHD , are mixed as following
E ∗ = w(x)E P IC + (1 − w(x))EM ID ,
J ∗ = w(x)J P IC + (1 − w(x))JM ID ,
where w(x) is the weighting function that smoothly ramped from 0 to 1 on the
periphery of the PIC domain, as shown in Fig.3b. Finally, using E ∗ and J ∗ ,
the MHD simulation is advanced again from tn to tn + Δt. This is the corrector
phase, and the procedure above is repeated until the calculation is ﬁnished. In

920

K. Kusano et al.

tn

(a)

tn+Δt
1:MHD(predictor)

(C)

t

2:PIC

(b)
1

w

3:MHD(corrector)

PIC

x

Fig. 3. (a) The algorithm for time advancement of the MMI plasma simulation. (b)
The schematic diagram of spatial relation between the weighting function w and the
PIC domain. (c) The result of the test simulation for Alfv´en wave propagation.

this algorithm, the kinetic process comes out with E P IC and J P IC , which are
used instead of the generalized Ohm’s law in the corrector phase.
Figure 3c shows the magnetic wave form in the test-simulation for the onedimensional Alfv´en wave propagation. Green and blue curves represent the initial
state and the result of the MHD model after a while, where red line indicates the
result of PIC, which is embedded in a small region. The wave form is scarcely
aﬀected by interlocking with the PIC model, as high-frequency modes appear in
the PIC domain. It indicates that the particle-continuum connection model is
applicable also to plasma simulations.

3

Summary

Three diﬀerent applications for the MMI simulation are demonstrated. In any
examples, the particle-continuum connection technique plays a crucial role. However, it is worthwhile to note that the particle-continuum connection in the cloud
simulation is not based on the domain decomposition method unlike the other
two applications of plasma and detonation, because cloud is ubiquitous phenomena and we cannot restrict the cloud domain into a limited region.
MMI simulation based on the particle-continuum connection technique might
be suitable to MMI simulator of heterogeneous architecture. For instance, vector
and scalar architectures ﬁt for the algorithms of continuum and particle models,
respectively. In fact, the parallelization with MPI is convenient for the implementation of MMI simulation, because the macro and micro models can be assigned
to diﬀerent ranks, and it could be easily ported also to the heterogeneous architecture system.
Although MMI simulator could be a potential tool for multiscale simulation,
at least so far the interlocking algorithm has been developed almost in ad hoc
manner. Therefore, it is not yet clear what is the best ﬁt architecture for each

Macro-micro Interlocked Simulation for Multiscale Phenomena

921

MMI algorithm, and more systematic research for the matching between the
algorithm and the architecture of MMI simulator will be required.
Acknowledgments. This work is performed as a part of the program of “Development of Multi-scale Coupled Simulation Algorithm” in the Earth Simulator
Center, JAMSTEC.

References
1. Sato, T.: Macro-Micro Interlocked Simulator, Journal of Physics: Conference Series
SciDAC 2005 Scientiﬁc Discovery through Advanced Computing, Vol.16, (2005)
310–316
2. Weinan E, Engquist, B., Li, X., Ren, W., and Vanden-Eijnden,E.: Heterogeneous
Multiscale Methods: A Review, Commun. Comput. Phys. 2, 3 (2007) 367-450.
3. Kevrekidis, I.G., Gear, C.W., Hummer, G.: Equation-free: The computer-aided
analysis of complex multiscale systems Aiche J. 50, 7 (2004) 1346-1355.
4. Shima, S., Kusano, K, Kawano, A., Sugiyama, T., and Kawahara, S.: Super-Droplet
Method for the simulation of Cloud and Precipitation; a Particle-Based Microphysics Model Coupled with Non-hydrostatic Model. submitted to J. Atm. Sci.
5. Bird, G.A.: Molecular Gas Dynamics and the Direct Simulation of Gas Flows.
Clarendon Press, Oxford (1994).
6. Aktas, O., Aluru, N.R.: A Combined Continuum/DSMC Technique for Multiscale
Analysis of Microﬂuidic Filters, J. Comp. Phys. 178, 2 (2002) 342–372.
7. Wijesinghe, H.S., Hadjiconstantinou, N.G.: Discussion of Hybrid AtomisticContinuum Methods for Multiscale Hydrodynamics, Int. J. Multiscale Computational Engineering 2, 2 (2004) 189–202.
8. Schwartzentruber, T.E., Boyd, I.D.: A Hybrid Particle-Continuum Method Applied
to Shock Waves. J. Comp. Phys. 215, 2 (2006) 402-416.
9. Kusano, K., Maeshiro, T., Yokoyama, T., & Sakurai, T.: The Trigger Mechanism
of Solar Flares in a Coronal Arcade with Reversed Magnetic Shear. Astrophys. j.
610 (2004) 537–549
10. Sugiyama, T., Kusano, K.: Multiscale Plasma Simulation by the Interlocking of
Magnetohydrodynamic Model and Particle-in-Cell Kinetic Model. submitted to J.
Comp. Phys.

