An Access Control Model in Lager-Scale P2P File
Sharing Systems∗
Yue Guang-xue1,2,3, Yu Fei3,4, Chen Li-ping1, and Chen Yi-jun1
1

College of Information Engineering, Jiaxing University, 314000 China
guangxueyue@yahoo.com.cn
2
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Huaihua University, 418000 China
guangxueyue@126.com
3
State Key Lab. for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, 210093 China
yufei@hunau.edu.cn
4
Jiangsu Provincial Key Laboratory of Computer Information Processing Technology,
Suzhou University ,2150063, China
hunanyufei@126.com

Abstract. In lager-scale P2P file sharing systems, peers often must interact with
unknown or unfamiliar peers without the benefit of trusted third parties or
authorities to mediate the interactions. The decentralized and anonymous characteristics of P2P environments make the task of controlling access to sharing
information more difficult. In this paper, we identify access control requirements and propose a trust based access control framework for P2P file-sharing
systems. The model integrates aspects of trust and recommendation, fairness
based participation schemes and access control schemes.

1 Introduction
In Peer-to-Peer (P2P) networks, all peers are both consumers and providers of resources and can access each other directly without intermediary peers. Compared with
a centralized system, a P2P system provides an easy way to aggregate large amounts
of resources residing on the edge of Internet, and it with a low cost of system maintenance[1]. By reason of peers are heterogeneous, some peers might be benevolent in
providing services, and some might be even malicious by providing bad services or
harming the consumers. There is no centralized node to serve as an authority to monitor and punish the peers that behave badly, malicious peers have an incentive to
provide poor quality services for their benefit because they can get away[2]. Some
traditional security techniques, such as service providers requiring access authorization, cannot prevent from peers providing variable-quality service. So a major
challenge for large-scale P2P file sharing systems is how to establish trust between
different peers without the benefit of trusted third parties or authorities. Mechanisms
∗

The research work was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of hunan provincial (No:
05FJ3018) and Open Science Foundation of State Key Lab. for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University (No: A2006-06).

Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 741–744, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

742

G.-x. Yue et al.

for trust and reputation can be used to help peers distinguish good or bad partners,
which are about generation, discovery, and aggregation of rating information in P2P
systems.

2 Access Control Model Architecture
There are requirements that an access control model for P2P file sharing systems[3]:
Peers in a P2P system are typically loosely coupled, and interacting partners are
mostly unknown. Access control mechanisms must provide a mechanism for a host
peer to classify users and assign each user different access rights; The incentive for
users to join a P2P file-sharing network is the availability and richness of files the
system provides. Access control mechanisms needs to give peers the ability to control
access to their files it must still encourage them to share their files; The open and
unknown characteristics of P2P make it an ideal environment for malicious users to
spread unsolicited and harmful content. Access control mechanisms should support
mechanisms to limit such malicious spreading, harmful digital content and punish
those who are responsible for it.
Peers in P2P file-sharing systems need the autonomy of controlling accesses to
their files. Host peer as a stand-alone system where shared files are objects that need
to be protected and client peers are subjects who are considered to possess, or gain
access rights. Files on a host peer are rated depending on their size and content. They
computed from combinations of scores: trust and contribution. The client peer is responsible to collect recommendations that contain the information needed to evaluate
its access values for a particular host. After each download transaction, direct trust
and direct contribution of both the client peer and host peers are updated accordingly
to the satisfaction level of the transaction, which then affect the future evaluation of
the access values between these two peers. The architecture sees Figure 1.

Fig. 1. Overlay architecture of a peer with access control implementation

2.1 Trust and Reputation Metrics
Trust is defined as a peer’s belief in attributes such as reliability, honesty of the trusted
peer. Trust can be broadly categorized by the relationships between the two involved
peers. A peer’s belief in another peer’s capabilities, honesty and reliability based on its
own direct experiences, it measures whether a service provider can provide trustworthy

An Access Control Model in Lager-Scale P2P File Sharing Systems

743

services; References refer to the peers that make recommendations or share heir trust
values. It measures whether a host can provide reliable recommendations.
Reputation of a peer defines an expectation about its behavior, which is based on
recommendations received from other peers or information about the peer’s past
behavior within a specific context at a given time. It can be decentralized, computed
independently by each peer after asking other peers for recommendations.
The peer’s trust and reputation development cycle see Figure 2[4].

Fig. 2. Trust and reputation development cycle

2.2 Scoring Scheme for Access Control Model
As a host peer needs to classify its client peers in order to provide them different
access privileges, then model uses a scoring system to differentiate peers based on
their behavior in the P2P network. Hence, after completing the authentication process
with the host, a client peer is required to supply its rating certificates for the host to
calculate the client’s relative access values. They indicate how the host peer perceives
the client’s trustworthiness and contribution level, which is to ensure the peer is
trusted to interact with and to promote fairness in P2P network. There are two sources
of information to compute these two values. One source is the host’s direct experiences with the client, and other peer’s recommendations based on their interactions
with the client. Therefore, the access vales are evaluated via combinations of four
types of scores: direct trust, indirect trust, direct contribution and indirect contribution. It tries to reduce the problem of unfair trading. Figure 3 represents procedures in
a typical interaction between a host and a client in our framework. It can be seen the
scheme adopts more of a “push” approach.

Fig. 3. Flow chart of an interaction between a host peer and a client peer

744

G.-x. Yue et al.

The Algorithm of peers constructing a trust graph as follows
Step1 suppose peer Pt is evaluating the trustworthiness of peer Pk and P is the set of
peers being visited. {Pi, Pj} denotes a referral r to peer Pj returned from peer Pi.
P is a finite set of peers { P1, . . . , Pn }, and R is a set of referrals { r1, . . . , rn}.
Step2 for ( ∀ Pi ∉ P and Pi has not been queried) do
if (Trust(Pi) < TrustBound) then ⇒ Pt queries Pi
Step3 if (Pi is a witness of Pk) then ⇒ Pi returns the rating about Pk to Pt, interation,
compute trust; else
Step4 for ( ∀ r = {Pi, Pj} from Pi) do, computer recommendation
P; else
Step5 if (Pj ∉ P) then ⇒ r R, Pj
Step6 ignore referral r
Step7 evaluation of the interaction, references and update DBs.

→

→

Therefore, it could effectively solve the follows problems
(1) A client submits other peers’ recommendations to a host in the form of rating
certificates.
(2) It is reasonable to expect that the greater the number of peers that the client has
interacted with, the more recommendations it has and the higher its indirect trust as
rated by the host peer.
(3) Avoid specify a required number of recommending peers. In general, this can
vary from peer to peer and depending on the type of transaction.

3 Conclusion
The proposed access control model and score systems help to classify both known and
unknown visitors according to their trustworthiness and contribution. The implemented contribution scores work effectively as a payment scheme; giving incentive
for users to share their resources and safeguarding the fairness of service exchange in
a P2P system. The proposed mechanisms for evaluating a transaction not only help to
differentiate poorly performing peers from good ones but also ensure that malicious
peers are punished and isolated.

References
1. Parameswaran M, Susarla A, Whinston AB. P2P networking: An information-sharing
alternative. Computing Practices, 2001,34(7):31-38.
2. Yao Wang, Julita Vassileva. Bayesian Network-Based Trust Model. Proceedings of the
IEEE/WIC International Conference on Web Intelligence (WI’03)
3. Huu Tran, Michael Hitchens, Vijay Varadharajan, Paul Watters. A Trust based Access Control Framework for P2P File-Sharing Systems. Proceedings of the 38th Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences -2005.
4. Farag Azzedin, Muthucumaru Maheswaran. Trust Modeling for Peer-to-Peer based
Computing Systems. Proceedings of the International Parallel and Distributed Processing
Symposium (IPDPS’03).

