The Portfolio Selection Model of Oil/Gas Projects Based
on Real Option Theory
Zefu Lin1 and Jianyue Ji2
1

School of Management Science and Engineering, Central University of Finance
and Economics, Beijing 100081, China
2
School of Economics, Ocean University of China, Qingdao 266071, China
linzf@cufe.edu.cn, jjx@ouc.edu.cn

Abstract. Portfolio selection of oil/ gas projects is a fundamental subject of
capital budgeting in the energy sector. In industry, strategic planning requires
the selection of a portfolio of projects to advance the corporate goals. The term
portfolio selection is more devoted to a set of financial assets that are easily
traded and divisible. The principles and fundaments of portfolio selection can
be used to compare strategies of investments, so that firms get maximum
returns. In this paper, we discuss the oil/gas projects valuation methods first.
Considering the characteristic of the oil/gas project, Real options method is
more suitable for the oil/gas project than NPV method, and then a new model
extended from the Black-Scholes model is built up. Finally, this paper put
forward the portfolio selection model and gives a Computational case.
Keywords: Portfolio selection; Oil/gas projects; Real options theory.

1 Introduction
The decisions of committing limited resources to multiple uses can either strengthen
or deteriorate their very financial foundation. On one end of the spectrum, capital
budgeting procedures often employ traditional operations research (OR) techniques to
guide and support decisions. On the other end, executives admit that selections come
down to intuition. Typically, however, what is common is to build models that
employ pro-forma plans centering on measures of the benefits of the investments –
returns and risk.
Energy plays an important role in the global economy and politics. The decision
about oil/ gas projects is also important for the industry and government. Developing
an oil and/or gas field nowadays is subject to considerably larger investments in time,
money, and technology. Furthermore, such large investments are almost always based
on imperfect, scant, and uncertain information.
Extraction of oil (and/or gas) from a virgin field is undertaken in typically four
stages: exploration and appraisal; development; production; and abandonment. This is
a gross simplification, of course, for within each phase there are a multitude of
technical, commercial, and operational considerations for the management to take
optional action. Keeping one eye on real options, in their crudest form these phases
can be briefly described as follows:
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part III, LNCS 4489, pp. 945–952, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

946

Z. Lin and J. Ji

Exploration and Appraisal: Seismic data is obtained and a picture of the subsurface
is then revealed. Coupled with geological knowledge, experience, and observations it
is then possible to generate a more detailed depiction of a possible hydrocarbonbearing zone. Seismic data cannot tell what fluids are present in the rock, so an
exploratory well needs to be drilled to better establish the nature, size, and type of an
oil and gas field.
Development: Once sufficient data has been obtained (from seismic or exploratory
wells) to make an educated judgment on the size of the prize, we enter into the
development phase. Here we decide upon the most commercially viable way for
exploiting this new resource by engineering the number (and type) of producing
wells, process facilities, and transportation. We must also establish if, at all, any
pressure support is necessary.
Production: Depending on the size of the reserve, the engineer must manage this
resource as carefully as any other valuable asset. Reservoir management (the manner
and strategy in which we produce from a field) has become increasingly important
over the past few years. Increasing the efficiency of our production from our
reservoirs is now a crucial part of any engineering effort.
Abandonment: Once reserves have been depleted, the infrastructure can either be
left to decay or – increasingly – it must be dismantled in an environmentally and
economically efficient manner.
Portfolio selection of oil/ gas projects is a fundamental subject of capital budgeting
in the energy sector. In industry, strategic planning requires the selection of a
portfolio of projects to advance the corporate goals. The theory of financial portfolio
is well developed and popular with the Markowitz’ portfolio theory, which is based in
the mean-variance optimization approach (Markowitz, 1959) .This theory, has
tentatively been extended to real projects portfolio case, mainly in professional
literature. However, although there are good papers showing that diversification
principles remain valid (e.g., see Ball Jr. & Savage, 1999), the real projects case
demands a richer portfolio theory in order to capture issues like synergy between real
projects and the real options embedded into real projects such as the option to defer
and learning options.
There are many challenges in implementing oil/gas portfolios. In particular, the
risk and return of individual projects within the portfolio must be characterized in a
consistent manner in order to achieve a minimum-risk and a maximum-return.
Clearly, it is important to use economic evaluation techniques to characterize these
risks and impacts on company performance and long-term value. Traditional methods
based upon discounted cash flow (DCF) reported in the finance literature are always
based upon static assumptions – no mention about the value of embodied managerial
options.
For the case of mutually exclusive projects as those to develop oil and gas reserves,
DCF rule tends to favor those with higher NPV values. However, in practice many
managers overrule passive net present value (NPV) analysis by using intuition and
executive judgment to take future managerial flexibility into assets values (Trigeorgis,
1996. There has been a move to use stochastic or dynamic methods in economic
evaluations and portfolio management due to work of several researchers. Luehrman,

The Portfolio Selection Model of Oil/Gas Projects Based on Real Option Theory

947

(1994), Copeland (1990) among others, suggest the use of option-based techniques to
value implicit managerial flexibility in investment opportunities.
The valuation of projects and business opportunities using DCF and real option
theory (ROT) is based on cost-benefit analysis, but they are different in the treatment
of risk. Risk is the possibility of loss or gains since future values are dispersed around
expected mean values so that the only way to measure risk is using probabilistic
approach. Mathematical models for option valuation were firstly developed to price
those on common stocks, exchange and interest rates, among others and later
migrated to value real options on real assets from industrial projects. Volatility is not
preset in DCF, but plays a remarkable role in option pricing.
Option theory methods for oil/ gas projects in the literature seem preoccupied with
concern about the affect of future, uncertain oil and gas prices and, less so, on the
non-financial options involved. Paddock, J., Siegel, D. and Smith, J. (1988) examine the
options arising as better information through time reduces uncertainties in the
exploitation of development assets. Luehrman, (1994) delves into the cost of
foreclosing the option to develop an oil and gas asset; Lohrenz (1991) does so with
respect to shut-in and abandonment of assets.
Obviously, oil/ gas projects give rise to different net cash flows. Each net cash flow
has its own uncertainties and the market reacts to the perceived uncertainties. Jacoby
and Margrabe (1978) give an option theory valuation methodology that considers each
of the cost, net revenue, and tax cash flows and their unique uncertainties. The
claimed advantage for their methodology is the ability to define the different risks
associated through time for the investor and the taxing government.

2 Real Option Methods for Oil/Gas Project Valuation
Real options rest upon an analogy between real option value levers and financial
option value levers. Luehrman (1994) established a mapping between project
characteristics and financial option value drivers as depicted in table 1.
Table 1. Mapping between real option and financial option

Financial option Value

Variable

Real options Value

Exercise price

X

Investment cost

Stock price

A

Time to expiry

T

Risk-free interest rate

rf

Uncertainty of stock price
movements

σ

Present value of expected
cash flows
Time to expiry
Risk-free interest rate
Volatility of expected cash
flows

948

Z. Lin and J. Ji

The investment cost is equivalent to the exercise price (X). When keeping the other
real options levers constant, an increase in X will decrease the value of the project as
X represents a negative cash flow.
The present value of the expected cash flows is analogous to the stock price (A).
The higher the stock price the higher the value of the option. As a result, an increase
in the present value of the expected cash flows will increase the overall value of the
project.
The time to expiry is analogous to the time to maturity of a financial option (T). It
is the maximum time period – expressed in years – which an investment can be
deferred without losing the option to investment in the project. In an uncertain
environment, the more time there is to learn about the uncertainty then the more
insight will be gained of how to appropriately address the uncertainty. As a result, a
longer time to expiry will increase the value of the project.
The risk-free rate ( r f ) will increase (decrease) the value of a call (put) option
because it will reduce the present value of the stock price (A). It will have the same
effect when applied to a real options situation.
The volatility of expected cash flows ( σ ) is analogous to the volatility of stock
price movements. Thus, a higher volatility will increase the value of the option.
Two fundamental methods for pricing financial options are the binomial tree model
and the Black-Scholes model. In addition to the two models, and Margrabe (1978) put
forward the pricing model which be used in exchange option pricing. These optionpricing models also can be used in the oil/gas projects. In the standard binomial tree
model (Cox J., S. Ross and M. Rubinstein, 1979), Let C is the value of call option
Let A follow the binomial distribution, Starting at t0, in one time period Δt, V may
rise to uV with probability q or fall to dV with probability 1-q, where d<1, u>1 and
d<r<u, with r being 1+ r f .
So in the binomial tree model, under the assumption of risk-neutral, we can get:

p≡
C=

rf − d

σ
u−d ，u =e

Δt

−σ
，d =e

Δt

pC u + (1 − p )C d
pMax (0, uA − X ) + (1 − p) Max (0, dA − X )
=
1 + rf
1 + rf

(1)
.

This is the binomial tree pricing model of European call options that also can be
used in oil/gas project valuation.

3 The Portfolio Selection Model Based on Real Option Theory
Based on characteristic of oil/gas project, we can extend the Black-Scholes (1973) as
follows according to the previous research (Bjerksund & Stensland, 1993). The
Variables in the model are listed in Table 2.

The Portfolio Selection Model of Oil/Gas Projects Based on Real Option Theory

949

Table 2. Variables in the model

F: Unit value of non-developed reserve；

I: Unit Investment cost;

Π: Unit profit

B: amount of developed reserve;

σ: Volatility of V (% per year)

T: total maturity period (years)

δ: Cash flow or “dividend yield” (%)

R: rate of return from developed
reserves;
ω : Yearly production of the global
V: Unit value of developed reserve or
underlying asset;
reserve (%)
r: real risk free interest rate after tax (% per
τ: Time interval to expire the lease
year)
rights;
μ: Risk-adjusted discount rate or expected
dz: Wiener’s increment to add
rate of return from V (%)
uncertain to the process;
The model assumes that production evolves over time as exponential decline curve
as:
dB = -

ω B dt .

(2)

Here, B is the amount of oil and ω a fraction of the remained global reserve
produced every year until economic depletion.
Then we can get the general for option valuation and similar to Black-Scholes
equation.

∂F (V , t )
∂F (V , t )
1 2 2 ∂ 2 F (V , t )
σ V
+ (r − δ )
+r
− rF = 0 (3)
2
2
∂V
∂t
∂V
.
Considering the economic meaning, we can set certain boundary conditions for the
equation. Then we can get the possible approximate solution for the Eq.(4) under
certain boundary conditions is given by Bjerksund & Stensland (1993):

V ∗ = B0 + ( B∞ − B0 )(1 − e h (T ) )

(4)

.

Where:

1 (r − δ )
2r
⎡ (r − δ ) 1 ⎤
+ ⎢
− ⎥ + 2
β= −
2
2
2
2⎦
σ
σ
⎣ σ
2

B∞ =

β

β −1
⎡ ⎛ r ⎞ ⎤
B0 = max ⎢ I , ⎜
⎟I ⎥
⎣ ⎝r −δ ⎠ ⎦
h (T ) = − (( ρ − δ )T + 2 σ

⎛
B0
T ) * ⎜⎜
B
⎝ ∞ − B0

⎞
⎟⎟ .
⎠

(5)

950

Z. Lin and J. Ji

When the firm exercises the option to develop the reserve, there is a exchange
between investment and reserve value that may take place now or in the future. Then,
a general expression for option valuation is of the form:
In a general case when the firm has n projects, the portfolio selection problem
reduces to Maximize portfolio’s NPV as:
n

Max∑ NPV j x j
j =1

n

S .t.∑ I j x j ≤ I * .

(6)

j =1

x j = 0or1
Zero-one programming is better than the other portfolio selection methods such as
index ranking etc. since it allows optimization of the full budget together with
maximum NPV or other DCF’s indicator. Considering the real option included in the
petroleum projects, the portfolio selection model should reconsider the optimization
objective as followed:
N

Max∑V j* x j
j =1

n

S .t.∑ I j x j ≤ I * .

(7)

j =1

x j = 0or1
4 Computational Case
Firm L has 4 oil/gas projects to develop proved reserves under a constrained budget
of US$ 600 million. Table 3 shows the geological and financial aspects of all potential
reserves. These reserves present little proportionality among many variables,
especially in correlation to reserve’s size.
Table 3. Data of the potential projects
Projects

A

B

C

D

Price (US$)

54

54

54

54

B (MMbbl)

500

600

850

620

δ(%)

2%

1.5%

1.2%

2%

T(year)
Investment (MM US$)

25

19

22

15

150

240

180

250

The Portfolio Selection Model of Oil/Gas Projects Based on Real Option Theory

951

Considering that all projects present similar geological characteristics and
comparable risk features, managers may be tempted to select project A, B, C
according to the original decision model based on the NPV rule and the total NPV of
the portfolio is 424. And the considering the uncertainty embodied in the oil/gas
projects and the flexibility, the manager will select projects A, C, D from the portfolio
based on Eq.(4),(5),(7)and the total value is 763 (see table 4 ).
Table 4. Results from NPV and real option analysis
Projects

A

B

C

D

NPV (M US$)

121

145

158

132

V* (M US $)

253

191

284

226

On the other hand, if these reserves do not reach their respective V*, which would
happen because of price reduction or cost increase. In this case, the firm would
develop immediately only reserve C, and save a large part of budget to be allocated in
more profitable opportunities. Valuable option to wait leads firms to invest only at
large positive NPV, the impact of competition drastically erodes the value of the
option to wait and leads to investment at very near the NPV threshold. However, this
is valid for competitive markets where firms don’t have proprietary options,
especially in projects of research and development (R&D), and not for proprietary
options as the development of reserves, with embodied geological, operational, and
financial uncertainties that enrich the option timing.

5 Conclusions
Portfolio selection of oil/ gas projects is a fundamental subject of capital budgeting
in the energy sector. In industry, strategic planning requires the selection of a
portfolio of projects to advance the corporate goals. In this paper, we discuss the
oil/gas projects valuation methods first. Considering the characteristic of the oil/gas
project, Real options method is more suitable for the oil/gas project than NPV
method, and then a new model extended from the Black-Scholes model is built up.
Finally, this paper put forward the portfolio selection model and gives a
Computational case.
In this paper, we just discuss the single real option in the oil/gas projects. Actually,
the decision-making may be different if option timing is not valuable or easily eroded
by competitors. It is difficult if consider the compound option or the role of learning
options and synergy between two or more real projects. The impact of sequential
investment and active management on the value of a portfolio of real options also will
increase the complexity of the problem. In following research, we will continue our
research on the portfolio selection of the oil/gas project with compound option or the
learning options and synergy between two or more real projects.

952

Z. Lin and J. Ji

References
1. Markowitz, H.: Portfolio Selection, J. of Finance, (1952) 77-91.
2. Luehrman, T.A.: Extending the Influence of Real Options: Problems and Opportunities,
paper SPE 71407, presented at the 2001 Annual Technical Conference and Exhibition,
New Orleans, Louisiana, 2001.
3. Paddock, J., Siegel, D. and Smith, J.: Option Valuation of Claims on Physical Assets: The
Case of Offshore Petroleum Leases, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 103 (1988): 479508.
4. Trigeorgis L., Real Options: Managerial Flexibility and Strategy in Resource Allocation,
MIT Press Cambridge, Massachusetts. 1996
5. Barone-Adesi G. and Whaley R.E. : Efficient Analytical Approximation of American
Option Values, Journal of Finance, (1987)301-320
6. Cox J., S. Ross and M. Rubinstein: Option Pricing: A Simplified Approach, Journal of
Financial Economics, (1979)229-263
7. Margrabe, W.: The Value of an Option to Exchange One Asset for Another, Journal of
Finance, 33(1978) 177-186.
8. Dixit A.K. and Pindyck R.S. :Investment under Uncertainty, Princeton University Press,
Princeton, NJ, 1994
9. Copeland T., Koller T. and Murrin J. Valuation: Measuring and Managing the Value of
Companies, John Wiley and Sons, NY, 1990
10. Black F. and M. Scholes: The Pricing of Options and Corporate Liabilities, Journal of
Political Economy, (1973)637-659
11. Luehrman, Timothy A.: Capital Projects as Real Options: An Introduction, Harvard
Business School Technical Note, 1994
12. Dixit, A. K., R. S. Pindyck. Investment Under Uncertainty. Princeton University Press,
Princeton, 1994

