Content-Based Image Retrieval
Using Shifted Histogram
Gi-Hyoung Yoo1, Beob Kyun Kim2, and Kang Soo You3
1

Department of Computer Engineering, Chonbuk National University,
Jeonju, 561-756, Korea
ghryoo@gmail.com
2
Korea Institute of science and technology Information, Daejeon, 350-806, korea
Bkyun.kim@gmail.com
3
School of Liberal Arts, Jeonju University, Jeonju, 561-756, Korea
kangsoo.you@gmail.com

Abstract. This paper proposes the shifted histogram method (SHM), for
histogram-based image retrieval based on the dominant colors in images. The
histogram-based method is very suitable for color image retrieval because
retrievals are unaffected by geometrical changes in images, such as translation
and rotation. Images with the same visual information, but with shifted color
intensity, may significantly degrade if the conventional histogram intersection
method (HIM) is used. In order to solve this problem, we propose the shifted
histogram method (SHM). Our experimental results show that the shifted
histogram method
Keywords: Content-Based Image Retrieval, Color Histogram, Shift Histogram.

1 Introduction
Content-based image retrieval (CBIR) is a promising approach to search through an
image database by means of image feature, such as appearance, color, texture, shape,
pattern, or a combination these factors [1], [2], [3], [4]. In the Histogram intersection
method (HIM) [5], [6] is the most common approach for using the intersected area of
histograms acquired from image features.
Although the conventional color histogram method can describe the global color
distribution of images in a straightforward manner, it only provides a very coarse
characterization of images. There is no spatial information included in the color
histogram. Thus, two completely different images may have very similar histograms.
Also, the lighting conditions will alter the histogram of an image. Even two pictures
with little difference in lighting conditions can not easily be matched.
In PWH (perceptually weighted histogram) by Lu et al. [7], each color from an
image is represented by its 10 nearest similar colors. However, HIM still takes place
of the full color-range (e.g. 256 colors) of the two images being compared. In MHM
(merged histogram method), colors from individual images and between images are
merged to form a dominant color set, instead of color components. The idea behind
MHM is to retrieve images in a database of which the intensity has been changed by
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part III, LNCS 4489, pp. 894–897, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Content-Based Image Retrieval Using Shifted Histogram

895

light. However, this method requires greater processing capability to generate feature
vectors.
In this paper, we propose a novel shifted histogram method (SHM), to overcome
the disadvantages of the conventional histogram method.

2 Histogram-Based Color Image Retrieval
The histogram-based method is very suitable for color image retrieval, because this
method is unaffected by geometrical information in images, such as translation and
rotation. The histogram intersection method (HIM) [5],[6] measures the intersections
between the two image histograms. These intersections are usually named query
image for the query input and target image for the image database. An image
histogram is an n-dimensional vector, in which each element represents the number of
pixels of color in the n-color image.
Regardless of image size, each element is normalized before comparison. The
similarity measure is then calculated by calculating the histogram intersection, as
shown in equation (1).
n

I (T , Q ) = ∑ min(Tk , Qk )

(1)

k =1

The larger the value has, the more similar the image has in equation (1). Images
can then be ranked from the image database.

3 Shifted Histogram Method (SHM)
In a more general mathematical sense, a histogram is simply a mapping that counts
the number of observations that fall into various disjoint categories (known as bins),
whereas the graph of a histogram is merely one way to represent a histogram. Thus, if
we let the total number of observations be the total number of bins, the histogram
meets the following conditions in figure 1.

Fig. 1. Histogram of original image and shifted image by light change

The proposed SHM can be divided into 4 stages before similarity measurement.
The process is as follows:

896

G.-H. Yoo, B.K. Kim, and K.S. You

Comments : h (Q ) -a histogram of query image, h (T ) -a
histogram of image in database, k -a histogram bin,
n -the number of total bins, Sim(T , Q ) -Similarity
between query image and image in database
Step 1 : Sim(T , Q ) = 0, qk = 1, tk = 1
Step 2 :

Make a histogram h (Q ) and h (T )

Step 3 : If hqk (Q ) > Threshold then go to Step 5,
otherwise, go to Step 4
Step 4 : If qk < n then qk = qk + 1 , go to Step3,
otherwise, go to Step 8
Step 5 : If htk (T ) > Threshold then go to Step 7,
otherwise go to Step 6
Step 6 : If tk < n then tk = tk + 1 , go to Step 5,
otherwise go to Step 8
Step 7 : Sim(T , Q ) = Sim(T , Q ) + min( hqk (Q ), htk (T ))
If qk < n and tk < n then qk = qk + 1 ,

tk = tk + 1 , go to Step 3,
otherwise go to Step 8.
Sim(T , Q )
Step 8 : Sim(T , Q ) =
The Number of Pixel used in Query Image
Step 9 : Return

4 Experiments
The analysis of histogram effectiveness in image discrimination is mainly used for the
design of image retrieval systems. In order to test the performance of our method, we
have implemented several groups of experiments. The testing image database includes
images with a wide range of image content, such as nature scenes, flowers, animals,
cars, trains, and so on.
The performance of the retrieval results is measured by Precision, Recall [8] and
AVRR (AVerage Rank of Relevant images). Relevant images are referred to as
images in the same class. In table 1 and table 2, the performance of SHM, MCH and
CHM is compared in terms of precision, recall and AVRR.
Table 1. Result of the three methods in flowers

Method
SHM
MCH
CHM

Result

7
6
4

Recall
0.78

0.59
0.47

Precision

AVRR

0.67
0.61
0.51

4.2
4.0
3.5

Content-Based Image Retrieval Using Shifted Histogram

897

Table 2. Result of the three methods in trains

Method
SHM
MCH
CHM

Result

7
6
4

Recall
0.78

0.59
0.47

Precision

AVRR

0.67
0.61
0.51

4.2
4.0
3.5

5 Conclusion
The shifted-color histogram method (SHM) is proposed for histogram-based image
retrieval, and is based on the dominant colors in images. The histogram-based method
is very suitable for color image retrieval because it is unaffected by geometrical
changes in images, such as translation and rotation. However, images with similar
visual information but with shifted color intensity, may result in a significant
degradation in the similarity level, if the conventional histogram intersection method
(HIM) is used. To solve the problem, the shifted histogram method (SHM) is
proposed.
In comparison with other methods, our method is more straightforward. It doesn't
haves special requirements or extra restrictions for images, for content-based image
retrieval. Our experimental results show that the shifted histogram method has
significantly higher retrieval effectiveness than the standard histogram method. In
future study, the proposed retrieval method is expected to be applied to large scale
image and video databases.

References
1. Flickner, M. et al.: Query by image and video content: The QBIC system. IEEE Computer,
Vol. 28(9). (1995) 23–32
2. Swain, M.J., Ballard, D.H.: Color indexing. Int. J. Computer Vision, Vol. 7(1). (1991)
11–32.
3. Gagaudakis, G., Rosin, P.: Incoprerating shape into histograms for CBIR. Proc. Int. Conf.
Image Processing, Thessaloniki, Greece, (2001) 7–10
4. Rui, Y., Huang, T., Chang, S.F.: Image Retrieval:Current Techniques, Promising Directions
and Open Issues. J. Visual Communication and Image Representation, Vol. 10. (1999)
39–62
5. Wong, K.M., Cheung, C.H., Po, L.M.: Dominant Color Image Retrieval using Merged
Histogram. Proc. the 2003 Int. Symposium, (2003)
6. Wong, K.M., Cheung, C.H., Po, L.M.: Merged-color histogram for color image retrieval.
Proc. of the 2002 Int. Conference, (2002) 24–28
7. Seong, O.S., Choi, T.S.: Edge Color Histogram for Image Retrieval. IEEE ICIP 0–7803–
7622–6/02/ (2000)
8. Muller, H., Muller, W., Squire D., Marchand, M.S., Pun, T.: Performance Evaluation in
Content-Based Image Retrieval:Overview and Proposals. Pattern Recognition Letters, Vol.
22(5). (2001) 593–601

