Characterisation of the Surfactant Shell Stabilising
Calcium Carbonate Dispersions in Overbased Detergent
Additives: Molecular Modelling and Spin-Probe-ESR
Studies
Francesco Frigerio and Luciano Montanari
ENI R&M, SDM-CHIF, via Maritano 26,
20097 San Donato Milanese, Italy
{francesco.frigerio, luciano.montanari}@eni.it

Abstract. The surfactant shell stabilising the calcium cabonate core in overbased
detergent additives of lubricant base oils was characterised by computational and
experimental methods, comprising classical force-field based molecular simulations and spin-probe Electron Spin Resonance spectroscopy. An atomistic model
is proposed for the detergents micelle structure. The dynamical behaviour observed during diffusion simulations of three nitroxide spin-probe molecules into
micelle models could be correlated to their mobility as determined from ESR
spectra analysis. The molecular mobility was found to be dependent on the
chemical nature of the surfactants in the micelle external shell.

1 Introduction
The lubrication of modern internal combustion engines requires the addition of specific additives to the base oils to improve the overall performance (minimization of
corrosion, deposits and varnish formation in the engine hot areas) [1]. Calcium sulphonates are the most widely used metallic detergent additives. They are produced by
sulfonation of synthetic alkylbenzenes. The simplest member would be a neutral alkylbenzene sulphonate with an alkyl solubilizing group approximately C18 to C20 or
higher to provide adequate oil solubility. In addition to metallic detergents such as the
neutral sulphonate, modern oil formulations contain basic compounds which provide
some detergency. Their main function, however, is to neutralize acid and to prevent
corrosion from acid attack. It is economically advantageous to incorporate as much
neutralizing power in the sulphonate molecule as possible: excess base in the form of
calcium carbonate can be dispersed in micelles [2, 3] to produce the so-called overbased sulphonates. Dispersions of calcium carbonate stabilized by calcium sulphonates have been characterized [4] using different techniques: electron microscopy [5],
ultracentrifugation [6], and neutron scattering [7]. SAXS results show that overbased
calcium sulphonates appear as polydisperse micelles having an average calcium carbonate core radius of 2.0 nm with a standard deviation of 0.4 nm [8]. The overbased
calcium sulphonates form reverse micelles in oil, consisting of amorphous calcium
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part II, LNCS 4488, pp. 272–279, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Characterisation of the Surfactant Shell Stabilising Calcium Carbonate Dispersions

273

carbonate nanoparticles surrounded by sulphonate surfactants. The polar heads (sulphonate) are attached to the metal core, while the hydrocarbon tails of hydrophobic
nature stabilize the colloidal particle in the non-polar oil medium. Coupling three surface analyses techniques (XPS, XANES and ToF-SIMS) it was observed that there is
a presence of some residual calcium hydroxide in the micellar core which is located
prevalently at the surroundings of the micelle core [9]. ToF-SIMS shows that the molecular structures of detergent molecules are in good agreement with micelles synthesis data; little is still known on surfactant shell physical nature.
The compactness of the surfactant shells could play an important role to prevent
negative consequences due to the interaction of carbonate core with other additives
used in oil formulation or with water molecules. Such interactions cause the calcium
carbonate separation by precipitation. In this study the molecular dynamics within the
surfactant shell was probed in a combined computational and experimental approach
by a small nitroxide such as TEMPO (2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-N-oxyl) and two
nitroxide-labelled fatty acids (5- and 16-doxyl-stearic acids). In fact, nitroxides are
known to exhibit ESR spectra that depend on the mobility of the spin-probe and the
micro-viscosity of the probe environment. They have been used to evaluate the microstructure of the absorbed layer of surfactants and polymers at the solid-liquid interface
[10-14] and also inside composite polymers [15, 16].
Detailed three-dimensional models were previously proposed for small overbased
micelles containing various classes of surfactants [17-21]. Experimental measurements collected in our laboratory (data not shown) pointed to a couple of important
micelle features: a flat disk shape for the inner core and a tightly packed outer shell.
The core is mainly composed of amorphous calcium carbonate and it is surrounded by
a distribution of surfactant molecules, arranged as a single layer with polar groups
contacting the core surface. The diffusion of TEMPO and labelled fatty acids through
the overbased micelle surfactant shell was simulated by a classical molecular mechanics methodology. The force-field based simulations protocols were applied to detailed
atomistic models, which were built limited to the central portion of the micelle structure and contain all its essential features. The slow molecular motions of the stable
surfactant layer around the rigid inorganic core could be reproduced by performing
molecular dynamics calculations. Furthermore, the movements of the nitroxide spinprobes were studied by an approach combining forced diffusion and constraint-free
molecular dynamics. Stable locations of such small molecules could be defined for
each micelle model under investigation.
It is assumed that the polar head groups of the probe molecules (nitroxide for
TEMPO and carboxylic for fatty acids) tend to be placed on the surface of the calcium
carbonate cores. ESR spectra give information about the viscosity of the local environment at different distances from carbonate surface (at the boundary for TEMPO,
while at 5- and 16- carbon positions for the two spin-labelled fatty acids). In our laboratory different surfactant molecules were used in the synthesis of overbased detergents with high calcium carbonate content, expressed as Total Base Number (the
amount of soluble colloidal carbonate and of metal oxide and hydroxide, measured as
equivalent milligrams of KOH per gram of sample [22]). Three overbased detergents
with TBN=300 and a mixture of mono- and di-alkyl-benzene-sulphonate were
analyzed.

274

F. Frigerio and L. Montanari

2 Experimental Methods
An approach combining computer graphics and atomistic simulations [17, 19]
produced a detailed model for the central portion of the overbased micelle structure.
The essential model features (thickness and internal structure of the core, concentration and location of excess hydroxide ions, density and molecular arrangement of the
shell) were inferred from analytical determinations performed on the detergent micelles that were produced in our laboratories (data not shown). Different relative concentrations of the surfactants were used to build the external shell of three micelle
models, referred to as model a, b, c throughout this paper. The starting molecular and
ionic building blocks were selected and manually manipulated within the InsightII
[23] graphical interface in order to set up initial atomic distributions. A partial micelle
model was built as an inorganic slab surrounded by two surfactant layers, one on top
of each of its largest surfaces. Three-dimensional periodic boundary conditions were
constantly applied during simulations in order to avoid model truncation effects.
Atomic parameters were assigned from the pcff force field [24]. Afterwards an amorphous calcium carbonate core (with a small concentration of hydroxide ions) and a
tight surfactant shell were generated by applying stepwise Monte Carlo docking and
molecular dynamics [25] to limited portions of the micelle models. These simulations
were performed by using InsightII and Discover [23], respectively. Along this part of
the model building process, the uninvolved atoms were kept frozen. Nitroxide spinprobes were then added to the system assembly, after subjecting the obtained micelle
models to extensive energy relaxation. The starting configurations contain a small
cluster of spin-probe molecules, packed in a single layer contacting the micelle surfactant shell. Respectively, 14 molecules of TEMPO, 6 of 5-doxyl-stearic acid and 6
of 16-doxyl-stearic acid were used. The forced diffusion procedure available within
InsightII [23] was carefully tailored to suit the overbased micelle model features. Its
application followed the thorough energy minimisation of each one of the starting
system configurations. Since the molecular motions within tightly packed assemblies
are very slow, they were accelerated by adding a directional force for a very short
time period at the beginning of the simulations, with the effect of gently pushing the
nitroxide spin-probes toward the micelle core. In this way the extremely long process
of generating spontaneous but unfrequent diffusion pathways could be avoided and
the simulations were concentrated on the more interesting task of studying the small
molecule motions throughout the micelle surfactant shell. The potential energy of the
system and the relative distances between the nitroxide groups of the spin-probes and
the micelle core center were derived by analysing the trajectories collected during the
following free molecular dynamics simulations. These values were finally compared
to the results from equivalent simulations, performed without the previous application
of the forced diffusion protocol and used as a reference (non-diffusive) state.
All spin-probe molecules (Aldrich Chemie) were diluted at 0.3 mM concentration
into a mixture of SN150/SN500 (produced by ENI according to ASTM standard
specification) lubricant bases (2/1 by weight). The overbased detergents were dissolved (at 30% by weight) into the spin-probe/lubricant solutions. The ESR spectra
were collected with a Bruker ESP 300E spectrometer conditioned at a temperature
of 50°C.

Characterisation of the Surfactant Shell Stabilising Calcium Carbonate Dispersions

275

3 Results
The diffusion pathways of TEMPO and of 5- and 16- spin-probe labelled stearic acids
were followed and compared in the three model-built partial micelles (identified as a,
b, c) with share an identical inorganic core but differ by the molecular distribution of
surfactants in the external shell.
ΔEpot vs -Δdist
TEMPO in a, b, c

1500
1000
500
0
-500
0

5

10

15

Fig. 1. Plot (left): -Δdistance (Å) vs ΔEpotential (kcal·mol-1) from the simulation of TEMPO into
micelle models a (grey), b (blue), c (magenta). Pictures (right): simulation boxes with 14 molecules (orange, Van der Waals) diffused into models a (green), b (yellow), c (cyan), composed
of inorganic core (Van der Waals) and surfactant layers (ball and stick).

The force constant application produced diffusive pathways during dynamics trajectories (Fig. 1) for the micelle models containing TEMPO. The average penetration
depth of the TEMPO nitroxide group into the micelle model is shortest and most energetically unfavourable (Fig. 1, left) within model a, while the results are slightly
better with model b and at their best within model c. The potential energy cost payed
for the production of TEMPO diffusive pathways appears high and generally increasing with the force constant value. For fast comparison among the micelle models only
very short trajectories were analysed. Further, longer molecular dynamics simulations
(data not shown) completely release all strain accumulated during the first part of the
ΔEpot vs -Δdist
d5sta in a, b, c
1500
1000
500
0
-500
0

5

10

15

Fig. 2. Plot (left): -Δdistance (Å) vs ΔEpotential (kcal·mol-1) from the simulation of 5-doxylstearic acid into micelle models a (grey), b (blue), c (magenta). Pictures (right): simulation
boxes with 6 molecules (orange, Van der Waals) diffused into models a (green), b (yellow), c
(cyan), composed of inorganic core (Van der Waals) and surfactant layers (ball and stick).

276

F. Frigerio and L. Montanari

diffusive process, while the final configurations do not differ significantly. One of the
final, energetically relaxed TEMPO diffusion configurations is depicted for each of
the three models a, b, c (Fig. 1, right). While most spin-probe molecules are located
into the surfactant shell, only a few of them can get in contact with the carbonate core.
These results can be compared to the dynamic behaviour of 5-doxyl-stearic acid
(Fig. 2). The average equilibrium penetration depth towards the micelle core (Fig. 2,
left) is similar to what observed with TEMPO, but the generally lower potential
energy cost reveals an easier diffusion through the surfactant shell. Anyway the structure of the two spin-probes is different: the stearic acid bears a nitroxide group laterally grafted to its long tail, therefore the reported distances from the micelle core
(Fig. 2) apply to a longer molecule than in the case of TEMPO (Fig. 1). However, the
order of spin-probe diffusion efficiencies through the three micelle models is again
found as: a < b < c. Three of the resulting relaxed configurations are reported (Fig. 2,
right). Differently from TEMPO, only a small fraction of the labelled stearic acid
molecules is able to reach a deep location into the surfactant shell.
ΔEpot vs -Δdist
16sta in a, b, c
1500
1000
500
0
-500
0

5

10

15

Fig. 3. Plot (left): -Δdistance (Å) vs ΔEpotential (kcal·mol-1) from the simulation of 16-doxylstearic acid into micelle models a (grey), b (blue), c (magenta). Pictures (right): simulation
boxes with 6 molecules (orange, Van der Waals) diffused into models a (green), b (yellow), c
(cyan), composed of inorganic core (Van der Waals) and surfactant layers (ball and stick).

Comparable results were obtained from the analysis of the 16-doxyl-stearic acid
dynamics trajectories (Fig. 3). The average equilibrium penetration depth (Fig. 3, left)
plotted against the potential energy cost still reveals some differences: model c is
slightly favoured over b, and this last over a. Limited penetration into the surfactant
shell is generally observed, compared to 5-doxyl-stearic acid. This can be attributed to
the nitroxide group location further away from the the spin-probe polar head in the
16-doxyl-stearic acid. Three energetically relaxed configurations, resulting from the
interaction of a cluster of 16-doxyl-stearic acid with models a, b, c, are reported
(Fig. 3, right). As previously evidenced, the penetration of the surfactant shell by
these spin-probe molecules is limited and they do not get in close contact with the
core surface, differently from what happens with TEMPO.
The ESR spectra recorded for spin-probe molecules in solutions containing overbased micelles a, b and c are presented in Fig. 4, 5, and 6. Frequently such spectra
show the superimposition of two components, an isotropic triplet produced by freely
moving molecules and an anisotropic feature typical of a species located in a rigid

Characterisation of the Surfactant Shell Stabilising Calcium Carbonate Dispersions

277

environment. The characteristic shape of that anisotropic signal originates from the
rotation of cylindrical molecules. In the adopted conditions 2A// hyperfine parallel
coupling could be measured on most recorded spectra; its values are reported on
Table 1.

Fig. 4. ESR spectra of a solution of TEMPO in base lubricant oil containing, respectively,
overbased micelles a (top), b (middle), c (bottom)

The results obtained with TEMPO (Fig. 4) clearly show the two components described above. The 2A// values (Table 1) for the three overbased micelles are quite similar to each other, though a somewhat lower rigidity is suggested for model a (Fig. 4,
top). The aspect of ESR spectrum for model b (Fig. 4, middle) is dominated by the isotropic signal, revealing a lower population of the anisotropic species, compared to the
other two overbased micelle solutions.

Fig. 5. ESR spectra of a solution of 5-doxyl-stearic acid in base lubricant oil containing, respectively, overbased micelles a (top), b (middle), c (bottom)

The 2A// values (Table 1) measured for 5-doxyl-stearic acid (Fig. 5) reveal a less
rigid environment around the nitroxide group, as compared to TEMPO. This is
slightly more evident for models b and c (Fig. 5, middle and bottom).

Fig. 6. ESR spectra of a solution of 16-doxyl-stearic acid in base lubricant oil containing, respectively, overbased micelles a (top), b (middle), c (bottom)

278

F. Frigerio and L. Montanari

With the 16-labelled stearic acid spin-probe (Fig. 6) a 2A// value could be measured (Table 1) only in the spectrum recorded for micelle a (Fig. 6, top), whereas in the
other cases no hyperfine coupling could be detected by the peak analysis.
Table 1. Hyperfine parallel coupling 2A// values measured from the ESR spectra of overbased
micelle solutions with three different spin-probes

Spin-Probe
micelle a
micelle b
micelle c

TEMPO
72.9
74.5
74.1

5-doxyl- stearic acid
66.3
64.5
63.5

16-doxyl-stearic acid
69

The differences in mobility observed by comparing the ESR spin probe spectra
mainly ensued from their diverse spin-label distances from the micelle core polar surface. The carboxyl group of both labelled fatty acids was strongly attracted but could
not reach it through the surfactant shell. On the contrary TEMPO was able to penetrate deeply and produced the highest 2A// values. The larger coupling value for 5doxyl spin probe in micelle a is due to peculiar alkyl chain features of that surfactant
shell. This effect is observed only with labelled fatty acids and is put into greater evidence when the nitroxide sits at a long distance from the micelle core as in 16-doxylstearic acid: the 2A// value is higher than for 5-doxyl-stearic acid in micelle a, while
in micelles b and c the mobility is comparable to that of a free molecule in solution.

4 Discussion
The development of new generations of surfactants for lubricant oil additives requires
an accurate characterisation of the reverse micelle structure of the overbased detergents [26]. In this study a combination of experimental and computational results
helped defining a correlation between the chemical nature of the stabilising surfactant
shell and the environmental rigidity imposed upon diffusing small molecules. The
surfactant shell compactness, responsible for the remarkable stabilisation of the
strongly basic micelle core in a non-polar environment, can be reasonably distinguished from shell viscosity. The first property is commonly attributed to a tight
packing of surfactant aromatic moieties [19, 21], while the second is mainly influenced by the molecular features of their alkyl chains. The ESR spectra analysis contributed a quantitative measurement of the micelle shell viscosity, revealing a subtle
modulation of the mobility experienced by spin-probe molecules in different locations
throughout the surfactant shell. The spin-probes diffusion was found to depend on
both their molecular shape and the polar groups location along the structure. The molecular dynamics simulations of such process provided a pictorial description of the
surfactant shell viscosity effects on diffusion. Moreover, its distance dependence from
the micelle core was quantitatively confirmed. Small molecules like TEMPO were
able to penetrate into a highly rigid environment next to the core surface, while labelled fatty acids were shown to fill the available room among surfactant alkyl chains,
further away from the core. Compared with TEMPO, the nitroxide grafted next to the
fatty acid polar group (5-doxyl-stearic acid) experienced higher mobility. When

Characterisation of the Surfactant Shell Stabilising Calcium Carbonate Dispersions

279

attached to the apolar end (16-doxyl-stearic acid) molecular freedom was found as
high as in solution and an environmnetal rigidity effect was revealed only by the peculiar surfactant shell structure of micelle a. In conclusion, the previously defined
structural features of overbased reverse micelles [2, 17-21, 26] have been further
detailed by this study, in view of developing improved performances as detergent
additives of lubricant base oils.

References
1. Liston, T. V., Lubr. Eng. 48 (1992) 389-397
2. Roman, J.P., Hoornaert, P., Faure, D., Biver, C., Jacquet, F., Martin, J.M., J. Coll. Interface Sci. 144 (1991) 324-339
3. Bandyopadhyaya, R., Kumar, R., Gandhi, K.S., Langmuir 17 (2001) 1015-1029
4. Hudson, L.K., Eastoe, J., Dowding, P.J., Adv. Coll. Interface Sci. 123-126 (2006) 425-431
5. Mansot, J.L. and Martin, J.B., J. Microsc. Spectrosc. Electron., 14 (1989) 78
6. Tricaud, C., Hipeaux, J.C., Lemerle, J., Lubr. Sci. Technol. 1 (1989) 207
7. Markovic, I., Ottewill, R.H., Coll. Polymer. Sci. 264 (1986) 454
8. Giasson, S., Espinat, D., Palermo, T., Ober, R., Pessah, M., Morizur, M.F., J. Coll. Interface Sci. 153 (1992) 355
9. Cizaire, L.; Martin, J.M.; Le Mogne, Th., Gresser, E., Coll. Surf. A 238 (2004) 151
10. Berliner, L.J.: Spin Labeling, Theory and Applications, Academic Press, New York (1979)
11. Dzikovski, B.G., Livshits, V.A., Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 5 (2003) 5271
12. Wines, T.H., Somasundaran, P., Turro, N.J., Jockusch, S., Ottaviani, M.F., J. Coll.
Interface Sci. 285 (2005) 318
13. Kramer, G., Somasundaran, P., J. Coll. Interface Sci. 273 (2004) 115
14. Tedeschi, A.M., Franco, L., Ruzzi, M., Padano, L., Corvaja, C., D’Errico, G., Phys. Chem.
Chem. Phys. 5 (2003) 4204
15. Maddinelli, G., Montanari, L., Ferrando, A., Maestrini, C., J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 102 (2006)
2810
16. Randy, B, Rabek, J.F.: ESR Spectroscopy in Polymer Research, Springer-Verlag, New
York (1977)
17. Tobias, D.J., Klein, M.L., J. Phys. Chem. 100 (1996) 6637-6648
18. Griffiths, J.A., Bolton, R., Heyes, D.M., Clint, J.H., Taylor, S.E., J. Chem. Soc. Faraday
Trans. 91 (1995) 687-696
19. Griffiths, J.A., Heyes, D.M., Langmuir, 12 (1996) 2418-2424
20. Bearchell, C.A., Danks, T.N., Heyes, D.M., Moreton, D.J., Taylor, S.E., Phys. Chem.
Chem. Phys. 2 (2000) 5197-5207
21. Bearchell, C.A., Heyes, D.M., Moreton, D.J., Taylor, S.E., Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 3
(2001) 4774-4783
22. Arndt, E.R., Kreutz, K.L. J.Coll. Interface Sci. 123 (1988) 230
23. Accelrys, Inc., San Diego
24. Hill, J.-R., Sauer, J., J. Phys Chem. 98 (1994) 1238-1244
25. Allen, M.P., Tildesley, D.J.: Computer simulations of liquids, Clarendon, Oxford (1987)
26. Hudson, L.K., Eastoe, J., Dowding, P.J., Adv Colloid Interface Sci 123-126 (2006) 425431

