A Flexible Image Retrieval Framework
Raoul Pascal Pein1,2 and Zhongyu Lu2
1
Multimedia Systems Laboratory (MMLab),
Faculty of Engineering and Computer Science,
Hamburg University of Applied Sciences,
Berliner Tor 7, 20099 Hamburg, Germany
2
Department of Informatics,
School of Computing and Engineering, University of Huddersﬁeld,
Queensgate, Huddersﬁeld HD1 3DH, United Kingdom

Abstract. This paper discusses a framework for image retrieval. Most
current systems are based on a single technique for feature extraction and
similarity search. Each technique has its advantages and drawbacks concerning the result quality. Usually they cover one or two certain features
of the image, e.g. histograms or shape information.
The proposed framework is designed to be highly ﬂexible, even if performance may suﬀer. The aim is to give people a platform to implement
almost any kind of retrieval issues very quickly, whether it is content
based or somehing else. The second advantage of the framework is the
possibility to change retrieval characteristics within the program completely. This allows users to conﬁgure the ranking process as needed.
Keywords: Content-based image retrieval (CBIR); retrieval framework;
feature vectors; query image; combined retrieval; improved result quality.

1

Introduction

Most available programs which provide an image search have very limited possibilities. They lack a ﬂexible design allowing to ﬁne tune the software to the user’s
requirements. Often they are capable of searching based on only a few features.
Especially the separation between common retrieval approaches and specialized
Content based Image Retrieval (CBIR) is visible.
Based on this observation, a standard design for image retrieval systems has
been developed, which can be implemented and extended as simple as possible.
This paper presents a framework which is:
–
–
–
–
–
–

platform independent
extensible and capable of oﬀering individual user interfaces
based selectively on database or ﬁle system
capable of ranking several features simultaneously
useful locally and in the web
allowing manual annotation to improve quality

Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part III, LNCS 4489, pp. 754–761, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

A Flexible Image Retrieval Framework

755

The proposed framework is based on the system described in [12,13]. The
emphasis is clearly placed on the properties mentioned above, rather than a high
performance. Some design decisions are deliberately made to provide ﬂexibility.
The important background of CBIR systems can be found in several papers
like the Northumbria report [4] and other related papers [15,14]. A standard
design for CBIR is presented by by Veltkamp and Tanase [17] which represents
the direct background for this paper. A combined indexing approach exploiting
multiple features is put on top of that design.
In Section 2 the basic types of image retrieval concepts are presented. Each
type has speciﬁc advantages and disadvantages which the proposed design tries
to exploit and overcome. Section 3 gives a brief overview of how the system is
generally designed and how the single components interact. Section 4 describes
a currently working implementation. The prototype is still under development
aiming at a better result quality and a servlet based user interface.

2

Related Work

Most image retrieval systems are based on one or more of these four basic indexing techniques: Keywords, Tags, Semantics or Content. All these techniques
have speciﬁc advantages and disadvantages.
The ”classic” approach is the use of keywords. This technique clearly is based
on a considerable amount of knowledge. Its advantage is that much previous
research from diﬀerent areas can be reused, as most retrieval work has been
done on text based documents. The major drawback of this approach is the
diﬃculty to extract useful keywords from images automatically. Current search
engines used locally (i.e. Beagle[16], Google Desktop Search[7]) or in the World
Wide Web usually understand textual queries.
A second approach is to use tags which are used to generate clusters of similar images. This approach makes searching very simple and straightforward.
The query consists of one or more tags and the engine only needs to ﬁlter out
the matches. Adding tags to an image can be done manually with a maintainable eﬀort. As simple tags are valid for many similar images at once, they can
be selected and tagged very quickly. The drawback is the bad accuracy of discrimination. If thousands of images are tagged with the same tags, the retrieval
process is rendered quite useless. F-Spot [5] is a personal retrieval software using
tags based on ”Emblem Tags” in Gnome [2]. A much more ambitious project is
the web based Flickr [6]. This program also allows to attach ”geotags” enabling
the user to ﬁnd pictures taken dependent on their location.
To introduce high quality results, the semantics of ﬁles can be used for retrieval. This technique allows to ﬁnd data based on very speciﬁc content, eliminating ambiguities in the natural language. Unfortunately, the research in semantics and semantic web is currently in a very early state and not even text
based engines are working satisfactorily. Also the annotation has to be done
very carefully and by experts to achieve signiﬁcant improvements. An example
for semantic image retrieval is the Ontogator project [8] or the approach by

756

R.P. Pein and Z. Lu

Zhang and Izquierdo based on Bayesian Networks [18]. A more lightweight approach to semantics can be found in TopicSEEK [3], where less eﬀort is put into
mathematical correctness but in usability.
The fourth technique introduces image speciﬁc attributes. It concentrates on
the actual content, represented by the pixels. This allows to use maths for extracting the relevant indexing data automatically. Ideally, there is no manual
input required to build a large index. Many diﬀerent algorithms are possible to
extract features of many kinds. The diﬃculty is to analyse the real content of
an image, as seen by a user. This would require a currently not available (and
probably impossible to implement) recognition algorithm. In addition a special
kind of user interface is required, as queries cannot be directly mapped to a
string. Examples are given by QBIC [11] and Virage [1].
An approach combining content and semantics has recently been described
by Lam and Singh [10].

3

Proposed Design

The proposed design (ﬁg. 1) is based on similar projects as well as cognitions
from the preceding prototype.

   

   
   




	
	



Fig. 1. The retrieval architecture consists of 6 basic modules. Core Service and Persistence can be enhanced by adding new features. Not content based features may also
require an optional visualization in User Interface and Administration.

It is tried to model all components in the framework replaceable. Basically
there are six diﬀerent modules in the design: Core Service, Persistence, User
Interface, Administration, Live Indexing, External Services.
Core Service. This module contains the whole retrieval logic, optimized on
CBIR. For each single feature one separate index is created. Every feature needs
to provide only two diﬀerent algorithms: extraction of the binary (or else) feature
from a pixel image and the calculation of similarity mapped to a range between
0 and 1. Based on these two algorithms, almost any feature can be supported
directly. Queries containing more than a single feature are merged internally.
The most important function is to hand over a query to the server and to get
a result set, which contains information about all relevant images. The query

A Flexible Image Retrieval Framework

757

should contain limitations where to cut oﬀ the ranking (minimal similarity, maximum result size) and some additional parameters to control each sub ranking
for a single feature (especially CBIR related data). For each image x a combined and weighted ranking rx is calculated based on the query. It is basically a
weighted sum
rx =

n

1
n
f =1

wf

∗

wf ∗ rxf

(1)

f =1

where wf is the weight/importance of feature f . rxf is the partial ranking for
image x using feature f . The optimal values for the feature weights depend on
the users requirements. By altering these values the search characteristics of the
engine can be changed completely. Alternative calculations (e.g. intersection of
the results) may also be interesting for ﬁne tuning.
Persistence. In the persistence layer all indexing data is stored. This can be a
database, a ﬁle system or something completely diﬀerent. There are only some
basic requirements which are deﬁned in the interface.
The basic access methods require opening and closing the source and read,
update, delete and add of a single dataset. For searching, a sequential iteration
over all datasets is required. To optimize the retrieval time, it may also be useful
to have ﬁltered access to a subset of an index.
User Interface. The user interface may vary widely. As well fat clients using a
middleware as thin clients providing a web interface are possible. The interface
of the core server is supposed to oﬀer every service required, like searching and
some information about the provided features. For manual annotation, writing
feature data for an image directly to the repository needs to be oﬀered.
Administration. A separate control instance is highly recommended to bar users
from tinkering with important settings. This administration module needs direct
access to the persistence module. It can be used to add new images into the
repository and for setting basic properties for ﬁne tuning the system.
Live Indexing. In order to provide live results which correspondent to locally
available resources, a daemon process can be set up. This process monitors
changes in the ﬁle system and adds new images automatically.
A web based service might use a similar program for automated updates. As
the topology of the world wide web is diﬀerent to a ﬁle system, a spider like
program may be implemented.
External Services. Everything available from other retrieval services should be
accessible. The core service is primarily designed to process image content, rather
than textual queries. It is thought to exploit the techniques currently used in
text based retrieval without re-implementing everything. A textual query can be
used to get a list of relevant images which can be ranked with CBIR in the core
system.

758

4

R.P. Pein and Z. Lu

Implementation

A great deal of platform independence is already given by using a modern programming language like Java. Being aware of system speciﬁc properties like ﬁle
names, the portability is reasonably high without much eﬀort. Using further
technologies requires also attention. To realize the prototype, components are
chosen which are available on diﬀerent platforms. For the underlying database,
MySQL has been chosen, as it runs on most PCs. Further it is aimed not to use
MySQL speciﬁc features to keep the migration eﬀort to another data base low.
The current system is meant to be connected to an external engine to exploit
existing text based search. The aim is to forward a search string from the user
interface to this engine and get a list of matching ﬁles. This only requires a very
simple interface, which will be realized as a small plug-in.
A promising engine seems to be the open-source project Beagle [16] which
limits use of the extended image retrieval to Linux. The modular plugging of the
external source allows to exchange the engine dependent on the user’s needs.
To prove the design, support for a couple of diﬀerent features is being implemented. Currently three diﬀerent features are supported: keywords, histograms
and spatially distributed histograms. Some other modules like a wavelet based
one [9] and tags [2] are under development. Each module needs to implement
two basic methods: calculateFeatureVector(String ﬁleName) is required to extract the features from a ﬁle and double calculateSimilarity(FeatureVector fv)
allows comparing two datasets. Optionally a speciﬁc GUI frame can be designed
to provide a detailed query composition (e.g. entering keywords).
The realization of the histogram/wavelet based features provide gradual rankings anywhere between 0.0 and 1.0. Here a full scan over all datasets is adequate
to achieve exact results, even if the required processing time is quite high. To
improve speed, the index could also be put into a multi dimensional tree. In this
case some otherwise good hits may be missing in the result set.
The text and tag based search is characterized for a much more distinctive
ranking. Results may either be exactly 1.0 (hit) or exactly 0.0 (miss), slight
diﬀerences may be realized with intermediate values. In the framework, these
features are also easy to implement in the ﬁrst place, especially for testing prototypes. Nevertheless a sequential search does not scale and the retrieval can be
improved dramatically by adding an appropriate index structure (e.g. hashes,
string based sorted trees) without losing any relevant result.

5

Results

The test data base contains information of 1709 images. To evaluate the eﬃciency of the combined ranking, the results of several queries are analyzed. The
program combines three diﬀerent result sets by using equation 1. As the Keyword component cannot handle query images, an additional query keyword is
set. The query image shows a scene in Liverpool, therefore the query ”liverpool”
is passed to the engine.

A Flexible Image Retrieval Framework

759

This keyword represents the not content based queries in section 2. The search
engine now has two independent views to calculate the ﬁnal ranking. Figure 2
shows the resulting image set. The weighted ranking is displayed in ﬁgure 3
listing the detailed ranking for the ﬁrst 125 images. To reﬁne the result set, the
weigths wf for each of the three modules have been adjusted manually.

Fig. 2. The screenshot shows the top 20 results of a combined ranking. The query
image (upper left) is ranked highest. Similarity decreases from left to right and top to
bottom.




	

"#
































	












 ! 

Fig. 3. The diagram visualizes details of the combined and weigthed ranking of ﬁg. 2.
The ﬁnal ranking is based on the weighted similarity (Weighted ).

6

Discussion and Analysis

The ranking generated by the retrieval service shows an eye-catching similarity
between the ﬁrst images in ﬁgure 2. A couple of brighter images with similar
content got slightly higher ranks than some of the visually closer related images.
This can easily be explained by the lossy compression of the histograms. An
important fact is, that all results are somehow related to ”liverpool”. Queries
without keyword restriction produce result sets containing several unrelated images in between the desired ones.
A way to overcome the drawbacks of each single indexing technique is to
combine their strengths. Figure 3 shows the eﬀect of combined retrieval. In
this case, especially the Keyword module is a highly eﬃcient ﬁlter to reject false

760

R.P. Pein and Z. Lu

positives. At the lower end (rank 123-125) some images had a very high similarity
(> 0.9) when only considering the content based modules. All 122 top ranked
images all contain the speciﬁed keyword, while the similarity drops from 1.0 to
about 0.6. All of the ﬁrst 24 images show houses of Liverpool from above. Turning
oﬀ the keyword search leads to a reatively high amount of images completely
out of context, as the content based modules have no way to ﬁlter them out. If
the user is only interested in visually similar images, disabling keywords helps
to ﬁnd images in less keyword-related regions of the repository.

7

Conclusion and Future Work

This paper shows a possible way to develop a ﬂexible image retrieval system.
The prototype design is a trade oﬀ between extensibility and high performance
with an emphasis on extensibility. It is assumed that a combined retrieval can
be used much more widely than a highly specialized one.
Achievements. The example query demonstrates the basic capabilities of the
framework. It is possible to implement diﬀerent feature modules supporting any
of the types described in section 2. Tags and semantics are basically a special
variation of keywords. The hard work with semantics need to be done in creating
ontologies and adding certain values to an image, but this has nothing special
to do with the framework itself.
Adding a new feature module can be done with minimal eﬀort. There are only
two important functions that need to be implemented plus some template-like
ones for persistence issues (i.e. mapping from objects to low-level data types and
back).
Future Work. The future work focuses on implementing new feature modules
and web support including active user annotation. Further it is aimed to improve
the text search by using specialized external search engines. A layer capable of
building fast and scalable index structures is also under development.
As soon as multiple highly distinctive features are available, a detailed survey
is planned. The objective is to evaluate whether the proposed combination of features leads to noticeable improvements in the result quality. The results of single
features will be compared to combined features on a basis of several thousand
images and many test persons to gain a signiﬁcant representative sample.

References
1. J. Bach, C. Fuller, A. Gupta, A. Hampapur, B. Gorowitz, R. Humphrey, R. Jain,
and C. Shu. Virage image search engine: an open framework for image management.
In I. K. Sethi and R. C. Jain, editors, SPIE, Storage and Retrieval for Image and
Video Databases IV, pages 76–87, February 1996.
2. James Barrett.
Emblems and tagging in gnome, 2006.
Available from:
http://live.gnome.org/EmblemTags.

A Flexible Image Retrieval Framework

761

3. Andreas Christensen. Semantische Anreicherung von Suchanfragen auf Basis von
Topic Maps., June 2005. Diplomarbeit.
4. J.P. Eakins and M.E. Graham.
Content-based Image Retrieval. A Report to the JISC Technology Applications Programme.
Technical report,
University of Northumbria at Newcastle, January 1999.
Available from:
http://www.unn.ac.uk/iidr/VISOR.
5. Larry Ewing. F-spot - personal photo management, 2006. Available from:
http://f-spot.org.
6. Flickr - Photo Sharing, 2006. Available from: http://www.flickr.com/.
7. Google desktop search, 2006. Available from: http://desktop.google.com.
8. Eero Hyv¨
onen, Samppa Saarela, and Kim Viljanen. Intelligent image retrieval and
browsing using semantic web techniques - a case study. Technical report, Helsinki
Institute for Information Technology (HIIT) / University of Helsinki, 2003.
9. Charles E. Jacobs, Adam Finkelstein, and David H. Salesin. Fast multiresolution
image querying. Computer Graphics, 29(Annual Conference Series):277–286, 1995.
Available from: citeseer.ist.psu.edu/jacobs95fast.html.
10. Tony Lam and Rahul Singh. Advances in Visual Computing, volume 4292/2006 of
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, chapter Semantically Relevant Image Retrieval
by Combining Image and Linguistic Analysis, pages 770–779. Springer Berlin /
Heidelberg, 2006.
11. W. Niblack, X. Zhu, J. Hafner, T. Breuel, D. Poncele´
on, D. Petkovic, M. Flickner, E. Upfal, S. Nin, S. Sull, B. Dom, B.-L. Yeo, S. Srinivasan, D. Zivkovic, and
M. Penner. Updates to the qbic system. Retrieval for Image and Video Databases
VI, 3312:150–161, 1998.
12. Raoul Pascal Pein. Multi-Modal Image Retrieval, April 2005. Diplomarbeit.
13. Raoul Pascal Pein and Zhongyu (Joan) Lu. Content Based Image Retrieval
by Combining Features and Query-By-Sketch. In Hamid R. Arabnia and Ray
Hashemi, editors, The 2006 International Conference on Information & Knowledge Engineering, pages 49–55, 2006.
14. Monika Renz and Wolfgang Renz. Neue Verfahren im Bildretrieval. Perspektiven
f¨
ur die Anwendung. In R. Schmidt, editor, Proceedings der 22. Online-Tagung der
DGI, pages 102–128, May 2000.
15. S. Shatford. Analyzing the Subject of a Picture: A Theoretical Approach. Cataloging and Classiﬁcation Quarterly, 6:39–62, 1986.
16. Joe Shaw.
Beagle desktop search, 2006.
Available from:
http://beagle-project.org/Main_Page.
17. Remco C. Veltkamp and Mirela Tanase. Content-Based Image Retrieval Systems:
A Survey. Technical Report UU-CS-2000-34, Department of Computing Science,
Utrecht University, October 2002.
18. Qianni Zhang and Ebroul Izquierdo. Semantic Multimedia, volume 4306/2006
of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, chapter A Bayesian Network Approach to
Multi-feature Based Image Retrieval, pages 138–147. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg,
2006.

