Healthcare Information Management System
in Home Environment
Chang Won Jeong1, Chung Sub Lee1, and Su Chong Joo1
1

School of Electrical, Electronic and Information Engineering, Wonkwang University, Korea
{mediblue,cslee,scjoo}@wonkwang.ac.kr

Abstract. In this paper, we suggested a healthcare information management
system for supporting healthcare home services. Our researching focus in this
paper is how to design system and how to use constructed database on the
framework for supporting healthcare home services. The healthcare database
constructed by using this information for the purpose of healthcare home
services is divided into the base information with real schemes and the context
based information with view schemes. Finally, for verifying the practical use of
healthcare information constructed in this paper, we show an example of
healthcare home monitoring service using information, emergency call, home
appliance control, and we describes the results of the experimental evaluation
between the base and context based information in terms of execution service
time for healthcare home applications.
Keywords: Healthcare information system, healthcare home service, distributed object Group Framework.

1 Introduction
Current research in ubiquitous computing focuses on building infrastructures for
managing active spaces, connecting new devices, or building useful applications to
improve functionality[1]. But, in these researches, integrated management of
information is a very important application of healthcare information technology,
especially for a u-healthcare home environment. Since existing healthcare information
system was constructed independently, there is no interconnection to support total
business area such as doctor, nurse, patient and environments. Also, there are a large
number of healthcare related applications that effectively support specific needs but
are isolated or incompatible. And interfaces are expensive and time-consuming
because systems use different platforms, programming languages and data formats[2]
Our system based on the distributed object group framework (DOGF) which
enables to easily integrate distributed objects to healthcare home applications[3]. And,
we used TMO scheme and TMOSM for interactions between distributed applications.
Finally, for verifying the practical use of healthcare database constructed in this
paper, via interconnecting this database to framework, we show an example of
healthcare home monitoring service, emergency call, appliance control, and so on
needed from living activity area for elderly living alone. Also, we show the results of
the experimental evaluation between the base and context based information in terms
of execution time for healthcare applications.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part III, LNCS 4489, pp. 170–173, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Healthcare Information Management System in Home Environment

171

2 Healthcare Information Management System
Our system used to component of supporting object group management for domain
grouping in DOGF, we consider home environments and related services such as
location tracking service, healthcare information and titrating environment supporting
service. Also, information collection and share in this environment, we adopted the
TMO scheme and TMOSM into the development environment of system that we
implemented. The architecture of the system is shown in figure 1 and is organized in
five layers. The physical layer contains hardware infrastructures such as various
sensors, devices, machines etc. Also, healthcare database consists of classification of
sensor node, collected sensor data by sensors and user profile included the health,
service information and access right information for security and view information for
supporting service applications. The framework layer contains a components of
DOGF which is supports a logical single view system environment by grouping them.
That is, the group manager API supports the execution of application of appropriate
healthcare home services on upper layer by using the input information obtained from
the individual or grouped physical devices thought sensor manger on the lower layer.
The tool layer consists of distributed programming developing-tool(DPD-Tool)and
healthcare database management tool(HDM-Tool).
Tool Layer

Client
Program
Developing
Module

Group
Applications

DOGF

Database

Group Security
Infor.
Dynamic
Manager
Repository Binder

Mobile
Proxy

Context
Provider

Healthcare
Database
Management
Tool

Database
Real Scheduler
Management
Time
System
Manager
(DBMS)

SensorNode SensorData UserProfile
Service
AccessRight
Information Information Information Information Information

View
Information
…

Physical
elements

Fig. 1. The architecture for Healthcare Information Management System

We defined the interaction of components which is interacts with the distributed
application, database, sensors and components of framework. The process of
grouping about distributed object by group manager object. Also, it provides the
interaction of distributed application by APIs and service object reference which
support collecting real time information from the sensor manager. Also it is
support the security service which is security object that is access right information
for client through healthcare database. When service object replicated, dynamic

172

C.W. Jeong, C.S. Lee, and S.C. Joo

binder object provide the reference of service object by binding algorithm.
Distributed application obtains real time information of sensor node through
service object reference which enable connect to healthcare database. And, the
interaction of objects in distributed application returned the result of service by
framework components.

3 Healthcare Database Based Healthcare Home Services
The healthcare database constructed by using this information for the purpose of
healthcare home services is divided into the two classes. The base information
includes low data obtained from physical sensors relevant to locations, personal
health, environments, and the user profiles. And, the context based information
that is produced and fused by using the based information. This context based
information might be got via various view schemes according to healthcare
application services. The context based information constructed by materialized
view and save to service schema repository which is manages the view scheme.
While programming by using this information, server or client program developers
can develop the healthcare application. Figure 2 show, to management of
healthcare information, we developed the healthcare database management
tool(HDMT) which provides user interface for interaction of healthcare database.
The functions of HDMT has a general function for constructed database
management such as show the DB List and table data, the query execution by SQL
and search of plan by user write SQL, dictionary information management. In
addition, it provides the creating function of context based information which is
materialization view tables.

Fig. 2. GUI for Healthcare Database Management Tool

Figure 3 shows the physical environments for healthcare home Services
reflecting real world. From these environments, we verify the executbility of the
healthcare home services we constructed. The healthcare home services are home
monitoring which provides location tracking, health and environment information
for home resident, emergency call as SMS using cell phone and home appliance
control based on health, location, standard information specified by user for
environments of home such as fan, light, air-conditioner etc.

Healthcare Information Management System in Home Environment

173

Home Auto
Control

Monitoring

Emergency
Call

Fig. 3. The physical environment for healthcare Home services

We analyzed the service time for the base information and the context based
information considering applying for the healthcare home services. As a result, we
obtained from this experiment. In case of location service is 37.4ms, the health
information service is 49.5ms and home auto control service is 20.3ms difference
respectively. From above evaluation results, we verified that the context based
information could provide the effectively to the healthcare home services.

4 Conclusions
In this paper, our researching focus in this paper is how to design healthcare
information management system and how to use constructed database on the
Framework for Supporting Healthcare Home Service. And we verified that healthcare
related information supporting healthcare home services and the context based
information could better impact than base information at healthcare home services.
Acknowledgments. This work was supported by research grants from Wonkwang University
in 2007.

References
1. Marcela Rodriguez, Jesus Favela, Victor Gonzalez and Miguel Munoz : Agent Based
Mobile Collaboration and Information Access in a Healthcare Environment. Proceedings of
Workshop of E-Health ISBN: 970-36-0118-9. Cuernavaca, Mexico, December (2003)
2. S.S. Spyrou, P. Bamidis, I. Chouvarda, G. Gogou, S.M. Tryfon, and N, Maglaveras:
Healthcare information standards: comparison of the approaches. Health Informatics
Journal, Vol. 8. 3 (2002)14 - 19
3. Chang-Won Jeong, Dong-Seok Kim, Geon-Yeob Lee, and Su-Chong Joo,: Distributed
Programming Developing Tool Based on Distributed Object Group Framework. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 3983, 8-11 May (2006) 853 – 863

