Building a Fuzzy Ontology of Edutainment Using OWL
Hua-Mao Gu1,2, Xun Wang2, Yun Ling2, and Jin-Qin Shi3
1

2

College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, 310027 Hangzhou, China
College of Information, Zhejiang Gongshang University, 310018 Hangzhou, China
3
College of Food, Zhejiang Gongshang University, 310018 Hangzhou, China
{ghmsjq, wx, yling, shijinqin}@ mail.zjgsu.edu.cn

Abstract. OWL Web Ontology Language is a W3C recommended Language
for representing machine-readable knowledge with more facilities than other
knowledge representation languages. In this paper, we present a Use-Case
based Fuzzy Ontology Constructing (UFOC) methodology for the building of
edutainment ontology, which is encoded with OWL. Besides, a solution of
representing fuzzy relation in OWL is also provided. In the edutainment
ontology, two fuzzy relations, DE and AE are discovered, both playing vital
roles in property calculation among online computer game.
Keywords: Fuzzy Ontology; Edutainment; OWL; Ontology Building.

1 Introduction
Computer games have gained great popularity in recent years, especially within
teenagers. Along with prevalence of games, some intelligent scholars realized the
significant influence of games on teenagers, and hoped for the combination of game
and education. Under such situation, the project “Educational Game for Middle &
Primary School Students” (EGMPSS) was carried out, aiming at making students
“Learning in playing”.
As a widely accepted knowledge representation model, ontology has been used and
taken a key role in many software applications. An increasing number of researchers
realized, however, the difficulty of describing uncertainty knowledge in ontology. To
approach this problem, some pioneers incorporated fuzzy logic into ontology in some
domains [1] [2].
Although there are already some papers concerning Ontology building [3], no
paper describes how to build Fuzzy Ontology so far. And as a way of representation
of knowledge, Ontology has not been applied to game domain yet, not to speak of
edutainment. So, the main goal of this paper is providing not only a methodology of
building Fuzzy Ontology, but also the Fuzzy Ontology of edutainment itself.
The rest of this paper is organized as following. Section 2 presents some related
definitions of Edutainment Fuzzy Ontology. Section 3 gives the way of representing
Fuzzy Relation in OWL. Section 4 introduces the UFOC methodology. Section 5
provides a simplified case study. Finally, section 6 concludes this paper and discusses
some future work.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part III, LNCS 4489, pp. 591–594, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

592

H.-M. Gu et al.

2 Fuzzy Ontology of Edutainment
Firstly, we give some formal definitions related to Edutainment Fuzzy Ontology
based on Fuzzy Set theory [4] and our research before going ahead.

μ

Definition 1: Fuzzy Relation. A Fuzzy Relation R is a set of triples {<x, y, R(x,y)>
| x X, y Y }. The R(x,y) is a membership function mapping from universe of
discourse X×Y to real number region [0,1]. For every x X, y Y, R(x,y) denotes
the membership degree of relation R between x and y.

∈ ∈

μ

∈ ∈ μ

Definition 2: Damage Effectiveness. Damage Effectiveness (DE) is a Fuzzy Relation
between Intelligence and Strength, which means the degree of fitness of the
proportion among them. In EGMPSS, the damage to monster is affected by the
player’s Intelligence and Strength, and vice versa.
Definition 3: Armor Effectiveness. Armor Effectiveness (AE) is a Fuzzy Relation
between Intelligence and Dexterity, which means the degree of fitness of the
proportion among them. In EGMPSS, the defense against attack is affected by the
player’s Intelligence and Dexterity, and so does Monster.
Definition 4: Fuzzy Ontology. Fuzzy Ontology in EGMPSS is an extended Domain
Ontology, denoted as {C, I, Rex}. Here, C = {C1,C2,…,Cm}. I is a set of instances of
the concepts in C. Rex = Rn {DE, AE} where Rn is a set of binary relations among C
and I of the domain.

∪

3 Representation of Fuzzy Relation in OWL
According to the above definition, Fuzzy Ontology is an extension of domain
ontology. Then, how to represent the membership degree in OWL (or other
representation languages) will be an urgent problem to be solved before Fuzzy
Ontology could be put to use.
First thought is to extend owl:DatatypeProperty to allow for two domains at the
same time. It, however, is impractical. A feasible solution is to build a concept of
Fuzzy Relation, which includes two owl:ObjectPropertys: “domain-1” and “domain2”, and one owl:DatatypeProperty: “hasFuzzy_Degree”. The two domains denote two
universes of discourse in Fuzzy Relation, and “hasFuzzy_Degree” means the
corresponding membership degree. Whenever there is a need of an element of Fuzzy
Relation, create an instance of this concept and assign specific values for each
property.

4 Use-Case Based Fuzzy Ontology Constructing Methodology
There are many suggestions for building domain ontology [5]. Fuzzy Ontology,
however, is an extended domain ontology, which involves Fuzzy Information
processing. For this purpose, we present a Use-Case based constructing methodology.

Building a Fuzzy Ontology of Edutainment Using OWL

593

The main processes of this methodology are explained as follows.
(1) Use-Case: the basis for guiding ontology construction.
(2) Objects Enumeration: enumerating all objects that may occur in domain.
(3) Categorization: categorizing objects into different concepts.
(4) Concept Tree: reorganizing concepts with “is-a” relation.
(5) Attributes Discovery: discovering appropriate attributes for each concept.
(6) Pruning: eliminating those unnecessary concepts and attributes.
(7) Relations Discovery: finding other right relations among concepts.
(8) Instances Creating: creating necessary individuals for ontology.
(9) DE, AE: building elements of DE and AE from relative individuals.

5 Case Study: The EGMPSS Ontology
In this section, we just give the Use-Case diagram and the hierarchy of core concepts
in the EGMPSS due to the restriction of page in length. Both of them may cooperate
to present a full picture of the EGMPSS ontology.
5.1 Use-Case Diagram of EGMPSS
In EGMPSS, there are three actors: PC, NPC and Monster. According to the
requirements of EGMPSS, we present a Use-Case diagram in Fig. 1.

Fig. 1. The Use-Case diagram of EGMPSS

From this diagram, we know that (1) PC can talk to NPC by dialogue to learn
knowledge, (2) PC may pick up treasures and read some messages (some knowledge
points), and (3) NPC may ask questions in the form of gap-filling, choice and truefalse. Questions, dialogues and messages provide full knowledge appeared in the
textbooks of middle and primary school, and etc.
5.2 Core Concepts Hierarchy
As EGMPSS is an educational game, naturally, there should be two main series of
concepts, one for game, and the other for education. Reflected in concept tree, there
are two branches from the top concept, as shown in Fig. 2.

594

H.-M. Gu et al.

Fig. 2. The hierarchy of Core concepts in EGMPSS Ontology

In the Game branch, all leaves are not the ends of concept tree. They all should be
derived out more special concepts. For instance, there are certainly some kinds of
monsters, each kind being a concept. And so do other leaves. While in the education
branch, each concept leaf means one mode for providing knowledge. There is no need
to be further subdivided.

6 Conclusions
In this paper, we have proposed a Use-Case based methodology for constructing
Fuzzy Ontology, and provided a Fuzzy Ontology that has come into use in EGMPSS.
Besides, representation Fuzzy Relation in OWL is also introduced. All these work
would be much useful for guiding Fuzzy Ontology building to engineers.
However, there are still some problems to be solved. For example, establishing
inference rules on Fuzzy Ontology to enable intelligent query and making the Fuzzy
Ontology well accepted are all important and beneficial work.

References
1. Lee C.S, Jian Z.W., Huang L.K: A Fuzzy Ontology and Its Application to News
Summarization. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics. 35 (2005) 859 – 880
2. Quan T.T, Siu C.H, Cao T. H: Automatic Fuzzy Ontology Generation for Semantic Web.
IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering. 18 (2006) 842 – 856
3. Stevens R., Goble C., Horrocks I., Bechhofer S.: Building a Bioinformatics Ontology Using
OIL. IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed. 6 (2002) 135– 141
4. Zadeh L. A.: Fuzzy sets. Information and Control. 8 (1965) 338 – 353
5. Jones D., Bench-Capon T., Visser P.: Methodologies for ontology development. In： Proc.
IT&KNOWS Conference, XV IFIP World Computer Congress. Chapman-Hall London
(1998) 62 – 75

