A General-Purpose Mobile Framework for Situated
Learning Services on PDA
Seong Baeg Kim, Kyoung Mi Yang, and Cheol Min Kim
Department of Computer Education, Cheju National University,
66 Jejudaehakno, Jeju-si, Jeju-do, 690-756, Korea
{sbkim,kmyang,cmkim}@cheju.ac.kr

Abstract. Recently, as ubiquitous technology has been developed rapidly, a
specific application service considering users’ situations has been becoming the
focus of attention. As a field of a typical situation-based application, we focus
on situated learning using a mobile device. A u-learning system can provide
learners with individualized learning at any time in any place. In this paper, we
propose a general-purpose mobile framework suitable for situated learning on
PDA with RFID mobile system. Specially, we examine three aspects in making
the framework. First, we investigate how learners obtain and access customized
learning contents suitable for them. Second, we construct a mobile middleware
for RFID on PDA. Finally, we devise the application-specific system for
situated learning.
Keywords: RFID, Situated Learning, Mobile middleware, Framework.

1 Introduction
In recent years, the development of information technology has encouraged the spread
of various mobile devices. Thus, the attention to a ubiquitous system has been
increasing. In general, a u-learning using a mobile device is more suitable for
customized learning. Furthermore a u-learning can be used to bring situated learning
for each learner. It has been recognized that web-based education systems enable
learners to have self-directed learning. However, they have still limits on making
possible customized learning reflecting differences such as degrees of knowledge,
learning capability and learning goals. For this reason, the systems have activities
made based just on inexact learning preferences of the learner and without doubt
aren't supporting effectively the learner for active and individualized learning.
There has been research regarding customized learning for each learner
[1][2][4][5]. However, there has been little research on personalized learning
considering situation. Also, the previous research on middleware system has focused
on constructing a middleware system on a desktop or server [3]. However, it is also
essential to construct a mobile middleware platform for developing the mobile
applications. The platform would be small volume, which includes minimal APIs
required for developing an application. From the viewpoint of situated learning theory
[7], the learning effect of using traditional learning methods is not good, because it
are mostly failed for learners to apply the knowledge in an actual situation that is
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part III, LNCS 4489, pp. 559–562, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

560

S.B. Kim, K.M. Yang, and C.M. Kim

obtained from learning without consideration of an actual situation. To solve it, the
situated learning theory has been studied [7].

2 Profiling Scheme
The profile data collected from a mobile device are sent using an encoding scheme
the form of the variable HTTP_USER_AGENT in order to provide customized
learning based on situation. Fields composed of the encoded values are divided into 4
main parts:PDA Profile, Learner Information, GPS Information and RFID
Information. They are split by a semicolon.
We encoded the values of the device manufacturer field with 15 mobile device
makers we have studied so far. When known the manufacturer and model of a PDA,
such hardware specifications of the PDA as CPU, RAM, and ROM etc. can be
extracted from a server. This information would be used in providing the customized
learning at right time in right place on the PDA that each learner has. Learner
information is composed of learner’s age, learning time, learning subject, learning
type, and learning motive.
In case of GPS information, it enables the system to find the exact location and the
moving direction of the learner at a certain time. Also, in case of RFID information, it
enables the system to identify an exact situation given. We encoded the RFID
information based on EPC (Electronic Product Code) that is currently used in popular.
The standard EPC consists of header, EPC manager, object class, and serial number [6].

3 Mobile RFID Middleware
In addition to our profiling system, there is a mobile RFID middleware developed in
order to support situated learning based on RFID. The structure of the mobile RFID
Middleware
Middleware Upper Layer

Reader
Control APIs
Queue APIs

Tag
Support APIs
Filter Control APIs

Middleware Lower Layer

Serial Port Control APIs

Protocol Management
APIs

Serial Communication Interface

RFID Reader

Fig. 1. The Structure of the Mobile RFID Middleware

A General-Purpose Mobile Framework for Situated Learning Services on PDA

561

middleware is shown in Figure 1. The middleware consists of two layers: upper layer,
lower layer. The upper layer provides APIs for supporting applications. The lower
layer has functions for various RFID readers. The APIs of the lower layer consists of
the serial port control APIs and the protocol management APIs.

4 Situated Learning
The situated learning theory based on constructivism explains that learning can be
effective when knowledge is provided in the meaningful context. The overall
architecture for situated learning on PDA is shown in Figure 2. The application

Situated
Learning
Application Program
Learning
DB

U-Learning Module

Search/Update Module
RFID Middleware
Middleware

Upper

Tag
Analysi

Reader
Control

Filtering
Tags

Middleware Lower Layer
Serial Port
Control

Tag Data
Transfer

Communication
with reader

RFID Reader
Decoding Instructions

Tag Collection

Fig. 2. The Overall Structure for Situated Learning

RFID
Info. DB

562

S.B. Kim, K.M. Yang, and C.M. Kim

program consists of U-learning module and Search/Update module. U-learning
module is implemented using U-learning APIs. Search/Update module provides the
function to search and update databases that serve RFID and learning information.

5 Conclusion
We suggested a general-purpose mobile framework for enabling situated learning
services under ubiquitous environment. In the framework, we described how to
encode learner’s profiling information considering the characteristics of a mobile
device and each learner, which is required for providing personalized learning at the
right time in the right place. That is to come up with a way of providing a best-suited
learning environment for each learner who uses a mobile device. Also, we proposed
the mobile RFID middleware, which is largely composed of two parts:upper layer and
lower layer. Finally, we presented the overall structure of application for situated
learning using RFID reader, which is attached to a mobile device PDA.
We’re optimizing the mobile RFID middleware modules and tuning it to improve
performance and reliability.

References
1. Tan-Hsu Tan, Tsung-Yu Liu: The Mobile-Based Interactive Learning Environment
(MOBILE) and A Case Study for Assisting Elementary School English Learning”, In
Proceedings of the 4th IEEE International Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies,
(2004).
2. Phivos Mylonas, Paraskevi Tzouveli, Stefanos Kollia: Towards a Personalized e-learning
scheme for Teachers, In Proceedings of the 4th IEEE International Conference on Advanced
Learning Technologies, (2004).
3. T. Jung, Y. Kim, Y. Lee: The Platform Technology of RFID Middleware, Telecommunications
Review, Vol. 15, No. 2, (2005).
4. Abbattista, F., Degemmis, M., Fanizzi, N., Licchelli, O., Lops, P., Semeraro, G., and
Zambetta, F.: Learning User Profiles for Content-Based Filtering in e-Commerce, In
Proceedings of AI Workshop su Apprendimento Automatico: Metodi e Applicazioni.
(2002).
5. Ricardo Carreira, Jaime M. Crato,Daniel Gonçalves, Joaquim A Jorge: Evaluating Adaptive
User Profiles for News Classification, In proceedings of IUI’04, (2004).
6. S. Sarma, D. Brock, and D. Engels: Radio Frequency Identification and the Electronic
Product Code, IEEE Micro, Vol. 21, (2001).
7. S. Kim: Good Ideas to Foment Educational Revolution, Communications of Korea
Educational Technology Research Association, Vol. 38, No. 1, (1998).

