Bio-terror Preparedness Exercise in a Mixed
Reality Environment
Alok Chaturvedi, Chih-Hui Hsieh, Tejas Bhatt, and Adam Santone
Purdue Homeland Security Institute, Krannert School of Management, 403 West
State Street, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907-2014
{alok, hsiehc, tejas, santone}@purdue.edu

Abstract. The paper presents a dynamic data-driven mixed reality environment to complement a full-scale bio-terror preparedness exercise.
The environment consists of a simulation of the virtual geographic locations involved in the exercise scenario, along with an artiﬁcially intelligent agent-based population. The crisis scenario, like the epidemiology
of a disease or the plume of a chemical spill or radiological explosion,
is then simulated in the virtual environment. The public health impact,
the economic impact and the public approval rating impact is then calculated based on the sequence of events deﬁned in the scenario, and the
actions and decisions made during the full-scale exercise. The decisions
made in the live exercise inﬂuence the outcome of the simulation, and
the outcomes of the simulation inﬂuence the decisions being made during
the exercise. The mixed reality environment provides the long-term and
large-scale impact of the decisions made during the full-scale exercise.

1

Introduction

The Purdue Homeland Security Institute (PHSI) created a Dynamic DataDriven Mixed Reality Environment to support a full-scale bio-terror preparedness exercise. In a mixed reality environment certain aspects of the scenario are
conducted in the live exercise, while others are simulated. Actions and outcomes
in the live exercise inﬂuence the simulated population, and the actions and outcomes of the simulation aﬀect the lessons learned. The simulation modeled the
public health aspect of the virtual population, as well as the economy of the
virtual geographies. The artiﬁcial population would also voice a public opinion,
giving a measure of support for the decisions and actions the government is taking on their behalf. The simulation provided the capability to analyze the impact
of the crisis event as well as the government response.
With such powerful capabilities, there are numerous advantages to using the
simulation to augment the live exercise. The simulation allows us to scale the
scenario to a much larger geographical area than possible with just a live exercise, thereby allowing key decision makers to keep the bigger picture in mind.
This research was partially supported by the National Science Foundation’s DDDAS
program grant # CNS-0325846 and the Indiana State 21st Century Research and
Technology award #1110030618.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part I, LNCS 4487, pp. 1106–1113, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Bio-terror Preparedness Exercise in a Mixed Reality Environment

1107

The simulation can execute in faster-than-real-time, allowing the participants
to analyze the long-term impacts of their actions in a matter of minutes. The
simulation also provides the ability to move forward and backward in virtual
time, to analyze possible future implications of current actions, or to go back
and retry the response to achieve better results.
In the future we hope to allow the participants to have greater interaction with
the simulation. The participants would receive continuously updated statistics
from the simulation and the live exercise. This will allow them to make more
strategic decisions on the scenario. With hands-on simulation training provided,
or technical support staﬀ taking actions on behalf of the participants, more
time can be spent analyzing the results of the simulation than dealing with the
simulation itself. The simulation is intended to be used as a tool for discussion
of critical issues and problems in a response and recovery scenario. With the
live exercise and the simulation connecting in real-time, the accuracy of the
simulation will greatly improve, thereby providing more meaningful information
to the key players.

2

Computational Modeling

The computational modeling is based on the Synthetic Environments for Analysis and Simulation (SEAS) platform. SEAS provides a framework that is unbiased
to any one speciﬁc scenario, model, or system and can be used to represent fundamental human behavior theories without restrictions of what can be modeled
common in modern simulation eﬀorts. The enabling technology leverages recent
advances in agent-based distributed computing to decouple control as well as data
ﬂow. SEAS is built from a basis of millions of agents operating within a synthetic
environment. Agents emulate the attributes and interactions of individuals, organizations, institutions, infrastructure, and geographical decompositions. Agents
join together to form networks from which evolve the various cultures of the global
population. Intricate relationships among political, military, economic, social, information and infrastructure (PMESII) factors emerge across diverse granularities. Statistics calculated from the simulation are then used to provide measurable
evaluations of strategies in support of decision making.
The fundamental agent categories in SEAS are the individuals, organizations,
institutions, and infrastructure (IOIIG). The population agents of these fundamental types will form higher order constructs in a fractal-like manner, meaning suﬃcient detail exists at multiple levels of focus, from world constructs to
individuals. Higher order constructs include political systems (type of government, political parties/factions), militaries (soldiers, institutions, branches of
service), economic systems (formal banking networks and black-market structures), social systems (tribes, religious groups, neighborhoods) and information
systems (print, broadcast, internet). Agents representing individuals are used to
model the populace in the synthetic environment. Individual agents are categorized into citizen and leader agents. An individual’s well being is based on a
model consisting of eight fundamental needs: basic, political, ﬁnancial, security,

1108

A. Chaturvedi et al.

religious, educational, health, and freedom of movement. The desire and perceived level of each of the well being categories are populated taking into account
the socio-economic class of the individual the agent represents.
Citizen agents are constructed as a proportional representation of the societal makeup of a real nation. A citizen agent consists of a set of fundamental
constructs: traits, well being, sensors, goals, and actions. The traits of citizen
agents, such as race, ethnicity, income, education, religion, gender, and nationalism, are conﬁgured according to statistics gathered from real world studies.
Dynamic traits, such as religious and political orientations, emotional arousal,
location, health, and well being, result during simulation according to models
that operate on the citizen agents and interactions they have with other agents.
The traits and well being determine the goals of a citizen agent. Each citizen
agent ”senses” its environment, taking into account messages from leaders the
citizen has built a relationship with, media the citizen subscribes to, and other
members in the citizen’s social network. Each citizen agent’s state and goals can
change as a result of interactions the citizen has with its environment. A citizen
agent can react to its environment by autonomously choosing from its repertoire
of actions. Additionally, a citizen agent’s set of possible actions can change during the course of the simulation, such as when a citizen agent resorts to violence.
Traits, well-being, sensors, and actions together determine the behavior of the
citizen agent.
Clusters of citizen and leader agents form organizations. Citizen agents voluntarily join organizations due to aﬃnity in perspective between the citizens
and the organization. An organization agent’s behavior is based on a foundation
consisting of the desires of the organization’s leaders and members. Organizational leadership constantly seeks maintenance and growth of the organizational
membership by providing tangible and intangible beneﬁts, and citizens subscribe
based on a perceived level of beneﬁt that is received from the organization. Additionally, through inter-organization networks, attitudes and resources may be
shared among organizations. Through these internal and external interactions,
organizations cause signiﬁcant changes in perception and attitude change and
become core protagonists of activism in the model. In turn, an organization exercises its power through the control over its resources and its ability to procure
and maintain its resource base.
Institution agents are represented as ’governmental entities’ such as the army,
police, legislature, courts, executive, bureaucracy, and political parties-entities
that are able to formulate policies that have legal binding, and have more discretionary resources. SEAS models institutions as structures that are products
of individual choices or preferences, being constrained by the institutional structures (i.e. an interactive process). Institutions are like formal organizations with
an additional power to inﬂuence the behaviors of members and non-members.
Media agents also play a signiﬁcant role in providing information to other
agents in the form of reports on well-being and attitudes. Media organizations
consist of television, radio, newspapers, and magazines. The media make choices
of what information to cover, who to cover, what statements to report, what

Bio-terror Preparedness Exercise in a Mixed Reality Environment

1109

story elements to emphasize and how to report them. Incidents are framed on
well-being components, and formalized in a media report. Media is able to set the
agenda for domestic policies as well as foreign policy issues. Citizens subscribe
to media organizations based on their ideological bend. Media organizations act
primarily to frame the issues for their audiences in such a way that they increase
their viewer-ship as well as their inﬂuence.
Agents interact with the environment and respond, i.e., take action, to exogenous variables that may be speciﬁed by human agents or players in the environment as well as inputs from other agents. This is implemented with the
introduction of inputs and outputs that each agent possesses. Inputs consist of
general ”environmental sensors” as well as particular ”incoming message sensors.” The incoming message sensors are singled out because of the importance
ascribed to each agent to be able to query messages from the environment discriminately. The agent also possesses ports characterized collectively as ”external
actions” that allow the agent to submit its actions or messages to the environment. Finally, the agent possesses an internal set of rules classiﬁed as ”internal
actions” that result in the agents ”external actions” on the basis of the sensor
inputs as well as the traits/attributes and intelligence structure of each agent.
2.1

Virtual Geographies

The simulation will consist of a ﬁctitious community that contains all the relevant
features (hospitals, railways, airports, lakes, rivers, schools, business districts)
from any Indiana community. This ﬁctitious community can be customized to
mimic a real community within Indiana. The virtual geography may be divided
into high population density residential areas, low population density residential
areas, commercial areas as well as uninhabitable areas. There can be various
level of granularity for diﬀerent communities as needed for the scenario (from
international, national, state, district, county, city to city block levels).
2.2

Computational Epidemiology of Synthetic Population

The virtual community will have a virtual population represented by artiﬁcial
agents. An agent is able to represent the activity of a human through a combination of learned variables and interactions. Research has shown that these agents
act as the vertices of a societal network, and that their interactions comprise
the edges of the network [Wasserman, 1994]. Like living beings, each agent has
diﬀerent interactions and experiences, and thus acts diﬀerently when faced with
a situation. And while these evolving diﬀerences are essential for a useful simulation, certain predeﬁned traits are also necessary. As an example, though all
students in a class may be exposed to a ﬂu virus, certain members will be more
susceptible, and case severity will diﬀer among those who contract the illness.
For this reason, parameters must be assigned that deﬁne the susceptibility of
an agent to a given pathogen. The high number of relevant attributes for each
agent serves to diﬀerentiate each agent from its peers. But as the artiﬁcial agents
grow in complexity, they must also grow in number, in order to maintain the

1110

A. Chaturvedi et al.

characteristics of the society they seek to describe. Once the society has been
suﬃciently populated, the artiﬁcial agents begin to interact with and learn from
each other, forming an environment well suited for analysis and interaction by
human agents.
In addition to these behaviors, each agent is endowed with certain characteristics that help to diﬀerentiate the population. These attributes help to model
the variability in human response to a situation. As an example, a wealthier
individual may be more likely to leave a high-risk area, if only because of the
ﬁnancial independence he or she enjoys. The following is a partial list of characteristics that serve to diﬀerentiate one artiﬁcial agent from another: Age, Sex,
Income, Education, and Health.
The decision-making process for an artiﬁcial agent is a simpliﬁed version of
the decision making process of rational humans. When faced with a decision,
rational humans consider numerous variables. Using a combination of intuition,
experience, and logic, one selects the alternative that leads to a certain goal
- usually happiness. And while diﬀerent decisions vary in magnitude, the underlying cognitive model remains relatively constant. As such, while diﬀerent
physical or psychological needs take precedence in diﬀerent situations, the human decision-making process can be modeled by considering each need in a
hierarchical manner. To illustrate, scholarship has shown that, when presented
with a threatening environment, the primary focus of a living being shifts to
ensuring its own survival. The list that follows partially describes the variables
that an artiﬁcial agent considers before making a decision: Security, Information
Level, Health, Basic Necessities, Mobility and Freedom, Financial Capability,
and Global Economy.
In the SEAS environment, as in the real world, reproductive rates and propagation vary according to the type of disease. Similarly, variables such as population density, agent mobility, social structure, and way of life interact to determine
the proliferation of the disease. The government oﬃcials, or human agents, interact with the system and control propagation via such means as vaccination,
treatment, or agent isolation. The options available to the human agents are the
same as in real life, and the eﬀectiveness of these interactions is modeled using
statistically veriﬁed historical information [Longini, et. al 2000].
2.3

Public Opinion Model

While the safety of the artiﬁcial agents takes highest precedence, government ofﬁcials must consider the overall spirit of the population when making decisions.
To illustrate, though safety may be maximized by quarantining a city in every
instance of potential attack [Kaplan, Craft & Wein, 2002], such restrictive measures may not be tolerated by the population. To enhance the level of learning
they can achieve through the simulation, the human agents must consider the
impact on public sentiment that each of their decisions may have. As in real life,
each artiﬁcial agent determines his or her happiness level using a combination
of variables: Current health status - must be alive in order to hold an opinion;
perceived security; information level; basic necessities; and freedom of mobility.

Bio-terror Preparedness Exercise in a Mixed Reality Environment

2.4

1111

Economic Impact Model

The simulation projects the long term economic impact of the crisis scenario.
The economic impact of the crisis scenario as well as the government response
is modeled based on the following criteria: Loss from impact on public health,
cost of response, loss of productivity, loss of business, and loss from impact on
public opinion.

3

Application: Indiana District 3 Full-Scale Exercise 2007

For the Indiana District 3 full-scale exercise in January 2007, the crisis scenario
involved the intentional release of aerosolized anthrax at a ﬁctitious district-wide
festival. The following section describes the district-wide results of the simulation
in more detail.
3.1

Detailed Public Health Statistics for District 3

As shown in Fig. 1, the scenario assumed that 22,186 people were initially exposed
to the anthrax. As the epidemiology of anthrax initiates, 17,693 people who were
not exposed to enough anthrax spores move into the recovered health status. The
remaining 4,493 people started showing symptoms and falling sick, with a brief period of reduction in symptoms, followed by high fever and an 80% chance of shock
and death. The remaining 892 people eventually recovered. Note: This graph is
for the no-intervention case (assuming no mass prophylaxis was started).

Fig. 1. Disease progression within the population of District 3 over a period of 3 weeks

3.2

Economic Impact for District 3

Even with a strong public health response, the District would have to deal with
a tremendous economic impact (close to 400 million dollars in the long term)
due to the crisis situation, as seen from Fig. 2.

1112

A. Chaturvedi et al.

Fig. 2. The economic loss is approximately 900 million dollars less than worst case

3.3

Public Opinion Impact for District 3

In the worst case scenario, the population became aware of the crisis when
people started to die from the anthrax exposure, as seen in Fig. 3. Hence, public
opinion drops at a later date than when the government announces plans for
mass prophylaxis. Even though public opinion dropped sooner, it did not go as
low as the worst case scenario, due to the proactive and eﬃcient government
response.

Fig. 3. The public opinion is 21.47% more in approval of the government than the
worst case scenario due to the government response in curbing the situation

4

Conclusion

The quick response of the local agencies participating in the exercise resulted
in fewer casualties in all counties within District 3. The counties were quick to

Bio-terror Preparedness Exercise in a Mixed Reality Environment

1113

determine the shortage of regimens available to them locally, and in requesting
additional regimens from the state. All the counties would have been able to
complete the simulated mass prophylaxis of the exposed population within the
timeline guided by the CDC (within 48 hours after exposure) based on their
survey responses. This created a dramatic diﬀerence (saving 2,505 lives) in the
public health statistics of District 3 as compared to the worst case.
While the worst case economic loss would have been around 1.3 billion dollars
for District 3, the estimated economic loss for the District 3 Exercise was only
392 million due to the government response and public health actions. Enormous
long term economic loss could have crippled the entire district, if the crisis was
not handled properly. This situation was avoided during the District 3 Exercise
due to positive and eﬃcient government actions.
Initial drop in public opinion was due to the inability of the government
to prevent the terror attack from taking place, however, in the long term, the
government response and gain of control over the situation, stabilized the public
opinion. Based on the public opinion results, it would take some time before the
public opinion would come back to normal levels - it likely would take aggressive
media campaigns and public service announcements, by the public information
oﬃcers as well as the elected oﬃcials, to mitigate the general state of panic and
fear of such an attack happening again.

References
1. Data from CDC website (http://www.bt.cdc.gov/agent/anthrax/anthrax-hcpfactsheet.asp)
2. Data from FDA website (http://www.fda.gov/CBER/vaccine/anthrax.htm)
3. Reducing Mortality from Anthrax Bioterrorism: Strategies for Stockpiling and Dispensing Medical and Pharmaceutical Supplies. Dena M. Bravata. Table 1
4. Systematic Review: A Century of Inhalational Anthrax Cases from 1900 to 2005
Jon-Erik K. Holty P.g: 275
5. Center for Terrorism Risk Management Policy (http://www.rand.org)
6. The Roper Center for Public Opinion Research at the University of Connecticut
7. E.H. Kaplan, D.L. Craft and L.M. Wein, Emergency response to a smallpox attack:
The case for mass vaccination, PNAS, 2002
8. I.M. Longini, M. Elizabeth Halloran, A. Nizam, et al., Estimation of the eﬃcacy of
life, attenuated inﬂuenza vaccine from a two-year, multi-center vaccine trial: implications for inﬂuenza epidemic control, Vaccine, 18 (2000) 1902-1909

