Intelligent Assembly/Disassembly System with a Haptic
Device for Aircraft Parts Maintenance
Christiand and Jungwon Yoon∗
Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering and ReCAPT,
GyeongSang National University, Jinju, Gyeongnam 660-701, Korea
tianize@yahoo.com, jwyoon@gnu.ac.kr

Abstract. This paper presents the development of an intelligent Assembly/Disassembly (A/D) system with the utilization of a haptic device. The development was aimed to assist the A/D process of aircraft parts maintenance
with an intelligent algorithm. A comprehensive methodology is presented by an
intelligent algorithm generating the best sequence for the assembled/disassembled parts. For this purpose, a genetic algorithm was chosen because of its effectiveness and compatibility dealing with the A/D sequencing
problem. Furthermore, A/D process of the parts will also be calculated in the
genetic algorithm process, which will show the effectiveness of the algorithm.
Moreover, the concept of both natural and artificial constraints are applied to
generate the path planning of the assembled/disassembled parts. It is believed
that the combination of haptic, optimized sequence algorithm and intelligent
path planning will increase efficiency for the overall aircraft parts maintenance
process.
Keywords: Haptic, Genetic Algorithm, Natural and Artificial Constraint,
Aircraft Part Maintenance.

1 Introduction
The implementation of Virtual Reality (VR) technologies such as the medical and
A/D fields, is increasing. The improvement of VR technologies promises a bright
future for the efficiency of the A/D process, including the maintenance of aircraft
parts. Since the physical objects are represented in digital form with VR technologies,
users do not need to have a real object for the simulation of the process. From that
point of view, the efficiency can be increased because of the elimination of real object. Furthermore, the development of VR technologies is also supported by the development of haptic technologies. Nowadays, some haptic devices are available and
widely used such as Phantom families [1] from SenseAbleTM Corporation and Omega
xTM from the Force Dimension Corporation. Haptic devices give touch sensing by a
force-feedback mechanism. Through this mechanism, an operator will feel the result
of collision force.
∗

Corresponding authors.

Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part II, LNCS 4488, pp. 760–767, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Intelligent Assembly/Disassembly System with a Haptic Device

761

The maintenance process itself benefits from advancements in the VR interface,
since the maintenance process involves many A/D task and depending on the amount
of parts involved. A maintenance simulation could be held to observe the scheme of
maintenance task by simulating the process in a virtual environment (VE). Borro et al.
have developed the system for the maintainability simulation in aeronautics. They
combined a haptic device to the system and keep the user’s movements same as those
that occur when testing a physical mock-up [2]. Similar work has also been suggested
by Saval et al. [3]. Another research focused on the development a language, such as
Virtual Fixture Assembly Language (VFAL) [4]. This library could be used to construct various virtual fixture series with graphic and force guidance rules, making the
low-level haptic and graphic rendering details transparent to the developers. Gallantuci et. al have researched the A/D planning by using fuzzy and genetic algorithms
[5]. They utilized a genetic algorithm (GAs) to generate the optimal sequence for
A/D task.
Our research focuses on the development of A/D system for the aircraft part maintenance process. We propose a combination of the utilization of a haptic device and
an intelligent algorithm for part sequence generation. We utilized a genetic algorithm
as an optimization method to optimize part sequence generation. Even though some
researches already have been suggested this for the parts sequence generation, they
didn’t consider the utilization of a haptic device. Natural and artificial constraint concepts are applied in this paper. Natural and artificial constraint concepts have been
widely applied in the robotics field. Even though there has been extensive research
[6-7] on the constraints in the haptics field, there has not been a detailed study on its
applicability to aircraft part maintenance. This paper describes the development of the
intelligent system for the aircraft parts maintenance with haptic information.

2 Description of Aircraft Part Maintenance System
The schematic of A/D system is shown in Figure 1. The system consists of a haptic
device (Phantom omni), a Virtual Environment (VE), and a trained operator. The
haptic device can be considered as an apparatus where an operator inputs the action
for the manipulated object. This device has only three degree of freedom (3-DOF), so
it can not generate torque. The communication occurred bi-directionally between the
haptic device and the VE through a fire-wire cable. The manipulated objects are aircraft parts with a scale model, which was made in CAD software and saved as the
VRML (Virtual Reality Machine Language) file format. After the object was transferred to VE, the operator could then manipulate the object during the scheme of the
maintenance task.
In the future trials according to the design, the movement made by the operator
will be constrained along to the suggested path. As the operator looks at VE, he/she
will feel the guidance force from artificial and natural constraints. The artificial and
natural constraints will guide the operator to put the part in the right position, using
the suggested path. The virtual environment was built based on the OpenInventorTM
graphic library, a collision detection library, a path planning algorithm, and an optimal sequence generation algorithm. Those components work together to make the
aircraft part maintenance system efficient.

762

Christiand and J. Yoon

(a) Schematic of A/D System

(b) An operator

Fig. 1. An intelligent A/D system for aircraft parts maintenance

3 Aircraft Maintenance System Algorithm
The overall system algorithm is shown in the flowchart in Fig. 2. First of all, the system should check the haptic device through the device initialization, verify the initial
position of a haptic stylus, and then confirm whether collision detection is being performed or not. This step was aimed to decide which part will be the first position in
the sequence. This procedure gives freedom to the operator to set the first suitable part
as he/she wish. Since the collision detection library only retrieves the coordinates of
the colliding polygons and points, the contact configuration needs to be reconstructed
by considering the possible combination of surface features between two bodies [6].
For collision detection, the functions from graphic API (Application Programming
Interface) Open Inventor are utilized [8].
After the first part of the algorithm is recognized, we can perform the optimal sequence generation. The genetic algorithm (GAs) is applied in this step. The GAs algorithm begins by defining the optimization variables, the cost function, and the cost
[9]. The cost function is a function that shows the relation between the optimization
variable and the parameter for evaluation of the problem solution. The cost is a difference between the actual solution and the desired solution. Optimization variables are
the variables that should be optimized to reach optimal solution for the case model.
The optimization variables are arranged in chromosome form. A cluster of chromosome is called as a population. The optimization variables are sequence order (S),
direction of each part (O), and used tool for each part (T).

chromosome = [S | O | T ]
where :

(1)

Intelligent Assembly/Disassembly System with a Haptic Device

763

S = ( s1 ss " sn ) = part sequence
O = (o1 os " on ) = part orientation
T = (t1 ts " tn ) = used tool for each part
n = number of part
The evaluation of disassembly sequence was realized by using cost function [5]:
Cost function = f (chromosome) = ( w1 ⋅ l ) + w2 ⋅ ( N − 1 − o) + w3 ⋅ ( N − g − 1)

(2)

where the parameters of the cost function were set to l, o, and g that variables are
the maximum length of feasible sequence, the orientation change number, the
gripper change number, respectively. Then, every parameter was associated with the
weight w.

Fig. 2. System algorithm of the intelligent A/D system

The use of these cost function parameters are quite representative for the case such
as the maintenance task. In the maintenance task, the numbers of orientation changes
and tool changes will affect the efficiency of overall maintenance process. An analogy
can be made to describe the effect of the cost function parameters for the overall efficiency. A gripper is a tool used to do one task of the A/D tasks, whereas the orientation changes represent how many step we needed for doing one task in A/D task list.
It needs to be restated in this case, that the best sequence is a list of parts in the assembled order which have the highest cost function value.
The ranking for chromosomes will be generated in every generation (iteration).
Ranking is made by sorting the cost value for each chromosome. Some portion of
population will be destroyed to give space for new offspring. This process is called

764

Christiand and J. Yoon

natural selection. Selection rate (Xrate) determines the amount of chromosomes that
still exists after the natural selection process. The selection rate is set to 50%. The
relation between the existing chromosomes (Pkeep) and the number of population (P) is
shown in (3).
Pkeep = X rate × P
(3)
Then, the numbers of the empty space or the disappearing chromosomes are shown
in (4).
Pdisappear = P − Pkeep
(4)
Half of the population will disappear and will be replaced by new offspring. The disappeared chromosomes (Pdisappear) are chromosomes that have low cost values. In each
generation, GAs operator: crossover and mutation are applied to produce new offspring. By applying the GAs operator, the fitness of the chromosomes can be increased. Crossover is a process matching of some nodes in one chromosome to
another chromosome. The results of the crossover process are two new offspring. In
this paper, the crossover process is based on a partially matched crossover (PMX) that
was introduced by Lazzerini et.al with more advancement called MPMX [10]. Parents
are taken from the existing chromosome (Pkeep). The pair of parents are randomly
selected from the existing chromosomes (Pkeep). Then, three numbers are randomly
selected. Let a, b, and l represent the starting nodes for the first and the second
chromosomes, and the length of the matching portion, respectively. For example: the
chromosomes are SA and SB, l = 4, a = 3, b = 7, n = 10.
a

a

a

SA

[ s4 s5 s8 s1 s9 s2 s6 s10 s7 s3 | o4 o5 o8 o1 o9 o2 o6 o10 o7 o3 | t 4 t5 t8 t1 t9 t 2 t 6 t10 t 7 t3 ]

SB

[ s7 s3 s 2 s8 s5 s6 s9 s1 s 4 s10 | o7 o3 o2 o8 o5 o6 o9 o1 o4 o10 | t 7 t3 t 2 t8 t5 t 6 t9 t1 t 4 t10 ]

b

b

b

After the crossover
b

b

b

CA

[ s2 s5 s9 s1 s4 s10 s6 s8 s7 s3 | o2 o5 o9 o1 o4 o10 o6 o8 o7 o3 | t 2 t5 t9 t1 t 4 t10 t 6 t8 t 7 t3 ]

CB

[ s7 s3 s4 s10 s5 s6 s8 s1 s9 s 2 | o7 o3 o4 o10 o5 o6 o8 o1 o9 o2 | t 7 t3 t 4 t10 t5 t6 t8 t1 t 9 t 2 ]

a

a

a

Then, the offspring (CA and CB) will fill the empty space in the population, replacing
the disappearing chromosome (Pdisappear). A mutation operator is necessary to increase
possibilities for getting better offspring. Mutation is held by modifying the chromosomes individually. The nodes are selected randomly. If generation has reached the
cost function threshold, the generation should be stopped. The most optimal sequence
for A/D task will be suggested to the operator. It is worth remarking that the optimal
sequence is conducted based on the first part recognition algorithm chosen by the
operator.
When provided with sufficient information, the system will generate the guidance
path for the operator, which will guide the operator for the best part sequence of the
maintenance task. In order to sense the guidance force, artificial and natural constraints are applied to the operator through the path. The fundamental idea of using
the force field is that each object in virtual environment is surrounded by repulsive
force field [7]. Since we already know the target position of our part position, the

Intelligent Assembly/Disassembly System with a Haptic Device

765

force field of whole environment can be calculated to assist the operator to reach the
target position. We can prescribe the target position for aircraft parts. During the assembly task, target position will be the best position for each part in Cartesian coordinate related to the geometry constraint of the assembled parts. In disassembly task,
target position is safe place (position) in Cartesian coordinate where we will put the
part for the final position. The force applied for the guidance is a summation between
the artificial and natural constraint. The following relation summarizes the force implementation [6] :

Constraint total (x,y,z) = Constraint natural (y) + Constraint artificial (x,z)

(5)

The constraint along the plane x and z is used to guide the object to reach the prescribed target position, whereas the natural constraint is the constraint that naturally
comes from the object. After one part has reached the target position, another guidance path for another part will be suggested to the operator. This process repeated
until all part reaches their target positions. The sequence of task based on the results
of the optimal sequence generation.

4 Experiment and Result
To implement optimal sequence generation, some experiments were conducted to test
the algorithm. As shown in Fig. 3, An operator attempted to disassemble the assembled part. To accomplish the disassembly task, parameters such as gripper and direction of part were involved in cost value calculation. While in [5] the number of feasible sequence was involved, this trial did not involve that parameter in this experiment.
Assume the possibility of escape part direction only limited to the +z and –z direction.
The gripper was available in five types.
Table 1. Available Gripper
Part
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Available Gripper
G1,G2,G3
G2,G3,G4
G1,G3,G4
G3,G4,G5
G3,G4
G5
G1,G2,G3
G2,G3,G4,G5
G1,G2,G3,G4
G5

Initial population consisted of 100 individuals. The number of generation was limited to 50 generation. In every generation, maximum and average cost value was
calculated. Below are the maximal cost value after 100 trial attempting. In every generation, maximum and average cost value was increased (Fig. 3) This indicate that

766

Christiand and J. Yoon

solution is getting better from generation to generation. The final solution suggested
for disassembly sequence are 10-8-6-2-5-9-1-4-7-3. Because the cost function did not
involve a number of feasible sub-sequence and feasible sub-sequence modules, so
there is a non-feasible sub-sequence in suggested solution.

G

(a) Maximum cost function

(c) Average cost function

(b) Assembled part for experiment

(d) Assembled part drawing for experiment

Fig. 3. Experiment result and picture of assembled part

5 Conclusion
In this paper, we have suggested the framework of the intelligent assembly/disassembly system for aircraft parts maintenance task. The algorithm and components of the system which deal with the complexity of the sequence selection by an
optimalized method have been described in this paper. Some results have been
showed refer to the selection of optimal sequence. In future works, sub-sequence
module will be involved in the calculation of cost value to avoid non feasible subsequence appear in sequence solution. Furthermore, a novel algorithm and strategy in
the haptic utilization has been developed.. In other words, this system could be a prototype of an efficient system for the purpose of aircraft part maintenance tasks. Since
this is an ongoing research, further developments and inputs are desired to increase
the effectiveness of the system.

Intelligent Assembly/Disassembly System with a Haptic Device

767

Acknowledgement
This work was supported by the Korea Research Foundation Grant funded
by the Korean Government (MOEHRD) (KRF-2005-005-J09902) and was supported
by NURI Project.

References
[1] http://www.sensable.com/. 4:23 pm. 26/12/2006
[2] Diego Borro, Joan Savall, Aiert Amundarain, Jorge Juan Gil, Alejandro Garcia-Alonso,
Luis Matey, “A Large Haptic Device for Aircraft Engine Maintainability,” IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 70-74, Nov/Dec 2004.
[3] Joan Savall, Diego Borro, Jorge Juan Gil, Luis Matey, “Description of a Haptic System
for Virtual Maintainability in Aeronautics,” IEEE International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems, Laussane, Switzerland, October 2002.
[4] Alex B. Kuang, Shahram Payandeh, Bin Zheng, Frank Henigman, Christine L.
MacKenzie, "Assembling Virtual Fixtures for Guidance in Training Environments," haptics, pp. 367-374, 12th International Symposium on Haptic Interfaces for Virtual Environment and Teleoperator Systems (HAPTICS'04), 2004.
[5] L. M. Galantucci; G. Percoco & R. Spina, “Assembly and Disassembly Planning by using Fuzzy Logic & Genetic Algorithms,” International Journal of Advanced Robotic Systems, volume 1 Number , 2004
[6] Daniel Galeano and Shahram Payandeh, “ Artificial and Natural Force Constraints in
Haptic-aided Path Planning,” IEEE International Workshop on Haptic Audio Visual Environments and their Applications, Ottawa, Canada, 1-2 October 2005
[7] Dongbo Xiao and Roger Hubbold. “Navigation Guided by Artificial Force Fields,” Proceedings of ACM CHI 98 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, vol. 1,
pp 179-186. ACM SIGCHI, Addison Wesley, April 1998
[8] “Open Inventor 6”, Mercury Computer System, 2006
[9] Randy L. Haupt and Sue Ellen Haupt, “Practical Genetic Algorithms 2nd Edition,” John
Willey and Sons, USA, 2004
[10] Lazzerini B., Marcelloni F., “A Genetic Algorithm for generating Optimal Assembly
Plans”, Artificial Intelligence in Engineering, Vol. 14, pp. 319-329, 2000

