Modeling VaR in Crude Oil Market:
A Multi Scale Nonlinear Ensemble Approach
Incorporating Wavelet Analysis and ANN
Kin Keung Lai1,2, Kaijian He1,2, and Jerome Yen3
1

Department of Management Sciences, City University of Hong Kong, Tat Chee Avenue,
Hong Kong
mskklai@cityu.edu.hk
2
School of Business Administration, Hunan University, Changsha, Hunan, 410082, China
paulhekj@gmail.com
3
Department of Finance, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
risksolution@gmail.com

Abstract. Price fluctuations in the crude oil markets worldwide have attracted
significant attentions from both, industries and academics, due to their profound
impact on businesses and governments. Proper measurement and management
of risks due to unexpected price movements in the markets has been crucial
from both, operational and strategic perspectives. However, risk measurements
from current approaches offer insufficient explanatory power and performance
due to the complicated non-linear nature of risk evolutions. This paper adopts a
VaR approach to measure risks and proposes multi-scale non-linear ensemble
approaches to model the risk evolutions in WTI crude oil market. The proposed
WDNEVaR follows a semi-parametric paradigm, incorporating both, wavelet
analysis and artificial neural network techniques. Experiment results from
empirical studies suggest that the proposed WDNEVaR is superior to traditional
approaches. It provides VaR estimates of higher reliability and accuracy. It also
brings significantly more flexibility during the modeling attempts.
Keywords: Value at Risk, Wavelet Analysis, Nonlinear Ensemble Algorithm,
Artificial Neural Network.

1 Introduction
Crude oil is a globally important industrial input. On one hand, crude oil price
fluctuations affect every sector in regional and global economies. On the other hand,
crude oil price forecasting and the allied risk measurement serve as important inputs
and form the basis for macro-econometric models, financial markets’ risk assessments
and derivatives’ pricing, etc. Therefore, demand for risk management in the crude oil
market is on the rise from both, academics and industries.
Among numerous risk measures, this paper adopts Value at Risk to measure
market risks in the crude oil markets. Due to its simplicity, VaR is widely accepted as
a risk measure by both, academics and industries [1]. Although different approaches
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part I, LNCS 4487, pp. 554 – 561, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Modeling VaR in Crude Oil Market

555

have been developed to estimate VaRs, the essential multi-scale heterogeneous data
structures remain unexplored. Therefore, this paper takes a semi-parametric approach
and proposes the novel wavelet based non-linear ensemble approach. Empirical
studies are conducted in the representative US West Intermediate Taxes (WTI) crude
oil market. The experiment results suggest that the proposed WDNEVaR model
outperforms the more traditional ARMA-GARCH based model.
The rest of the paper develops as follows: the second section reviews the relevant
theories. The third section lays down the algorithm for wavelet based non-linear
ensemble approach for VaR estimates. The fourth section presents and interprets
results of empirical studies in WTI crude oil market. The fifth section concludes.

2 Background and Theories
VaR is a single number describing the maximal potential loss of a portfolio of
financial instruments during a given period of time for a given probability. Estimation
of appropriate VaR is a difficult challenge that has been tackled mainly from three
approaches over the years: parametric, non-parametric, and semi-parametric approach
[1]. The semi-parametric approach is the emerging methodology that strikes the
balance between the parametric and non parametric approaches. These include many
inter-disciplinary techniques such as wavelet analysis, extreme value theory, etc [2].
To verify the modeling adequacy, the model’s past performance are often taken as
the indication of the future performance [1]. Kupiec frequency based backtesting
procedure is the most dominant hypothesis based approach, which takes the
consistency level of observed frequency of losses as indication of the level of model
adequacy. When the sample size is sufficiently large, the Kupiec backtesting
procedures would offer an acceptable level of discriminatory power between good
and bad models. Therefore, it is adopted in this paper to backtest and evaluate
different models.
As the emerging new tool for estimating VaRs, wavelet analysis is the latest
development in the harmonic analysis field. It possesses the capability to project data
into time-scale domain for analysis [2]. Mathematically, wavelets are continuous
functions
that
satisfy
admissibility
conditions
as
in
Cψ = ∫

∞

0

Ψ( f )
f

df < ∞ Ù

∫

∞

∞

2
ψ (t )dt = 0 and unit energy condition as in ∫ ψ (t ) dt = 1 ,

−∞

−∞

where ϕ is the Fourier transform ofψ .
There are different families of wavelets designed, each with their own special
characteristics [2]. Typical wavelet families include the Haar wavelet, the Daubechies
wavelets, and the coiflets wavelets, etc[2].
The wavelet transform is conducted as W (u, s) = ∫ ∞ x(t )ψ u , s (t ) dt while the inverse
−∞

(synthesis) operation is performed as in

1
x (t ) =
Cψ

∞

∞

0

−∞

∫ ∫

W ( u , s )ψ u , s ( t ) du

ds
s2

. Thus together

they
form
the
basis
for
multi-resolution
analysis
as
in
f (t ) ≈ S J (t ) + DJ (t ) + DJ −1 (t ) + ... + D1 (t ) , where S J (t ) refers to the smooth signals

and equals

∑

k

s j , k φ j , k (t ) . D J (t ) refers to the detail signals and equals

∑

k

d j ,kψ j ,k (t ) .

556

K.K. Lai, K. He, and J. Yen

Since Ramsey (1999) introduced wavelet analysis into the mainstream literature,
wavelet analysis has been applied in three different areas: firstly, wavelet analysis has
been applied for economic and financial relationship identification to reveal the nonlinear multi-scale data structure[3]. Secondly, wavelet analysis has been used
extensively for denoising financial data, which extracts the maximal level of useful
information [4]. Thirdly wavelet analysis has been used extensively in the forecasting
model building process to decompose the original data series for further modeling
attempts[5]. However, wavelet analysis has received little attention in the risk
management field. Fernandez (2006a, 2006b) has used wavelet analysis to investigate
the risk distribution across time scales in the Chilean stock markets and found
concentration of risk in high frequency parts of data[6, 7]. But, these approaches
mainly focus on investigating the distribution of potential market losses embedded in
VaR numbers, across the time horizon. Their approach is based on the assumption
that wavelet decomposed variances at different scales represent investors’
preferences. However, they seem to have ignored the impact of different wavelet
families chosen during their analysis, which leaves their findings largely inconclusive.
Another methodology proposed for estimating VaR is the ensemble approach. The
Ensemble approach pools the partial information sets employed by different
n
individual forecasters into a unified one as in yˆ =
, where yˆ t is the
w xˆ
t

∑

i =1

t

i ,t

output at time t. wt is the weight assigned to different forecasts. xˆ i ,t is the forecast at
time t. n is the number of forecasts. Among different techniques introduced to
optimize weights, artificial neural network is the most popular one. It is an important
connectionist model for estimating non-linear data patterns and has distinguished
itself as a universal function approximator for empirical studies. Artificial neural
network consists of nodes and connections between the nodes. Neurons are grouped
in three different types of layers: input layers, hidden layers and output layers.
Depending on the direction of information flow, the neural network structure can be
grouped into feed-forward and recurrent types. The network structure takes the matrix
form as in (1):
q

p

j =1

i =1

yt = a0 + ∑ w j f (a j + ∑ wi , j xi ) + ε t

(1)

where a j refers to the bias on the jth unit, w refers to the connection weight between
different layers, f(.) refers to the transfer function of the hidden layer, p is the total
number of input nodes while q is the total number of hidden nodes.

3 Wavelet Decomposed Nonlinear Ensemble Value at Risk
(WDNEVaR)
When the sample is of sufficient length, VaR can be estimated by the parametric
approach as in (2):
VaRt = μ t + σ t G −1 (α )

where G −1 (α ) refers to the inverse of the cumulative normal distribution.

(2)

Modeling VaR in Crude Oil Market

557

The estimation process boils down to estimation of conditional mean and
conditional standard deviation, which involves three steps:
Firstly, the original data series are decomposed using wavelet analysis based on the
chosen wavelet families as in (3):
J

rt = rA J ,t + ∑ rD j ,t

(3)

j =1

Secondly, the conditional mean at each scale is assumed to follow ARMA
processes and it is forecasted at each individual scales as in (4).
r

m

i =1

j =1

μˆ t , s = a0, s + ∑ ai , s rt −i , s + ∑ b j , sε t − j , s

(4)

where μˆ t, s is the conditional mean at time t, s is the wavelet scales. rt − i , s (i = 1...r ) is
the lag r returns with parameter ai , s , and ε t − j , s ( j = 1...m) is the lag m residuals in the
previous period with parameter b j , s .
The conditional standard deviation at each scale is assumed to follow GARCH
processes and it is estimated at each individual scales as in (5):
p

q

i =1

j =1

σˆ t2, s = ωs + ∑ ai , sε t2− i , s + ∑ β j , sσ t2− j , s

(5)

where σˆ t2,s is the conditional variance at time t, σ t2− j , s ( j = 1 ... q ) is the lag q variance
with parameter ai , s , and ε t2− i , s ( i = 1 ... p ) is the lag p squared errors with parameter
β j , s in the previous period, during which the mean return is set to be zero.
Thirdly, as wavelet transform decorrelates the decomposed data, the conditional
mean can be aggregated from the conditional means estimated at each individual
scales as in (6).
μˆ t = μˆ A

J

J

,t

+ ∑ μˆ D j , t

(6)

j =1

The conditional standard deviations at each scale are synthesized, using wavelet
analysis, to produce the aggregated estimates as in (7). The synthesis process pools
the partial information set at each scale together and retains its authenticity based on
the “preservation of energy” property of wavelet analysis.
σˆ t 2 = σˆ A2

J

J

,t

+ ∑σˆ D2 j ,t
j =1

(7)

In the next step, since previous VaRs are estimated based on certain wavelet families,
to reduce the biases introduced by arbitrary choice of wavelet families, the non-linear
ensemble algorithm is proposed, to combine VaRs estimated based on different wavelet
families into the optimal one utilizing artificial neural network, as in (8).

558

K.K. Lai, K. He, and J. Yen

σ WDNEVaR =

∑Weight *σ
i

(8)

i

i∈F

where F refers to the set of wavelet families attempted. Weight refers to the weight of
the standard deviation estimated using different wavelet families.
When training artificial neural network to ensemble different volatility forecasts, a
historical volatility measure is needed to provide an objective during the training
process. There are mainly three dominant volatility measures identified in the
literature: squared returns as VolatilitysquaredReturns= rt 2 , realized volatilities as
RV =

n

∑

t =1

rt 2

and historical volatilities H V

=

1
N

N

∑

t =1

(r i − r )2

.

4 Empirical Studies
Data for this study were obtained from Global Financial Data (GFD) and consists of
5840 daily closing price for US West Intermediate Taxes (WTI) crude oil in
dollars/barrel, which transforms to 1212 weekly observations. The date range for the
data is from 4th April, 1983 to 30th June, 2006. As for ARMA-GARCH and WDVaR
model fitting, 60% of the data, i.e. 727 observations, are reserved as the training set,
while the remaining serves as the test set. As for WDNEVaR estimates, 40% of the
test set, i.e. 194 observations, is reserved for training the neural network structure.
The rolling window method is used to reflect the arrival of new information. Three
different ex-post measures of volatilities, i.e. squared returns, historical volatility and
realized volatilities are calculated using daily closing prices in the markets. VaRs are
estimated using the average weekly prices as calculated in Pw = 1 ∑ l Pi , where Pw
l

i =1

is the weekly price. Pi is the daily price within the week. l is the length of the week.
Performance of different models is evaluated by both Mean Square Error (MSE) for
its accuracy and Backtesting procedures for reliability. The returns are log differenced
as rt = ln( Pt / Pt −1 ) . For each experiment, a portfolio of one asset position worth $1 is
assumed.
Several stylized facts about the data series can be summarized from table 1 as
follows: price series exhibit significant fluctuations. The standard deviation is
significantly positive, which indicates unignorable level of risks in the markets. There
are considerable gains, as well as losses, and the market return is asymmetric and loss
intending, as suggested by negative skewness levels. There is also high probability of
extreme events occurrence as suggested by significant excess kurtosis levels.
Table 1. Descriptive Statistics for crude oil returns series in US WTI crude oil markets
Crude Mea
Oil
n
market
WTI

0.00
07

Maxim
um

0.2440

Minimu Mediu Standa Skewn Kurtos Jarquem
m
rd
ess
is
Bera Test
Deviat
(p value)
ion
-0.1967 0.001 0.041
6.758
0
9
2
0.2107
0

BDS
Test
(p
value)
0

Modeling VaR in Crude Oil Market

559

Rejection of both, Jarque-Bera test of normality and BDS test of independence,
suggests that the data deviate significantly from the normal distribution and are nonlinear dependent in nature.Therefore, the market is characterized by the leptokurtic
(fat-tail and heteroscedasticity) phenomenon, where non-linear dynamics dominate.
Table 2. Experiment results for ARMA-GARCH VaR in US WTI crude oil market
Crude Oil
market

Confidenc
e Level

Exceedances

MSE

US WTI
Crude Oil

99%
97.5%
95%

8
14
21

0.0131
0.0099
0.0076

Kupiec
Test
Statistics
1.7281
0.2835
0.4793

P-Value

Model
Acceptance

0.1187
0.5944
0.4887

Ĝ
Ĝ
Ĝ

Experiment results in table 2 show that the ARMA-GARCH approach offers
acceptable levels of reliability in the tested market. The ARMA-GARCH VaR is
accepted across all confidence levels. However, under fierce competition and
increasingly tight profit margins, the ARMA-GARCH approach no longer suffices
due to the following reasons. Firstly, as indicated by the generally low level of failure
rates, the ARMA-GARCH provides conservative VaR estimates that achieve
reliability at the cost of accuracy. This may result in “more than enough” idle capital
and increase operational costs. Secondly, when higher levels of reliability are
demanded by market participants due to increasing competition level, this linear
combination approach offers little room for further performance.
Table 3. Experiment results for WDVAR(x, 1) in WTI crude oil market
Crud Confi
WDVaR(Haar, 1)
e Oil dence Exce MSE Pmark level edan
Value
et
ces
US 99.0% 14
0.0123 0.0007
WTI
0.0093 0.2857
Crud 97.5% 16
e Oil
95.0% 28
0.0072 0.4516

WDVaR(Db2, 1)
WDVaR(Coif2, 1)
Exce
MSE
PExce MSE
Pedan
Value edan
Valu
ces
ces
e
0.0137 0.00
14
0.0148 0.0007 18
00
19
0.0111 0.0656 24
0.0104 0.00
23
0.0079 0.08
32
0.0085 0.1256 33
52

The notion WDVaR(x, i) in table 3 refers to the VaR estimated based on x wavelet
families and the decomposition level (scale) i. Experiment results above show that by
switching from Coif2 to Db2 and Haar wavelet family, both accuracy and reliability
level can be improved. E.g. when switching from Coif2 to Haar wavelet families, both
reliability and accuracy level of VaR estimates increase significantly. As experiment
results suggest, the performance difference is closely related to the characteristics of
the wavelets used as different wavelet families lead to different trade-offs between
accuracy and reliability levels in VaR estimates. Clearly the advantage of WDVaR
lies in the additional flexibility introduced into the modeling process. By tuning the
two parameters, WDVaR provide different perspectives into the underlying risk

560

K.K. Lai, K. He, and J. Yen

evolution and is capable of striking a balance between reliability and accuracy for
VaR estimates.
Since VaR estimated based on different wavelet families tracks the underlying risk
evolution based on partial information set extraction, to estimate VaR at the highest
level of reliability and accuracy, it would be necessary to combine partial information
sets during forecasting. The artificial neural network based non-linear ensemble
algorithm is used to derive the optimal weights for combining individual forecasts.
The back propagation feedforward neural network with structure (3, 6, 1) is used.
Through trial and error method, the historical volatility is selected to be the volatility
proxy since WDNEVaR using it provides the best performance. Experiment results
are listed in table 4.
Table 4. Experiment results for WDNEVAR in WTI crude oil market
Crude
Oil
Markets
US WTI
Crude
Oil

Volatility
Proxy

Confiden
ce Level

Historical
Volatility

99.0%
97.5%
95.0%

Exceeda
MSE
nces
3
6
12

0.0120
0.0091
0.0069

Kupiec
Test
Statistics
0.0022
0.2525
0.5175

Model
P-value Acceptanc
e
0.9626
Ĝ
0.6153
Ĝ
0.4719
Ĝ

Experiment results in table 4 suggest that WDNEVaR achieve higher levels of
reliability and accuracy than the ARMA-GARCH based approach. Reliability level of
VaR estimated improves as the p value improves in most of the situations, except the
slight inferior performance in WTI market at 95% confidence level. More
importantly, the accuracy level increases drastically, when measured by significantly
lower MSE value uniformly. The improved accuracy in risk tracking implies less idle
funds and better allocation of capital resources for financial institutions.

5 Conclusions
The contribution of this paper is two fold. Firstly, this paper incorporates the multiscale heterogeneous data structure into the modeling process. Separation and
integration of different layers in the data are conducted using wavelet analysis. When
data are decomposed into the underlying influencing factors in the time scale domain,
models are fitted to more stationary data with fewer violations of assumptions and
improved goodness of fit. Wavelet analysis has demonstrated its capability to
explicitly reveal and track the multi-scale time varying patterns of the data in these
experiments. Secondly, in light of the estimation biases resulting from arbitrary
selection of different sets of parameters, this paper proposes Artificial Neural
Network (ANN) based non-linear ensemble algorithm to reduce estimation bias
introduced by different wavelet families. Given the lack of consensus on the
suitability and correspondence of certain wavelet families to particular data features in
the current literature, non-linear ensemble approaches have proven to be a promising
approach to minimize biases introduced by different wavelet families during the
forecasting process. It should be noted that the performance of the proposed

Modeling VaR in Crude Oil Market

561

WDNEVaR is sensitive to volatility proxies and parameter settings, as suggested by
experiment results. More refined volatility proxies could further improve the model
performance.
Acknowledgement. The work described in this paper was supported by a grant from
City University of Hong Kong (No. 9610058).

References
1. Dowd, K.: Measuring Market Risk. John Wiley, Chichester (2005)
2. Gençay, R., Selçuk, F., Whitcher, B.: An introduction to wavelets and other filtering
methods in finance and economics. Academic Press, San Diego, CA (2002)
3. Ramsey, J.B.: The contribution of wavelets to the analysis of economic and financial data.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London Series a-Mathematical Physical
and Engineering Sciences 357 (1999) 2593-2606
4. Aminghafari, M., Cheze, N., Poggi, J.-M.: Multivariate denoising using wavelets and
principal component analysis. Computational Statistics & Data Analysis 50 (2006) 23812398
5. Yamada, H.: Wavelet-based beta estimation and Japanese industrial stock prices. Appl.
Econ. Lett. 12 (2005) 85-88
6. Fernandez, V.P.: The international CAPM and a wavelet-based decomposition of value at
risk. Stud. Nonlinear Dyn. Econom. 9 (2005) 7. Fernandez, V.: The CAPM and value at risk at different time-scales. International Review
of Financial Analysis 15 (2006) 203-219

