Optimization of Mobile IPv6 Handover Performance
Using E-HCF Method*
Guozhi.Wei1, Anne.Wei1, Ke.Xu2, and Gerard.Dupeyrat1
1

University of Paris XII 61, Avenue du General de Gaulle 94010 Créteil France
2
Tsinghua University 100084 Beijing China
{guozhi.wei,wei,g.dupeyrat}@univ-paris12.fr,
xuke@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract. Mobile IPv6 permits the Mobile Node (MN) to maintain the continuous connectivity to the Internet when it moves from one access router to another.
Due to both link switching delay and IPv6 protocol operation during the handover
process, packets destined to the MN can be delayed or lost. This paper proposes a
solution to improve the Mobile IPv6 handover performance over wireless network
by introducing a new entity - Extension Handover Control Function (E-HCF).
E-HCF could send the decisive control message to MN to accelerate the handover
process and manage the traffic belonging to MN to reduce the packet loss. With a
comparison between Mobile IPv6 and our E-HCF solution, we show that our solution allows us providing low-latency and low packet loss for real-time services
during the handover.
Keywords: Mobile IPv6, Handover, E-HCF function, WLAN.

1 Introduction
The need of keeping connection with Internet in everywhere and at every time is more
and more demanded in recently years. However, the continuous Internet connectivity
and the correct routing of packets could not be guaranteed when users change their
access point to the Internet. To resolve these problems, the protocols Mobile IPv4
(MIPv4) [1] and Mobile IPv6 (MIPv6) [2] are respectively proposed by the Internet
Engineering Task Force (IETF). The major difference between MIPv4 and MIPv6 is
that Foreign Agent (FA) is elided in the latter; moreover Mobile Node (MN), its
Home Agent (HA) and its Correspondence Node (CN) must all support the IPv6 Protocol. The MIPv6 operations involve movement detection, router discovery, Care of
Address (CoA) configuration, Duplication Address Detection, and Binding update.
Although MIPv6 is proposed in the interest of improving the handover performance,
the latency and packet loss are always two main problems, which affect the real-time
application employing for mobile user.
Along with the widely implantation of Wireless LAN (WLAN) [3], the user of
WLAN would like to have the more mobility. To meet this demand, the MIPv6 is
needed to be better improved over the WLAN. While the infrastructure networks are
already installed, such as Access Router (AR), Access Point (AP), they are hardly
*

This work was supported in part by the international project PRA-SI under Grant SI04-03.

Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 506–513, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Optimization of Mobile IPv6 Handover Performance Using E-HCF Method

507

updated or modified. Under this background, we introduce a new entity - Extension
Handover Control Function (E-HCF) in Mobile IPv6 over WLAN to improve the
handover performance without changing the existing infrastructures. As the probe
phase (MN launches the scanning process to find the available AP in WLAN.) [3] and
Detection Address Duplication (DAD) process are the main negative influences on
handover latency, E-HCF aims to improve the handover performance by reducing
their effects. Moreover, to reduce the packet loss, E-HCF could buffer, and then redirect the traffic according to the MN’s need during the handover process to reduce the
packet loss.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents background
and related work of Mobile IP. Section 3 presents our Extension Handover Control
Function (E-HCF) architecture and the detailed protocol operation associated. Section
4 deals with the performance of E-HCF handover in term of handover latency and
packet loss. The numerical results show that E-HCF handover procedure reduces
significantly the latency and packet loss regarding the Mobile IPv6. Finally, conclusion and future work are mentioned in section 5.

2 Background and Related Works
Actually, the main proposals accepted by IETF are Hierarchical Mobile IPv6
(HMIPv6) [4] and Fast Handover for MIPv6 (FMIPv6) [5].
HMIPv6 introduces an entity - Mobility Anchor Point (MAP) who acts somewhat
like a local HA for the visiting MN. HMIPv6 classes MN mobility into micromobility (within the same MAP domain or intra-MAP) and macro-mobility (between
the two MAP domains or inter-MAP). When intra-MAP handover occurs, MN only
needs to register its new CoA with its serving MAP, therefore, HMIPv6 could limit
the amount of signal required outside the MAP’s domain, decrease the signal load and
the signal transmission delay, and consequently, the handover performance could be
improved. While HMIPv6 introduces the additional delay for establishing the bidirectional tunnel between MAP and MN, generates the more signal load for InterMAP handover. Furthermore, it is difficult to determine an adaptive MAP domain
size for different MN’s mobility pattern [6] [7].
FMIPv6 tries to reduce handover delay by providing fast IP connectivity as soon as
MN attaches to a new subnet. To realize this aim, MN must launch the passive or
active scanning process to discover the available AP [8]. According to the probe results, AR provides MN with the corresponding subnet prefix information, and then
MN could generate a New CoA when it is still connected to its current subnet. To
minimize packets loss, a bi-directional tunnel is set up between Previous AR and New
AR. Utilizing this tunnel, PAR forwards the packets destined to MN’s Previous CoA
to its New CoA, MN could also continue to send packets to CN through PAR. Such
tunnel remains active until MN completes Binding Update with its CNs. However,
there are two mains shortcomings in the FMIPv6 protocol. Firstly, MN couldn’t receive or send the data during the probe phase, while it lasts minimum 350 ms [9],
furthermore, MN must spend time to re-switch the channel and re-associate with its
Previous AP to exchange the messages with PAR; Secondly, the DAD process could

508

G. Wei et al.

not be completely avoided if MN’s New CoA isn’t validated by the New AR before
MN disconnects with its previous AR.
Besides the main proposals, some approaches are proposed to providing lossless
handover and minimizing the handover delay ([10], [11], [12]). IEEE 802.11f standard, known as Inter-Access Point Protocol (IAPP), has been proposed in 2003[10].
IAPP specifies the information to be exchanged between APs to support MN handover. But this standard has been withdrawn on February 2006 by the IEEE 802 Executive Committee. In [11], a Pre-Handover Signaling (PHS) protocol is proposed to
support the triggering of a predictive handover and to allow the network to achieve
accurate handover decisions considering different constraints, such as Quality-ofService (QoS), the user’s profile and the MN service requirements. In [12], this paper
proposes to use a new entity - Handover Control Function (HCF) to pre-decide MN’s
new CoA, consequently, MN could send Binding Update message when it still connects with its previous AP. However HCF could not avoid absolutely the IP collision
and the inter-HCF handover is not discussed. Therefore, in this paper, we use E-HCF
entity to reduce the layer 2 scanning delay, avoid the duplication of IP address, and
support the inter-E-HCF handover.

3 Extension Handover Control Function (E-HCF) for Mobile IPv6
3.1 E-HCF Overview
We introduce a local intelligent entity, called E-HCF, which is able to control the
ARs, APs and MNs of its domain. The architecture of E-HCF is shown in Fig 1.

Fig. 1. Architecture of Extension Handover Control Function (E-HCF)

In order to improve the MIPv6 handover performance over WLAN, we endow
E-HCF with the new functions: E-HCF could provide a list of the AP as the available

Optimization of Mobile IPv6 Handover Performance Using E-HCF Method

509

AP and a corresponding IP address as the new CoA for MN. In this way, MN needn’t
launch the scanning process to discovery the available AP and the Detection Address
Duplication (DAD) process in the new subnet.
E-HCF could provide beforehand a list of the APs which MN could potentially
connect to in accordance with the MN’s location (in other words, based on the location of MN’s current AP). Moreover, E-HCF defines the priority of the available APs
according to the AP’s charge, the network balance, the MN’s trajectory, etc. If necessary, E-HCF could enquire its contiguous E-HCFs to offer their APs and relative
information via the Int-E-HCFReq and Int-E-HCFRep messages [13].
E-HCF reserves a pool of IP address to form a list of available CoA for MN. Simultaneously, E-HCF generates and updates periodically a special IP address list - a
list of IP address used by the nodes of its domains. By comparing these two lists, EHCF could find the potential address collision in its domain. If the reserved IP address
were used by a node, E-HCF would either withdraw this IP address from the fist list
or demand the node to change its IP address. In this way, we could assure that once EHCF distributes a reserved IP address to MN, MN could use this IP address directly in
the new subnet.
We add six new messages into Mobile IPv6 protocol. E-HCF could use these messages to exchange both the intern (local) information with its ARs/MNs and the extern
information with another E-HCF. These messages are the following: MN Request
(MNReq), E-HCF Reply (E-HCFRep), Inter-E-HCF Request (Int-E-HCFReq), Inter-EHCF Reply (Int-E-HCFRep), Connection Established Information (CEInf) and Handover Finished Confirmation (HFCon) messages. Due to the limited pages, the formats
of these messages won’t be given at here, please read our technique report [13].
3.2 E-HCF Procedure
In this sector, we give the detail handover procedure to the well understand of our
proposition. As shown in Figure 2, E-HCF procedure is detailed as follows:
z

z
z

z

MN moves in the network, once the threshold of received signal strength is overstepped, it sends a MNReq Message to E-HCF immediately to request the network information, such as the available APs, its BSSID, its channel, the prefix of
the corresponding ARs, etc.
E-HCF replies to MN with the E-HCFRep message. MN could obtain the needed
information, and the prospective corresponding CoA from this message.
Once MN receives the E-HCFRep message, MN begins to associate with the
first AP of the list. If MN could establish the connection with the first AP, MN
uses the proposed CoA to send the Binding Update to its HA, its CNs, and sends
the CEInf message to E-HCF to notify its attachment. Otherwise, it does the
same in order to connect to the better AP.
To avoid packets loss, E-HCF commences buffering the traffic destined to MN’s
previous CoA when it receives the MNReq message. Once it receives the CEInf
message, it sends the buffered packets to MN’s new CoA. E-HCF sends HFCon
message to MN when it couldn’t receive the traffic destined to MN’s previous
CoA any more.

510

G. Wei et al.

Fig. 2. E-HCF procedure

Recall that Int-E-HCFReq/Int-E-HCFRep messages are exchanged between the
two E-HCFs for MN’s inter-E-HCF handover. Each E-HCF maintains and updates its
proper network information.

4 E-HCF Performance Estimation
The MIPv6 handover over WLAN consists of Link Layer handover and Network
Layer handover. Link Layer handover includes Probe phase, Authentication phase,
and Re-association phase. Network Layer handover includes Router Discovery phase,
DAD phase and Binding Update phase. Displayed in Figure 3, the handover latency

Fig. 3. Standard MIPv6 Latency

Optimization of Mobile IPv6 Handover Performance Using E-HCF Method

511

could be estimated to minimum 1290 ms [14] without including probe phase delay
(between 350ms and 500ms). If we analyze each phase during handover process, we
can observe that the probe phase and DAD phase delay costs 350ms and 1000ms
respectively. In another word, probe phase and DAD phase are the key argument for
the handover latency. In the following sections, we try to prove our proposition by
mathematic analysis and compare E-HCF with MIPv6.
Before the detail latency analysis, we give the following notations:
LMIPv6
LE-HCF
LProb
LAuthentication
LAssociation
LRouter Discovery
LDAD
LBU/BA

LMNReq
LE-HCFRep
LCEInf
LHFCon

Total handover latency with MIPv6
Total handover latency with E-HCF.
Latency that MN scans all neighboring AP to find the available AP
Latency for authentication phase of Link Layer handover.
Latency for association phase of Link Layer handover.
Latency for Router Discovery phase of Network Layer handover
Latency for DAD phase of Network Layer handover
Latency for Binding Update phase of Network Layer handover
Latency that MN sends a MNReq message to its E-HCF.
Latency that E-HCF sends E-HCFRep message to MN, including
sometimes the delay for the Int-E-HCFReq message/Int-E-HCFRep
message exchange.
Latency that MN sends CEInf message to E-HCF
Latency that E-HCF sends HFCon message to MN

In according to the procesus illustrated in above section.
The total MIPv6 handover latency LMIPv6 is:
LMIPv6 = LProb + LAuthentication + LAssociation + LRouter Discovery + LDAD + LBU/BA
The total E-HCF handover latency LHCF is:
LHCF = LMNReq + LE-HCFRep + LAuthentication + LAssociation + LBU/BA + LCEInf + LHFCon
When we compare our E-HCF approach with MIPv6, we find that the key negative
arguments of handover latency (such as LProb, LRouter Discovery, LDAD) could be eliminated from our E-HCF proposition. Although the latency for messages exchange is
introduced, latency for messages exchange would not be important.
In term of the packet loss, E-HCF commences buffering the traffic destined to
MN’s previous CoA when it receives the MNReq message. Once it receives the
CEInf message, it sends the buffered packets to MN’s new CoA. If we consider that
the size of E-HCF buffer is sufficient for buffering all packets destined to MN’s previous CoA, which arrived before E-HCF receives CEInf message and begins to sends
the packets to MN’s new CoA, the packet loss gets its value to zero. Moreover, according to our E-HCF approach, the duration between the time that E-HCF commences buffering the packets and the time that E-HCF receives CEInf message and
begins to sends the packets to MN’s new CoA is quite short.

512

G. Wei et al.

Fig. 4. E-HCF handover latency comparison in function of DAD

5 Conclusions
This paper proposes a new entity - E-HCF to improve the handover performance in
Mobile IPv6 over WLAN. According to our analysis, both the handover delay and the
packet loss could be significantly decreased. Moreover, E-HCF could enhance the
AP’s security, because AP needn’t broadcast its SSID any more to permit MN to
discover itself. Furthermore, E-HCF permits MN to connect to the authorized AP by
adding the corresponding security parameters (such as WEP/WPA) into the encrypted
E-HCFRep messages.
While how to better choose the available AP and define the AP’s priority according to MN’s mobility pattern is still a challenge for us. What’s more, we need guarantee the QoS service for diverse MNs which have the different traffic type, the
different service demand, and the different priority. Our current work focuses on
resolving above problems and using the OPNET (Optimized Network Engineering
Tool, a network simulator) [15] to prove our proposition. The wireless handover in
MIPv6 will be studied in the future.

References
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]

C. Perkins, “IP Mobility support for IPv4”, RFC 3220, IETF, January 2002.
D.Johnson, C. Perkins, and J.Arkko, “Mobility Support in IPv6”, RFC 3775, June 2004.
B. O’Hara, A. Petrick, “IEEE 802.11 Handbook- A Designer‘s Companion”, IEEE Press.
H.Soliman, C.Castelluccia, K.Malki, and L.Bellier, “Hierarchical Mobile IPv6 mobility
management (HMIPv6)”, RFC 4140, August 2005.

Optimization of Mobile IPv6 Handover Performance Using E-HCF Method

513

[5] R. Koodli, Ed. “Fast Handovers for Mobile IPv6”, RFC 4068, July 2005.
[6] Bok-Deok Shin, Kyung-Jae Ha, “An Improvement of Handoff Latency by Virtual MAPs
for HMIPv6”, in Proceedings of the IEEE CIT 2006 p.78
[7] Sangheon Pack, Minji Nam, and Yanghee Choi, "Design and Analysis of Optimal MultiLevel Hierarchical Mobile IPv6 Networks," Springer (Kluwer) Wireless Personal Communications (WIRE), Vol. 36, No. 2, January 2006.
[8] Mishra, M.Shin, and W.Arbaugh, “An Empirical Analysis of the IEEE 802.11 MAC layer
Handoff Process”, ACM Computer Communications Review, vol. 33, no. 2, Apr. 2003.
[9] Ishwar Ramani, Stefan Savage, “ SyncScan: Practical Fast Handoff for 802.11 Infrastructure Networks”, Proceedings of the IEEE Infocom Conference, Miami, FL, March 2005
[10] “IEEE 802.11f: Recommended Practice for Multi-Vender Access Point Interoperability
via an Inter-Access Point Protocol Access Distribution Systems Supporting IEEE 802.11
Operation”, IEEE Standard 802.11, Jan. 2003
[11] H.Chaouchi, P.Antunes, “Pre-handover signaling for QoS aware mobility management,”
international journal of network management 14, pp.367-374, 2004;
[12] G. Z. Wei, A. Wei, K. Xu and H. Deng, “Handover Control Function Based Handover for
Mobile IPv6,” In Proceedings of ICCS 2006, May 2006.
[13] Guozhi WEI, “E-HCF function and messages formats”, research report 2006-145, University of Paris XII –Val de Marne
[14] Wei Kuang Lai and Jung Chia Chiu, “Improving Handoff Performance in Wireless Overlay Networks by Switching Between Two-Layer IPv6 and One-Layer IPv6 Addressing,”
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communication vol. 23, No.11, November 2005.
[15] C. Zhu, O. W. W. Yang, J. Aweya, M. Oullette, and D. Y. Montuno. “A comparison of
active queue management algorithms using the OPNET Modeler.” IEEE Communications Magazine, 40(6): 158-167, 2002.

