Analysis of Local Route Maintenance for Ad Hoc
Network*
Shaobin Cai, Nianmin Yao, Wenbin Yao, Yong Li, and Guochang Gu
Harbin Engineering University, Harbin, China, 150001
Phone: 86-451-82518030
caishaobin@hrbeu.edu.cn

Abstract. In ad hoc network, most link ailure recoveries can be localized to a
small region along the previous route. However, the theory is not proved by
mathematic analysis and simulations. In this paper, we analyze it by mathematical
analysis and by simulations.
Keywords: Ad hoc network, Local Route Maintenance, Mathematics Analysis.

1 Introduction
An ad hoc Network [1] is a multi-hop wireless network. According to that most link
failure recoveries can be localized to a small region along previous route [2], NSMP [3]
and PatchODMRP [4] are proposed to prolong their flooding periods by their local
route maintenance. However, none of them mathematically analyze the local route
maintenances, and the functions of the local route maintenances are not clearly.
Therefore, we analyze local route maintenance by mathematic analysis and simulations
in this paper.

2 Local Route Maintenance
NSMP adopts a neighbor supporting local route discovery system to reduce its control
overhead. In NSMP, during its forwarding mesh setting up, the nodes, which will
transmit data packets, are marked as forwarding nodes, and the nodes, which are
neighbors of forwarding nodes, are defined as neighbor nodes. After forwarding mesh
has been setup, normal source maintains its forwarding mesh mainly by periodically
flooding control packets in the scope of its forwarding nodes and its neighbor nodes.
*

This paper is supported by the following foundation:
(1) National Science foundation of China “60603059” “60403026” “60503055”;
(2) Postdoctoral science foundation of china “2005038193”;
(3) Postdoctoral foundation of Heilongjiang province, china;
(4) Tackling key technical problem of Heilongjiang province “GC06C106”
(5) Science Foundation of Harbin Engineering University “HEUFFT05010”;
(6) Young backbone teacher project of Harbin Engineering University.

Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part III, LNCS 4489, pp. 157–161, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

158

S. Cai et al.

PatchODMRP extends ODMRP by its local route maintenance. It sets up its
forwarding mesh as ODMRP does. During its transmission of data packets, forwarding
nodes know the status of their neighbor nodes by BEACON signal of MAC layer.
When a forwarding node finds that a link between its upstream node and itself is
broken, it does its local route maintenance in two-hop or three-hop.

3 Mathematic Analysis of Local Route Maintenance
In this section, we analyze the characters of local route maintenance by a random graph.
The graph presents an ad hoc network, which is formed by n mobile nodes in a square
(1000m × 1000m), and each node has n′ ( n′ ≤ n ) neighbors.
In ad hoc network, if a link failure is caused by a node failure, then the possibility
that the link failure can be amended is equal to the possibility that a i -link path exists
between any two un-neighbor nodes.
Statement 1: In ad hoc network, the possibility

pi′ that there is only a i ( i > 1 ) links

i ( i −1)
n′ 2
(n′) × (1 − )
n
, ( i > 1 ).
path between any two un-neighbor nodes is: pi′ =
n
i

Proof: In ad hoc network, the possibility that a node is a neighbor of another node
is

n′
. A i ( i > 1 ) links path between any two un-neighbor nodes, from a source to a
n

destination, consist of two parts:
1. A

i − 1 links path from the source to one of the neighbors of the destination.

2. A one-link path from the destination to one of its neighbors.
Then, the probability

pi′ that only a i -link path exists between any two un-neighbor

nodes is a product of the following three fractions:
1. The number of neighbors of the destination.
2. The probability pi′−1 that the source reaches one of the neighbors of the destination

i − 1 links path.
n′ i −1
3. The probability (1)
that the destination is not a neighbor of the first
n
i − 1 nodes on the i − 1 links path.
through a

Now, we can know that the probability
between any un-neighbor nodes is:

pi′ that there is a i ( i > 1 ) links path

Analysis of Local Route Maintenance for Ad Hoc Network

159

i ( i −1)
i ( i −1)
n′ i −1
n′ 2
n′ 2
1
i −1
i
pi′ = pi′−1 × n′ × (1- ) = n′ × (1- )
× p1′ = n′ × (1- )
×( )
n
n
n
n
( i > 1)

Statement 2: In ad hoc network, the possibility

pi that there is another i ( i > 1 ) links
n′
)
n
n

(n′) i × (1 −
path between any neighbor nodes is:

pi =

( i +1)( i − 2 )
2

Proof: According to Statement 1, we know the possibility

, (i

> 1)

pi′ that there is only a

i ( i > 1 ) links path between any two un-neighbor nodes. Then it can be obtained that
pi′
the possibility that there is a i ( i > 1 ) links path between any two nodes is:
.
n′
(1 − )
n
And thus, the probability that there is a i ( i > 1 ) links path between any two
neighbor nodes is:

pi =

n′
×
n

pi′
=
n′
(1 − )
n

n′
)
n
n

(n′) i × (1 −

( i +1)( i − 2 )
2

, (i

> 1)

4 Simulations
GloMoSim [5] is used here to realize simulations of PatchODMRP and NSMP
protocols. In the simulations, 50 wireless mobile nodes, which move around over a
square (1000m × 1000 m), form an ad hoc network; the radio transmission power of the
mobile nodes is 15dBm. During the 500s simulation period, the nodes move according
to the “random waypoint” model without pause time.
Fig1 describes the relationship between local recovery probability and
communication radius. From the simulation results, we can know that, when the mobile
nodes have the reasonable communication radius, the local route maintenance can
amend most link failures. Three-hop PatchODMRP has the strongest local route
maintenance; NSMP has a weaker the local route maintenance of than that of
PatchODMRP; two-hop PatchODMRP has the weakest local route maintenance.
Fig2 describes the local control overhead of these protocols. In Fig4, the control
overhead of global flooding is set 1, and the control overhead of other protocols is
related to that of global flooding. From the simulation results, we can know that, the
local control overhead of NSMP is the highest; the local control overhead of two-hop
PatchODMRP is the lowest. The scope of local route maintenance determines the
control overhead of local route maintenance. Therefore, NSMP has the largest local

160

S. Cai et al.

route maintenance scope; two-hop PatchODMRP has the smallest local route
maintenance scope.
Fig3 describes the data delivery ratio of these protocols as a function of sources
increases. When there are few sources in group, the ability of their local route
maintenances determine the stability of their forwarding mesh; the stability of their
forwarding mesh determines their data delivery ratio. Therefore, when there are few
sources in group, three-hop PatchODMRP has the highest data delivery ratio; two-hop
PatchODMRP has the lowest data delivery ratio. When there are many sources in
multicast group, their control overhead determines the wireless bandwidth acquired by
data packets for their transmissions, and the wireless bandwidth for data transmissions
determines the data delivery ratio. Therefore, when there are many sources in group,
two-hop PatchODMRP has the highest data delivery ratio because of its lowest control
overhead; NSMP has the lowest data delivery ratio because of its highest control
overhead.
From the results of mathematic analysis and simulation, the performance of these
local route maintenances is known. The local route maintenances of three-hop
PatchODMRP and NSMP is stronger. However, their control overhead is higher. The
control overhead of two-hop PatchODMRP is much lower. However, its local route
maintenance is weaker, and some link failures can’t be amended when the
communication radius of mobile nodes is small. Therefore, PatchODMRP outperforms
NSMP. However, PatchODMRP still has some shortcomings. Therefore, the local
route maintenance scope of PatchODMRP should be reduce further without reducing
its functions by some aiding nodes to is improve its scalability when the number of
nodes increase.

Fig. 1. Relationship between Fig. 2. Control overhead of local Fig. 3. Data delivery ratio as a
function of sources
local recovery probability and route maintenance
communication radius

5 Conclusions
In this paper, we analyze the characters of local route maintenance of both NSMP and
PatchODMRP by mathematic analysis and simulations. From the mathematic analysis
and simulation results, we know that, the overhead of these local route maintenances is

Analysis of Local Route Maintenance for Ad Hoc Network

161

still high, and they scale poor when the number of sources increases. Therefore, we
should reduce local route maintenance scope further without affecting its function.

References
[1] Mobile Ad-Hoc Network (MANET) Working Group [Online]. Available http://
www.ietf.org/html.charters/ manet-charter.html.
[2] G Aggelou, R Tafazolli, “RDMAR: a bandwidth-efficient routing protocol for mobile ad
hoc networks”, Proceedings of The Second ACM International Workshop on Wireless
Mobile Multimedia (WoWMoM), Seattle, WA, August 1999.
[3] Seungjoon Lee, Chongkwon Kim. “Neighbor supporting ad hoc multicast routing protocol”.
MobiHOC. 2000 First Annual Workshop on Mobile and Ad Hoc Networking and
Computing, 2000.
[4] Meejeong Lee; Ye Kyung Kim. “PatchODMRP: an ad-hoc multicast routing protocol”
Information Networking, 2001. Proceedings. 15th International Conference on, 2001
[5] Wireless Adaptive Mobility Lab. DEPT of Comp. SCI, UCLA “GloMoSim: A Scalable
Simulation Environment for wireless and wired Network System: http://pcl.cs.ucla.edu/
projects/domains/glomosim.html

