Research on Advanced Distributed Learning by Using
SCORM
Ronghui Wu1, Renfa Li1, Fei Yu1,2,3, Guangxue Yue1, and Chen Xu1,2,3
1

College of Computer & Communication, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, China
wrh@hnu.cn
2
Jiangsu Provincial Key Laboratory of Computer Information Processing Technology,
Province, Suzhou University, Suzhou, 2150063, China
hunanyufei@126.com
3
Guangdong Province Key Lab of Electronic Commerce Market Application Technology,
Guangdong University of Business Studies, Guangzhou,510320, China
Yufei@hunau.edu.cn

Abstract. The Sharable Content Object Reference Model (SCORM) was created to assist the e-learning industry in standardizing the best approaches to creating, storing, transferring and deploying learning content. The Advanced Distributed Learning Initiative(ADL) provides these guidelines consequent to a
survey of authoring tools that support SCORM. In this paper, we us SCORM
Sequencing Definition model to construct adaptive courseware. At first introduces the architecture of the whole system; Then introduces the way to build
adaptive courseware, Finally gives a conclusion.

1 Introduction
The SCORM introduces technical changes in the way authoring tools prepare and
package learning content. Beyond the technical changes, the SCORM affects the
overall relationship between authoring tools and other key e-learning elements, such
as Learning Management Systems (LMSs) and content repositories. This paper is
primary to provide insights to authoring tool vendors about key aspects of SCORM.

2 Architecture
Before we utilize SCORM into our courseware , we should make a brief cognition of
how it works. As we described in section 1, SCORM 1.3 is mainly consisted of two
parts: SCORM Content Aggregation Model and SCORM Run-Time Environment.
2.1 SCORM Content Aggregation Model
SCORM Content Aggregation Model: not only defines the content components of a
learning experience but also how to represent the intended behavior of a learning
experience (Content Structure) and how to aggregate activities of learning resources
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part III, LNCS 4489, pp. 571–574, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

572

R. Wu et al.

for movement between different environments (Content Packaging). Furthermore, it
provides a mechanism for describing specific instances of the components of the
content model named meta-data. The basic content objects in SCORM are categorized
as Asset and Sharable Content Object (SCO).
The SCORM Version 1.2 Content Aggregation Model, describes three types of
SCORM Meta-data: Content Aggregation, SCO and Asset. Any or all of these three
types may be contained in two different XML documents: as standalone meta-data
(i.e., a single XML document that describes one thing), or embedded in a SCORM
manifest. A manifest allows for meta-data to be represented in two ways: in-line or
referenced to a file. Meta-data that is part of a manifest is referred to as “in-line”
meta-data in the SCORM Content Packaging Information Model.

Fig. 1. Shows the system architecture of the SCORM Run-Time Environment and demonstrates
how the system is worked

2.2 SCORM Run-Time Environment
SCORM Run-Time Environment defines a common content object launch mechanism, a common communication mechanism between content objects and LMSs, and
a common data model for tracking a learner’s experience with content objects.
In SCORM 1.3, the SCORM RTE is constructed based on a JSP&Java Servletenabled jakarta-tomcat-4.1.24 Servlet Engine and Web server. On the server side , a
JSP component is used to dynamically analysis and render the content aggregation
file of one specific courseware into a navigation menu which will appears as a series
of hyperlinks whose targets contain the corresponding launch locations of SCOs.
What’s more, there are also several Java Servlet components that are responsible for
controlling actual sequencing of SCOs and handling communication between RTE
and SCO. While on the client side, a non-face Java Applet is implement as the
SCORM RTE API Adapter, which provides the communication to the RTE serverside Servlet components.

Research on Advanced Distributed Learning by Using SCORM

573

3 Construct the Adaptive Courseware
While the ADL provides several useful SCORM utilities and testing tools that are
freely available to the public, ADL does not provide a means to directly test authoring
tools for SCORM conformance. The following step is to design the activity tree of the
whole courseware to achieve the goal of adaptive capacity. Fig.2 shows our design of
activity tree of CIS courseware.

Fig. 2. The activity tree of the CIS courseware

4 System Analysis
The adaptive capacity of a Web-based course is probably the next main issue of the
individuals and organizations using E-learning standards to develop coursewares after
achieving the goal of reusability and interoperability of the coursewares. This paper
introduces a method of constructing courseware by using SCORM Sequencing
Model, and shows how to use this model to define required content organizations.
Being conformant with the E-learning standard, it can be reusable and interoperable through the internet which greatly meets the need of exchanging some newly
accumulated experience between different organizations. By using the SCORM Sequencing Definition Model, the courseware realizes the adaptive capacity, that is
different learners view different content according to their acknowledge level.

5 Conclusion
By using the Sequencing Definition Model, we define more complicated organization
of the courseware with the adaptive feature according to various instructional needs.
Furthermore, we plan to develop a SCORM-conformant intelligent tutoring system to
improve the adaptive characteristics of our Web-based coursewares.

574

R. Wu et al.

References

～

[1] Charlton J P,Birkett P E. : An Integrative Model of Factors Related to Computing Course
Performance.Education Computing Research,1999,20(3) :237 257
[2] Valverde-Albacete, F.J. Pedraza-Jimenez, R, Cid-Sueiro, J. : An environment for instructional content design based on competences.Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on Applied Computing, 2003
[3] Jun-Ming Su,Shian-Shyong Tseng,Jui-Feng Weng. : An Object Based Authoring Tool for
Creating SCORM Compliant Course. Proceedings of Advanced Information Networking
and Applications(AINA’2005)

