Evolutionary Strategy for Political Districting
Problem Using Genetic Algorithm
Chung-I Chou1 , You-ling Chu1 , and Sai-Ping Li2
1

Department of Physics, Chinese Culture University, Taipei, Taiwan 111, R.O.C.
2
Institute of Physics, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan 115, R.O.C.

Abstract. The aim of the Political Districting Problem is to partition
a zone into electoral districts with constraints such as contiguity, population equality, etc. By using statistical physics methods, the problem
can be mapped onto a q-state Potts model system, and the political constraints are written as an energy function with interactions between sites
or external ﬁelds acting on the system. This problem is then transformed
into an optimization problem. In this paper, we apply the genetic algorithm to Political Districting Problem. We will illustrate the evolutionary strategy for GA and compare with results from other optimization
algorithms.
Keywords: Genetic Algorithm, q-state Potts model, Political Districting
Problem.

1

Introduction

The aim of the Political Districting Problem is to partition a territory into
electoral districts subject to constraints such as contiguity, population equality,
etc. In our previous work [1], we have mapped the political districting problem
onto a q-state Potts model In this model, we use “precinct” as the smallest unit
and identify it as a site. The constraints can then be written as interactions
between sites or external ﬁelds acting on the system. Districting into q voter
districts is thus equivalent to ﬁnding the ground state of this q-state Potts model
which then becomes an optimization problem. In this earlier work, we used
simulated annealing method to study both computer generated and real world
districting cases.
Since genetic algorithm (GA) is known to be very useful in studying optimization problems, we will here apply this method to the Political Districting
Problem. There are indeed diﬃculties in applying GA to this problem. The usual
GA maps variables to some 1D gene code, and to generate these gene codes (or
chromosomes) in a gene pool as the parent generation. Evolutionary operators
such as crossover, mutation, selection, will help to generate the child generation. As the evolution goes on, chromosomes with better ﬁt will appear. For a
spin system like we have here, problems will appear in the crossover stage. The
usual crossover is to swap some part of the sequences among 1D parent gene
codes. Since the Political Districting Problem is a 2D problem, only randomly
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 1163–1166, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

1164

C.-I Chou, Y.-l. Chu, and S.-P. Li

swapping the 1D parent gene codes will lose the important 2D structural information. Most of the newly generated chromosomes will then behave worse than
their parents. The crossover strategy for the Political Districting Problem thus
needs to be modiﬁed. We here design a process to mix the boundaries of the
districting zone of a pair of parents, and to generate a child from these mixed
boundaries. In this way, each child will in some way look similar to its parents.
In the following, we will illustrate our evolutionary strategy for GA and compare
the results with other optimization algorithms.

2

Model for Political Districting Problem

In our model [1], the total number of sites (precincts) is equal to N and each spin
can have q-states (voter districts). Each spin can have its state function as Si =
1 . . . q . The goal is to ﬁnd the ground state of this q-state Potts model with the
interaction given by the constraints. We consider population equality, contiguity
and compactness here, which are the most common constraints people consider.
For population equality, we associate a random ﬁeld to the site (precinct) pi .
It is easy to see that when pi is a constant for every i, the population for each site
(precinct) is equal. Therefore, the magnetization (the total voter population) of
N
a voter district Pl can be written as Pl = i=1 pi · δSi ,l , where δi,j equals to 1
when i and j are equal and zero otherwise, the total population is P0 = ql=1 Pl ,
and the average population for each voter district is < P >= P0 /q . Hence we can
q
Pl
write the average population for each voter district as EP = l=1 1 − <P
> .
The smaller this energy is, the closer it is to the average value.
We next consider the constraint of contiguity and compactness. Deﬁne a connection table for each spin as Ci,j which equals to 1 when spins i and j are
connected to each other and zero otherwise. We here deﬁne the boundary of the
domain of spins as ED = i,j 1 − δSi ,Sj · Ci,j , When this function is in its
minimum, the district will have the smallest number of precincts on its boundary. The total energy is therefore given by E = λP EP + λD ED . Varying λ will
aﬀect the contribution of each constraint to the total energy function.
With this energy function, the problem now becomes an optimization problem
and can be solved by using optimization algorithms.

3

Strategy for Genetic Algorithm

As mentioned above, genetic algorithms try to simulate the evolutional process of
biological system. For the spin system here, the crossover procedure of the usual
GA will lose important parent’s 2D structure information. We will therefore
introduce a modiﬁed crossover strategy for the Political Districting Problem.
Recall that the Key idea of the crossover strategy is to ﬁnd the main information of the parent generation, and to help the child inherit this information.
Since the aim of the political districting problem is the ﬁnd some suitable districting zones, we believe the main information should be the boundary of each

Evolutionary Strategy for Political Districting Problem

1165

Fig. 1. A sketch of cross-over procedure. (a) The boundaries of districts from a parental
chromosome; (b) Boundaries from another parental chromosome; (c) Mixed boundaries;
(d) The ﬁlial chromosome.

districting zone. We thus here design a crossover process to mix the boundary
of districting zone of each of the two parents, and generate a child districting
zone from these mixed boundaries. Each child in some way inherit its parents’
characteristic and would look similar to its parents. We illustrate the detail of
our GA process in the following.
First, we should prepare a gene pool with many genes (or ﬁlial generations).
To create a chromosome, we randomly put q seeds with diﬀerent states into an
N spin system and let these seeds grow until they ﬁll all spins of system. This
process will create a pool of chromosomes but only chromosomes with lower
energy can be survived. These chromosomes compose of a gene pool of ﬁrst
generation. Once gene pool is constructed, the GA process can go on. A lot of
children will be created by Cross-over and mutation procedure, and newer gene
pool of children’s generation will be constructed by using selection procedure.
The aim of our Crossover Strategy is to help the child generation inherit
their parent’s information of boundary of each districting zone. To achieve this
aim, we randomly pick two chromosomes, and mix their boundaries into a new
spin system and form a new chromosome. Since this chromosome with too many
boundaries of districting zone, we randomly remove some boundary lines to make
sure there are only q diﬀerent states in this chromosome. By using this procedure,
the child chromosome will inherit its parents’ most important information. Fig. 1
is a sketch of the cross-over procedure.
The mutation procedure of GA is to increase the diversity of the gene pool,
and to avoid being trapped in a local minimum. We use a simple method to
create a mutated chromosome. We pick a chromosome from gene pool , and
randomly cut a small domain in the spin system and let spins to start growing
diﬀusively from the edge of domain, till the domain is ﬁlled . By controlling the
size of the cut domain, we can control the verity between mutated chromosome
and original one.
From both the crossover and mutation procedures, many children chromosomes will be created. These chromosomes will go through the selection procedure to determine which chromosomes will survive. Here we use a simple rule of
selection–only chromosomes with lower energy will survive.

1166

C.-I Chou, Y.-l. Chu, and S.-P. Li

Table 1. A comparison of algorithms.(SR: Success Rate(%). Total number of trials is
equal to 100).
No. of spins
Method(i)
Method(ii)
Method(iii)
Method(iv)
Method(v)

4

100
Emin
20
20
20
20
20

SR
100
100
86
85
—

400
Emin
40
40
40
40
40

SR
61
49
13
2
—

900
Emin
60
60
60
60
60

SR
72
70
22
4
—

Result and Conclusion

We ﬁrst choose N × N square-lattice spin systems as a test of our idea. We use
ﬁve methods to ﬁnd the minimum of the political districting problem, namely,
(i) GA with modiﬁed Crossover strategy and modiﬁed Mutation strategy, (ii)
GA with modiﬁed Crossover strategy and usual single Spin-swapping Mutation
strategy, (iii) GA with usual 1D Spin-swapping Crossover strategy and modiﬁed Mutation strategy, (iv) GA with usual 1D Spin-swapping Crossover strategy and single Spin-swapping Mutation strategy, and (v) simulated annealing
method(SA). Table 1 is a summary of results using these ﬁve methods. In these
test cases, the size of each gene-pool is equal to 400, the numbers of Crossover
and Mutation in each generation are 4000 and 1000, and the total number of
generation of each method is 300. The districting parameters λP and λD equal
to 40 and 1. The results show that the GA with both modiﬁed Cross-over and
Mutation strategy is more eﬀective than any other GA methods.
In this paper, we mapped the Political Districting Problem onto a q-state Potts
model in which the constraints can be written as interactions between sites or
external ﬁelds acting on the system. We then show how to modify the genetic
algorithm and apply it to the Political Districting Problem. Since the usual GA
hardly communicate the structural information from the parent generation to
their children in spin system, we design a new crossover strategy to help the
child generation chromosomes inherit their parents’ structural information. Our
results show that this strategy work well in the Political Districting Problem.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by the National Science Council, Taiwan,
R.O.C. (grant no. NSC-94-2112-M-001-019 and NSC-94-2112-M-034-001).

Reference
1. Chou, C.I., Li, S.P.: Taming the Gerrymander–Statistical Physics Approach to
Political Districting Problem. Physica A 369 (2006) 799–808

