Image Segmentation by Nonparametric Color
Clustering
Shukui Bo1, Yongqiang Ma2, and Chongguang Zhu1
1

Institute of Remote Sensing Applications, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
P.O. Box 9718, 100101 Beijing, China
bsk586@163.com
2
College of Computer Science & Technology, Henan Polytechnic University,
454000 Jiaozuo, China

Abstract. We present a color image segmentation scheme based on pixel color
clustering. The proposed segmentation is based on mean shift clustering
method, which is a powerful tool for the analysis of feature space. However,
earlier clustering techniques based on mean shift use single scale over the entire
feature space and are not feasible to analyze complex multi-modal feature
spaces. In this paper, we present an adaptive mean shift method, in which the
local scale information is involved. Actual regions in an image can be obtained
by segmentation using the proposed clustering technique.
Keywords: image segmentation, clustering, mean shift.

1 Introduction
Image segmentation is a major step in shape feature extraction. Segmentation using
clustering involves the search for image points that are similar enough to be grouped
together. In the analysis of an image, K-means, ISODATA, and Fuzzy C-means are
conventional clustering techniques. Conventional clustering techniques are always
based on partitioning of the feature space. A usually used assumption in these
methods is that the individual clusters obey multivariate normal distributions, i.e., the
feature space can be modeled as a mixture of Gaussians. However, the assumption is
not correct in many real data. Nonparametric methods in feature space analysis avoid
the use of the normality assumption. Arbitrarily structured feature spaces can be
analyzed only by nonparametric methods since these methods do not impose any
assumptions. Mean shift (MS) algorithm is a nonparametric technique for feature
space analysis. The mean shift theory was proposed in 1975 by Fukunaga and
Hostetler [1]. The mean shift method and its applications have been discussed by a
series of researchers [2,3,4,5,6]. In the related works, however, the local bandwidth
(or local scale) and structure information of neighborhood around individual sample
are not considered adequately. In [7], the algorithms only take into account the
difference of local bandwidth. The other algorithms do not involve the information of
both local bandwidth and the anisotropy of sample’s neighborhood in the feature
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part III, LNCS 4489, pp. 898–901, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Image Segmentation by Nonparametric Color Clustering

899

space. Therefore, these methods are not effective when the real data has complex
distribution in the feature space.
This paper introduces a segmentation technique based on the mean shift clustering,
a simple nonparametric procedure for estimating density gradients. The clustering
technique is improved by considering local scale information to avoid the drawbacks
of the abovementioned techniques.

2 The Segmentation Algorithm
The mean shift procedure is a nonparametric analysis technique of feature space. To
avoid the drawback of clustering using single scale for the whole feature space, we
improve earlier mean shift algorithms by involving the neighborhood information of
samples. The neighborhood of a point in feature space can be described using its Knearest neighbor (KNN). The KNN query is a common type of query in databases.
The nature of KNN tells the local density information, while the task of mean shift
procedure is to find a local density maximum. Therefore, the combination of KNN
and mean shift is an adaptive way to detect the exact local mode based on local
density. The partition of the feature space is obtained by means of dividing all data
points into groups centered on the modes. The improved method will do mean shift at
suitable scales on different locations with various density, so clusters of contrasting
sizes and densities could be detected correctly. As far as clusters of arbitrary shapes
and structures are concerned, an idea of multi-center is considered, i.e., a cluster is
represented by more than one “center” point (mode).
In the feature space, the volume covered by the K-nearest neighbor (KNN) of a
point shows the density of its neighborhood. So embedding the KNN information will
be a good choice to provide the local density parameter in clustering procedure. The
KNN information can be obtained by performing K-nearest neighbor query to the
points in the feature space. If the volume that the K-nearest neighbor of a sample
holds is small in the feature space, the density around the sample is high because the
number of nearest neighbors is fixed. That is to say the points in the neighborhood are
close to each other. Therefore the appropriate local scale should be small and
computed according to KNN information. On the other hand, if the volume is large, a
relative large scale should be used in the mean shift procedure to locate the local
mode.
However, clustering by means of the above method cannot be satisfactory in
practical applications. The KNN query procedure is quite time consuming, since its
computational complexity is O(Kn2) for a set of n data points and the data set of an
image may be very large. So a subset can be randomly selected from the data because
the points (pixels) in an image are spatially correlated to a great extent. In our
program, a subset of m points (m<<n) is selected from the original data by a random
tessellation of the image. The hyper-spheres centered on the m points will cover most
of the data points, therefore, the quality of the density gradient estimate is not
diminished by the use of sampling, while the computational complexity decreases to
O(Knm).
The above algorithm is called adaptive mean shift (AMS) in this paper. Involving
the information of K-nearest neighbor in mean shift procedure makes the algorithm

900

S. Bo, Y. Ma, and C. Zhu

adapt to regions of different density. After the mean shift procedures, m cluster center
candidates are defined as the m convergent points. Although a cluster might be
anisotropic in the feature space, it can be delineated by more than one point. If some
of the m candidates belong to the same cluster, they will be close to each other after
adaptive mean shift procedures. Then these close candidate points are assigned to a
single cluster. So clusters of arbitrary shapes and structures can be described by
several “centers” and the number of clusters is also determined automatically in this
way.

3 Experiment and Analysis
In our experiment, a color image is used to test the proposed segmentation method. In
both mean shift methods, we transform the RGB color space to the L*u*v space,
whose coordinates are related to the color values by nonlinear transformation [4]. All
feature space computations are performed in the L*u*v space measured by Euclidean
distances. Note that all small regions less than 10 pixels are removed from the result
images for the sake of visual effect.
The experiment uses part of the water lilies image to demonstrate the segmentation
based on the adaptive mean shift clustering. Figure 1 shows the original image of
water lilies. The main objects in the image are flowers, stems, and leaves. The
background is composed of shadow and water.

Fig. 1. The water lilies image

Three methods: region growing, single scale mean shift and adaptive mean shift
methods are performed on the experimental image individually. In the adaptive mean
shift algorithm, the number of nearest neighbors K and the size of subset m were set to
10 and 1 percent of data size individually. This experiment well demonstrates the
superiority of the adaptive mean shift algorithm over the other segmentation
techniques. The results of segmentation are shown in figure 2.
As seen from the segmentation results, region-growing technique does not
distinguish the image objects well. There are two segmented images by region
growing method (figure2 (a) and (b)). The detailed segmentation result (figure2 (a))
cannot show the flowers in the straightforward way. The flowers are over-segmented,
while the other objects are properly segmented. And in the coarse one, there are many
sub-segmented objects such as the stem. Though the stem and leaves are unsegmented, the flowers are still shown in a complex way. The single scale mean shift
also has the problem separating the flowers into many objects, like the region growing

Image Segmentation by Nonparametric Color Clustering

901

method. Both of them cannot balance the over-segmented and sub-segmented regions
in the image. However, the segmentation ability of the adaptive mean shift clustering
is excellent. It has a powerful capability distinguishing objects in the image. The
flowers are segmented clearly and simply, and the others are also appropriately
separated as we can see from figure 2.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 2. The results of the image segmentation (a) region growing, detailed one, (b) region
growing, coarse one, (c) single scale mean shift clustering, (d) the proposed method

4 Conclusions
In this paper, the goal of image segmentation is achieved by mean shift based
clustering, a nonparametric clustering technique. Since earlier algorithms use single
scale to the entire feature space, they have problems when the structures of clusters in
the feature space are very different. The adaptive mean shift method is proposed by
involving the local scale information. Clusters with various structures can be found in
the procedure. It can be learned by the experiment that the proposed method has the
advantage of segmentation quality over earlier methods.

References
1. Fukunaga, K, and Hostetler, LD. : The estimation of the gradient of a density function, with
applications in pattern recognition. IEEE Trans Info Theory, 21(1975), 32-40
2. Comaniciu, D. and Meer, P.: Mean shift: A robust approach toward feature space analysis.
IEEE Trans. on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 24(2002), 603-619
3. Cheng, YZ. : Mean shift, mode seeking, and clustering. IEEE Trans. on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence, 17(1995),790-799
4. Comaniciu, D. and Meer, P.: Robust analysis of feature spaces: Color image segmentation.
In Proc. of the IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), (1997)
750-755
5. Comaniciu, D. and Meer, P.:Mean shift analysis and applications. In Proc. of the IEEE Int’l
Conf. on Computer Vision (ICCV), (1999)1197-1203
6. Comaniciu, D. and Meer, P.:, Distribution free decomposition of multivariate data. Pattern
Analysis and Applications, 2(1999), 22-30
7. Comaniciu, D., Ramesh, and V., Meer, P.:The variable bandwidth mean shift and datadriven scale selection. In Proc. of the IEEE Int’l Conf. on Computer Vision (ICCV). (2001)
438-445

