Learning in Cooperating Agents Environment
as a Method of Solving Transport Problems
and Limiting the Eﬀects of Crisis Situations
Jaroslaw Koźlak
Department of Computer Science, AGH-UST, Al. Mickiewicza 30, 30-059 Kraków,
Poland
kozlak@agh.edu.pl

Abstract. The realising of transport requests plays an important role
for companies regarding cost. For this reason the construction of an optimal and eﬀective transport planning and scheduling, oﬀering the best use
of transport means is hugely important. One of the researched transport
problems at present is PDPTW. In this work, the PDPTW problem will
be extended by adding changeable and uncertain travel times between
given locations, which will then be examined and learnt by the dispatching company system. The changeable travel times are the results of traﬃc
jams forming and propagating. The applied multi-agent approach allows
us to consider the problem on the level of a whole company and on the
local level analysed by a particular vehicle. The other aspects which are
taken into consideration are traﬃc patterns, whose goal it is to facilitate
the optimal routes for the given traﬃc patterns. These patterns contain
the information about the dependencies between the traﬃc state on the
particular routes.
Keywords: Multi-agent systems, transport problems, learning, traﬃc
jams.

1

Introduction

Vast amounts of money from the budgets of many companies are spent on costs
related to transport. In the case of some goods or services, these costs constitute
the most dominant element. A lot of companies oﬀer shipping services or services
on demand, where it is necessary that the vehicle arrives at the destination
in a given period of time. Additionally, and especially in the case of motor
transport, it is diﬃcult to predict the exact times of travel between locations.
This could be a consequence of changing traﬃc volume, traﬃc jams or some other
current unpredicted events. Therefore, the development of software tools which
make route planning and predicting travel times possible, takes on a very high
signiﬁcance. This will also allow the limiting of the use of means of transport and
total traversed distances, and will assure that the time and capacity constraints
can be achieved.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part II, LNCS 4488, pp. 872–879, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Learning in Cooperating Agents Environment

873

A lot of diﬀerent transport problems like TSP, VRPTW or PDPTW in static and dynamic versions have been widely researched. The basis of the current
work constitutes a dynamic version of the PDPTW (Pickup and Delivery Problem with Time Windows). The PDPTW consists of the realisation of a set of
transport requests by a ﬂeet of vehicles. In PDPTW, it is assumed that by using
a ﬂeet of vehicles it is necessary to perform a set of transport requests described
by periods of time when operations of a pick up and a delivery may take place,
locations where the goods are picked up and where they must be delivered as
well as the quantity of commodities. The dynamic version of the problem concerns the requests arriving during the running of the system, a problem solving
algorithm that must be able to be started repeatedly, the variable constraints
related to time ﬂow and performed operations of pickups and deliveries have to
be taken into consideration as well as making it necessary for the movement of
vehicles to be modeled.
In the version of the problem being analysed in this work, several extensions
to dynamic PDPTW were introduced. They are based on assessing uncertain
and changeable travel times between locations, which are additionally a result of
the formation of traﬃc jams and them propagating onto neighbouring arcs. The
problem, extended in such a way, better suits the situations we may encounter
when planning the realisation of transport requests in practice. To solve the
problem, the multi-agent approach has been chosen.
The layout of this paper is as follows. Section 2 contains an overview of the
work being carried out within domains of transport planning and multi-agent
systems. Section 3 concerns the presentation of a model of a multi-agent system
for planning transport requests, while taking into consideration communication
between agents, modelling and the spread of traﬃc jams and traﬃc patterns.
Section 4 contains an overview of experiments carried out and the advantages
oﬀered by communication between agents as well as traﬃc patterns. Section 5
contains conclusions and plans for future research.

2

State of the Art

To solve transport planning and scheduling problems diﬀerent approaches are
applied. One can distinguish two major kinds of problems: static and dynamic.
To solve the static problems nowadays, diﬀerent heuristic approaches are usually used. They are based on algorithms such as evolutionary algorithms, simulated annealing, tabu search [5], squeaky wheel [6] or ant colony approach. To
solve the dynamic problem, metaheuristics based on tabu search [4] or multiagent approaches are used. The multi-agent approach exploits methods such us
Contract-Net, simulated trading [1,3,2] or DCSP [8].
The multi-agent approach facilitates an analysis of problems which consider
additional elements that take part in the planning of transport requests in practice, but which are not present in the classical PDPTW. These aspects are for
example modelling traﬃc jams [3], taking into consideration diﬀerent kinds of

874

J. Koźlak

freight and construction of the transport unit (composed of trucks and trailers
adjusted to the given needs [2]) as well as a problem decentralisation [9].
The next aspect being analysed in this paper is a problem of uncertainty related to travel times through the arcs. This problem is examined in particular by
the systems designed for city traﬃc modelling. A very popular approach which is
the basis for diﬀerent multi-agent realisations, is the Nagle-Schreckenberg model
[7]. Taking advantage of these systems and possessing information about city
traﬃc, it is possible to estimate travel times in any given part of the route.

3

Model

The model presented in this work, besides solution optimisation methods focus
on the learning of the travel times and recognition of traﬃc-jam patterns in the
road network. The model of the system consists of a set of agents (a dispatcher
and vehicles) and of the environment, where agents function (ﬁg. 1).

Fig. 1. System layers model

3.1

Environment

The environment is represented by the transport network, which is a graph
T N =(V , E), where V is a set of nodes (Vi ) and E is a set of edges (Ei ). Each
node is described by its coordinates (xi ,yi ) and the probability pgi of a request
generation taking this given node as a pickup or a delivery point. Each edge Ei is
described by nodes Vj , Vj being the starting and ending nodes of the edge, the
distance djj between these nodes and a function of probability distribution Ti
which represents the travel times through the edge. The probability distribution
function may vary depending on traﬃc volume on this edge tvi . The traﬃc
volume changes depending on the time of day or as a result of random events
which cause the build-up of traﬃc (accidents, breakdowns, closing of roads).

Learning in Cooperating Agents Environment

3.2

875

Agent-Dispatcher

The goal of the agent-dispatcher is to receive requests from customers and to
assign these requests to the vehicles, according to the goal function. Additionally,
agent-dispatcher manages a common knowledge of enterprise concerning any
current appearances of traﬃc jams and patterns of traﬃc jam distribution.
The agent-dispatcher AC is represented by the following parameters (gAC , R,
Rf , Ra , Rn , Rr , KAV , Ar , T J, T P ) where: gAC – goal function of agent, R –
set of arrived requests, Rf , Ra , Rn ,Rr , – sets of requests realised, assigned to
agent-vehicles to be realised, which have not yet been assigned for realisation to
agent-vehicles and a set of rejected requests, KAV – set of information concerning
the vehicles belonging to the company, Ar – set of oﬀers of request realisations,
T J, T P – knowledge about current traﬃc-jams and traﬃc patterns.
The knowledge bases T J and T P are made available as an external blackboard, where access is allowed for all agents – the agent-dispatcher as well as
agents-vehicles. However, operations on them are performed by the dispatcher
on the basis of data acquired from agents-vehicles.
The dispatcher may take info consideration diﬀerent criteria of choice of vehicle, taking into consideration the preferences represented by goal function such
as: as small as possible estimated costs related with the request realisation by
the vehicle, or even distribution of requests among vehicles. The agent-dispatcher
performs the following actions:
– actions related to an allocation of requests: receipt of request, bringing forward the requests to agents-vehicles, receipt of an oﬀer from agent-vehicles,
analysis of oﬀers (the choice of the best oﬀer of action realisation, clearing the set of oﬀers of this request realisation and sending an answer of
acceptance or rejection to agents which sent the propositions of request realisations), acceptance of a request to realisation or request rejection, receipt
of information that a request has already been completed;
– actions related to management of knowledge base about the current traﬃcjams (receipt of information and table update);
– actions related to management of knowledge base about traﬃc patterns (receipt of information and table update).
3.3

Agent-Vehicles

The goal of agent-vehicle is to negotiate transport requests for realisation, determination using insertion algorithm to ﬁnd the best positions in the travel route
for adding new request points, request realisation and exploration of the road
networks to improve the quality of information about travel times. Agent-vehicle
AV k is represented by the following n-tuple (V k , Rk , Rpk , Rdk , P k , Prk , φk , pk ,
g k , ckmax , ck , sk , AT , AT k ,rk ), where:
– V k ∈ V – actual location (the node where the agent currently is at present
or where it is currently aiming);

876

J. Koźlak

– Rk , Rpk , Rdk – set of requests assigned for realisation, picked up and have
been realised (after delivery);
– P k - planned route, represented as a series <pkj > where pkj =Vj ;
– Prk - planned travel route which consists only of pickup or delivery points;
– φk - function which assigns the request points to be performed at given
locations to the points of the travel routes;
– pk – a special point in the travel route, describing the current position of the
vehicle;
– g k – goal function describing the functioning of an agent;
– ckmax – maximum capacity of vehicle;
– ck – current load, ck should be lower or equal to ckmax ;
– sk – strategy which is used by the agent to estimate travel times between the
nodes and to take into consideration the uncertainty of travel times (average
value of estimations, given probability of successful plan realisation);
– AT – knowledge concerning the estimated travel times through the arcs;
– AT k – knowledge concerning travel times through the given arcs adjusted by
the travel times coming from agent experiences (its times of travel through
the arcs during its movements) and information obtained from other agents;
– rk – parameter describing an inclination to take a risk, for a small value of
this parameter, the agent chooses the fastest known routes, for larger values,
the agent tries to explore the road networks and to supplement the data
about less explored arcs.
The quality of solution g k for the given vehicle AV k is described by eq. 1.
n
n
pi − βc − γΣi=1
(fip + fid )
g k = αΣi=1

(1)

where: n – number of requests to be realised by a vehicle, pi – gain after realisation of request number, c – costs caused by total distance travelled, fip , fid –
penalties caused by lateness at the points of pickup and delivery of request i, α,
β, γ – weighting coeﬃcients;
Agent-vehicle performs the following actions:
– actions related to request allocation: construction of route for a given set
of requests taking into consideration information about travel times and a
parameter describing the inclination to take a risk, route estimation, estimation of submitted proposition (it is described as a diﬀerence between goal
function of agent after request acceptance and before request acceptance, the
agent may also inform that it is not able to realise the request), submitting
an oﬀer of request realisation to agent-company or acceptance or rejection
of request;
– actions related to vehicle movement: movement of vehicle, pickup realisation,
delivery realisation;
– actions related to an updating of its own knowledge bases and those of
other agents: modiﬁcation of route because of traﬃc jam, modiﬁcation of
knowledge base about travel times through the arcs AT k , sending of message
to agent-vehicles giving information on current travel times through a given
arc, observation of existing traﬃc jams, acquiring information about traﬃc
patterns.

Learning in Cooperating Agents Environment

3.4

877

Traﬃc Jams

It is assumed that each arc has a maximum allowed capacity cmax
and actual
ij
traﬃc cij . Additionally, arcs, coming out from a given node, are given weightings reﬂecting how the traﬃc coming into this node is divided among the arcs
coming out from it. If the actual traﬃc reaches the values equal or greater than
a maximum allowed capacity, a traﬃc jam will appear on these arcs, which will
also slow down the movement of vehicles modelled on these arcs. A traﬃc jam
may also be a result of a randomly generated crisis situation which increases
the actual traﬃc volume on the arc. According to the rules of ﬂow of traﬃc to
neighbouring arcs, traﬃc jams may propagate.
If a vehicle reaches the start of an arc on which a traﬃc jam has appeared
(it may be recognized by observing the relationship between the current traﬃc
parameter and maximum allowed capacity on the arc), then the vehicle attempts
to construct a diversion route. A route construction algorithm is initiated once
more but in this case omitting the arc where the traﬃc jam has occurred. If this
construction of a diversion is successful, the vehicle will then continue along this
new modiﬁed route.
The distribution of travel times through the arcs are not known to the agents
carrying out planning. The vehicles and dispatcher do not know the distribution
on the given roads, they may only know some estimations and gain additional
knowledge while obtaining their own experience or experience acquired by other
vehicles. The agent may acquire information concerning travel times between
the nodes using the following methods:
– as a result of traversing a given arc and making a measurement of the time
required. In this case an estimated value of travel times between the nodes
(n+1)
(n)
= αtij + βtij , where
i and j is changed and takes a value equal to tij
tij is the current travel time from i to j, and α and β are the weighting
parameters, equal in its simple case to n/(n + 1) and 1/(n + 1), where n+1
is a number of measurements taking the last one into consideration.
– as a result of obtaining information about travel times through the arc from
the other cooperating agent. In this case, a new travel time estimation will
be calculated in the similar manner as previously described and taken into
consideration after during the planning process.
3.5

Traﬃc Patterns

The table concerning the traﬃc pattern is managed by an agent-dispatcher. Rows
and columns are identiﬁed by the number of arcs ej and ei . For each cell of this
table, lists are stocked containing the gathered parameters describing results of
observation of traﬃc states on these arcs measured within the tolerated time
period: was a traﬃc jam observed on the arc ei (yes or no), was a traﬃc jam
observed on the arc ej (yes or no), time of observation. This information is
delivered to the agent-dispatcher which makes it accessible to particular agentvehicles afterwards. Agent-vehicle observing or obtaining information about a

878

J. Koźlak

traﬃc-jam appearing on any given arc may verify whether a traﬃc-jam appearing
on this arc was often associated with the appearances of traﬃc jams on other arcs
contained in its planned route. If this is the case, the agent makes an attempt to
construct a diversion route also omitting the arcs threatened by the appearance
of traﬃc-jams.

4

Experiments

The experiments were conducted with the goal of estimating the quality of the
system functionality depending on the selected behaviours of agents. In particular, the following aspects were considered:
– diﬀerent frequencies of messages exchanged between agent-vehicles, these
messages contained information about travel times through the arcs, the
other option taken into consideration was the lack of exchange of this kind
of information.
– application of traﬃc patterns which describe the dependencies between the
state of traﬃc on the diﬀerent pairs of arcs, the other option was to not take
this element into consideration

Fig. 2. Vehicle groups income a) diﬀerent messages exchange frequencies – Group1 and
no message exchange – Group2 b) with and without patterns

Vehicles in the system were divided into two groups. The vehicles in the ﬁrst
group exchange information about the travel times through the given arcs. The
vehicles in the second group do not use this mechanism. As a method of estimating the quality of activities, the total income of vehicles in each group is
considered. Experiments proved (ﬁg. 4) that for almost each frequency of messages exchanged, the group which used this mechanism obtained better results.
The only exception was a case when the communication had the lowest frequency.
In this case the exchanged information might not be current and so has a limited
inﬂuence on the improvement of the accuracy of traﬃc description on this arc.
The results obtained for those vehicles using the patterns proved to give highest ﬁnancial income than those that did not. Because the quantities of performed

Learning in Cooperating Agents Environment

879

requests were similar in each case, the increase of income in the cases with
communication and with the patterns is caused by a more accurate estimation
of travel times which limits lateness and the consequent ﬁnancial penalties.

5

Conclusions

The system for solving the transport problem as an extension to the dynamic
PDPTW by uncertain travel times was realised. The experiments showed advantages resulting from the additional exchange of information among agents
concerning travel times and the application of traﬃc patterns. Future work on
the system will have as its goal the improvement of the quality of obtained solutions and to make veriﬁcation better. In particular, an elaborate set of tests
based on the benchmarks for static PDPTW is planned. The use of larger graphs
representing the road networks, which is a real city (roads e.g. in Kraków.) is
also planned.
Kind thanks to the Computer Science students at AGH-UST and the trainees
who contributed to the work on the pilot version of the system and especially to
M. Kwiecień, J. Rachwalik and Ch. Elmer.

References
1. Bachem, A., Hochstattler, W., Malich, M.: Simulated Trading A New Parallel Approach for Solving Vehicle Routing Problems. Proc. of Int. Conf. Parallel Computing: Trends and Applications, 1994.
2. Burckert, H.-J., Fischer, K., Vierke., G. : Transportation scheduling with holonic
MAS - the TELETRUCK approach. Third International Conference on Practical
Applications of Intelligent Agents and Multiagents (PAAM 98), 1998.
3. Fischer, K., Müller, J.P., Pischel, M.: Cooperative Transportation Scheduling: an
Application Domain for DAI. Applied Artiﬁcial Intelligence, vol.10, 1996.
4. Gendreau, A., Guertin, F. , Potvin, J.Y., Séguin, R. :Neighborhood search heuristics
for a dynamic vehicle dispatching problem with pick-ups and deliveries. Rapport
technique CRT-98-10, Université de Montréal, 1998.
5. Li, H., Lim A.: A Metaheuristic for the Pickup and Delivery Problem with Time
Windows. Proceedings of 13th IEEE International Conference on Tools with Artiﬁcial Intelligence (ICTAI’01), USA, 2001.
6. Lim, H. , Lim, A., Rodrigues, B.: Solving the Pick up and Delivery Problem using
”Squeaky Wheel” Optimization with Local Search. Proceedings of American Conference on Information Systems, AMCIS 2002, USA.
7. Nagel, K., Schreckenberg, M.: A cellular automaton model for freeway traﬃc, J.
Phisique I, 2(12), 1992.
8. Neagu, N., Dorer, K., Calisti, M.: Solving Distributed Delivery Problems with AgentBased Technologies and Constraint Satisfaction Techniques. Dist. Plan and Schedule
Management, 2006 AAAI Spring Symp., The AAAI Press, USA.
9. Dorer, K., Calisti, C.: An Adaptive Solution to Dynamic Transport Optimization,
Proceedings of the AAMAS05 industry track, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 2005.

