Can Tsunami Waves in the South China Sea Be Modeled
with Linear Theory?
Yingchun Liu1,2 , Yaolin Shi2 , Hailing Liu1 ,
Shuo M. Wang4 , David A. Yuen3,4, and Hui Lin Xing5
1

South China Sea Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, China
2 Graduate University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
spring.yingch@gmail.com, shiyl@gucas.ac.cn
3 Minnesota Supercomputing Institute, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, USA
4 Department of Geology and Geophysics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, USA
5 ESSCC, University of Queensland, Australia
Abstract. We have compared the results from linear and nonlinear theories of
the shallow-water equations applied to the South China Sea. Our results indicate
that tsunami waves in the South China Sea can be modeled with linear theory.
There is little difference in the probability predicted by nonlinear theory and that
forecasted by linear treatment on tall waves, more than two meters high, which
may impinge on Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan. This probability is estimated to
be 10% in the next century.
Keywords: Tsunami, Shallow-water equation, Numerical computation, South
China Sea.

1 Introduction
The recent Pingtung earthquake occurred on December 26, 2006 in southern Taiwan
has called our attention to possible tsunami hazards along the Chinese coast from large
earthquakes from Taiwan in the north to the Manila trench in the south. Numerical
simulation based on linear theory with the shallow-water equations is a good candidate for timely prediction due to much smaller amount of computation involved. The
South China Sea (SCS) (Fig. 1), together with Taiwan to its east and the Philippine
arc-trench, form complicated channel-basin structural system. The majority of earthquakes in South China Sea region are distributed around South Taiwan and Philippine
(Fig. 1), especially along the Manila trench fault, which is the region most likely to generate tsunamis in the South China Sea. Historical seismic tsunami catalog shows that
tsunamis have occurred close to Taiwan and Manila trench.

2 Comparison of Linear and Non-linear Modeling
The initial condition of the linear shallow water equation is computed according to
Okada’s work [3], which numerically predicts the water level changes due to earthquake
faulting. Rectangular 2-D fault and half-space elastic models are adopted to represent
major seismic faults for calculating the earthquake induced tsunamis. The earthquake
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part III, LNCS 4489, pp. 1205–1209, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

1206

Y. Liu et al.

Fig. 1. Earthquake distribution with the epicenter depth in South China Sea and its adjacent
regions. Database comes from NEIC. Major shallow earthquakes with magnitude over 6 are
marked with star symbol. Grey balls represent the historical seismic tsunamis catalog from
NGDC/NOAA. The marked hypothesized epicenter is used in Fig.3 and 4. A total of 31 receivers
are placed on a straight line from epicenter to Hong Kong.

magnitude is set to be 8.0. In the rupture models, source parameters (rupture length L,
width W , and the average slip D) are derived from theoretical and empirical relationships [5]. The fault dips and strikes from the composite fault plane solutions come from
the average dip of the fault segments according to the Harvard catalog. The following
linear shallow-water equations (1) are employed:
∂η
∂t

+ ∂∂Mx + ∂∂Ny = 0; ∂∂Mt + gD ∂∂ηx = 0; ∂∂Nt + gD ∂∂ηy = 0.

(1)

Due to the existence of the shallow water regions, for comparison, we also apply the
non-linear shallow-water model. Here we include the effect of the friction coefficient
on the wave height. The non-linear equations (2) are given by:
∂η
∂M
∂N
∂t + ∂ x + ∂ y = 0
√
2
∂η
∂M
∂ M
∂ MN
n2
2
2
∂ t + ∂ x ( D ) + ∂ y ( D ) + gD ∂ x + D7/3 M√ M + N = 0
2
2
∂
η
∂N
∂ MN
∂ N
n
2
2
∂ t + ∂ x ( D ) + ∂ y ( D ) + gD ∂ y + D7/3 N M + N = 0.

(2)

In both models where η is the water height, t is time, x and y are the horizontal
coordinates, M and N are the discharge fluxes in the horizontal plane along x and y
coordinates, h(x, y) is the undisturbed basin depth, D = h(x, y) + η is the total water
depth, g is the gravity acceleration, and n is the Manning roughness.
We have employed in our simulations the linear tsunami propagation model TunamiN1 and nonlinear model Tunami-N2, that were developed in Tohoku University (Japan)
and provided through the Tsunami Inundation Modeling Exchange (Time) program [1].
These models solve the governing equations by the finite-difference technique with a
leap-frog scheme [1]. We use open boundary condition in these models, which permits

Can Tsunami Waves in the South China Sea Be Modeled

1207

Fig. 2. Visualization of the tsunami wave propagation at three different times: 12 minutes, 72
minutes, and 479 minutes. Four meters represent the maximum height shown.

Fig. 3. Comparison of water heights in time histories with linear and nonlinear models in various water depths: 12.0m, 534.0m, 1806.0m. These waves are taken at the receivers located in s
straight line between the epicenter (marked in Fig.1) and Hong Kong.

free outward passage of the wave at the open sea boundaries. The bathymetry of the
South China Sea was obtained from global seafloor topography (Etopo2) with grid resolution of nearly 3.7 km. The total number of grid points in the computational domain
is 361, 201, which is 601 × 601 points. The time steps in both models are selected to be
1 second to satisfy the temporal stability condition.
We have visualized in Fig. 2 one set of simulated tsunami wave propagations with
the nonlinear model. The duration of wave propagation is 6.0 hours. This hypothesized
seismic tsunami occurs southwest to Philippines (14.5◦N, 119.2◦ E), with a magnitude
of 8.0. For comparison between the linear and nonlinear models, we perform our simulations under the condition of n = 0.025 as the bottom friction coefficient in this application [1]. Tsunamis occurring at this location are furthest to the coast of mainland
China. Due to the longest propagation time and very strong wave energy of this tsunami,

1208

Y. Liu et al.

strong oscillations, reflection, and interference characteristics of tsunami waves can be
well observed near the islands.
To further validate the wave propagation process in linear and nonlinear models, we
place 31 receivers along the straight line between the epicenter in the Philippines and
Hong Kong, as shown in Fig. 1. It has been found in our simulation that, there is one
critical region with depth between 400 and 500 meters. The nonlinear character dominates
the wave with small wavelengths. Above this depth, both linear and nonlinear models
generate similar wave shapes and wave magnitudes. In other words, with the ratio of wave
height to water depth smaller than 0.01, wave propagation can be modeled by linear theory
with reasonable accuracy. We select three receivers (Fig. 3) at different water depths.

3 Probabilities of Potential Tsunami Hazard of SCS
In South China Sea, over three-fourth of this area is deeper than 500 meters. Due to
dominance of the deep region, the linear model is expected to perform well. Here we
will compute the probabilities of the tsunami hazard in the South China Sea area by
using both linear and non-linear models. In the nonlinear model, the Manning roughness
is 0.025 for the natural channels in good condition which is suitable for the South China
Sea. The probability of seismic studies for the South China Sea and the adjacent areas
was based on the Gutenberg-Richter (G-R) relationship [2]. The number of earthquakes
is computed from the probability of seismic evaluation [6]. Earthquakes are sampled
with the epicenter randomized according to a modified G-R distribution [4]. To estimate
precisely the probability of tsunami hazard, 13 seismic tsunami models with magnitudes
ranging from 6.5 to 8.0 are computed. We record the maximum positive amplitudes of
the tsunami over a sufficiently long period of time.
Our probability for tsunami wave occurrence is computed from the probability of
earthquake occurrence and the probability of maximum wave height of all seismic
tsunami induced by such earthquakes. The tsunami wave with heights of [1.0m, 2.0m]
and heights over 2.0 meters are considered for the hazard prediction. We forecast that
the probability for tsunami wave with more than 2.0 meters to hit within the next 100
years is 10.12% for Hong Kong and Macau, 3.40% for Kaoxiong, and 13.34% for Shantou with the linear model. With the nonlinear model, the probability is the same for the
same tsunami wave height at Hong Kong and Macau, and Kaoxiong, while a lower
probability at Shantou of 10.12% is found. In general, the probabilities for most coastal
cities do not change with the usage of nonlinear theory.

Acknowledgement
We would like to thank Professor Fumihiko Imamura for his providing the code of
TUNAMI N1, TUNAMI N2, and his kind guidance on the tsunami numerical method.
This research is supported by National Science Foundation of China (NSFC-40574021,
40676039) and the EAR program of the U.S. National Science Foundation.

Can Tsunami Waves in the South China Sea Be Modeled

1209

References
1. Goto, C., Ogawa, Y., Shuto, N., and Imamura, N.: Numerical method of tsunami simulation
with the leap-frog scheme (IUGG/IOC Time Project), IOC Manual, UNESCO, No. 35 (1997)
2. Gutenberg, B. and Richter, C. F.: Seismicity of the Earth and Associated Phenomena, Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton (1949)
3. Okada, Y.: Surface deformation due to shear and tensile faults in a half-space, Bull. Seism.
Soc. America 75 (1985) 1135–1154
4. Reiter, L.: Earthquake Hazard Analysis: Issues and Insights, Columbia Univ. Press, New York
(1990)
5. Wells, D., Coppersmith, K.: New empirical relationships among magnitude, rupture length,
rupture area, and surface displacement. Bull. Seismol. Soc. Am. 84 (1994) 974–1002
6. Liu, Yingchun, et al.: Tsunami Hazards From Potential Earthquakes along South China Coast.
submitted to Physics of the Earth and Planetary Interiors (PEPI), Elsevier, 2007

