Modeling, Learning and Simulating Biological Cells with
Entity Grammar
Yun Wang1,* Rao Zheng2, and Yan-Jiang Qiao1
2

1
Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, Beijing, 100102, China
Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing, 100029, China
yonwangpku@yahoo.com.cn

Abstract. In recent years, whole cell modeling approaches, which combine
existing knowledge and machine learning results, have received considerable
attention. These approaches are potentially very efficient for simulating and analyzing physiological function of cells. In this work, entity grammar system is
proposed as formalism for knowledge representation and multistratgy learning
techniques in systems biology. Modeling biological cells with entity grammar
starts from the simple grammatical models. Integrating the simple models into a
cooperating entity grammar of cell facilitates real-time model learning and
updating. This makes a difference with many other formalisms to build preset
models. The scheme of such a platform is described in the paper and the possible
applications are discussed. The proposed formalism method is open to all reasoning paradigm and can be used for studying biological complex systems.
Keywords: entity grammar system, systems biology, complex system.

1 Introduction
Computational models in biology connect molecular mechanisms to the physiological
properties of cell, which is important to integrate the knowledge of cells. There have
been many previous efforts to design simulators for general purpose such as
GEPASI[1], E-CELL[2], Virtual Cell[3], BioDrive[4], Cellerator[5] etc. The involved
formalisms include differential equations, Boolean networks, logical/graph-based
(LG), Bayesian Networks, Petri-nets, π-calculus, etc. Most of the formalisms are
based on the settled knowledge about cells, which deal with the problems of modeling
from knowledge. To solve the problems of knowledge discovery from data, machine
learning techniques are required. However, in most conditions, modeling from knowledge and knowledge discovery from data are concurrent. Combination of modeling
and simulation procedures with machine learning techniques will promote and
simplify both the process of model validation and data integration. Although much
endeavor has been done in this direction, modeling, learning and simulating complex
systems require more flexible formalism, which is also one of the main tasks in
systems biology.
*

Corresponding author.

Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 138–141, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Modeling, Learning and Simulating Biological Cells with Entity Grammar

139

To meet the need for new modeling formalism, learning strategies, simulation platforms and their integration, we present the formalism of Entity Grammar System
(EGS) as a potential choice for these tasks.

2 Entity Grammatical Model of Biological Cell
In this section, we will recall the basic definitions of EGS. For more details, please
refer to reference [6].
An entity grammar G is a quintuple, G = (V N ,VT , F , P, S ) , where, VN is finite set of
non-terminal symbols, VT is finite set of terminal symbols, and V N ∩ VT = Φ , F is

finite set of operations, F = {f i | f i : (E (V , F ))n → E (V , F ),1 ≤ i ≤ m, m, n ∈ N } , where
V = V N ∪ VT , P is a finite set of productions α → β with α ∈ E + (V , F ) and
β ∈ E (V , F ) , S is the start entities.
A cooperating entity grammar of n EGSs is denoted by

(

)

G = g VN (V N ,1 ,L , V N , n ), g VT (VT ,1 , L , VT ,n ), g F (F1 , L , Fn ), g P (P1 , L , Pn ), g S (S1 , L , S n )

(1)

Where g is the cooperating functions of alphabets, sets of operations, sets of production rules and sets of start entities.
To model biological system, the cells can be represented by several cooperating
systems, including the DNAs, RNAs, proteins, membrane and small molecules. The
subsystems cooperate through their interactions in different levels.
Suppose we have the following entity grammatical models:
GDNA = (VDNA , FDNA , PDNA , S DNA )

(2)

G RNA = (VRNA , FRNA , PRNA , S RNA )

(3)

G protein = (Vprotein , Fprotein , Pprotein , S protein )

(4)

According to the basic definition of cooperating entity grammar, the cooperating
entity grammatical model of DNAs, RNAs and proteins can be denoted as
⎛ g V (VDNA , VRNA , Vprotein ), g F (FDNA , FRNA , Fprotein ), ⎞
⎟
G=⎜
⎜ g (P , P , P
⎟
⎝ P DNA RNA protein ), g S (S DNA , S RNA , S protein ) ⎠

(5)

In general, the alphabets of the three grammars are different, the function gV could
be concreted as the union operation, denoted by
g V (V DNA , V RNA , V protein ) = VDNA ∪ VRNA ∪ Vprotein

(6)

The function gF is the operation on the organizers of the three grammars. Overlap
among the elements of the three sets of operations requires deletion of the iterative
operations and addtion of new operations describing new structures. If the set of new
operations is denoted by FDNA-RNA-protein, the function gF can be denoted by

140

Y. Wang, R. Zheng, and Y.-J. Qiao
g F (FDNA , FRNA , Fprotein ) = FDNA ∪ FRNA ∪ Fprotein ∪ FDNA - RNA -protein

(7)

Similarly, function gP can be denoted by
g P (PDNA , PRNA , Pprotein ) = PDNA ∪ PRNA ∪ Pprotein ∪ PDNA -RNA - protein

(8)

Where, PDNA-RNA-protein is the rewriting procedures involving at least two kinds of
molecules. The choice of the start entities of the cooperating entity grammar depends
on the purpose of research. The elements of the start entities could be DNAs, RNAs,
proteins or their complexes, only if they can be described by the operations in gF.
Such a modeling method in EGS provides the possibility for establishing the models
of meta-systems.

3 Entity Grammatical Model-Based Learning of Cells
In this section, we present the basic ideas of knowledge representation and learning
strategy implemention based on the formalism of EGS. The approach represents the
statements of knowledge as entity grammars. The collection of knowledge is the cooperating entity grammars. Entity grammatical model-based learning includes four
transforms: entity generalization (induction), entity specialization (deduction), entity
similization (analogy) and entity dissimilization (analogy). The process of how
knowledge transmutations modify a statement in EGS can be realized in the environment of multi-programming paradigms (e.g. Mathematica).
The kernel of the platform includes a knowledge library in the form of entity grammars and a process of knowledge collection to build the knowledge library(Fig. 1). It
provides the mechanisms of knowledge integration and the interface for knowledge
input. The simulator of the platform is both the interface for query input and the channel for communicating with the kernel.

1.Update the knowledge library with new information; 2. Search and retrieve knowledge; 3. Replace;
4. Induction; 5. Input start entities; 6. Deduction; 7. Analogy; 8. Answers

Fig. 1. The architecture of entity grammar based platform

Modeling, Learning and Simulating Biological Cells with Entity Grammar

141

The original knowledge library is empty. With the input of knowledge from instructor and the observed facts, the model would become more and more powerful.
The relationships between input knowledge and initial knowledge mainly include five
types: (1) The input being included by initial knowledge would be discarded. (2) The
input including initial knowledge library would be updated. (3) The input of new
information would be added to the initial knowledge library. (4) For the input similar
to initial knowledge, the kernel will use the induction approaches to gain the new
knowledge from the input and initial knowledge and then update the library. (5) The
input contradicting with initial knowledge will be reevaluated and accepted if it is
more credible than initial ones. Otherwise, the input will be discarded.
The knowledge library in this system is an entity grammar with the start entities
being an empty set. The definition of the start entities is left to users according to their
interested problems. The simulator will input them to the kernel for simulation.

4 Concluding Remarks
In this paper, entity grammar system is presented as formalism approach for integrating
diverse data and knowledge in biological cells. The platform for modeling, learning
and simulating biological cells using entity grammars is described. This formalism is
open to all knowledge from different cells and most of the reasoning paradigms, including induction, deduction and analogy. The cooperating entity grammar provides
the methods for real-time model learning and updating. This make a difference with
many other formalisms to build preset models. The approach can be used to solve
problems in biological complex systems. With the development of the related concrete
techniques, the formalism approach will facilitate whole cell modeling and reasoning.
Acknowledgements. This work was financially supported by the Natural Science
Foundation of China (No. 30500643).

References
1. Mendes, P.: GEPASI: A Software Package for Modeling the Dynamics, Steady States and
Control of Biochemical and Other Systems. Comput. Appl. Biosci. (1993) 563-571
2. Tomita, M., Hashimoto, K., Takahashi, K., Shimizu, T. S., Matsuzaki, Y., Miyoshi,
F., Saito, K., Tanida, S., Yugi, K., Venter, J.C., Clyde, A., Hutchison, C.A.: E-CELL: Software Environment for Whole-cell Simulation. Bioinformatics. (1999) 72-84
3. Schaff, J., Loew, L.M.: The Virtual Cell. Proceedings of Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing '99. (1999) 228-239.
4. Kyoda, K.M., Muraki, M., Kitano, H.: Construction of a Generalized Simulator for MultiCell Organisms and its Application to SMAD Signal Transduction. Pacific Symp. Biocomputing. (2000) 314-325
5. Shapiro, B.E., Levchenko, A., Mjolsness, E.: Automatic Model Generation for Signal
Transduction with Applications to MAP-Kinase Pathways. in Foundations of Systems Biology, Kitano, H. (ed.), MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. (2001)
6. Wang, Y.: Entity Grammar Systems: A Grammatical Tool for Studying the Hierarchal
Structures of Biological systems. Bull. Math. Biol. (2004) 447-471

