Unequal Error Recovery Scheme for Multimedia
Streaming in Application-Level Multicast
Joonhyoung Lee, Youngha Jung, and Yoonsik Choe
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Yonsei University,
134 Shinchon-dong Seodaemun-gu, Seoul, 120-749, South Korea
{jhlee019,crosscom,yschoe}@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract. As a way of implementing multicast delivery, applicationlevel multicast (ALM) is known for its various advantages including high
ﬂexibility and easy deployment. However, one of its key limitations in
achieving reliability and quality-of-service (QoS) for streaming services
is the hierarchical error propagation caused by its tree structure. As a
solution to this error propagation problem, we propose an unequal error
recovery (UER) scheme where we apply diﬀerent number of retransmissions to the diﬀerent levels of the ALM tree. The error recovery scheme
is implemented using reliable-UDP (RUDP). For each node of the ALM
tree, the optimal number of the maximum retransmissions that minimizes the residual loss rate is obtained using Lagrange theory for a given
delay constraint. Compared to the equal error recovery scheme where
the equal number of maximum retransmissions is applied throughout
the ALM tree, the proposed UER scheme shows up to 10% improvement in residual loss rate while maintaining acceptable delay overhead
for real-time streaming applications.
Keywords: ALM, multicast, multimedia streaming, error recovery.

1

Introduction

Multicast delivery has been the preferred choice for the middle ground application between point-to-point unicast and large-audience broadcast [1]. In implementing the multicast functionality, two approaches have been widely used:
IP multicast and application-level multicast (ALM). While IP multicast can
provide the best performance in terms of the bandwidth on physical links, it has
several drawbacks hindering its wider deployment. These include slow pace of
deployment and the diﬃculties in reliability, congestion control and ﬂow control.
On the contrary, ALM can provide higher ﬂexibility in streaming applications
by implementing the multicast functionalities at the end hosts connected to the
network. That is why it started receiving much attraction recently [1].
In general, ALM protocol is comprised of a logical tree rooted at source, where
all the nodes are hosts and each link in the tree represents a network path. In
this hierarchical structure, packet loss occurred in any links can be propagated
to all the descendant links. The packet losses accumulated at the lower part of
the tree can then cause severe performance degrading to its leaf nodes. Also,
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 668–675, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Unequal Error Recovery Scheme for Multimedia Streaming in ALM

669

leaf nodes can suﬀer from a large amount of packet loss even though the link
connected to the leaf node itself has no packet loss at all. Therefore, packet loss
occurred in each link in the ALM tree has diﬀerent impacts depending on its
level. For this reason, we can construct more eﬃcient and reliable ALM tree by
making the higher levels of the tree more robust than its lower levels.
In order to recover packet losses in the ALM tree, many approaches have
been proposed including forward error correction (FEC) based on redundant
parity packets [3,4] and the retransmission scheme based on feedback mechanism
[5]. While all these approaches show good error recovery performances in each
link of the ALM tree, they still show the inherent limitation caused by the
hierarchical error propagation. Recently, a lateral error recovery (LER) scheme
[2] was proposed to improve the error recovery performance of the ALM tree. In
LER, a node recovers its losses by retransmission not from its ancestor node but
from some nearby recovery neighbors of other planes, which contain independent
ALM trees. However, the performance of LER scheme can still be improved by
taking the hierarchical error propagation into account. While the retransmission
scheme can improve the performance, it has the side eﬀects of increasing end-toend delays. For this reason, simply applying the same error recovery scheme to
all the levels in the ALM tree can result in the large delay overhead especially
at the leaf nodes.
In this paper, we propose a unequal error recovery (UER) scheme based on
reliable-UDP (RUDP) [7]. UER has been designed and developed with the tradeoﬀ between performance and delay overhead in mind. In other words, high
performance scheme is applied to the higher levels of the ALM tree and low
performance scheme is applied to the lower levels. To do this, the eﬀect of the
conﬁgurable parameters of RUDP on the performance is ﬁrst analyzed and one
of the dominant parameters - maximum number of retransmission - is selected to
model the performance of the error recovery scheme. Then, optimal solution for
the number of retransmission that minimizes overall packet loss rate is obtained.
The optimization is performed using Lagrange theory with delay penalty as a
constraint. Compared to the uniform error recovery scheme (where same type
of recovery scheme is applied to all the levels in the ALM tree), UER shows
up to 10% improvement in residual loss rate while maintaining a similar delay
penalty.
Although we use RUDP in our UER approach, the retransmission scheme can
be replaced by any kind of error recovery scheme as long as it can provide a
means to apply the unequal performances depending on the level of the ALM
tree. Also, diﬀerent kinds of error recovery schemes can be applied to the diﬀerent
levels of the ALM tree in order to further improve the performance.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Sect. 2, basic error
characteristics of ALM are presented. In Sect. 3, the performance of retransmission scheme with RUDP is modeled using its conﬁgurable parameters and
an optimal solution for the parameter is obtained for UER using Lagrange theory. Experimental results are shown in Sect. 4 followed by the conclusion in
Sect. 5.

670

2

J. Lee, Y. Jung, and Y. Choe

Error Characteristics in ALM Tree

Among various ALM tree construction algorithms, the binary tree is selected to
construct an ALM tree in order to analyze the error characteristics. In Fig. 1,
the packet 3, which is lost between source S and node A becomes lost packets
in all descendants. While the loss of packet 8 from node B to node C aﬀects
node C only, the loss of packet 3 between source S and node A consequently
means packet loss to the other six nodes. That is, the number of nodes aﬀected
by packet loss strongly depends on the level of the hierarchical ALM tree.

Fig. 1. Error propagation property through the link of the ALM tree

By considering the error propagation described above, decreasing packet losses
in the higher level of the ALM tree can improve the performance of the ALM.
While minimizing the packet loss rate in all levels of an ALM tree is the best
solution, improvement of error recovery at all levels might cause the following
side eﬀects: 1) For FEC, increasing redundant packet reduces packet loss rate,
while bandwidth eﬃciency is reduced. 2) In case of retransmission scheme, incrementing the number of retransmission accompanies additional delay in network
path although it improves the error recovery performance. There is a strong
possibility that these accumulated side eﬀects in the ALM tree deteriorate the
service quality of streaming service severely. For this reason, these side eﬀects
should be considered all together to optimize the performance of error recovery
scheme.

3

Unequal Error Recovery (UER) Scheme

In this section we analyze the retransmission scheme and model its delay and
packet loss rate in terms of the RUDP parameters. Based on the analysis, we ﬁnd
the optimal values of the parameter, the maximum number of retransmission,
which minimizes the packet loss rate subject to the delay constraint.

1.35
1.3
1.25
1.2
0

671

0.01

1.4

Residual loss rate

Relative delay penalty

Unequal Error Recovery Scheme for Multimedia Streaming in ALM

2

4

6

8

10

Maximum number of retransmission

(a) RDP

0.008
0.006
0.004
0.002
0
0

2

4

6

8

10

Maximum number of retransmission

(b) RLR

Fig. 2. The performance of error recovery scheme in terms of the maximum number
of retransmission

3.1

Modeling the Performance of Retransmission Scheme

Although TCP provides 100% reliability by means of retransmission, it is not
suitable for real-time streaming application [2]. UDP is widely used for real-time
streaming application. However it does not provide any error recovery scheme at
all. We use RUDP [7] as an error recovery scheme because it provides retransmission mechanism and high ﬂexibility with various conﬁgurable parameters. It
can also be easily and eﬀectively applied to any real-time streaming applications
and show acceptable performance.
Error recovery performance and delay of error recovery scheme are easily
controlled by several parameters in RUDP. Because these parameters have tradeoﬀ between error recovery performance and delay, we need to analyze the eﬀects
of these parameters on the performance of error recovery scheme. To analyze the
performance, we use the following two performance measures.
– Relative Delay Penalty (RDP); it is deﬁned as the ratio of the delay in the
overlay to the delay in error-free delivery.
– Residual Loss Rate (RLR); it is deﬁned as the overall packet loss rate for all
packets
In order to measure the performance of RUDP in terms of each parameter, large
amount of experiments are done with various combination of the parameters for
various packet loss rates. These experiments show that the maximum number
of retransmission, N , is the dominant parameter in terms of its impacts on the
error recovery performance and delay characteristics. This is also backed up by
the fact that setting all the other RUDP parameters (except N ) as recommended
by [7] does not show performance variations compared to setting them to the
other values (this results are omitted due to the limit of this paper)
As an example, Fig. 2 shows the performance of error recovery scheme in
terms of the maximum number of retransmission, N . We set the packet loss
rate of links to 10% in this experiment. As it can be inferred from Fig. 2, RDP

672

J. Lee, Y. Jung, and Y. Choe

has a linear relationship to N and RLR follows the inverse square curve of N.
Accordingly, RDP and RLR can be modeled as follows.
Di = αNi + β .
Ri =

(1)

γ
.
Ni2

(2)

where Di and Ri are RDP and RLR measured at link i, respectively, Ni is the
maximum number of retransmission, and α, β, γ are modeling coeﬃcients.
3.2

Optimal Unequal Error Recovery Scheme

Using the basic models in (1) and (2), the performance of error recovery schemes
along a single network path from a source to a leaf node can be expressed as
follows.
T

T

Di =

D=
i=1

(αNi + β) .

(3)

i=1

T

R=

T

wi Ri =
i=1

i=1

wi γ
.
Ni2

(4)

where D and R are RDP and RLR measured along a single network path from
the source to the leaf node, respectively, T is the number of links and wi is the
weighting factor that represents the number of descendants that are aﬀected
by the packet lost in the ith link. Now we want to ﬁnd the expression for the
maximum number of retransmission for each level, N1∗ , . . . , NT∗ , that minimize
RLR in (4) while satisfying the condition such that the delay from the source to
the leaf node must be equal to or lower than the delay constraint, Dtotal :
T

N1∗ , . . . , NT∗

=

argmin
N1 ,...,NT
T
i=1 Di ≤Dtotal

i=1

wi γ
.
Ni2

(5)

Observe that, since we are minimizing a convex, diﬀerentiable function on
a convex set, there is a unique solution that can be obtained using Lagrange
theory [6]. To do this, we deﬁne λ and λ∗ as the Lagrange multiplier and its
optimal value, respectively. Then the optimization problem in (5) can be rewritten in its equivalent (unconstrained) form:
T

N1∗ , . . . , NT∗ , λ∗ = argmin

N1 ,...,NT ,λ i=1

wi γ
+λ
Ni2

T

(αNi + β) − Dtotal

.

(6)

i=1

By setting partial derivatives to zero in (6), we can obtain the following expression for the optimized value for the maximum number of retransmission at
each level.
Dtotal − T β
3 2wi γ
· T 3
Ni∗ =
.
(7)
α
2α2 wi β
i=1

Unequal Error Recovery Scheme for Multimedia Streaming in ALM

673

The experiments using this optimal value in the ALM tree is explained in the
next section.

4

Experimental Results

For the performance experiments, we generated a number of ALM trees using
the NS-2 simulator [8]. Each node in the tree is connected to a router with 1 ms
delay, and each router is connected to the other routers with 30 ms delay. For
an ALM tree, the basic form of binary tree was chosen due to its simplicity for
analysis. We used MPEG-4 compressed bitstream for streaming application and
RTP as a streaming protocol.
Packets transmitted by multicast were randomly dropped in physical links.
Packet loss rates were selected in accordance with LER [2]: with the probability
of 0.95 the packet loss rate of a link is uniformly distributed between 0 and 1%,
and with the probability of 0.05 the packet loss rate is uniformly distributed
between 5 and 10%. Packets were divided into two types, such as data packets
for video bitstream and control packets for control message. We assumed that
control packets cannot be lost by applying an error model to downlink only.
As a measure of performance, RDP and RLR explained in Sect. 3.1 were
used and we set the coeﬃcients for (7) such that α = 0.0029, β = 1.0304,
γ = 0.000583. These numbers were obtained through least-square-error model
ﬁtting of the various experiments. All the other parameters of RUDP, except the
maximum number of retransmission, were set as recommended in [7].
The performance of the proposed UER scheme was compared with the equal
error recovery (EER) scheme where the maximum number of retransmission of
3 (N = 3) was applied to all levels of the ALM tree. Delay constraint, Dtotal ,
was set as the RDP value from the EER with N = 3, meaning that we want
to improve the error recovery performance of the UER under the same delay
penalty condition as in the EER scheme. The optimal values of the maximum
number of retransmission at each level were obtained from (7) and represented
in Table 1.
Relative delay penalties of the proposed UER and the EER scheme are compared in Table 2. It can be seen from the table that the RDP values of the UER
are almost same as the ones of the EER. This is simply because the UER is
designed assuming the delay constraint of the EER. We can also see from the
Table 1. Optimal values of the maximum number of retransmission at each level
The number of links
from source to leaf
5
6
7
8
9

0
5
5
6
6
6

1
4
4
4
5
5

Level
2 3 4
3 2 2
3 2 2
3 3 2
4 3 2
4 3 3

5
1
2
2
2

6
1
1
2

7
1
1

8
1

674

J. Lee, Y. Jung, and Y. Choe
Table 2. Comparison of relative delay penalty
The number of hosts (levels)
63 (6)
127 (7)
255 (8)
511 (9)
1023 (10)

UER
5.39259
6.424505
7.488069
8.592417
9.694796

EER
5.393329
6.431873
7.47746
8.583579
9.686914

−3

2.2

x 10

1.024

Retransmission overhead

Residual loss rate

2
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
UER
EER

1
0.8
0

200

400

600

800

1000

Number of hosts

(a) Residual loss rate

1200

1.022
1.02
1.018

UER
EER

1.016
1.014
1.012
1.01
0

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

Number of hosts

(b) Retransmission overhead

Fig. 3. UER performance versus number of hosts

table that the increment of the delay using RUDP is acceptable for streaming
application. The increment of delay penalty is less than 10% compared to the
error-free environments.
The residual loss rate versus the number of hosts was also compared between
the UER and the EER and it is shown in Fig. 3(a). As the plot shows, the
performance of the UER provides better residual loss rate compared to that of
the EER. However, the performance gain of the UER is not perfectly linearly
dependent on the number of hosts (there is a dip near 255 hosts). This is because
the residual loss rate of UER strongly relies on the distribution of high packet
loss rate link. The performance gain of the UER will be higher if the network
paths near the source node have high packet loss rates.
In addition to the two performance measures (RDP, RLR) that we discussed
in Sect. 3.1, we also analyzed the retransmission overhead of each error recovery
scheme as shown in Fig. 3(b). Retransmission overhead represents the ratio of the
number of all packets traversing a physical link to the number of source packets
in the ALM tree. As seen from the Fig. 3(b), the retransmission overhead of
the UER is much smaller than that of the EER. This is because the UER uses
smaller value for the number of maximum retransmission in the lower part of the
ALM tree and the lower part has much more number of links connected than its
higher part. This also explains why the retransmission overhead becomes smaller
as the number of host increases.

Unequal Error Recovery Scheme for Multimedia Streaming in ALM

675

It can also be inferred from Fig. 3(a) and Table 2 that error recovery performance and delay characteristic of RUDP is good enough to be applicable to any
real-time streaming application based on the UDP. Optimization for dedicated
streaming application is also very easy due to its simplicity and ﬂexibility.

5

Conclusion

In this paper, we proposed and investigated an unequal error recovery (UER)
scheme to recover packet loss in application-level multicast (ALM). The UER was
designed to make use of the hierarchical structure of the ALM tree and showed
good performance results. As an error recovery methodology, the retransmissionbased RUDP was used on top of the UDP. The performance of RUDP is heavily
dependent on the maximum number of retransmission so that we modeled the
relative delay penalty and the residual loss rate using this parameter and optimal
value was obtained using Lagrange theory. The simulation results demonstrated
the beneﬁt of the proposed UER approach. Under acceptable delay penalty,
residual loss rate can be improved up to 10%, compared to the baseline error
recovery scheme which has equal performance in all levels of the ALM tree.

References
1. Ganjam, A., Zhang, H.: Internet Multicast Video Delivery. Proc. IEEE 93 (2005)
159–170
2. Yiu, W.-P.K., Wong, K.F.S., Chan, S.-H.G., Wong, W.C., Zhang, Q., Zhu W.W.,
Zhang, Y.Q.: Lateral Error Recovery for Media Streaming in Application-Level Multicast. IEEE Trans. Multimedia 8 (2006) 219–232
3. Tan, W.-T., Zakhor, A.: Video Multicast Using Layered FEC and Scalable Compression. IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol. 11 (2001) 373–386
4. Noguchi, T., Yamamoto, M., Ikeda, H.: Reliable Multicast Protocol Applied Local
FEC. Proc. IEEE ICC 8 (2001) 2348–2353
5. Towsley, D., Kurose, J., Pingali, S.: A Comparison of Sender-Initiated and ReceiverInitiated Reliable Multicast Protocols. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 15 (1997)
398–406
6. Pierre, D.A.: Optimization Theory with Applications. New York:Dover (1986)
7. Bova, T., Krivoruchka, T.: Reliable UDP Protocol. Internet Draft, Network Working
Group [OnLine]. Available: draft-ietf-sigtran-reliable-udp-00.txt
8. NS-2: network simulator [OnLine]. http://www.isi.edu/nsnam/ns

