Neuro-discriminate Model for the Forecasting of Changes
of Companies Financial Standings on the Basis
of Self-organizing Maps
Egidijus Merkevičius1, Gintautas Garšva1,2,3, and Rimvydas Simutis1
1

Department of Informatics, Kaunas Faculty of Humanities, Vilnius University
Muitinės st. 8, LT- 44280 Kaunas, Lithuania
2
Department of Information Systems, Kaunas University of Technology,
Studentu 50, LT-51368 Kaunas, Lithuania
3
Department of Informatics, Engineering and Biomechanics, Lithuanian Academy of
Physical Education,
Sporto 6, LT-44221 Kaunas, Lithuania
{egidijus.merkevicius, gintautas.garsva,
rimvydas.simutis}@vukhf.lt

Abstract. This article presents the way how creditor can predict the trends of
debtors financial standing. We propose the model for forecasting changes of
financial standings. Model is based on the Self-organizing maps as a tool for
prediction, grouping and visualization of large amount of data. Inputs for
training of SOM are financial ratios calculated according any discriminate
bankruptcy model. Supervised neural network lets automatically increase
accuracy of performance via changing of weights of ratios.
Keywords: self-organizing maps, Z-score, bankruptcy, prediction, bankruptcy
class, multivariate discriminate model, Altman, Zmijewski, feed-forward neural
network, model.

1 Introduction
Bankruptcy is a process which results reorganization of the company in order to repay
debts and fulfill other liabilities. Close monitoring of financial standing of the
company is very important in order to prevent possible bankruptcy.
Model forecasting changes in financial standing is presented in this article. The
fundamental bankruptcy models (Altman, Zmijewski etc.), supervised and
unsupervised artificial neural networks are used as the base in this model. The
concept of the model is universal – any of discriminate bankruptcy model can be used
in order to describe the company by one meaning.
Related works are presented in the first part of the article. The methodology of the
model is described in the second part. Third part includes description and results of
testing of the model with the actual financial data.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part II, LNCS 4488, pp. 439–446, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

440

E. Merkevičius, G. Garšva, and R. Simutis

2 Related Work
Bankruptcy is described as inability or impairment of ability of an individual or
organization to pay their creditors, in other words – default. One of the most
important tasks of the creditors is to manage the credit risk making forecast of
changes in financial standing. The early history of research attempts to classify and
predict bankruptcy is well documented in [1],[7]. Altman [2], Zmijewski, [16],
Ohlson [10], Shumway [14] and other authors are the first and fundamental creators
of bankruptcy models. The key-point of these models is to determine most important
indicators (ratios) and their weights in discriminate or logistic function. A detailed
description of the SOM method is presented in [9].
During the past 15 years investigations in area of SOM applications to financial
analysis have been done. Doebeck described and analyzed most cases in [5]. Martindel-Prio and Serrano-Cinca generated SOM’s of Spanish banks and subdivided those
banks into two large groups, the configuration of banks allowed establishing root
causes of the banking crisis [11].
Based on Kiviluoto’s study [8], through visual exploration one can see the
distribution of important indicators (i.e. bankruptcy) on the map.
The following authors have estimated only historical and current financial data of
the companies and afterwards they have interpreted it for forecasting bankrupt of
those companies. In this paper, we suggest generating SOM as one that could be
applied for forecasting of bankruptcy classes for other than trained companies.

3 Methodology
In this section we present Neuro-discriminate model for forecasting of changes of
companies financial standings on the basis of Self-organizing maps (further - Model).
The Model includes various methods - multivariate discriminate analysis, selforganizing maps, feed-forward supervised neural network, combination of which
makes original model of forecasting. These methods [2], [16], [9], [1] used in the
Model are original with no major adjustments, so they are not presented.
The main concept of the Model is presented in figure 1.
Description of the Model concept:
1.
2.

3.

On the basis of bankruptcy models changes of companies financial standing
are determined (0 – negative changes, 1 – positive changes);
The components of discriminate bankruptcy model are used for training of
unsupervised neural network and generating SOM. Testing of accuracy of
the SOM is executed via calculation of corresponding nodes between
training and testing data.
The accuracy of forecasting is improved via changing of weights. Feedforward neural network is used in the Model as a tool for changing of
weights where inputs are test data and targets are outputs of trained SOM.

Neuro-Discriminate Model for the Forecasting of Changes

441

Financial data
data
Multivariate discriminate
bankruptcy model

corrected
weights

FF ANN
inputs / outputs

x

x

x

y

SOM

w

x

w
w
w
w

. ..
x

weights

Fig. 1. The concept of the Model

The detailed algorithm of the Model is visualized in figure 2.

M ySQL
DB

Local companies
financial d atabase

Weights of
components of
discriminate
bankruptcy model

Financial ratios:
components of
discriminate
bankruptcy model
- EDGAR

inputs

trained
SOM

EDGAR
label nodes of
trained
SOM
calculate
corresponding
nodes
LT
label nodes of
trained
SOM

Financial ratios:
components of
discriminate
bankruptcy model
- LT

LT
Calculate
Z-scores/
classification

EDGAR
labeled nodes
of trained
SOM/
targets

accuracy is
acceptable

Feed-forward neural network
no

yes

ED GA R PRO
Financial
d atabas e

EDGAR
Calculate
Z-scores/
classification

inputs
x
x
x

w
w
w
w

Status Report
y

w

x

...
x

Fig. 2. Algorithm of proposed Model and methodology of weights adoption

The main steps of the algorithm are as follows:
1.

On the basis of financial statements of the companies, taken from EDGAR
PRO Online database (further related data is named EDGAR)[6], the

442

E. Merkevičius, G. Garšva, and R. Simutis

2.

3.
4.
5.

6.

7.
8.

financial variables (ratios) and the bankruptcy scores (further named
Z-scores) are calculated and converted to bankruptcy classes based on
Z-scores changes during two years (0-negative changes, 1-positive changes).
The same calculations are made with data, taken from other financial
sources, for example, financial statements of Lithuanian companies (further
related data is named LT), assigning bankruptcy classes (0-negative changes,
1-positive changes) in the same way as described above.
Data preprocessing is executed. The process consists of normalizing data
set, selecting map structure and the topology, setting other options like data
filter, delay etc.
The SOM is generated on the basis of EDGAR data. The Inputs of SOM
are the Z-Score variables and the labels are bankruptcy classes.
The generated SOM is labeled with the bankruptcy classes of LT companies.
Labeled units of the trained SOM are compared with the same units labeled
with LT bankruptcy classes. Corresponding units are calculated. If the
number of corresponding EDGAR and LT labels which are located on the
same SOM map unit number (accuracy of prediction) is acceptable, then
status report is generated, otherwise changing of weights with the feedforward neural network (further - FF ANN) starts.
The attempt to increase corresponding labels is made in order to create such
a map structure in which the amount of unit numbers has the biggest
corresponding label number. For this goal we have used FF ANN, where
inputs are the ratios of LT calculated as bankruptcy discriminate model with
no weights. The targets of the ANN are units of SOM labels which belong to
correspondent LT data. The initial weights of ANN are the original weights
of bankruptcy discriminate model. As a result we have changed weights.
The weights of original discriminate bankruptcy model are updated with
changed weights.
Next iteration of presented algorithm starts (1-7 steps). When the
performance of the prediction doesn’t rapidly change the algorithm has
stopped.

The results of this algorithm are as follows:
1.
2.
3.
4.

New SOM with a certain prediction percentage and good visualization of
large amount of data;
Original way how to use different financial database in the same bankruptcy
model.
New multivariate discriminator model that is based on the original
discriminate bankruptcy model with corrected weight variables.
Automatic tool to update original weights according to accuracy of
prediction – FF ANN.

Result of prediction is the most important information for creditor showing the
trend of a company (positive or negative changes of financial standing of company).

Neuro-Discriminate Model for the Forecasting of Changes

443

4 Results of Testing
In this section we have presented the results of Model testing.
The testing of proposed Model has been executed using two real financial datasets:
companies from NASDAQ list, (further - TRAINDATA) loaded from EDGAR PRO
Online database and a dataset of Lithuanian company’s financial statements
(TESTDATA) presented by one of the Lithuanian banks.
The basis for generating the SOM is TRAINDATA. Calculated bankruptcy ratios
are based on the original discriminate bankruptcy model by Zmijewski [16]. The
ratios are used as inputs and changes of Z-Scores during two years are used as labels
for the identification of units in the SOM.
Table 1. Characteristics of financial datasets

Dataset
Taken from

TRAINDATA
TESTDATA
EDGAR PRO Online Database Database of Lithuanian
(free trial)
bank.
Period of financial data
7 periods consecutively
2003-2004
Amount of companies
9364
776
Count of records
56184
776
Count of records after
46353
767
elimination of missing
data
Number
of
inputs
6
(attributes)
Risk
classes
of If the Z-score of second period is less than the Z-score of
bankruptcy
first period then the risk class is determined as 0, otherwise
– 1.
The SOM was trained using the SOM Toolbox for Matlab package [15]. Changing
of weights with FF ANN has been executed using NNSISID Toolbox for Matlab [13].
The testing process was as follows:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Getting data from financial sources and putting them to the MySQL
database.
Filtering missing data.
Calculating Z-scores; assigning of the risk classes.
Dividing TRAIN data into two subsets: training and testing data with ratio
70:30.
Preprocessing of training data: normalizing of data set, selecting structure of
map and topology, setting of other options like data filter, delay etc.
Executing algorithm which is described in the section 3 while accuracy of
corresponding nodes between TRAINDATA and TESTDATA achieves
desirable result.

In the figure 3 is presented the run of testing.

444

E. Merkevičius, G. Garšva, and R. Simutis

Fig. 3. Run of increase of Model performance

Figure 3 shows rapidly increase of Model performance: testing on the basis of
original weights with 30% of TRAINDATA accuracy of prediction seeks 75.69%,
while testing with TESTDATA accuracy of prediction seeks 79.15%; after changing
of weights on the 11 step of cycle the accuracy of prediction seeks respectively
87.08% and 84.47%. The number of iterations is related with 8 step of the algorithm,
i.e. when the performance of the prediction doesn’t rapidly change the algorithm
has stopped.
Table 2 presents Performance matrix of TESTDATA.
Table 2. Performance matrix of TESTDATA

Actual vs Predicted (Performance Matrix)
Predicted (by model)
0
1
Total (units)
73.47
26.53
98
Actual 0 (%)
9.03
90.96
166
Actual 1 (%)
Total (%)
84.47%
Table 3 presents comparison of importance of ratios in discriminate bankruptcy
model before and after changing of weights.
The highest impact on results has Total liabilities/Total assets ratio and Net
income/Total assets ratio. Changing of weights allows seek the highest accuracy of
bankruptcy prediction.

Neuro-Discriminate Model for the Forecasting of Changes

445

Table 3. Changes of variables weights before and after the cycle
Name
no-ratio weight
Net income/Total assets
Total liabilities/Total assets
S.-t. assets/ S.-t. liabilities
no-ratio weight
Net income/Total assets
Total liabilities/Total assets
S.-t. assets/ S.-t. liabilities
Performance of bankruptcy
prediction (%)

Variables (X0-first period, X1second period)
X0_1
X0_2
X0_3
X0_4
X1_1
X1_2
X1_3
X1_4

Weight Weight after
before

-4,336
-4,513
5,679
0,004
-4,336
-4,513
5,679
0,004

-4,336
-5,834
5,255
-0,207
-4,336
-4,545
4,617
-0,180

79.15%

84.47%

5 Conclusions
•

•

•
•
•
•

The presented Neuro-discriminate model for forecasting of changes of
companies financial standings on the basis of Self-organizing maps also
includes multivariate discriminate analysis of bankruptcy and feed-forward
supervised neural network; combination of these methods makes original
model suitable for forecasting.
The other authors which were studied capabilities of SOM in the areas of
bankruptcy have estimated only historical and current financial data of the
companies and afterwards they have interpreted it for forecasting bankrupt of
those companies. We suggest generating SOM as one that could be applied
for forecasting of bankruptcy classes for other than trained companies.
The presented model works well with real world data, the tests of the model
with presented datasets showed accuracy of prediction with more than
84% performance.
Methodology of presented model is flexible to adopt every datasets because
rules and steps of methodology algorithm are universal.
Changing of weights with supervised neural network allows seek the highest
accuracy of bankruptcy prediction.
Result of prediction is the most important information for creditor showing
the trend of a company (positive or negative changes of financial standing
of company).

References
1. Atiya.: Bankruptcy prediction for credit risk using neural networks: a survey and new
results. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, Vol. 12, No. 4, (2001) 929-935
2. Altman, E.: Financial Ratios, Discrimination Analysis and the Prediction of Corporate
Bankruptcy. Journal of Finance, (1968)

446

E. Merkevičius, G. Garšva, and R. Simutis

3. Altman. E.: Predicting Financial Distress of Companies: Revisiting the Z-Score and
ZETA® Models. (working paper at http://pages.stern.nyu.edu/~ealtman/Zscores.pdf)
(2000)
4. Deboeck, G.: Financial Applications of Self-Organizing Maps. American Heuristics
Electronic Newsletter, Jan, (1998)
5. Deboeck, G.: Self-Organizing Maps Facilitate Knowledge Discovery In Finance. Financial
Engineering News, (1998)
6. EDGAR Online, Inc. http://pro.edgar-online.com (1995-2006)
7. Galindo, J., Tamayo, P.: Credit Risk Assessment Using Statistical and Machine Learning:
Basic Methodology and Risk Modeling Applications. Computational Economics. (2000),
Vol 15
8. Kiviluoto, K.: Predicting bankruptcies with the self-organizing map. Neurocomputing,
Vol. 21, (1998),191–201
9. Kohonen, T.: The Self-Organizing Map. Proceedings of the IEEE, 78:1464-1480
10. Ohlson, J. A.: Financial Ratios and the Probabilistic Prediction of Bankruptcy. Journal of
Accounting Research (Spring). (1980), 109-131
11. Martin-del-Prio, K., Serrano-Cinca, Self-Organizing Neural Network: The Financial State
of Spanish Companies. In Neural Networks in Finance and Investing. Using Artificial
Intelligence to Improve Real-World Performance. R.Trippi, E.Turban, Eds. Probus
Publishing, (1993), 341-357
12. Merkevičius, E., Garšva, G., Girdzijauskas, S.: A Hybrid SOM-Altman Model for
Bankruptcy Prediction. International Conference on Computational Science (4), Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, 3994, 364-371, (2006), ISSN 0302-9743
13. Nørgaard, M.: Neural Network Based System Identification Toolbox Version 2. Technical
Report 00-E-891, Department of Automation Technical University of Denmark. (2000).
http://kalman.iau.dtu.dk/research/control/nnsysid.html
14. Shumway, T.: Forecasting Bankruptcy More Accurately: A Simple Hazard Model, Journal
of Business, Vol. 74, No. 1 (2001), 101-124
15. Vesanto, J., Himberg, J., Alhoniemi, E., Parhankangas, J.: SOM toolbox for Matlab 5,
Technical report A57 (2000), Helsinki University of Technology, Finland
16. Zmijewski, M. E.: Methodological Issues Related to the Estimation of Financial Distress
Prediction Models. Journal of Accounting Research 24 (Supplement): (1984) 59-82

