Federation Based Solution for Peer-to-Peer Network
Management
Jilong Wang and Jing Zhang
Network Research Center, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
wjl@cernet.edu.cn, zhj_021@tom.com

Abstract. Recently, Peer-to-Peer (P2P) technology has become one of the
hottest topics in the research area of Internet. With a variety of P2P
applications, especially those applications sharing large-size file resources
among a large scale of user community, P2P brought us an even more exciting
Internet life. However, P2P also made lots of troubles to network managers
because of consuming too much network bandwidth sometimes. Lacking of
effective management solution, some ISPs plan to block all P2P services on
their network boundaries. In this paper, we propose a federation-based solution
for peer-to-peer network management. By setting up a P2P federation, ISPs and
P2P service providers can work together for P2P network management. From
P2P federation service, ISPs can get P2P nodes information of their own
network to make some control to those that disturb normal network services. At
the same time, service providers of P2P may get routing information of specific
ISPs to optimize the routing of P2P network itself by joining in federation.
Under such scenario, it will save much cost for ISPs to detect and control P2P
traffic and give up the idea of killing P2P services. Save and help to the
development of P2P are the most important target of this solution.
Keywords: Peer to Peer, Federation, Management.

1 Introduction
Currently, Peer-to-Peer (P2P) technology is widely applied in Internet application
systems, especially those applications sharing large-size video files among a large
scale of user community.
P2P changes the traditional Client/Server communication model into a pointto-point model. P2P traffic is no longer converged at a few computers that play as
server hosts, but is distributed among each node in the network, which makes the
distribution of traffic more reasonable and helps avoid congestion of network.
Although P2P technology has lots of advantages, it brings troubles to network
operation sometimes. On account of being frequently used to transfer large size files
such as audio and video clips, P2P applications may consume much network
bandwidth. Furthermore, P2P application is always apt to use the network bandwidth
as much as it possible. In a certain study [2], it has estimated that the total P2P
volume goes about 80% of the total downloading traffic in the Internet, and the ratio
has been constantly on the rise, nearly twice a year.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 765–772, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

766

J. Wang and J. Zhang

Long-time congestion brings the network management great difficulty. Let’s take
account of the case of BitTorrent (BT) [1], one P2P application for file sharing.
Providing there are numerous clients using BT to download and upload files at the
same time, this application will take up lots of network bandwidth and influence other
services in the Internet [3]. On the other hand, lack of proper management of P2P
applications also causes a series of social problems, relating to copyright, privacy,
security and so on. Owing to these referring matters, Internet Service Providers (ISPs)
urgently desire to find an effective way to monitor and control the P2P applications.
But it is not an easy subject. Current P2P applications tend to disguise their protocol
specifications, operate on the random port numbers, and even use the custom port
number, such as port 80 of HTTP, intentionally. These characteristics of new-style
P2P applications make it even more difficult to monitor and control P2P traffic.
In this paper, we propose a federation-based solution for peer-to-peer network
management. Not by measurement, but by exchanging information among ISPs and
P2P providers, which is named PSPs under federation model. By setting up a P2P
federation, ISPs and PSPs can work together for P2P network management. From P2P
federation service, ISPs can get P2P nodes information of their own network to make
some control to those that disturb normal network services. Meanwhile, PSPs may get
routing information of specific ISPs to optimize the routing of P2P network itself by
joining in federation. Under such circumstance, it will save much cost for ISPs to
detect and control P2P traffic and give up the idea of killing P2P. Save and help to the
development of P2P are the most important target of this solution.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows:Section2 analyzes the previous work
in the areas of P2P traffic measurement and management, and then indicates some
problems. Section 3 presents the framework of the solution. Section 4 describes some
details, including considerations of implementation. Finally, we conclude the paper in
Section 5.

2 Previous Works
In order to monitor and manage the P2P applications, we need to distinguish P2P
traffic from other network load.
At present, there are basically two ways to measure P2P traffic. One is active
measurement, and the other is passive measurement which contains two methods:
payload analysis and nonpayload analysis.
2.1 The Active Measurement
In this method we collect P2P nodes information by setting some P2P crawlers. P2P
crawlers are some special nodes deployed in the P2P network, connected with other
live hosts through TCP. Communicating with known hosts, crawler establishes a
peer-list and adds hosts that were freshly found into the list. In this way, crawler host
acquires the information of other peers in the P2P network, from which we could
know the nodes’ (peers’) actual distribution and operating status.
However, there are two serious limitations using this methodology. Firstly, it does
not adapt to the management of large scale P2P network since this method depends on

Federation Based Solution for Peer-to-Peer Network Management

767

the number of connections that crawlers keep. And one significant character of P2P
applications is just the enormous user community. Secondly, this method is concerned
with specific protocols. Therefore, it is not apt to P2P systems having several types of
protocols, especially when some protocols are not open.
2.2 The Passive Measurement—Payload Analysis
Payload analysis of P2P traffic is based on identifying characteristic bit strings in
packet payload. It analyses the potential character (usually using the IP packet head
and the sixteen bits of the data packets) in the packet payload to identify the type of
P2P traffic. E.g. the character sign of BitTorrent protocol is “0x13Bit” [1]. We can
distinguish BT traffic by analyzing whether the packet payload contains “0x13Bit”. In
the same way, eDonkey packets can be identified by “0xe319010000” [7].
The disadvantage of this method is the inefficient application layer identification.
Due to the demand of dealing all the data packets, the speed of analysis is slow, which
means that it is not adapt to the real-time analysis. In addition, this method is not able
to deal with the unknown protocol either.
2.3 The Passive Measurement—NonPayload Analysis
Using nonpayload analysis methodology, we can identify the P2P traffic without
inspecting the user payload. The analysis needs only some packet header information
such as the connection patterns of source and destination IPs and ports.
From some related references, at present there are six out of nine popular P2P
applications using both TCP and UDP as the transport layer’s protocols. These P2P
applications usually use TCP to transfer actual data and use UDP to control traffic [2].
Due to this characteristic, we can identify P2P hosts by looking for pairs of sourcedestination hosts that use both transport protocols (TCP and UDP). Whereas the usage
of both TCP and UDP is not only for the P2P protocols, it is also used for some other
application protocols such as DNS to transport. Therefore, it is hard to distinguish the
P2P application from other applications which have the same characteristic, especially
in the case of some P2P applications intentionally using the custom port number.
For the descriptions presented above, we strongly commit to the notion that
although the management of P2P applications is very important, at the present there is
still not an adaptive and effective methodology to analyze so many kinds of P2P
applications.

3 Federation Based Solution for P2P Network Management
Because of the diversity and variability of P2P protocols, it is quite hard for ISPs to
monitor and manage P2P applications just by active and passive measurement. In
order to deal with the matters in the network caused by P2P applications, ISPs attempt
several means (e.g. ban the port numbers P2P protocols usually using), and do their
best to forbid the P2P applications. At the same time, PSPs create a series of
improved protocols and renew-edition client software to confront the forbiddance
from ISP, which makes the management of P2P applications more difficult. Thus,
both sides of ISP and P2P are plunging into a hostile competition.

768

J. Wang and J. Zhang

Fig. 1. Architecture design of P2P federation. P1…Pn represent various of P2P service providers, ISP1…ISPn represent Internet Service Providers.

Fig. 2. (a) ISPs learn P2P network information from federation. (b) P2Ps learn ISP’s routing
information from federation.

To solve above problems, we propose to establish a service called P2P-Federation
that helps to exchange P2P client and communication information between ISPs and
PSPs. Using this methodology, we can easily deal with the current problems existing
in P2P management such as multiple protocols, disguising port numbers and so on.
The basic idea of P2P federation service is cooperation. Instead of the traditional
method that made a contrastive relationship between ISPs and PSPs, P2P federation
solution aims to found collaboration between ISPs and PSPs.
Commonly, a P2P federation system is composed of three parts. They are ISP units
(a series of ISPs), P2P units (a series of P2P providers) and a P2P-Federation Center.
Figure 1 shows the architecture design of the P2P federation. Figure 2(a) and (b) show
the scenarios of exchanging nodes and routing information between ISPs and PSPs.
The P2P-Federation Center works as a backbone to connect ISPs and P2Ps
together, and provides services of information exchange. The federation center gets
nodes lists from P2P service providers and provides nodes information to ISPs. On
the other hand, the federation center may also gains the IP routing information from

Federation Based Solution for Peer-to-Peer Network Management

769

ISPs and provides such information to P2P service providers. The communication
among ISP, federation center and PSP should be based on the reliable and secure
protocols.

4 The Working Procedure and the Experiment
This section describes how the P2P Federation works in detail. The basic Working
Procedure of P2P Federation Service is shown as Figure 3.
Step 0: Register. The P2P-Federation Center provides the register service. The
acceptable users contain all kinds of ISPs and P2P service providers. For users whose
identity is ISP, the personal information they should submit to register includes:
userName, userPwd (that is user’s password), userIP (that is the IP address used by
ISP’s server), IPSection (that is the IP sections that is managed by this ISP),
routingFormat (that is the format of the routing table this ISP uses). In the same way,
as to users whose identity is PSP (P2P service provider), they should also submit their
personal information including userName, userPwd, userIP (that is the IP address that
the server providing P2P service uses), p2pType (that is the type of the P2P
application, such as Bittorrent, eMule, and so on), p2pFormat (that is the format of the
P2P’s routing information). Then, the P2P-Federation Center provides each user a
unique userID to identify. The P2P-Federation Center maintains a database for
preserving the users’ identity information.
Step 1: P2P servers that have registered in the P2P-Federation Center will transfer
Peers lists ( li ) they maintained to the Center in real-time. The content of Peers list
( li ) is the routing information of all the P2P clients which use the service provided by
the corresponding P2P server. The formats of these Peers lists ( l1 , l2 ......, ln ) from
different P2P servers may also be different. It lies on whether the p2pIDs of the
different P2P application are the same.
Step 2: The P2P-Federation Center formats the Peers lists ( li , i=1,…,n) by an
adaptor (signed as Adaptor-1). In this way, all the various Peers lists have been
formatted in the same mode, that is (IP, p2pID). We can sign the new lists as
f1 (l1 ), f1 (l2 ),......, f1 (ln ) . The function f1 () represented the process by Adaptor-1.
Step 3: The P2P-Federation Center then adds up all the new lists

f1 (l1 ), f1 (l2 ),......, f1 (ln ) ) and acquires an entire Peers list which is called L.
L = f1 (l1 ) + f1 (l2 ) + ...... + f1 (ln ) .

(

Step 4: According to the IPSections given by ISP users who have registered in the
Center, the P2P-Union Center decomposes the L into several child lists which is noted
as L1 , L2 ......, Lm .
Step 5: The P2P-Federation Center transfers the child lists

L j (j=1,…,m) to

corresponding ISP users in real-time.
As shown in Figure 4, we can easily and directly comprehend the process of how
to transfer the P2P routing information to ISPs.

770

J. Wang and J. Zhang

Fig. 3. The Working Procedure of P2P Federation Service

Step6: ISP users that have registered in the P2P-Federation Center will transfer
routing tables ( ri ) maintained of their own to the Center in time. The content of

ri ) is the routing information of the IPSection managed by the
corresponding ISP. The formats of these routing tables ( r1 , r2 ......, rm ) from different
routing table (

ISPs may be different too.
Step 7: The P2P-Federation Center formats the routing tables ( ri , i=1,…,m) by an
adaptor (signed as Adaptor-2). In this way, all the various routing tables have been
formatted in the same mode, that is (sourceIP, nextRoute, target). We can sign the
new lists as f 2 (r1 ), f 2 ( r2 ),......, f 2 ( rm ) . The function f 2 () represented the process
by Adaptor-2.
Step 8: The P2P-Federation Center then adds up all the new lists
( f 2 (r1 ), f 2 ( r2 ),......, f 2 ( rm ) ) and acquires an entire Peers list which is called R.

R = f 2 (r1 ) + f 2 (r2 ) + ...... + f 2 (rm ) .
Step 9: The P2P-Federation Center transfer the child lists R to each PSPs in realtime.
We can see the process of how the ISPs transfer the IP routing information to PSPs
in the Figure 5.
Step 10: ISP uses the Peers lists to manage P2P traffic. Taking into account of
ISPi , it gets the Peers list Li from the P2P-Federation Center, in which there is all
the P2P clients’ routing information (including IP and p2pType). Then
confine the hosts whose IP is in the list

ISPi can

Li to a low speed network through infusing

specific routing information into the network. Notes that this is just one of possible
ways to use the Peers lists.

Federation Based Solution for Peer-to-Peer Network Management

771

Fig. 4. The Scenario of Step 1 to Step 5

Fig. 5. The Scenario of Step 6 to Step 9

We set up a web server to simulate the P2P-Federation Center which provides
some web pages used for registering, logging in and showing the information and
maintains a database keeping the peers information. Then we set up two BitTorrent’s
tracker server to simulate the P2P units, and we use two users registered in the center
as ISP units. In this way, the ISP users can acquire the current P2P users’ IP and port.

5 Conclusions
This paper discusses P2P management in a new vision. Different from traditional
measurement based method, we propose a federation-based solution for P2P
management. By exchanging information from a trustable federation center, ISPs can
easily acquire P2P peers’ information. In this way, we avoid measuring the P2P traffic
accurately which is difficult and inextricable to some extent.

772

J. Wang and J. Zhang

At the same time, the P2P service providers who have joined in the federation may
get the IP routing information of specific ISPs from the P2P-Federation Center, which
help much to improve the quality and efficiency of P2P services.
Therefore, the P2P federation solution described in this paper can achieve a
win-win consequence to both ISPs and PSPs. It will advance the P2P technology and
improve the management of P2P network.

References
1. Bram Cohen. BitTorrent Protocol Specification v1.0 Identification.
http://www.bitconjurer.org/BitTorrent/protocol.html
2. Subhabrata Sen, Jia Wang. Analyzing Peer-to-Peer Traffic Across Large Networks. In:
IEEE/ACM TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 12, NO.2, (APRIL 2004)
3. Bram Cohen. Incentives Build Robustness in BitTorrent.
http://bittorrent.com/bittorrentecon.pdf
4. T. Karagiannis, A. Broido, M. Faloutsos, and K. Claffy. Transport Layer Identification of
P2P Traffic. In: Proceedings of 2004 ACM SIGCOMM Internet Measurement Conference,
IMC 2004, Taormina, Italy, 2004.
5. T. Hamada, K. Chujo, T. Chujo, and X. Yang. Peer-to-Peer Traffic in Metro Networks:
Analysis, Modeling, and Policies. In: Proceedings of IEEE Symposium Record on Network
Operations and Management Symposium, Seoul, South Korea, (2004).
6. Ashwin R. Bharambe, Cormac Herley, Venkata N. Padmanabhan. Some Observations on
BitTorrent Performance. Proceedings of the 2005 ACM SIGMETRICS international
conference on Measurement and modeling of computer systems, (Jun. 2005)
7. eDonkey2000. http://www.edonkey2000.com

