Numerical Solution to Maxwell’s Equations in
Singular Waveguides
Franck Assous1 and Patrick Ciarlet Jr.2
1

2

Bar-Ilan University, 52900 Ramat-Gan, Israel
and College of Judea&Samaria, Ariel, Israel
franckassous@netscape.net
ENSTA,32 bvd Victor, 75739, Paris Cedex 15
ciarlet@ensta.fr

Abstract. This paper is devoted to the numerical solution of the instationary Maxwell equations in singular waveguides. The geometry is
called singular, as its boundary includes reentrant corners or edges, which
generate, in their neighborhood, strong electromagnetic ﬁelds. We have
built a method which allows to compute the time-dependent electromagnetic ﬁeld, based on a splitting of the spaces of solutions: First, the
subspace of regular ﬁelds, which coincides with the whole space of solutions, in the case of convex or smooth boundary; Second, a singular
subspace, deﬁned and characterized via the singularities of the Laplace
operator. Numerical results illustrate the inﬂuence of frequency of the
ingoing electromagnetic waves in a L-shaped waveguide.

1

Introduction

Many practical problems require the computation of electromagnetic ﬁelds. They
are usually based on Maxwell equations. Within this framework, we developed a
numerical method for solving the instationary Maxwell equations (see [5]), with
continuous approximations of the electromagnetic ﬁeld. However, in practical
examples, the boundary of the computational domain includes reentrant corners
and/or edges, called geometrical singularities because they generate strong ﬁelds.
We developed a method, the so-called Singular Complement Method, which
consists in splitting the space of electromagnetic ﬁelds into a two-term, direct,
possibly orthogonal sum. The ﬁrst subspace is made of regular ﬁelds, the second
one is called the subspace of singular electromagnetic ﬁelds. One compute the
regular part of the solution with the help of an ad hoc – classical – method [5].
The singular part is computed with the help of speciﬁcally designed methods.
The present paper is a continuation of the Singular Complement Method,
developed for Maxwell equations in 2D [4], and for the Vlasov-Maxwell equations
[1]. We ﬁrst recall Maxwell’s equations, together with the functional framework,
which is then used to describe the Singular Complement Method. Section 3 is
devoted to the numerical algorithms. In particular, the computation of singular
basis functions is described, together with the discretization of the variational
formulations. Numerical experiments are presented in the last Section.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 235–242, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

236

2

F. Assous and P. Ciarlet Jr.

Mathematical Analysis of the Problem

Let Ω be a bounded, open, polyhedral subset of R3 . We denote by Γ its boundary and by n the unit outward normal to Γ . If we let c, ε0 and μ0 be respectively the light velocity, the dielectric permittivity and the magnetic permeability
(ε0 μ0 c2 = 1), Maxwell’s equations in vacuum read,
∂E
1
− c2 curl B = − J ,
∂t
ε0
∂B
+ curl E = 0,
∂t

div E =

ρ
,
ε0

div B = 0,

where E and B are the electric and magnetic ﬁelds, ρ and J the charge and
current densities, which depend on the space variable x and on the time variable
t. As it is well known, ρ and J have to verify the charge conservation
∂ρ
+ div J = 0.
∂t
These equations are supplemented with appropriate boundary conditions. For
the sake of simplicity, we will only consider ﬁrst perfectly conducting boundary.
The case of Silver-M¨
uller boundary condition will be then introduced. For the
time being, we suppose that
E × n = 0 and B · n = 0 on Γ.
Finally, one adds initial conditions, set at time t = 0, E(0) = E0 , B(0) = B0 .
We explain below how in our formulation the electric and the magnetic ﬁelds
can be handled separately. Even if the principles of analysis are the same, the
results and the mathematical tools are diﬀerent (see theoretical details in [2]).
The electric case generally appears in a non divergence-free modelling, typically
the Vlasov-Maxwell equations, and has been exposed in [1]. In this paper, we
will focus on the magnetic ﬁeld formulation. Let us recall the deﬁnitions of the
following spaces
H(curl , Ω) = {u ∈ L2 (Ω), curl u ∈ L2 (Ω)} ,
H(div , Ω) = {u ∈ L2 (Ω), div u ∈ L2 (Ω)} ,
H1 (Ω) = {u ∈ L2 (Ω), grad u ∈ L2 (Ω)} .
We deﬁne the space of magnetic ﬁelds B, called Y,
Y = {y ∈ H(curl , Ω) ∩ H(div , Ω) : y · n|Γ = 0} .
In what follows, we use the notation (·, ·)0 for the usual scalar product in L2 (Ω)
or L2 (Ω), and (·, ·)Y = (curl ·, curl ·)0 + (div ·, div ·)0 for the one in Y.
When the domain is convex (or with a smooth boundary), the space of magnetic ﬁelds Y is included in H1 (Ω). That is not the case anymore in a singular

Numerical Solution to Maxwell’s Equations in Singular Waveguides

237

domain (see for instance [10]). One thus introduces the regular subspace for
magnetic ﬁelds (indexed with R )
YR = Y ∩ H1 (Ω),
which is actually closed in Y [9]. Hence, one can consider its orthogonal subspace
(called singular subspace and indexed with S ), and then deﬁne a two-part, direct,
and orthogonal sum of the space as
⊥Y

Y = YR ⊕ YS .
As a consequence, one can split an element y into an orthogonal sum of a regular
part and of a singular one, namely y = yR + yS . We have now to characterize
the singular magnetic ﬁelds. Following [9], elements yS ∈ YS satisfy
Δ yS = 0 in Ω ,
yS · n|Γ = 0 .
Now, we suppose that a part ΓC of the boundary Γ behaves as a perfect conductor, namely B · n|Γ = 0. On the other part ΓA = Γ \ ΓC , we have to model
the electromagnetic interactions between the domain Ω and the exterior. One
has
(E − cB × n) × n = e × n on ΓA ,

(1)

where the surface ﬁeld e is given. These conditions are known as the SilverM¨
uller boundary conditions. Moreover, the artiﬁcial boundary ΓA is often splitted into ΓAi and ΓAa . On ΓAi , we model incoming plane waves by a non-vanishing
function e , whereas we impose on ΓAa an absorbing boundary condition by
choosing e = 0. Without loss of generality, one can choose the location of the
artiﬁcial boundary ΓA , in such a way that it does not intersect with a geometrical
singularity. Moreover, one can also choose a regular shape for ΓA .
Now, one could consider the space of solutions
YΓA = {y ∈ H(curl , Ω) ∩ H(div , Ω) : y · n|ΓC = 0} .
ΓA
Then introduce the regular subspace YR
= YΓA ∩ H1 (Ω), and construct the
ad hoc orthogonal splitting, in which appears a singular space, say YSΓA . Nevertheless, it is more interesting from a numerical point of view, to consider the
(non-orthogonal) splitting
ΓA
YΓA = YR
⊕ YS .

First, since the subspace of singular magnetic ﬁelds is YS , as before. Second,
modelling incoming plane waves, or imposing an absorbing boundary condition
has no impact, as far as the singular subspace is concerned. It will be suﬃcient,
as soon as ΓA is not empty, to add in the variational formulation, integral terms
on ΓA as for a regular domain Ω.

238

3

F. Assous and P. Ciarlet Jr.

Numerical Algorithms

The numerical method consists in computing ﬁrst the basis of the singular subspace. Then we solve the problem by coupling a classical method (to compute
the regular part of the solution) to the linear system, which allows to compute
the singular part of the solution.
To compute yS ∈ YS , it is convenient to introduce its divergence- and curlfree parts wS and mS , which verify the following Helmholtz decomposition
yS = wS + mS .

(2)

From now on, we assume that the singular subspace YS is ﬁnite-dimensional.
This is actually the case for a two-dimensional domain Ω, where the dimension
of the singular subspace is equal to the number of reentrant corners ( cf. [4]).
The three-dimensional case can be written formally as below, but some technical
mathematical tools are needed (unclassical spaces, weak trace properties, etc.).
We refer the reader to [2] for more theoretical details.
We shall need sN and sD , the non-vanishing, singular, harmonic functions,
with Neumann and Dirichlet homogeneous boundary condition respectively, solutions to
ΔsN = 0,
ΔsD = 0 ,
in Ω
∂sN
on Γ .
= 0,
sD = 0 ,
∂νν
Remark that sN and sD are not equal to zero since we are looking for a singular
solution, namely with a too poor regularity to be a variational solution. One
then introduce φS and ψS respectively solution to
−ΔφS = sN ,

−ΔψS = sD

in Ω,

(3)

still with Neumann and Dirichlet homogeneous boundary condition. Next, the
singular basis functions yS ∈ YS can be obtained (see [3]) with the relation
wS = curl ψS ,

mS = grad φS ,

(4)

together with relation (2). Hence, the keypoint is to compute sN and sD .
Consider, for simplicity reasons, a domain with one reentrant corner. To compute sN and sD , we have chosen to use the Principal Part Method. Let us describe
it on sD . It consists in splitting sD in a regular part s˜D (which belongs to H 1 (Ω))
and a known singular part sP
D
sD = sP
˜D .
D +s

(5)

−α
sin(αθ), where (r, θ) denote the polar
It is common knowledge that sP
D = r
coordinates centered on the reentrant corner of angle π/α. Above, sP
D is singular
since it belongs to L2 (Ω) but not to H 1 (Ω), and veriﬁes ΔsP
D = 0. One thus
computes with a P 1 ﬁnite element method, s˜D by solving

Δ˜
sD = 0 in Ω,
s˜D = −sP
D on Γ .

Numerical Solution to Maxwell’s Equations in Singular Waveguides

239

Next, one proceeds similarly for the function ψS ∈ H01 (Ω) solution to
−ΔψS = sD in Ω,
ψS = 0 on Γ .
Again, splitting ψS in a regular part ψ˜S (which belongs to H 2 (Ω)) and a singular
one ψSP ,
ψS = ψ˜S + Cψ ψSP ,

(6)

where Cψ is a constant which can be determined with an integration by parts
formula (cf. [3]). One needs the expression of ψSP in polar coordinates, ψSP =
rα sin(αθ). The regular part ψ˜S is then computed, by solving a standard variational formulation. The singular function sN and φS are obtained in the same
way.
With the help of singular mappings (see [2]), one can compute the singular
electromagnetic basis functions. We get the basis wS (resp. mS ) by simply taking
the curl of ψS (resp. the gradient of φS )
wS = curl ψ˜S + Cψ curl ψSP ,
mS = ∇φ˜S + Cφ ∇φP ,
S

(7)
(8)

and yS is easily obtained with (2).
We recall now the Variational Formulation, or VF, which have been developed to solve the problem. We also introduce the discretization of this VF. First,
Amp`ere and Faraday’s laws are written equivalently as two second-order in time
equations, plus suitable initial and boundary conditions. Then, the electric and
magnetic ﬁelds are decoupled (up to the initial conditions). Next, following [5],
we enforce the divergence constraints on the electromagnetic ﬁeld by introducing two Lagrange multipliers, which dualize Coulomb’s and absence of free magnetic monopole’s laws. This approach gives a Mixed VF of Maxwell’s equations,
which is well-posed, if the well-known inf-sup (or Babuska-Brezzi [6,7]) condition holds. In addition, we use an Augmented VF, by adding to the bilinear
form (curl ·, curl ·)0 , the term (div ·, div ·)0 . This results in a Mixed, Augmented
VF, or MAVF. In our case, the magnetic ﬁeld belongs to Y. Then, the correct
Lagrange multiplier space is L20 (Ω). Denote by p(t) the Lagrange multiplier, this
formulation reads
Find (B(t), p(t)) ∈ Y × L20 such that
d2
1
(B(t), y)0 + c2 (B(t), y)Y + (p(t), div y)0 = (J (t), curl y)0 ,
2
dt
ε0
(div B(t), q)0 = 0
∀q ∈ L20 (Ω) .

∀y ∈ Y,

240

F. Assous and P. Ciarlet Jr.

One has to include the regular/singular splitting in this formulation. The magnetic ﬁeld B being decomposed into B(t) = BR (t) + BS (t) , and the same for the
test functions, the variational formulation reads now:
Find (BR (t), BS (t), p(t)) ∈ YR × YS × L20 (Ω) such that
d2
1
(BR (t), yR )0 + c2 (BR (t), yR )Y + (p(t), div yR )0 = (J (t), curl yR )0
dt2
ε0
d2
− 2 (BS (t), yR )0 ,
∀yR ∈ YR ,
(9)
dt
2
d
1
(BS (t), yS )0 + c2 (BS (t), yS )Y + (p(t), div yS )0 = (J (t), curl yS )0
2
dt
ε0
d2
− 2 (BR (t), yS )0 ,
∀yS ∈ YS ,
(10)
dt
∀q ∈ L20 (Ω).
(11)
(div BR (t), q)0 + (div BS (t), q)0 = 0,

Remark 3.1. In the case of a non-orthogonal splitting, as for instance with a
non-empty absorbing boundary ΓA , one has to add −c2 (BS (t), yR )Y to equation
(9), and the term −c2 (BR (t), yS )Y to equation (10) (generated by the loss of
orthogonality).
To derive a ﬁnite-element approximation of this formulation, we have now to
choose discrete ﬁelds and test-functions, which verify a uniform, discrete inf-sup
condition. The Taylor-Hood, P2 -iso-P1 Finite Element retains our attention here,
ﬁrst because it fulﬁll this condition (cf. [8]). Moreover, it allows to build diagonal
mass matrices, when suitable quadrature formulas are used (cf. [5]). Thus, the
solution to the linear system, which involves the mass matrix, is straightforward.
Since there is one singularity, we can write BS (t) = κ(t)yS , where (yS ) denotes
the basis of the discrete singular space, and κ is a continous time-dependent
function. Next, discretizing in time this formulation with the help of the wellknown leap-frog scheme, this results in the following fully discretized scheme:
MΩ B n+1
R

+ MRS κn+1 + LΩ pn+1 = F n ,

(12)

MTRS B n+1
R
n+1
T
LΩ B R

+ MS κ

=G ,

(13)

=0.

(14)

n+1

+ LTS κn+1

+ LS p

n+1

n

Above MΩ denotes the usual mass matrix, and LΩ corresponds to the divergence
h
and ph (t). Then, MRS is a rectangular matrix, which is obterm involving yR
tained by taking L2 scalar products between regular and singular basis functions,
MS is the ”singular” mass matrix, and ﬁnally, LS corresponds to the divergence
term involving ySi and ph (t).
One can solve this system by removing the unknown κn+1 . To that aim, replace
−1
T
equation (12) by (12)−MRS M−1
S (13), and equation (14) by (14)−LS MS (13).

Numerical Solution to Maxwell’s Equations in Singular Waveguides

241

n+1
In this modiﬁed system, only the unknowns (B n+1
) appear. If one lets
R ,p
stand for the modiﬁed matrices and right-hand sides, it reads

MB n+1
+ Lpn+1 = F n ,
R
n+1
− LTS M−1
= Hn .
LT B n+1
R
S LS p

Its solution can be obtained with the help of a Uzawa-type algorithm. Finally,
one concludes the time-stepping scheme by computing κn+1 with the help of
(13).

4

Numerical Experiments

We study now the inﬂuence of the frequency of the incoming signal, on the
localization in space of the singular eﬀects. This is of importance, since not
taking into account the singular part of the electromagnetic ﬁeld can result in a
computed solution, which is wrong over the whole domain.
We consider an L-shaped domain Ω, with a boundary Γ split into two parts,
Γ = ΓC ∪ ΓA . On ΓC (top and bottom parts), a perfect conducting boundary
condition is imposed. An incident wave enters the waveguide through the boundary ΓAi (left side), and exists through ΓAa (rigth side). This behavior is modelled
thanks to the boundary condition (1) with a right hand-side equal to C sin(ωt)
on ΓAi and zero on ΓAa . Initial conditions are uniformly set to zero. Above, C is
a constant, and ω is associated to a frequency ν, which can vary.
We compare two numerical solutions. One, which is obtained by taking into
account the singular part, i.e. with the Singular Complement Method or SCM.
The other one, by computing only a P 1 , Lagrange ﬁnite element approximation.
The values of ν are set successively to ν1 = 5.109 Hz, and ν2 = 15.109 Hz. In each
case, the mesh is such that the number of discretization nodes per wavelength
is constant. Numerical dispersion, if it occurs, is therefore comparable.
Results are shown on Figure 1. For the higher frequency ν2 , the height is
roughly equal to seven wavelengths and the singular behavior is more localized,
near the reentrant corner. Results are rather close. But for ν1 , which corresponds

Fig. 1. with (left) and without (right) SCM for low frequency ν1 - with (left) and
without (right) SCM for high frequency ν2

242

F. Assous and P. Ciarlet Jr.

to a wavelength comparable to the dimensions of the domain (the height is
roughly equal to two wavelengths), the solutions are very diﬀerent.

5

Conclusion

In this paper, we were interested in the propagation of a wave in a singular
waveguide, by studying how the frequency of the ingoing electromagnetic waves
inﬂuences the singular solution. We developed a numerical method, based on
direct, and possibly orthogonal, splittings of the space of electromagnetic solutions. One of the foremost result is that the singular behavior of the solution is
more localized, near the reentrant corner for the higher frequencies than for the
lower.

References
1. F. Assous, P. Ciarlet, Jr., Solving Vlasov-Maxwell equations in singular geometries, accepted to Math. and Comput. in Simulation.
2. F. Assous, P. Ciarlet, Jr., E. Garcia, A characterization of the singular electromagnetic ﬁelds by an inductive approach, submitted to Math. Meth. Appl. Sci..
3. F. Assous, P. Ciarlet, Jr., E. Garcia, J. Segr´
e, Time dependent Maxwell’s
equations with charges in singular geometries, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg., 196, 665–681, 2006.
4. F. Assous, P. Ciarlet, Jr., J. Segr´
e, Numerical solution to the time-dependent
Maxwell equations in two-dimensional singular domain: The Singular Complement
Method, J. Comput. Phys., 161, 218-249 (2000).
5. F. Assous, P. Degond, E. Heintz´
e, P. A. Raviart, J. Segr´
e, On a ﬁnite
element method for solving the three-dimensional Maxwell equations, J. Comput.
Phys., 109, 222-237 (1993).
6. I. Babuska (1973), The ﬁnite element method with Lagrange multipliers, Numer.
Math., 20, 179-192 (1973).
7. F. Brezzi, On the existence, uniqueness and approximation of saddle point problems arising from Lagrange multipliers, RAIRO Anal. Num´
er., 129-151, (1974).
8. P. Ciarlet, Jr., V. Girault, Inf-sup condition for the 3D, P2 -iso-P1 , Taylor-Hood
ﬁnite element; application to Maxwell equations, C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris, Ser. I,
335, 827-832 (2002).
9. E. Garcia, R´esolution des ´
equations de Maxwell avec charges dans des domaines
non convexes, PhD Thesis, University Paris 6, France (2002). (in French)
10. P. Grisvard, Singularities in boundary value problems, 22, RMA Masson, Paris
(1992).

