Semi-analytical Approach for Analyzing
Vibro-Impact Systems
1
ˇ
Algimantas Cepulkauskas
, Regina Kulvietien˙e1 , Genadijus Kulvietis1 ,
and Jurate Mikucioniene2
1

Vilnius Gediminas Technical University, Saul˙etekio 11, Vilnius 2040, Lithuania
{algimantas cepulkauskas, regina kulvietiene,
genadijus kulvietis}@gama.vtu.lt
2
Kaunas University of Technology, Kestucio 27, Kaunas 44025, Lithuania
jumik@ktu.lt

Abstract. A semi-analytical approach, combining the features of analytical and numerical computations, is proposed. Separating the linear
and nonlinear parts of equations of motion, the harmonic balance method
and computer algebra have been synthesized for obtaining analytical solutions of the nonlinear part, whereas the linear part was solved by the
numerical methods. On the basis of this technique, the numerical investigation of abrasive treatment process dynamics has been performed and
regimes ensuring the most eﬀective treatment process determined.

1

Introduction

Mechanical systems exhibiting impacts, so-called impact oscillators in the English literature at the present time, or vibro-impact systems in the Russian literature, are strongly nonlinear or piecewise linear, due to sudden changes in
velocities of vibrating bodies at the instant of impact or friction forces when the
velocity of motion changes its polarity. Their practical signiﬁcance is considerable and the investigation of the motion of such systems was begun about ﬁfty
years ago [7].
Several methods of the theoretical analysis were developed and diﬀerent models of impacts were presented [1,6,7]. The method of “ﬁtting” which uses the
Newton restitution coeﬃcient seems to be most important. It is accurate and
applicable under the assumption that the time during an impact is negligible. It
can solve certain assumed periodic impact motion and its stability, but this procedure can be realized in the explicit form only for simple mechanical systems,
simple types of periodic motion, and for undamped impactless motion.
As usual, the solution method must correlate with the type of motion equations and concurrently with the character of the initial mechanic system. The
harmonic balance method was chosen for the investigation of a vibratory abrasive
treatment process [2,8] as it is easily applied to systems where calculations are
made by computer algebra methods and, in this case, considerably less computer
memory is needed than by other methods [3]. As a result, we obtain a nonlinear algebra equation system with many very short expressions. So it is possible
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part II, LNCS 4488, pp. 259–262, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

260

ˇ
A. Cepulkauskas
et al.

and expedient to process the results by numerical methods. The analytic calculation system VIBRAN is extremely eﬀective in this case. Since an adequate
method for solving the motion equation of dynamically complicated systems has
to contain a large amount of analytic as well as numerical calculations, there
must be a strong program connection among them. The analytic calculation
system VIBRAN was selected in order to ensure this connection [3].The system
is designed to generate subroutines in FORTRAN, to select and reject excessive
operations while generating programs in accordance with analytic expressions.
Besides, this system stands out by ﬂexibility of input-output and the unique
means for operations with sparse matrices.

2

Implementation of Computer Algebra

Consider the system of s degrees of freedom with the Lagrangian function [5]:
L = L(qi , q˙i , t) (i = 1, 2, ...s),

(1)

where L is the Lagrangian function, qi , q˙i , t are generalized coordinates and
velocities of the system and time; s is the number of degrees of freedom.
The equations of motion of such a system are [4]:
d
dt

∂L
∂ q˙i

−

∂L
= Fqi .
∂qi

(2)

These equations can be divided into the linear and nonlinear parts by formal
replacements L = LL + LN and Fqi = FLi + FN i . The equations of motion may
now be expressed in the form:
d
dt

∂LL
∂ q˙i

−

∂LL
− FLi
∂qi

+

d
dt

∂LN
∂ q˙i

−

∂LN
− FN i
∂qi

= 0,

(3)

where Fqi , FN i , FLi are generalized force, nonlinear (polynomial with respect to
generalized coordinates and periodical or Fourier expansion of time) and linear
parts; and LN , LL are nonlinear and linear parts of the Lagrangian function,
respectively.
The linear part can be formalized for numerical analysis without diﬃculty and
we used special VIBRAN programs to analyze the nonlinear part of the system.
The proposed method provides shorter expressions for analytical computation
and allows the analysis of systems of higher order. After some well-known perturbations, the equations of motion can be rewritten in the matrix form:
[M ]{¨
q} + [B]{q}
˙ + [C]{q} = {H(q, q,
˙ t)} + {f (t)},

(4)

where f(t) is the periodic function; H(q, q,
˙ t) is the nonlinear part of a system,
calculated by a special VIBRAN program.
Solution of the abovementioned system can be expressed using the harmonic
balance method in the form [3,4]:
{q} = {A0 } + {A1 } cos (ωt) + {A2 } sin (ωt) + ...,

(5)

Semi-analytical Approach for Analyzing Vibro-Impact Systems

261

where {Ai } are the unknown vectors that can be found by the nonlinear algebraic
equations.
According to the harmonic balance method, these equations for the ﬁrst three
vector coeﬃcients in the matrix form are:
[U ] {A} − {f } − {H(A)} = {0} ,

(6)

where fi are coeﬃcients of Fourier expansion of the function f(t). Analogously,
equations for other harmonics could be found by the VIBRAN program. The
expressions of Hi and their derivatives required are expressed in closed form
using computer algebra techniques by the FORTRAN code generation procedure. Special modiﬁcations were made to the terms with dry friction, and the
integration procedure was developed by the Malkin method [7].

3

Application of Abrasive Treatment Process Dynamics
in the Investigation

The new method for the treatment of miniature ring-shaped details was proposed
in [8], where the internal surface of the detail is treated as well as an external
one. During the vibratory treatment process the working medium particles are
constantly striking each other. As a result, slight scratches and crater-shaped
crevasses occur on the surface of treated details that form the surface microrelief. In this way, abrasive friction and impacts on the treated details perform
the treatment process.
The equations of motion describe the dynamics of a vibratory abrasive treatment process [5]:
⎧
¨1 + bx˙ 1 + bk (x˙ 1 − x˙ a ) + (c + c1 )x1
⎨ m1 x
˙
= cξ(t) − Fm (x1 ) − F1 sign(x˙ 1 − x˙ a ) + bξ(t),
(7)
⎩
˙
ma x
¨a + bx˙ a + bk (x˙ a − x˙ 1 ) + cxa = cξ(t) + F2 sign(x˙ 1 − x˙ a ) + bξ(t).
where m1 is the mass of components treated; ma is the mass of abrasive particles; the load mechanical properties are evaluated by elasticity c and working
medium resistance b; F1 , F2 are forces of dry friction between a component and
abrasive; bk is viscosity resistance; the elasticity of magnetic ﬁeld is evaluated by
a stiﬀness coeﬃcient c1 , the detail was additionally excited by generating a variable component of magnetic ﬁeld Fm (x1 ). Its stiﬀness properties were obtained
experimentally by the least squares method.
The kinematics excitation of a loaded vessel is ξ(t) = A sin ωt.
Analytic expressions obtained according to the VIBRAN program conclude
the part of analytic calculations of H(A) [3]. The corresponding derivatives are
very simple and there are only 25 nonzero terms.
All the properties complying with the dynamic pattern of the process are
investigated in the numerical way and the program itself is composed in the
FORTRAN language. For this reason, in order to calculate the factors of analytic expressions and their partial derivatives, two FORTRAN subroutines have

262

ˇ
A. Cepulkauskas
et al.

been generated: one for compiling a dictionary and another for calculating the
expressions themselves. Besides, the program, created by applying the harmonic
balance method for systems of diﬀerential equations in addition to the equations
where amplitudes and constant components are found, also presents equation
derivatives from unknown quantities. In this case, one or some criteria of further
numerical parameter optimization may be calculated.

4

Conclusions

On the basis of solving nonlinear diﬀerential equations by a harmonic balance
method and synthesis of the analytic calculation system VIBRAN, the investigation method of nonlinear systems with a dry friction eﬀect has been created. This
method combines the advantages of analytic calculation methods and computer
algebra. They are a compound of the principle of parallel analytic-numerical calculation, where analytic rearrangements are applied only to the nonlinear part
of the system, while concurrently the linear part of the system could be easily
solved in the numerical way. The proposed method provides shorter expressions
for analytic computation and allows the analysis of systems of higher order.

References
1. Baron, J.M.: Abrasive and Magnetic Treatment of Details and Cutters, St. Petersburg, Mashinostrojenie (in Russian), (1986)
2. Blekhman, I.I.: Forming the properties of nonlinear mechanical systems by means of
vibration, Proc. IUTAM/IFToMM Symposium on Synthesis of Nonlinear Dynamical
Systems, Solid Mechanics and Its Applications, vol. 73, Kluwer Academic Publ.,
Dordrecht (2000) 1-13.
3. Cepulkauskas, A., Kulvietiene, R., Kulvietis G.: Computer Algebra for Analyzing
the Vibrations of Nonlinear Structures. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol.
2657. Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg New York (2003) 747-753
4. Klymov, D.O., Rudenko, V.O.: Metody kompiuternoj algebry v zadachah mechaniki
Nau , O(r)scow, (in russian), (1989)
5. Kulvietiene, R., Kulvietis, G., Fedaravicius, A., Mikucioniene, J.: Numeric-Symbolic
Analysis of Abrasive Treatment Process Dynamics, Proc. Tenth World Congress of
the Theory of Machines and Mechanisms, Vol. 6, Oulu, Finland, (1999) 2536-2541
6. Lewandowski, R.: Computational Formulation for periodic vibration of Geometrically Nonlinear Structures – Part 1: Theoretical Background. - Int. J. Solid Structures, 34 (15) (1997) 1925-1947
7. Malkin, I.G.: Some Problems of Nonlinear Oscillation Theory, Moscow, Gostisdat
(in russian), (1956)
8. Mikucioniene, J.: Investigation of vibratory magnetic abrasive treatment process
dynamics for miniature details, Ph.D. Thesis, KTU, Technologija, Kaunas, (1997)

