A Collaborative Teaching Approach
Using Integrated Electronic Environments
for Information Security
Yu-An Tan, Zuo Wang, and Xu-Bo Wu
School of Computer Science and Engineering
Beijing Institute of Technology, 100081 Beijing, P.R. China
victortan@yeah.net, qiushui@bit.edu.cn, wuxubo@bit.edu.cn

Abstract. Rapid advancement and new information sources in many academic
fields offer expanded opportunities for collaborative teaching. In this paper,
we propose a collaborative teaching approach using integrated electronic
environments for information security. Taking the security problem of implicit
type conversion of C++ program as instance, we present the learning goals &
objectives, course content, student assignments and discussion of the
collaborative teaching approach using integrated electronic environments. The
teaching performances suggest that this new proposed teaching approach is very
efficacious.
Keywords: collaborative teaching approach; integrated electronic environments;
information security; safety vulnerability.

1 Introduction
There is a growing call for competency-based education in educational contexts.
Competencies can be construed as abilities that enable learners to recognize and
define new problems in their domain of study as well as solve these problems [1].
According to Keen [2], competencies are a combination of complex cognitive and
higher-order skills, highly integrated knowledge structures, interpersonal and social
skills, and attitudes and values. Acquired competencies enable learners to apply these
skills and attitudes in a variety of situations and over an unlimited time span [3].
In educational circles, educational designers are moving from cognitive, often rule
based instructional design for efficient and effective teaching towards constructivist
instructional design for competency based learning. The problem is that this is not a
question of adaptation of the design methodology used, but is a question of beginning
anew. For this reason, we proposed a collaborative teaching approach using integrated
electronic environments for information security in this paper.
This paper is organized as following. Section 2 presents the proposed collaborative
teaching approach using integrated electronic environments for information security.
Finally, the conclusions of this study are drawn in section 3.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part III, LNCS 4489, pp. 567–570, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

568

Y.-A. Tan, Z. Wang, and X.-B. Wu

2 The Proposed Collaborative Teaching Approach
In this section, we will present the proposed collaborative teaching approach using
integrated electronic environments for information security. Taking the security
problem of implicit type conversion of C++ program as instance, we present the
learning goals & objectives, course content, student assignments and discussion of the
collaborative teaching approach using integrated electronic environments.
2.1 Teaching Background
The business information plays an extremely important role in most organizations
today, and efforts to protect such business information should be of the utmost
importance. Information security is more often than not viewed only as a technical
concern [4], and hence seems to lack the attention of top management and boards of
directors. According to the current popular viewpoints, information security
awareness should switch to a better program [5-6]. For this reason, the security
problem of implicit type conversion of C++ program is adopted as an instance in this
paper.
2.2 Learning Goals and Objectives
The learning goals and objectives can be characterized as follows.
(1) Teach advanced techniques for searching data.
(2) Make students aware of information security awareness.
(3) Emphasize the importance of evaluating research findings.
(4) Provide individual assistance as necessary to ensure that all students achieve a
"comfort level" result.
2.3 Course Content
The course contents can be described as following.
Session 1: searching technology. We will spend 10 minutes to explain the
searching technology and approach, for example, Internet, BBS, library, etc.
Session 2: information security awareness. We will spend 10 minutes to explain
the information security awareness. In this session, we should emphasize following
two points: (1) business information plays an extremely important role today, and
efforts to protect such business information should be of the utmost importance; (2)
information security awareness should switch to a better program.
Session 3: The security problem of implicit type conversion of C++ program. We
will spend 20 minutes to explain the security problem of implicit type conversion of
C++ program. In this session, we will apply a material example to explain this
content.
Conversion between Pointer & Citing
A pointer which points to any type object can be evaluated to the variable with
the void* type. It can convert the void* type to another type with an evident
way. This void* object can evaluate to that void* object. Two void* objects can

A Collaborative Teaching Approach Using Integrated Electronic Environments

569

be compared each other. Besides the above basic operation, other operation to
the void* object is insecure. In the following, we will give a material example
of this kind of security problem. In this example, pv points to an integer object
(achieved by pi in the third line). In the sixth line, this pointer was evaluated to
the pd2 after its conversion. As you know, this conversion is not secure.
Example of a Computer Program about Conversion Between Pointers

1: int main(int *pi)
2: {
3:
void *pv = pi;
4:
int *pi2 = (int *)pv;
5:
double *pd1 = (double *)pv;
6:
double *pd2 = pv;
7:
return 0;
8: }
Session 4: task arrangement. We will spend 10 minutes to arrange the subsequent
tasks. There are four major tasks should be finished for these students. The first one is
to get together some accidents about information security. The second one is to
collect some examples about the security problem of implicit type conversion in C++
program. The third one is to design or implement some solutions for security problem
of implicit type conversion in C++ program. The forth one is to design and execute
the evaluation for research findings.
Session 5: Student's presentation. We will spend 100 minutes for student's
presentation. Each group of students can present their research findings with their
own freeform presentation methods, but the presentation time should be limited to 20
minutes.
Session 6: Evaluating research findings. We will spend 10 minutes for evaluating
research findings. The Evaluating group will estimate the presentation of each group
according to their proposed index system, and they will notify the final evaluating
result at this session.
2.4 Student Assignments
All the students were assigned as follows (Table 1).
Table 1. The student assignments
Group
1
2
3
4

Major Task
Collect some accidents about information security
Collect some examples about the security problem
of implicit type conversion in C++ program
Design or implement some solutions for security
problem of implicit type conversion in C++ program
Evaluate the research findings

Group Scale
3-5
3-5
6-8
4-8

570

Y.-A. Tan, Z. Wang, and X.-B. Wu

2.5 Discussion
The teaching performances of this class can be characterized as follows.
(1) Abundant teaching content. There are 3 accidents about information security, 8
examples about the security problem and 5 solutions for security problem were
collected and presented by the students.
(2) Equitable evaluation for research findings. The evaluating group designed a
practical and efficacious evaluation index system, and their evaluation is equitable
and evenhanded on the whole.
(3) Collaborative learning approach using integrated electronic environments. All
the students learned, prepared and presented their course contents with a collaborative
way, and they applied many electronic types of equipment for their learning. Through
this way, all the students can learn the course contents with an initiative way.

3 Conclusions
The contribution of this paper can be characterized as follows: it proposed a
collaborative teaching approach using integrated electronic environments for
information security. We present the learning goals & objectives, course content,
student assignments and discussion of the collaborative teaching approach using
integrated electronic environments. The teaching performances suggest that this new
proposed teaching approach is very efficacious.

References
1. Kirschner, P.A., Van Vilsteren, P., Hummel, H., et al.: A Study Environment for Acquiring
Academic and Professional Competence. Studies of Higher Education, 22(2): 151-171.
(1997).
2. Van Merrienboer, J.J.G.: Cognition and Multimedia Design for Complex Learning.
Inaugural address available from the Educational Technology Expertise Center of the Open
University of the Netherlands, (1999).
3. Keen, K.: Competence: What Is It and How Can It Be Developed? In J. Lowyck, P. de
Potter, & J. Elen (Eds.), Instructional design: Implementation issues. Brussels, Belgium:
IBM International Education Center, (1992) 111-122.
4. Birman K.P.: The Next-generation Internet: Unsafe at Any Speed. IEEE Computer, 33(8):
54-60(2000).
5. Johnson E.C.: Security Awareness: Switch to a Better Programme. Network Security, 2(2):
15-18(2006).
6. Kovacich G.L.: Establishing a Network Security Programme. Computer & Security, 15(6):
486-498(1996).

