A WSN Coalition Formation Algorithm Based
on Ant Colony with Dual-Negative Feedback
Na Xia, Jianguo Jiang, Meibin Qi, Chunhua Yu, Yue Huang, and Qi Zhang
School of Computer and Information,
Hefei University of Technology,
Hefei, 230009 PR China
jgjiang@hfut.edu.cn

Abstract. In large-scale, complicated Wireless Sensor Networks, the
cooperation among sensor nodes is a key topic, and has been receiving
more and more attention. The dynamic coalition mechanism in MultiAgent System is an important method for this topic, and then an energyeﬃcient coalition formation algorithm is needed since the energy resource
of WSN is restricted. This paper proposes a WSN coalition formation
algorithm based on Ant Colony System with dual-negative feedback characteristic. Coalition sponsor inclines to wake those sensor nodes which
seldom or never joined coalitions before to form coalition, which can balance the energy consumption among sensor nodes, so as to extend the
network lifetime for more tasks. The results of simulation experiment
show the validity of this algorithm.
Keywords: Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN), Cooperation, Coalition,
Ant Colony System.

1

Introduction

Wireless sensor networks (WSN) is garnering a lot of research interets due to its
important applications such as battleﬁeld surveillance, environment monitoring,
home security and target tracking, etc [1,2]. Due to the severe constraints of energy, computation and communication, sensor nodes have to cooperate with each
other to perform tasks. So the cooperation among sensor nodes is a key topic.
As the similar characeristics of distribution, autonomy and self-organization between Muti-Agent System (MAS) and WSN, the MAS theory has become an
important method for this topic [2,3,4]. L. K. Soh and C. Tsatsoulis [5,6,7] investigated the WSN cooperation problem adopting dynamic coalition method in
MAS. A dynamic sensor node coalition is formed for a task, and the coalition
will dismiss after the task is completed. The coalition formation algorithm is
based on case-based reasoning (CBR). In the course of coalition formation, the
coalition sponsor describes the current task in parameters, searchs in the case
database and ﬁnds the most similar case according to the task description. Then
the corresponding strategy is taken out and modiﬁed to suit the current task.
CBR based coalition formation algorithm reduces computation resource
spending to a certain extent, but it brings serious disadvantage to the energy
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 1139–1146, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

1140

N. Xia et al.

usage of WSN in other ways: those sensor nodes in successful case would be chosen repeatedly to form coalition to perform tasks, so their limited battery energy
will be consumed up too early. The death of these sensor nodes will aﬀect the
function of WSN and shorten the network lifetime. This paper proposes a WSN
coalition formation algorithm with dual-negative feedback characteristic. It can
balance the energy consumption among sensor nodes, so as to extend the every
sensor node and network lifetime for more tasks.

2

The DN-AC Algorithm

Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) [8,9,10] is inspired by social ants’ collective
behavior. In Ant Colony System, artiﬁcial ants explore solution space, and the
transition probability depends on pheromone intensity and heuristic information. The pheromone accumulation (positive feedback) leads ants to consistent
good solution, whereas the pheromone evaporation (negative feedback) is helpful
to avoid early convergence to suboptimal solution. Based on the feedback mechanism in Ant Colony System, we propose a dual-negative feedback for WSN
coalition formation, and design the algorithm for target tracking application.
According the movement of target, the algorithm can wake certain sensor nodes
dynamically to form coalition to track the target. The tracking accuracy and
energy-load balancing are the primary performance metrics for the algorithm.
2.1

Algorithm

Deﬁne the surveillance zone as F , Consider n sensor nodes of WSN randomly
scattered in F . The sensor node set can be expressed as A = {A1 , · · · , An }, and
the position set of sensor nodes can be expressed as L = {L1 , · · · , Ln }, where Lk
represents the location of Ak .
Deﬁne the current energy status of Ak as pheromone τk , τk ∈ [0, 1], which can
be expressed by the residual energy percentage of Ak .
When a target O enters F , the sensor node Ai which ﬁrst detects the target
will become coalition sponsor Asponsor . It will wake certain sensor nodes to form
coalition for tracking mainly considering their pheromone value (energy status)
and the distance from these sensor nodes to the target. The waking probability
of Ak at time t is calculated as follows:
α

pk (t) =

[τk ]

Rc − Lk −lo (t)
Rc

0

β

Lk − lo (t) ≤ Rc k = 1, · · · , n
otherwise

(1)

Here, lo (t) is the located position of target O at time t. Rc is the detection
radius of sensor node. It is evident that larger τk and smaller distance means
that the sensor node has more chance to be wakened.
Wake sensor nodes stochastically according to pk (t). The wakened sensor
nodes form coalition to track the target for Δt period, and then update the
waking probability pk (t) using the newly located position of target O, so as to

A WSN Coalition Formation Algorithm Based on Ant Colony

1141

execute the next waking operation. With the target moving, the sensor node
coalition is dynamic in the surveillance zone. While target moves out of F , a
round of target tracking is over.
The wakened/sleeping state of sensor node Ak at time t can be represented
by the indicator θk (t) as follows:
θk (t) =

1 Ak is wakened at time t
k = 1, · · · , n
0 Ak is sleeping at time t

(2)

The integral working time of sensor node Ak in dynamic coalition during a
round of target tracking can be represented as follows:
θk (t) k = 1, · · · , n

Tk =

(3)

t

After a round of target tracking, the pheromone value on every sensor node
will be updated. For those sensors which participated in dynamic coalition, besides pheromone evaporation, their pheromone will be decreased further,
which is we termed Dual-Negative feedback. The updated pheromone value
for Ak is calculated as follows:
τk ← ρ · τk − Δτk k = 1, · · · , n

(4)

Here 1 − ρ ∈ (0, 1) is the decay coeﬃcient which represents the energy consumption under sleeping model. The pheromone decrease Δτk represents the
energy consumption of sensor node Ak during this round of target tracking,
which is as follows:
Δτk =

ξ·

ÈTT
k

k

if Ak participate in dynamic coalition

k

0 otherwise

k = 1, · · · , n

(5)

Δτk is direct proportion to Tk . Deﬁne the pheromone decrease coeﬃcient as
ξ, which can be adjusted.
Consequently, when next target appears, it is less possible for Asponsor to
wake the sensor nodes which participated in coalition before, whereas Asponsor
inclines to wake those sensor nodes which seldom or never joined coalition to
form coalition. This behavior balances energy-load among sensor nodes, and
network lifetime extending is achieved.
To guarantee the tracking reliability and avoid waste of resource, we deﬁne
the minimal node number wmin (wmin ≥ 3) and maximal node number wmax
for a dynamic coalition. After N Cmax rounds of target tracking, query network,
and update τk (t) using the actual energy status of each sensor. This operation
is good to the correctness of latter decision for algorithm.
We term this dynamic coalition formation algorithm based on Ant Colony
with Dual-Negative feedback as DN-AC, and its pseudocode is as follows:
– Step1. Initialize: Set initial value τk = 1 (100%).
– Step2. Set N C = 0.

1142

N. Xia et al.

– Step3. Set t = 0, θk (t) = 0, Tk = 0, Δτk = 0.
– Step4. If (O is detected by Ai ) then
{Ai becomes Asponsor , lo (t) = Li ;
Asponsor wakes certain sensor nodes to form coalition according to pk (t) by
(1), update θk (t), the coalition tracking O for Δt period, Set t = t + Δt,
update lo (t)}
Else wait.
– Step5. While (lo (t) ∈ F )
{Asponsor wakes certain sensor nodes to form coalition according to pk (t) by
(1), and selects the sensor node with maximal pk (t) value as new Asponsor ,
update θk (t), the coalition tracking O for Δt period, t = t + Δt, update
lo (t)}.
– Step6. Output lo (t) , t = 0, Δt, 2Δt, 3Δt, · · ·.
– Step7. For k = 1 to n do
Update the pheromone τk by (3), (4), (5).
– Step8. Set N C = N C + 1.
– Step9. If (N C < N Cmax ) then Goto step 3
Else query network, update the τk using the actual energy status of each
sensor node, Goto step 2.
2.2

Algorithm Evaluation

The performance metrics being investigated are:
(1) Tracking error of target O
Deﬁne the tracking error of target O as follows:
ϕ (O) = |lo (t) − lo∗ (t)|

(6)

Where lo (t) is the target position located by the sensor node coalition at time
t, while lo∗ (t) is the actual position of target at time t. So, ϕ (O) represents the
accuracy of target tracking.
(2) Mean square error of network energy
Deﬁne the mean square error of network energy at time t as follows:
σ (t) =

1
n

n
2

(τi − τ )

(7)

i=1

Here τ1 , · · · , τn are the pheromone values of n sensor nodes at time t. This
metric represents the status of network energy. The smaller the value is the more
energy load-balanced the network achieves.
(3) Health degree of network
Deﬁne the total number of living sensor nodes (i.e. not run out of energy) at
time t as nliving (t). The health degree of network at time t can be deﬁned:
H (t) =

nliving (t)
n

(8)

A WSN Coalition Formation Algorithm Based on Ant Colony

1143

This metric represents the sensor protection performance of the algorithm.
Otherwise, the network lifetime T can be deﬁned as the time period from the
instant the network is deployed to the moment when 30% of all sensor nodes run
out of energy.

3

Simulation Experiment

Fig.1 depicts the surveillance zone, which is a rectangle from (0m, 0m) to
(200m,200m). There are 500 sensor nodes shown by dots randomly scattered in
the zone. In turn, the targets O1 , O2 , O3 , O4 , O5 and O6 move from the same start
point (0, 0) with constant velocity but diﬀerent angles 35◦ , 38.7◦ , 42◦ , 45◦ , 47.7◦
and 50.2◦ to cross the surveillance zone within 40s. These targets’ trajectory is
represented by dashed line.

Fig. 1. Surveillance zone

We adopt CBR method and DN-AC algorithm to form dynamic coalition
for target tracking respectively, and compare 50 times Monte Carlo simulation
results. The parameters of DN-AC are shown in Table 1.
For DN-AC, it forms dynamic coalition to track O1 , and the tracking result is depicted in Fig.2. The red circles represent the sensor nodes wakened
Table 1. Parameters setting
Rc
40m

Δt τk α β
2s

1

1

ρ

ξ

1 0.99 20

wmin wmax
3

5

1144

N. Xia et al.

to form dynamic coalition during this round of target tracking, moreover the
continuous green line represents the trail gained by these sensor nodes locating
O1 . The tracking error of this round is 1.19m. In Fig.3, the tracking errors of
O1 , O2 , O3 , O4 , O5 and O6 for CBR and DN-AC are compared. The result shows
the tracking accuracy of the two algorithms is similar.

Fig. 2. Tracking result to O1 using DN-AC, ϕ (O1 ) = 1.19m

Fig. 3. The comparison of tracking errors of 6 targets between two algorithms

During the 6 rounds of target tracking, the variance of the mean square error of
network energy σ (t) and the health degree of network H (t) for two algorithms
are depicted in Fig.4 and 5. In Fig.4, for CBR, the σ (t) value rises rapidly
because CBR method results in some sensor nodes running out of energy too
early and some other nodes consuming energy badly, so that the energy level of

A WSN Coalition Formation Algorithm Based on Ant Colony

1145

network is rather separate. Since DN-AC can balance the energy consumption
among sensor nodes, the σ (t) value rises more slowly than CBR. In Fig.5, It
is evident that DN-AC exhibits better network health degree than CBR. It is
found that there are 30 sensor nodes dead after the 6th round of target tracking for CBR (shown in Fig.6), whereas the number is 15 for DN-AC (shown
in Fig.7). Therefore DN-AC achieves signiﬁcantly better energy-load balancing
performance than CBR, so as to extend the network lifetime eﬀectively.

Fig. 4. The variance of mean square error Fig. 5. The variance of health degree
of network for two algorithms
of network energy for two algorithms

Fig. 6. The status of dead sensor nodes
after the 6th round of target tracking
for CBR, the crosses representing the
dead sensor nodes

4

Fig. 7. The status of dead sensor nodes
after the 6th round of target tracking for
DN-AC, the crosses representing the dead
sensor nodes

Conclusions

This paper investigates the energy-eﬃcient dynamic coalition formation algorithm in WSN, and proposes a coalition formation algorithm based on Ant

1146

N. Xia et al.

Colony System with dual-negative feedback characteristic. With coalition quality
guaranteed, it can balance the energy consumption among sensor nodes, so as to
extend the network lifetime for more tasks. The results of simulation experiment
show the validity of this algorithm for target tracking application.
Acknowledgments. This work is supported by NSFC, National Natural Science Foundation of China, No. 60474035, and Natural Science Foundation of
Anhui Province, No.070412035.

References
1. L. F. Akyildiz, W. Su, Y. Survey on Sensor Networks. IEEE Communication Magazine, 2002, 40(8): 102–114.
2. H. B. Yu, P. Zeng, W. Liang. Intelligent Wireless Sensor Networks. Beijing: Science
Press, 2006. 215–278.
3. C. Che, W. Liang, Y. Zhou, et al. Cooperation Problem of Wireless Sensor Network Based on Multi-agent. Chinese Journal of Scientiﬁc Instrument, 2005, 26(8A):
229–232.
4. V. Lesser, C. L. Ortiz, M. Tambe. Distributed Sensor Networks: A Multiagent
Perspective. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2003.
5. L. K. Soh, C. Tsatsoulis. Real-time Satisfying Multiagent Coalition Formation. In
Working Notes of AAAI Workshop on Coalition Formation in Dynamic Multiagent
Environment. 2002. 7–15.
6. L. K. Soh, X. Li. An Integrated Multi-Level Learning Approach to Multiagent Coalition Formation. In Proceedings of IJCAI’03. Acapulco, Mexico, 2003.
619–624.
7. L. K. Soh, C. Tsatsoulis. Satisfying Coalition Formation among Agents. In Proceedings of AAMAAS’02. Bologna, Italy, 2001. 15–19.
8. M. Dorigo, T. Stutzle. Ant colony optimization. MIT Press, U. S., 2004.
9. R. Wang, Y. Liang, G. Q. Ye, et al. Swarm Intelligence for the Self-Organization
of Wireless Sensor Network. In Proceedings of the IEEE Congress on Evolutionary
Computation. Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2006. 838–842.
10. S. Selvakennedy, S. Sinnappan and Y. Shang. T-ANT: A Nature-Inspired Data
Gathering Protocol for Wireless Sensor Networks. Journal of Communications,
2006, 1(2): 22–29.

