Text Retrieval Oriented Auto-construction of Conceptual
Relationship
Yi Hu1, Ruzhan Lu1, Yuquan Chen1, and Bingzhen Pei1,2
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Guizhou University, Guiyang, China
{huyi, rz-lu, yqchen, peibz}@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract. The dependence analysis is usually the key for improving the
performance of text retrieval. Compared with the statistical value of a
conceptual relationship, the recognition of relation type between concepts is
more meaningful. In this paper, we explored a bootstrapping method for
automatically extracting semantic patterns from a large-scale corpus to identify
the geographical “is part of” relationship between Chinese location concepts.
The experiments showed that the pattern set generated by our method achieves
higher coverage and precision than DIPRE does.
Keywords: Conceptual Relationship; Extraction Pattern; Text Retrieval.

1 Introduction
The independence assumption has been widely used in current retrieval models.
Although the assumption makes the models easily to build up, the independence
between words in language is obviously trustless in fact. Naturally, a promising idea
based on accurate conceptual relationship for information retrieval has been tried in
[4]. Apparently, the deep understanding of content is closer to human cognition. Note
that in terms of information retrieval based on concepts, it needs recognizing all valid
relation types between concepts to build up a complete conceptual graph of content,
and then providing response to the users’ requirement.
Seen from the previous efforts, unsupervised bootstrapping had been used in many
fields of information extraction. With respect to recognizing concept types (weapon
names, terrorism organizations etc.), the efforts in [3][5] are significant efforts. On the
other hand, extracting conceptual pairs with certain relationships from English corpus
are also tested [1][2]. This paper also proposes a method for constructing relationship
under bootstrapping learning by taking the geographical “is part of” as example.

2 Our Contributions
Our method is implemented based on the idea of DIPRE [2] by proposing a new SPG
(Semantic Pattern Getter) system. The contributions of our work lie in:
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part II, LNCS 4488, pp. 1214–1217, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Text Retrieval Oriented Auto-construction of Conceptual Relationship

1215

1. Introducing the bi-sequence alignment algorithm in bio-informatics to extract
multiple common subsequences (MCS) for getting flexible context expression rather
than the single longest common subsequence (LCS) in DIPRE.
2. Defining a new evaluation metric for the pattern confidence, which improves the
extracting quality.
2.1 Generating Patterns
A formalized pattern is a five-tuple, i.e. (prefix, middle, suffix, order, confidence) that
has the same meaning of [2]. The system captures patterns from the contexts of given
seeds, and the procedure of generating patterns in our study is illustrated as:
Step 1. Find all the occurrences of every seed in the large-scale corpus and record
the left, middle and right strings of the context.
Step 2. Use the bi-sequence alignment algorithm to extract patterns. Each context
pair of a seed generates a candidate pattern.
Step 3. The candidate patterns are filtered through the pattern validation rules.
Because there is the detailed description in [6], we do not describe the alignment
algorithm in details. But we can see an instance generated from two contexts:
Context1:

公司地址：中国上海市江浦路1515号。

(Company Address: No. 1515, Jiang Pu Rd., Shanghai City, China.)
Context2:

公司通信地址：中国上海市国顺路549号。

(Company Corresponding Address: No.549, Guo Shun Rd., Shanghai City, China.)
The bi-sequence alignment algorithm extracts a pattern denoting the “is part of”
relationship between two location concepts: (
<ANY_STRING>
, NULL,
<ANY_STRING> <ANY_STRING>
, -1, <Confidence>). In order to make
the pattern not to be overly generalized, we define the following validation rules to
choose new candidate patterns with higher qualities.

市

路

号。

公司

地址：

Rule 1. The “prefix” or “suffix” cannot be just a < ANY_STRING >;
Rule 2. Both the most right component of “prefix” and the most left component of
“suffix” cannot be an “<ANY_STRING>”;
Rule 3. The “prefix”, “middle” and “suffix” cannot just be punctuation;
These rules are simple and easy to understand. They are the experiences from
extracting patterns. Note that, the system removes those Chinese stop-words, such as
“ (de)” and “ (le)”. In terms of a context set containing N sentences, the procedure
can at most generate CN2 candidate patterns. But a lot of them will be removed after

的

了

using the validation rules.
2.2 Pattern Confidence
How to evaluate the pattern confidence is the key factor affecting the coverage and
precision of final pattern set. We define a new confidence definition in (1).
⎛
⎞
Ppositive
α
Conf RlogF ( P) = ⎜
⎟⎟ × [log2 ( Pnew + 1)]
⎜P
P
+
⎝ positive negative ⎠

(1)

1216

Y. Hu et al.

Where, P denotes the evaluated pattern and Ppositive denotes the number of correct
pairs in all the extracted pairs in current iteration; Pnegative denotes the number of
wrong pairs; Pnew is the number of newly extracted pairs. This pattern confidence
expresses the precision ingredient ( Ppositive ( Ppositive + Pnegative ) ) and the recall ingredient
( [log 2 ( Pnew + 1)]α ) of the pattern P. and α is the percentage of correct pairs in new ones.
When Pnew and α are larger, the pattern confidence is higher too. If Pnew or α is equal
to 0, the pattern confidence goes back to its initial definition in [7].

3 Experiments
In this section we give the experiment results of SPG and compare them with the
results of DIPRE. We use the sub-collections ranging from #29 to #39 of the
CWT100g (Chinese Web Test collection with 100GB web pages) corpus for training
and use the sub-collections ranging from #60 to #63 for testing. This paper uses the
following pairs as initial seeds in terms of “is part of” conceptual relationship.
Table 1. Initial Chinese Seed List

长春 (Chang Chun)
黑龙江 (Hei Longjiang)
海淀 (Hai Dian)
西安 (Xi An)
静安 (Jing An)

吉林 (Ji Lin)
中国 (China)
北京 (Bei Jing)
陕西 (Shan Xi)
上海 (Shang Hai)

The results of experiments by running three iterations can be seen in Table 2.
Table 2. Pairs and Patterns in every iteration

SPG
Iterations

DIPRE

Tuples

Patterns

Tuples

Patterns

1

5

28

5

21

2

57

51

31

33

3

171

169

20

25

In the first run, both the two systems use the same five seeds as initial input and the
last two runs use the seeds extracted from the previous iteration. Column 3 and 4
show the number of valid patterns. Seen from the experiment results, SPG can extract
more conceptual pairs than DIPRE does from the same sub-collections.
Then we need to consider the ability of SPG in constructing the conceptual
relationship between concepts. We use all the patterns obtained into the test collection,
respectively. Because the test collection is fixed, the system extracting MORE correct
pairs has the higher recall. Their precisions are easily evaluated manually.

Text Retrieval Oriented Auto-construction of Conceptual Relationship

1217

SPG has the better coverage than DIPRE because SPG can get more conceptual
pairs. On the other hand, the precisions also shows that SPG does better than DIPRE:
the precision of SPG in three iterations keeps about 90% with slightly fall, while the
DIPRE’s precision drops very quickly, and arrives at 50% in its third iteration. After
the experiment on testing corpus, SPG system totally obtain 1,504 pairs at last, and
1,358 of them are correct (precision = 90.29%); DIPRE obtains 588 pairs, and 384 of
them are correct (precision = 60.20%). The SPG patterns have higher performance.

4 Conclusion
In this paper, we propose a system named SPG for determining whether two concepts
satisfy the “is part of” relation in given context. We introduce a bi-sequence
alignment algorithm in bio-informatics to capture clearer and more understandable
patterns. And we also define a new confidence evaluating method for patterns. After
training the SPG system, the experiment results show that our system performs better
than DIPRE in terms of coverage and precision.
As mentioned above, our study aims at serving the retrieval model based on
concepts. Therefore the pattern set ought to give the support to determine the
relationship between two concepts in contexts. The pattern set should be useful in
many web pages and the precision should be guaranteed. For a long-term goal,
recognizing the accurate relationships definitely bring IR huge benefits, but to the
performance of current system, it is still a hard job. The key points of our future work
lies in developing an advanced SPG system and extending the method proposed in
this paper to the recognition of other relationships.
Acknowledgments. This work is supported by NSFC Major Research Program
60496326: Basic Theory and Core Techniques of Non Canonical Knowledge.

References
1. Agichtein, E., and Gravano, S.: Snowball: Extracting relations from large plain-text
collections. In Proc. of the 5th ACM International Conference on Digital Libraries (2000)
2. Brin, S.: Extracting patterns and relations from the World Wide Web. In Proc. of the 1998
International Workshop on the Web and Databases (1998)
3. Etzioni O., Cafarella M., Downey D. and Popescu A.M. et al: Methods for DomainIndependent Information Extraction from the Web: An Experimental Comparison. In Proc.
of the AAAI Conference (2004)
4. Genest, D. and Chenin, M. A Content-Search Information Retrieval Process Based on
Conceptual Graphs. Knowledge and Information Systems Journal. (2005) Vol. 8, 292-309
5. Lin W., Yangarber R., Grishman R.: Bootstrapped Learning of Semantic Classes from
Positive and Negative Examples. In Proc. of the ICML-2003 Workshop on the Continuum
from Labeled to Unlabeled Data, Washington DC (2003)
6. Michael S., B. Morgenstern, and J. Stoye. Divide-and-conquer multiple alignment with
segment-based constraints. Bioinformatics. (2003) 19(2): 189-195
7. Thelen M. and Riloff E.: A Bootstrapping Method for Learning Semantic Lexicon using
Extraction Pattern Contexts. In Proc. of the 2002 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (2002)

