HVEM Control System Based on Grid:
A Cornerstone of e-Biology
Hyuck Han, Shingyu Kim, Hyungsoo Jung, and Heon Y. Yeom
School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Seoul National University,
Seoul 151-742, Korea
{hhyuck,sgkim,jhs,yeom}@dcslab.snu.ac.kr

Abstract. This paper proposes HVEM Control System, which is the
cornerstone for teleinstrumentation infrastructure. The proposed system
is oriented for people whose primary work is to get access to a remotely
located instrument, a High-Voltage Electron Microscope (HVEM). Our
system is implemented to fulﬁll all the necessary requirements in allowing
the user to 1) control every single part of HVEM in a ﬁne-grained manner,
2) check the HVEM and observe various states of sample, and 3) take
their high resolution images of the sample. In that aspect, this paper
suggests an HVEM Control System designed on the concept of the Grid
and Web Service which satisﬁes various types of user groups, explains
novel characteristics of our system.

1

Introduction

Many scientists use computing resources, storage resources and any other resources
to perform real-time experiments. This science, which is performed through distributed global collaborations over the Interenet, is called e-Science[1]. Specially,
scientists in e-Science need to access or control experimental devices remotely in a
ﬁne-grained manner, and this capability is crucial for remote experiments.
High-Voltage Electron Microscope (HVEM) allows scientists to see objects at
a magniﬁcation greater than the actual sample. The type of HVEM referred in
this paper is transmission electron microscopy (TEM), which produces an image
that is a projection of the entire object, including the surface and the internal
information. When tilt is needed, the Goniometer rotates to change the angle of
the sample. When environments inside the HVEM such as voltage and focus are
needed to be changed, FasTEM performs such operations which users command.
It is the CCD camera that produces an actual image inside the HVEM. HVEM
users control the HVEM in a ﬁne-grain manner, observe the sample using the
above subcomponents of HVEM, and take high-resolution images using storage
resources. Since remote users want to perform the same tasks as oﬄine users, the
HVEM-Grid provides remote users with applications for controlling the HVEM,
observing the sample, and carrying out other tasks remotely.
The objective of our system is to work towards an implementation of the
vision of being able to use the HVEM of the Korea Basic Science Institute
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part III, LNCS 4489, pp. 26–33, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

HVEM Control System Based on Grid: A Cornerstone of e-Biology

27

(KBSI)[2] remotely. This typically means that the remote users can carry out
the realistically large scale research. Therefore, this requires functions that allow
remote users to control subcomponents of the HVEM and to observe the sample.
Specially, the functions include requirements of biologists such as memorization
of some speciﬁc locations and recording/replaying the trace of the sample.
In this paper we describe the HVEM Control System, which has the capabilities listed above. This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes
background material. Section 3 explains the architecture of our HVEM Control
System. Section 4 shows experimental results. Section 5 summarizes our plans
for future work and Section 6 concludes the paper.

2
2.1

Background and Related Work
Grid and Web Service

A Grid can be deﬁned as a layer of networked services that allow users single
sign-on access to a distributed collection of computing, data, and application
resources. The Grid services allow the entire collection to be seen as a seamless
information processing system that the user can access from any location. However, the heterogeneous nature of the underlying resources remains a signiﬁcant
barrier. Scientiﬁc applications often require extensive collections of libraries that
are installed in diﬀerent ways on diﬀerent platforms.
Web service is an important emerging distributed computing paradigm that
focuses on simple, Internet-based standards to address heterogeneous distributed
computing. Web services deﬁne a technique for describing software components
to be accessed, methods for accessing these components, and discovery methods
that enable the identiﬁcation of relevant service providers.
HVEM Control System utilizes Grid and Web service for the control of HVEM.
By doing this, our HVEM Control System can support many other systems. A
3D-image construction service, which we are currently developing, gives us a
good example. The service commands the HVEM to tilt the angle of the sample
by 1 degree, take an image and repeat this process. Then, it builds a new 3D
image out of taken images. Because HVEM Control System is based on Grid
and Web service, it can support HVEM Control User Interface as well as other
services such the 3D-image construction service.
2.2

Other Research

The National Center for Microscopy and Imaging Research (NCMIR) at the University of California San Diego(UCSD) develops 3D imaging and analysis technologies to help biomedical researchers understand biological structure and function relationships in cells and tissues. Its web-based tool[3] and EMWorkspace[4]
are innovative and similar to our system. However, they have some major drawbacks. First, they can not support the HVEM of KBSI, which is really largescale and newest. Second, GTCP[5] which EMWorkspace uses is not suitable for

28

H. Han et al.

asynchronously operated microscopes. When operations are issued to such microscopes, it is needed to poll the status in order to verify success of operations.
Although all clients can poll the status of the HVEM, it is to hard to guarantee
consistency between clients. Therefore, there exists a Grid service that polls the
status of the HVEM and manages the status in our system. Third, they do not
have speciﬁc functions to biologists such as memorization of interesting locations,
recording/replaying traces that remote users are interested in. These functions
are necessary because they lead to eﬃcient observation and experiments.

3
3.1

Architecture
HVEM Control System in 3-Tier Architecture

This section of the paper describes the architecture of the HVEM Control System. Our system has a 3-tier architecture[6] which utilizes Grid and Web Service. Grid and Web Service which is based on the XML messaging have many
advantages suitable for integration with complex systems: platform independent
architecture, interoperability, and ﬂexibility.

HVEM Control
User Interface

Presentation
Tier

Streaming
Protocol

Replay
Service

FasTEM
Control
Web
Service

Status
Poller

Command
Executor

Goniometer
Control
Web
Service

Multicast
Protocol

Application Server
Tier

Goniometer

Camera
Web
Service

Record
Service

Narada Broker
(Message Broker)

FasTEM

Application
Specific API

Status
Manager

RMI over
Web Service

HVEM Control Service

RMI over
WSRF

HVEM Grid Service

Digital
Micrograph
Real
Time
Image
Provider

JMF

Data Server Tier
(Legacy System or DB)

Fig. 1. System Architecture

Figure 1 shows the architecture of the HVEM Control System. HVEM Control
User Interface (HVEM Control UI) program corresponds to the presentation tier
of the 3-tier architecture. HVEM Grid Service based on Globus Toolkit 4[7] and
Narada Broker[8,9] correspond to the application server tier. Remote Method
Invocation (RMI) which is based on Web Service Resource Framework(WSRF),
is used to communicate between HVEM Control UI and HVEM Grid Service.
HVEM Control Service is responsible of handling control requests from HVEM
Control UI. Status Poller polls the overall status of the HVEM such as location

HVEM Control System Based on Grid: A Cornerstone of e-Biology

29

of the angle, voltage value, focus and brightness. Then, it forwards such information to Status Manager, which manages the status of HVEM. Many operations
for retrieving speciﬁc status are handled by the Status Manager, not corresponding subcomponents of the HVEM. This can alleviate the overhead of FasTEM
and Goniometer. Command Executer routes users’ operations to related Web
services. FasTEM, Goniometer and Digital Micrograph, which are provided by
manufacturers, are encapsulated in Web services, and those Web services correspond to data server tier. Applications which control Goniometer and FasTEM
are termed Goniometer and FasTEM respectively, and Digital Micrograph is
an application to manipulate CCD camera. We encapsulated those application
speciﬁc APIs in Web services to provide only secure and reliable features.
Record and Replay services are tightly coupled with each other. If the Record
service receives a start request, it starts to record real-time images from the
Digital Micrograph to a stable storage device. It continues to record them until
it receives a stop request. The Replay service transfers the saved video to the
HVEM Control UI when it receives a replay request which the HVEM Control UI
selects. Record and Replay services provide a good method to biologists because
they tend to observe past samples.

Fig. 2. HVEM Control System Network

Figure 2 outlines the HVEM Control System on the Network. HVEM Control UIs are located on internet, and legacy systems which manipulate HVEM
and Web services which encapsulate legacy systems are on KBSI’s site, which is
protected by ﬁrewalls. HVEM Grid Service objects interact with HVEM Control
UIs, Web services of HVEM legacy system (encapsulated experimental equipment) and other hardware resources such as storage devices. By doing this,
HVEM Control System can be more secure, because unauthorized users are prevented from accessing legacy systems direct.
3.2

Control of Goniometer and FasTEM

Figure 3(a) shows the sequence to move an axis of a sample by HVEM Control
UI. HVEM Control UI sends a request message of movements along X-axis to
HVEM Control Service by RMI over WSRF, and HVEM Control Service transfers a request message to Goniometer Web service object which encapsulates

30

H. Han et al.

H V E M C o n tro l
GUI

H V E M C o n tro l
G rid S eriv ce

G o n io m eter C o n tro l
W eb S erv ice

G o n io m eter

M o v e X −a x is

H V E M C o n tro l
GUI

H V E M C o n tro l
G rid S eriv ce

G o n io m eter C o n tro l
W eb S erv ice

G o n io m eter

M o v e X −a x is
S et X −a x is

S et X −a x is
S et X v a lu e

S et X v a lu e

G et p o sitio n

G et p o sitio n

G et X p o sitio n
G et X −a x is

(a) Basic Sequence

(b) Optimized Sequence

Fig. 3. Sequence to move an axis of a sample by Goniometer

the Goniometer control application. When the response for the request of movements along X-axis is delivered to HVEM Control UI, HVEM Control UI sends
another message to request information of current location of a sample. The
request message goes through the same way as before. A similar message ﬂow is
applied to control of FasTEM.
In general, we can control cameras and microscopes with small number of
operations. However, we need many operations to control axis of sample and
angle of stand in Goniometer. Usually, biologists start experiments after they
complete the whole setting of the HVEM such as brightness, focus and voltage.
During observation they move the axis or tilt the angle through the Goniometer
to ﬁnd speciﬁc parts of the sample. Then, they take an image. This suggests
that most of operations are related to moving or tilting. Therefore, we can get
chances to improve performance in that part.
Figure 3(a) shows that we need two operations to move an axis of the sample in
Goniometer: changing the axis and reading the location of the sample. Therefore,
it could suﬀer from overload due to too many operations when large number of
HVEM Control User Interfaces access to it or moves an axis by trackball. Figure
3(b) shows the optimized sequence of control operations in application level.
Unlike Figure 3(a), HVEM Control User Interface can complete two operations,
which are operations to change the axis and to read the location, in one RMI
call. It could be a useless operation to read the location when you intend to
change the axis only. However, biologists look at the samples by changing the
axis in most cases. In that case, the operation to read the location of sample is
followed by the operation to change the axis. This feature makes the performance
improvement larger.
3.3

Control of Camera

Control of camera consists of two parts: Real-Time Streaming Service and Snapshot Service. We begin by introducing Real-Time Streaming Service.
Figure 4(a) shows the sequence for Real-Time Streaming Service. Real-Time
Image Provider gets video sources from Digital Micrograph by utilizing Java
Media Framework (JMF). It transfers received images to the Narada Broker,
which multicasts messages. Then, the Narada Broker delivers them to HVEM
Control UI (and Record service if it receives a subscription request).

HVEM Control System Based on Grid: A Cornerstone of e-Biology

31

(a) Sequence of Real-Time Streaming (b) Sequence of Taking Images of an
Service
Sample
Fig. 4. Sequences of Camera Control

Figure 4(b) shows the sequence of taking images of a sample. This sequence
starts from HVEM Control UI. HVEM Control UI sends a request message of
taking images of a sample to HVEM Control Service. Next, HVEM Control
Service delivers the message to Camera Web service and the message arrives at
Digital Micrograph ﬁnally. Digital Micrograph has a COM plug-in to process this
requests. After plug-in completes the request, the result is delivered to HVEM
Control UI through Camera Web service and HVEM Control Service, and HVEM
Control UI can download the image.
3.4

Record and Replay

In order to record real-time images, HVEM Control UI sends a start request to
Record service. Then, Record service subscribes an appropriate topic to Narada
Broker. The topic should be related to real-time images from Digital Micrograph.
After the subscription Record service starts and continues to save real-time images into stale storages as an appropriate format until it receives a stop request.
When a remote user wants to replay a speciﬁc video, HVEM Control UI sends
a replay request to Replay service. Then, it transfers saved images to Narada
Broker and Narada Broker delivers them to HVEM Control UI by the same way
of the Real-Time Streaming Service. This capability leads to eﬃcient research
because many biologists want to watch past experiments during the current
observation. Note that sequence diagrams of Record and Replay services are
skipped due to the page limit.

4

Evaluation

The machines used in this evaluation were a Pentium IV 2.80GHz PC in Seoul
National University (SNU) and two Pentium IV 3.0 GHz PCs in KBSI, running
Linux 2.4.18. RMI service server is located in KBSI, and RMI clients are in SNU
and KBSI when the experiments run in WAN and LAN environment respectively.
Figure 5 shows latencies of RMI which performs optimized operation of Goniometer Control. We measured latencies when RMI is called 30 times continuously. Figure 5(a) shows all results from ﬁrst to 30th call. The latency of ﬁrst
call is larger than others, because loading RMI library takes some time in Java
VM. Figure 5(b) excluded the ﬁrst latencies. In this case, the average latencies

32

H. Han et al.

60

2500

WAN
LAN

WAN
LAN

50

Latency(ms)

Latency(ms)

2000
1500
1000
500

40
30
20
10

0

0
0

5

10
15
20
Number of RMI Calls

25

(a) Including ﬁrst RMI call

30

0

5

10
15
20
Number of RMI Calls

25

30

(b) Except ﬁsrt RMI call

Fig. 5. Latencies of RMI with Optimization in Application Level

are 38ms and 17ms for WAN and LAN respectively. It may take at least 76ms
in WAN environment without the optimization because it needs two RMI calls
to move axis of sample (changing the axis and reading the location). This is
good advantage to reduce the latency to 38ms by the optimization and allows
biologists to control the Goniometer with a reasonable speed.

5

Future Work

HVEM Control System is a part of our three-year project, and it is the objective
of the ﬁrst year. Currently, we are developing an image processing system, which
is the objective of the second year. It is a kind of workﬂow systems, which receives
a job speciﬁcation from remote users, carries out the job, and then stores results
of the job. Usually, biologists tend to take many images of samples and build 3D
images based on the 2D images. To do this, users tilt the angle of samples by
some degrees (between 0.5 and 1), focus the lens of the CCD camera, and take a
high-resolution 2D image. Until 2D images are enough to construct 3D images,
this process is repeated, and then 3D images are built. The objective of the
system that we are developing is to automate this workﬂow. Thus, this system
requires to control the Goniometer, the FasTEM, and to take an image through
the CCD camera, and our HVEM Control System provides those functionalities.

6

Conclusion

This article has proposed the system to control HVEM at remote site. Our
HVEM Control System is implemented based on Grid technology and Web services. Initial version of the system was assembled by basic components, and
we optimized ﬂows of messages. Then, we presented reasonable results and our
results showed that our system will be a very useful research method to biologists. We are convinced that our HVEM Control System will be a core software
infrastructure in research work of scientists at remote stations.

HVEM Control System Based on Grid: A Cornerstone of e-Biology

33

Acknowledgment
The ICT at Seoul National University provides research facilities for this study.

References
1. Oxford e-Science Centre: (e-Science Deﬁnitions) http://e-science.ox.ac.uk/
public/general/definitions.xml.
2. Korea Basic Science Institute:
(KBSI microscopes & facilitates) http://
hvem.kbsi.re.kr/eng/index.htm.
3. Hadida-Hassan, M., Young, S.J., Peltier, S.T., Wong, M., Lamont, S., Ellisman,
M.H.: Web-based telemicroscopy. Journal of Structural Biology 125 (1999) 235–
245
4. National Center for Microscopy and Imaging Research: (Telescience Project)
http://telescience.ucsd.edu.
5. Globus Alliance: (Globus Teleoperations Control Protocol) http://www.globus.
org/toolkit/docs/development/4.2-drafts/execution/gtcp/
6. Helal, S., Hammer, J., Zhang, J., Khushraj, A.: A three-tier architecture for ubiquitous data access (2001)
7. Globus Alliance: (Globus Toolkit 4.0 Release Manuals) http://www.globus.org/
toolkit/docs/4.0/.
8. Fox, G., Pallickara, S., Rao, X.: A Scaleable Event Infrastructure for Peer to Peer
Grids. In: Proceedings of the ACM Java Grande ISCOPE Conference. (2002)
9. Uyar, A., Pallickara, S., Fox, G.: Towards an Architecture for Audio Video Conferencing in Distributed Brokering Systems. In: Proceedings of the 2003 International
Conference on Communications in Computing. (2003)

