Roadmapping and i-Systems
Tieju Ma
1

1,2,3

1

1

, Hongbin Yan , and Yoshiteru Nakamori

School of Knowledge Science, Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology,
1-1 Asahidai, Tatsunokuchi, Ishikawa 923-1292, Japan
2
Research Center on Data Technology and Knowledge Economy,
CAS Beijing, China
3
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis
A-2361 Laxenburg, Austria
{tieju,hongbinyan,nakamori}@jaist.ac.jp

Abstract. The abstract should summarize the contents of the paper and should
contain at least 70 and at most 150 words. It should be set in 9-point font size
and should be inset 1.0 cm from the right and left margins. There should be two
blank (10-point) lines before and after the abstract. This document is in the
required format. Roadmapping, as a strategic planning tool, is attracting increasing applications in industries. By applying the principles of Interactive
Planning (IP), this paper puts forward a new solution for making personal academic research roadmaps. Then this paper introduces an ongoing project that is
to develop a roadmapping support system based on the solution, and gives some
considerations about applying the i-System Methodology for enhancing the
knowledge creation in a roadmapping process.
Keywords: We would like to encourage you to list your keywords in this section.

1 Introduction
Motorola Inc. firstly introduced the concept of "roadmap" as a strategic planning tool
in the 1970s. Perhaps the most widely accepted definition of a roadmap was given by
Bob Galvin, CEO of Motorola: "A roadmap is an extended look at the future of a
chosen field of inquiry composed from the collective knowledge and imagination of
the brightest drivers of change in that field". "Roadmaps" can mean different things to
different people. What all those different roadmaps have in common, however, is their
goal, to help their owners clarify the following three problems:
z
z
z

Where are we now?
Where do we want to go?
How can we get there?

There are many existing solutions for roadmapping, developed for the purpose of
industry, with strong commercial background. Roadmapping for supporting scientific
research should be different from those solutions for industry, since academic labs
have different features from commercial organizations. The main target of academic
labs should be "emerging technology" and "creative invention", and academic labs
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 1–8, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

2

T. Ma, H. Yan, and Y. Nakamori

should also have the function for the accumulation and expansion of scientific knowledge and function for inspiring researchers. Based on the Interactive Planning (IP)
Methodology, we developed a solution for the roadmapping for supporting scientific
research. To improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the roadmapping process, we
developed a web-based roadmapping support system. The purpose of making personal
academic research roadmaps is not only to make plans, it should also be a knowledge
creation process. The i-Systems methodology is a systems methodology that uses
approaches in social and natural sciences complementarily [14-16], which is very
useful for enhancing the knowledge creation in a roadmapping process.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the Interactive
Planning Methodology and explains why we applied it for roadmapping. Section 3
gives the new solution for making personal academic research roadmap. Section 4
introduces the roadmapping support system. Section 5 gives some considerations
about applying the i-system methodology for enhancing the knowledge creation in the
roadmapping process.

2 Interactive Planning
IP was put forward by Ackoff R.L [1-4]. It is regarded as a basic methodology for
solving creative problems by researchers in both the field of management science and
the field of systems science. IP has the following three important principles, which we
think are also very important in the roadmapping process.
z
z
z

Participative principle. Ackoff believed that the process of planning is more
important than the actual plan produced.
Continuity principle. This principle points out that planning is a neverending process, since the values of the organization's stakeholders will
change over time and unexpected events will occur [6].
Holistic principle. This principle insists that people should make plans both
simultaneously and interdependently.

IP is composed five interrelated phases, namely, formulating the issue, ends planning, means planning, resource planning, and design of the implementation and controls. These phases should be "regarded as constituting a systemic process, so the
phases may be started in any order and none of the phases, let alone the whole process, should ever be regarded as completed [4]".
In the description of IP, the objects are organizations, or systems from the viewpoint of systems science. A personal academic research plan can also been seen as a
system inside human brain. In this sense, the five phases of IP can be clearly mapped
to the three important questions that roadmapping aims to answer. The first phase of
IP, namely "formulating the issue", in fact tries to answer the question "where are we
now"; the second phase of IP, "ends planning", corresponds to the problem "where do
we want to go"; and the remaining three phases of IP, "means planning", "Resource
Planning" and "Design of Implementation and Control" -- are for answering the question "how can we get there". Fig.1 shows the relationship between IP and the three
important problems which roadmapping aims to solve.

Roadmapping and i-Systems

3

Fig. 1. Relationship between IP and Roadmapping

3 A New Solution for Making Personal Academic Research
RoadMaps
Applying the ideas of IP to the process of making personal academic research roadmaps can enhance communication among researchers from different fields, since IP
pays much attention to the participation of stakeholders. In addition, an atmosphere
can be created in which research on "emerging technology" and "creative invention"
are encouraged by what R.L. Ackoff has called "idealized design" [1-4].
Idealized design is a very important feature of IP. It is meant to generate maximum
creativity among all the stakeholders involved. "To ensure this, only two types of
constraint upon the design are admissible. First, it must be technologically feasible,
not a work of science fiction; it must be possible with known technology or likely
technological developments; but it should not for example, assume telepathy. Second,
it must be operationally viable; it should be capable of working and surviving if it is
implemented. Financial, political, or similar constraints are not allowed to restrict the
creativity of the design [1-4, 6]." Our solution is composed of six interrelated phases,
as shown in Fig.2.
Phase 1: Forming groups. We believe that roadmapping should be a group activity
and a consensus building process. A group should contain two kinds of members in
addition to the regular members. The first is experienced researchers, for example,
professors, associate professors and so on. The second is knowledge coordinators.
Knowledge coordinators are those people who can manage creative research activities
based on the theory of knowledge creation [14].
Phase 2: Explanation from knowledge coordinators. In this phase, knowledge coordinators explain the following things (mainly) to all group members.
z
z
z

Concept of roadmaps and the benefits of making roadmaps
The role of every member
The schedule of the group

4

T. Ma, H. Yan, and Y. Nakamori

Phase 3: Description of present situation. In this phase, the experienced researchers
give a description of the present situation that mainly includes:
z
z
z
z

Background knowledge in this research field
The leading groups/labs, famous papers, journals and conferences over
the world in the research field
The common equipments and skills needed in this field
Hot topics at current time in this research field

Fig. 2. Solution for making personal academic research roadmaps

Phase 4: Members' current status and idealized design. In this phase, every member firstly describes the experience (the skills and knowledge) he/she already has.
Then, by using IP's idealized design, every member describes his/her research goals.
The ideas generated by idealized design are discussed by the whole group, and each
individual can refine, modify his/her idealized design with the benefit of the whole
group's knowledge.
Phase 5: Research schedule and study schedule. In this phase, members not only
make their own research schedules, but also make their own study schedules for reaching the goals. Those schedules should also be subjected to group discussion, and
members need to modify those schedules according to the result of group discussion.
After consensus is reached, group members can start to make their first-cut roadmaps.
Road-mapping is a never ending process, people need to go back to some previous
phases again and again, modify and improve their research roadmaps continuously.

Roadmapping and i-Systems

5

Phase 6: Implementation and Control. This is mainly done by regular seminars,
workshops and reports. By Phase 5, each researcher's personal research roadmap is
ready. Although much effort has gone into making a reasonable research roadmap, it
is still a first cut. The roadmap should be continuously refined in practice, which
accords with the continuity principle of IP. The knowledge coordinator(s) should
arrange regular seminars and workshops to monitor and control the implementation
of the personal research roadmaps.

4 A RoadMapping Support System
As a project supported by the JAIST COE Program titled "technology creation based
on knowledge science", a roadmapping support system is under developing. The
benefits of using the system include: Helping researchers to managing their personal
roadmaps; Helping the supervisor to managing his/her group/lab's research; Promoting the knowledge sharing among researchers, especially promoting the dispute
among researchers; Building roadmap archives that can be used as the source of data
mining (knowledge discovery).
The system is a web-based system. Basically, users only need a web browser, such
as Internet Explorer or Netscape, and an Internet connection to access it. The following is the main techniques used for developing the system:
z

z
z
z
z

Java [8] and Java Applet [9]. For running the system, client users need to
download some Java plug-in. But users do not have to worry about this, the
system will atomically check if there is the right plug-in in client computers, if there is no, then it will automatically download it.
JSP (JavaServer Pages) [10].
Java Servlet [11].
Tomcat [7]. We use Tomcat 5.1 as the web server.
SQL Server 2000 [12]. We use MSSQL Server 2000 as the background database server.

The user can see and modify his research roadmap which has been stored in the
system. Besides the function of viewing and editing his/her own research roadmap,
there are several functions that users can use.
Users can view other group members' research roadmap by clicking their names or
research topics. The system provides two formats of a research roadmap, like an article, or like a table (ATRM model [17]). Users can make comments on other members'
research roadmaps. The system allows users to make comments anonymously. As
mentioned by Wierzbicki: Far Eastern societies are better than Western at Socialization and achieving consensus but (perhaps therefore) worse in Dispute [18]. Allowing
making comments anonymously will promote the dispute among researchers, which is
very important for knowledge creation. Sometimes users, especially the leader or
supervisor of the group would like to have a general structure or a general view of
his/her group's research. The system also provides tools, with which, it will be easy to
see what the group is doing now, what it plans to do and when it will do them.

6

T. Ma, H. Yan, and Y. Nakamori

5 The I -Systems Methodology for Enhancing Knowledge
Creation in RoadMapping Process
Developed by Nakamori, the i-systems methodology uses approaches in social and
natural sciences complementarily [14-16]. According to Nakamori in [14], i-systems
are composed of five subsystems/dimensions, at the subsystem Intervention, knowledge is a problem; at the subsystem Intelligence, knowledge is a model; at the subsystem Imagination, knowledge is scenarios; at the subsystem Involvement, knowledge
is opinions; and at the subsystem Integration, knowledge is solutions.
Although the i-systems methodology does not give a sequential process or interrelated phases for practice, it identified the important dimensions and gave a clear
description of the relationship among the five dimensions. The understandings of the
knowledge creation process, which we can learn from the i-systems methodology, can
help us to design a better knowledge creation space [18].
Interactive Planning Methodology is developed in industry, and it does not pay
much attention to the "emerging technology" and "creative invention", which are the
main targets of academic labs. So it is necessary to apply some methodologies, such
as the i-systems methodology, which addresses much the knowledge creation process,
to enhance the knowledge creation in the solution introduced in Section 3. Instead of
giving some concrete examples of applying i-systems methodology in roadmapping
process, this paper only gives some considerations of applying it for making personal
research roadmaps.
As shown in Fig.3, we start from the intervention dimension. In this dimension,
one researcher should answer questions such as "what do you want to achieve" or
"what's your purpose and motivation".
When the researcher finds the answer to those questions, he/she would refer to the
social dimension, the scientific dimension and creative dimension (referred to as the
three dimensions in the following). In the scientific dimension, the researcher gathers
knowledge of the existing research models related to his/her research purpose. This is
mainly done by reading literatures. In the social dimension, the researcher gathers the
opinions from industry and government, and of course also from other researchers,
especially those experienced researchers who work in the same fields. Sometimes,
communications with researchers from different field can bring surprising wonderful
ideas. And in the creative dimension, the researcher generates his individual ideas,
makes his purpose clearer and writes rough research proposals. We would not like to
make a sequential process for the actions in the three dimensions because a researcher
maybe refers to these three dimensions at the same time, or the researcher will frequently refer to one or more than one dimensions for many times. For example, we
could not say clearly that the work of gathering existing research models should be
finished in one or two months, and in this one or two months, a researcher does not
refer to other dimensions. Researchers should consider the work referring to the three
dimensions according to their own schedules. It is obviously that before a researcher
answers the questions asked in the intervention process, he/she already referred to the
three dimensions, and his/her answer in fact is based on the three dimensions. After
answering the questions in intervention dimension, a researcher need deliberately
refer to the three dimensions for improving his/her answers. After the answer is determined, the researcher need refer to the three dimensions again for making his/her

Roadmapping and i-Systems

7

research roadmap. During those processes, discussions, brainstorming, seminars,
workshops, and other methods of communication, with or without IT support, should
be used for the knowledge sharing (learning from each other), and thus to enhance the
knowledge creation.

Fig. 3. The i-systems methodology for enhancing the knowledge creation in roadmapping
process

In the integration dimension, researchers work out their personal academic research
roadmaps, which can be viewed as the solutions for those questions asked in the intervention dimension. Since roadmapping is a never ending process, a researcher
should continuously refer to all the five dimensions again and again for improving
his/her research roadmap.

6 Concluding Remarks
This paper put forward a solution for making personal academic research roadmaps
based on the IP Methodology, introduced a web-based roadmapping support system,
and gave some considerations of applying the i-systems methodology for enhancing
the knowledge creation in roadmapping process. In the practice of roadmapping [13],
we found that roadmapping can be an unwieldy and time consuming process, which
can discourage participation, while competent knowledge coordinators and proper IT
(information technology) support can reduce this negative factor. In practice, we also
found that roadmapping is more welcomed by junior researchers than senior researchers. It seems the benefits of roadmapping for junior researchers are obvious than those
for senior researchers. Senior researchers are more likely to believe that they can

8

T. Ma, H. Yan, and Y. Nakamori

arrange their research by themselves, and will be reluctant to spend time on roadmapping, but most of them would like to help making juniors researchers' roadmaps. The
junior researchers are more likely to find that they can get useful information, knowledge, and good suggestions and ideas through the roadmapping process.

References
1. R. L. Ackoff, Brief Guide to Interactive Planning and Idealized Design, available
at:http://www.sociate.com/texts/AckoffGuidetoIdealizedRedesign.pdf, 2001.
2. R. L. Ackoff, Creating the Corporate Future, Wiley, New York, 1981.
3. R. L. Ackoff, Redesigning the Future, New York: Wiley, 1974.
4. R. L. Ackoff, The Art of Problem Solving, New York: Wiley, 1978.
5. B. Bergeron, Essentials of Knowledge Management, Wiley, 2003.
6. R. L. Flood and M. C. Jackson, Interactive Planning, Creative Problem Solving: total systems intervention, Wiley, Chapter 7, pp. 143-165, 1991.
7. http://jakarta.apache.org/tomcat/
8. http://java.sun.com/
9. http://java.sun.com/applets/
10. http://java.sun.com/products/jsp/
11. http://java.sun.com/products/servlet/index.jsp
12. http://www.microsoft.com/sql/default.asp
13. T. Ma, S. Liu, and Y. Nakamori, Roadmapping for supporting Scientific Research, The
17th International Conference on Multiple Criteria Decision Analysis, Canada, August,
2004.
14. Y. Nakamori and M. Takagi, Technology Creation Based on Knowledge Science, Proceedings of the First International Symposium on Knowledge Management for Strategic
Creation of Technology, Ishikawa High-Tech Exchange Center, Japan, pp. 1-10, 2004.
15. Y. Nakamori, Knowledge Management System Toward Sustainable Society, Proceedings
of the First International Symposium on Knowledge and System Sciences. E. Shimemura,
Y. Nakamori, J. Gu and T. Yoshida (eds), 57-65. Ishikawa, Japan: Japan Advance Institute
of Science and Technology, 2000.
16. Y. Nakamori, Towards Supporting Technology Creation Based on Knowledge Science,
Systems Science and Systems Engineering, ICSSSE'03, Global-Link Publisher, pp. 33-38,
2003.
17. S. Okuzu, A Technology Management Methodology for Academic Science & Engineering
Laboratories by Fusion of Soft System Methodology and Technology Road Mapping,
masters thesis, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 2002.
18. A. P. Wierzbicki, Knowledge Integration: Creative Space and Creative Environments,
working paper and a draft for a book, 2004.

