Performance Enhancement Schemes of OFDMA
System for Broadband Wireless Access
Dong-Hyun Park, So-Young Yeo, Jee-Hoon Kim, Young-Hwan You,
and Hyoung-Kyu Song
uT Communication Research Institute, Sejong University, Seoul, Korea
mith80@sdc.sejong.ac.kr, yeossoh@sdc.sejong.ac.kr, bid4u@sdc.sejong.ac.kr,
yhyou@sejong.ac.kr, songhk@sejong.ac.kr

Abstract. Orthogonal frequency-division multiple access (OFDMA),
which is a combination of orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing
(OFDM) with frequency-division multiple access (FDMA), is regarded
as a promising solution for enhancing the performance of interactive
wireless systems in ubiquitous mobile communication environment. In
such an application, this paper presents an investigation into improving
the channel estimation scheme and of the eﬀects of symbol timing misalignment when OFDMA is used as an access scheme. Under OFDMA
uplink channel environments, appropriate symbol length of CAZAC sequences as a preamble could be utilized in accordance with the number
of transmitting antenna and channel condition. The eﬀect of the number
of CAZAC sequences for channel estimation is also presented in terms of
mean square error (MSE). Taking into account the eﬀect of multiple access interference (MAI) introduced by a symbol timing misalignment, the
symbol error rate (BER) and throughput performance are investigated
for a typical OFDMA uplink scenario.
Keywords: OFDMA, channel estimation, MAI, CAZAC.

1

Introduction

Mobile users are demanding anywhere and anytime access to high-speed data
real-and non-real time multimedia services from next-generation wireless systems. In accordance with the requirements of users, the future generations of
broadband wireless communications will provide to subscribers the high quality of service (QoS) and bit rates by employing a variety of techniques. Also,
they will support the future ubiquitous communications systems. In wireless
multi-user environments, one of the reliable solutions for such communication
systems is OFDMA technology. OFDMA, also referred to as Multiuser-OFDM,
is being considered as a modulation and multiple access method for 4-th generation wireless networks. OFDMA is an extension of Orthogonal Frequency
Division Multiplexing (OFDM), which is currently the modulation of choice for
high speed data access systems such as IEEE 802.11a/g wireless LAN (WiFi)
and IEEE 802.16a/d/e wireless broadband access systems (WiMAX) [1]-[3].
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 344–351, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Performance Enhancement Schemes of OFDMA System

Home users

Mobile
Backhaul

345

Hotspots

T1+ Level Service
Enterprise

Users on the go
Internet
Backbone

BWA Operator Network
Backbone

Fig. 1. Illustration of the reference model for interactive OFDMA system

The Evolution of OFDM to OFDMA completely preserves the robustness
against multipath propagation and high bandwidth eﬃciency. However, in case
of using multiple antenna for OFDM systems, recovering the transmitted signal
is impossible without knowing channel coeﬃcients because the signals from each
multipath channel are overlapped. Therefore, channel estimation processing is
a major key as recovering the corrupted signal [4]. In a typical OFDMA uplink
scenario, moreover, multiple access interference (MAI) caused by symbol timing
errors destroys the orthogonality among users [5]-[7]. So, this paper shows our
investigations for improving the performance of channel estimation and symbol
timing misalignment on OFDMA uplink. At the same time, we provide an algorithm which generates extended-CAZAC (E-CAZAC) sequences to overcome a
limitation of the number of transmiting antennas and multipath components to
maintain the orthogonality for both uplink and downlink of OFDMA systems.
Besides, the Bit error rate (BER) and throughput performance of the interactive
OFDMA uplink system for symbol timing misalignment is considered.
The outline the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, symbol timing error
model for OFDMA uplink is described. Section 3 gives the improving channel
estimation scheme for both uplink and downlink OFDMA system. Section 4,
simulation and numerical results show the mean square error (MSE) of channel estimation and BER performances of OFDMA uplink systems. Finally, the
concluding remarks are given Section 5.

2

System Model

In this section we are concerned with the evaluation of the uplink subject to
OFDMA system as shown in Fig. 1. The subcarrier frequencies from all users
form a set of N orthogonal carriers by appropriate choice of the spacing, as it is

346

D.-H. Park et al.

done in OFDM. As such, each tone in an OFDM symbol is used by a diﬀerent
uplink user. Thus, the users share the same bandwidth at the same time, however
orthogonality is achieved by assigning distinct tones to distinct users. These
tone assignment schemes consist of interleaved tone assignment scheme that are
regularly interleaved across the overall set of N tones and block tone assignment
scheme that are assigned to each user with disjoint blocks whose size is Ku ,
where Ku is the number of subcarrier per each user. Usually, The interleaved
scheme yields a worse signal to interference ratio (SIR) compared to the block
scheme [8]. With the above block scheme in mind, the transmitted signal of the
n-th subcarrier for the d -th user in the time domain can be expressed as

xn,d

1
=
N

Md ·d−1

Xk,l exp −j2π
k=Md (d−1)

kn
−NG ≤ n < N ,
N

(1)

where k is a subcarrier index and Md = NNu is the number of subcarriers assigned
to each user. Note that xn,d incorporates the GI of length NG ≤ N .
The transmitted signal by each user goes through multipath fading channel and
the received signal can be expressed as

rn =

1
N

Nu

Md ·d−1

Hk,d Xk,d · exp −j2πn
d=1 k=Md (d−1)

(k − τd )
+ Wn ,
N

(2)

where Wn is the zero-mean Gaussian noise (AWGN) with two-sided power spectral density of N0 /2, τd is the timing error for the d -th user, and Hk,d is the
discrete frequency response Hk,d = αk,d · exp(jθk,d ). In the Hk,d , αk,d is the
independent identically distributed (i.i.d) Rayleigh random variable and θk,d is
uniformly distributed random variable over [−π, π].
Then, the reconstructed FFT output for the q-th user’s l-th subcarrier is given
by

Rl,q =

1
N

N −1 Nu

Md ·d−1

Hk,d Xk,d · exp −j2πn
n=0 d=1 k=Md (d−1)
N −1

(k − l − τd )
+ Wn ,
N

(3)

where l ∈ Sq and Wl = n=0 exp[j(2πln/N )].
In the equation (3), The MAI caused by symbol timing error τd of the multiple
access users depends on the transmitted modulated symbol. So, it is diﬃcult for
the base station receiver to eliminate or mitigate the MAI. Also, we consider
the power of the MAI. Let us assume that the data symbols Xk,d which is the
k -th output signal of the d -th user, on diﬀerent subcarriers of diﬀerent users are
independent of each other, with a zero mean and the same average power Pa .
Without loss of generality, we assume that the channel state is invariant during
the observed symbol period.

Performance Enhancement Schemes of OFDMA System
0.24

SNR = 10 [dB]
SNR = 15 [dB]
SNR = 20 [dB]
Simulation(SNR =
Analysis

0.2

347

∞)

MAI POWER

0.16

0.12

0.08

0.04

0
112

116
120
124
Frequency-Domain Subcarrier Index

127

Fig. 2. Interference power plus noise versus frequence domain subcarrier index of the
8-th desired user for N =256 and Ku =16 (16QAM and τn,8 =65)

With the above assumptions in mind, we show that the power of the MAI [7]
for k-th output signal of the d-th user is
E|M AI|2 =

1
π2

N −1

E|αp,n |2 Pa ×
n=d p=0

1 − cos2π(p − k)(τn,d − TG )/T
,
(p − k)2

(4)

where τn,d is the symbol timing misalignment of the n-th user with respect to
the d-th user at the receiver, the index p is subcarrier of n-th user. And E|αp,n |2
is the average channel gain. TG and T are the cyclic preﬁx and OFDM symbol
duration including guard interval, respectively.
Fig. 2 shows the MAI power for SNR models versus frequency-domain subcarrier index of desired user (the 8-th user) for N =256 and Ku =16. In this
ﬁgure, we set to the same symbol timing error (τn,8 = 65) for all users except
the eighth user. The Simulation results were obtained by 16QAM signaling and
multipath fading channel with respect to various SNR value, also analysis results
were obtain through the average channel gain E|αp,n |2 = 1. As we can see from
this ﬁgure, we conﬁrmed what subcarrier between adjacent subbands has higher
MAI power. One popular solution to mitigate the MAI is to insert a guard band
(GB) among two adjacent subbands and to use the receiver diversity in the base
station. The improving performance of the above methods present the Section 4.

3
3.1

Improving Channel Estimation Using E-CAZAC
CAZAC Sequence

We introduce OFDMA system with multiple antenna using CAZAC preamble
as system model. In section 2, in order to employ simulation, perfect channel
estimation on each user is assumed. However, since channel condition has the

348

D.-H. Park et al.

multipath fading features in practice, we need to estimate the channel coeﬃcients. Also, one of the most dominant factors of the performance degradation
is channel estimation error. In order to solve this problem, we achieved the a
channel estimation technique using the constant-amplitude zero-autocorrelation
(CAZAC) preamble which holds outstanding periodic autocorrelation property
is one of the well-known algorithms [9]. The CAZAC preamble provide good
and rapid signal acquisition performances even for low SNR conditions with
4-phase and 16-symbol-length. However, if the CAZAC preamble is adopted in
multiple antennas system, its capability of channel estimation is limited by the
number of transmit antennas (Nt ) and multipath components (P ) to maintain
the orthogonality as follows [4]
1≤P ≤

L
,
Nt

(5)

where L presents the symbol-length of the CAZAC sequence. In order to overcome such problem, we provide an algorithm which generates extended-CAZAC
(E-CAZAC).
3.2

Proposed Channel Estimation Method

The E-CAZAC sequences are obtained by zero-padded among the CAZAC sequences in order to maintain orthogonality when multiple antenna are used and
multipath component are existed. The follow equation show a structure of the
E-CAZAC:
j mn for n < 4
(6)
em·L/4+n =
0
for n ≥ 4,
where m ∈ 0, 1, 2, 3, n ∈ 0, 1, · · · , L/4 − 1. Remark that L must be times of 4.
Since such zero paddings do not provide any additional information about the
power spectrum, ﬂat power spectrum of CAZAC sequence is inherited. It shows
that we can use the autocorrelation of CAZAC sequences. When E-CAZAC sequence is used, we can have more ﬂexible capability of the channel estimation
as varied L or Nt . In addition, One may think other CAZAC sequences with
higher phase that better solution for multiple antennas system because all symbols are used for estimation. However, it provides the additional defect because
longer sequences with higher phase causes the transmitter complexity and power
consumption for transmission or correlation. Therefore, proposed scheme with
conventional 4-phase CAZAC sequences can realize a multiple antennas OFDMA
system with low hardware complexity and power consumption.

4

Performance Evaluation and Discussions

In this section, several simulation results which show the eﬀect of each scheme are
provided. To simulate the OFDMA system performance, a ﬂat Rayleigh fading
channel on each subcarrier is used and i.i.d fading among diﬀerent subcarriers is
assumed in the simulations. The entire bandwidth (BW) of 20 MHz is divided

Performance Enhancement Schemes of OFDMA System
1

349

GB = 0
GB = 2
GB = 4
GB = 6
RX = 1
RX = 2

Bit Error Rate

0.1

0.01

0.001
0

10

SNR [ dB ]

20

30

Fig. 3. BER performance of OFDMA uplink systems with respect to the number of
GB for N =256 and Ku =16 (16QAM and τn,d =65)

Throughput [ Mbit / sec / user ]

5

4

3
GB = 0
GB = 2
GB = 4
GB = 6
RX = 1
RX = 2
2
0

10

SNR [ dB ]

20

30

Fig. 4. Throughput performance of OFDMA uplink systems with respect to the number of GB for N =256 and Ku =16 (16QAM, τn,d =65 and 20Mhz bandwidth)

into 256 subcarrier. And, the 8-th user is regarded as the desired user. In case of
OFDMA uplink channel estimation, we evaluate the performance of proposed ECAZAC sequnce in terms of MSE. Here, we adopt the least square (LS) estimator
simulation.
Fig. 3 presents BER performances of OFDMA uplink systems with respect to
the number of guard band. A performance enhancement can be observed with
increase of the number of GB regardless of the number of receiver antennas. As
expected, the BER for the existing MAI give a performance degradation since
they destroy the orthogonality among users. However, As the number of guard
band increase, throughput is found to decrease as shown in Fig. 4.
Fig. 5 displays the MSE performances of 32-symbol-length E-CAZAC sequence when 7 paths are presence. In the simulation, we can see that E-CAZAC

350

D.-H. Park et al.
0.1

MSE of E-CAZAC sequence

0.01

Tx = 1
Tx = 2
Tx = 4
Tx = 8

0.001

0.0001

1E-005

1E-006
0

10

SNR [ dB ]

20

30

Fig. 5. The MSE performance of OFDMA uplink channel estimation using the ECAZAC for 1, 2, 4 and 8 transmit antennas over 7-path Rayleigh faing channel

sequence performs completely when up to 4 transmit antennas are used as equation (7). In the other case, MSE performaces are very poor because the orthogonality of E-CAZAC sequence is broken. Therefore, we should notice this point.
Also, if we want to use 8 transmit antennas, they will estimate the channel
condition nicely as increase E-CAZAC sequence length. As expect, the MSE
of CAZAC sequence gives the better performance by increasing the number of
CAZAC sequence. However, we should use to be properly the symbol-length
and number of CAZAC sequences restricted in conformity with the system and
channel conditions.

5

Conclusions

OFDMA is a promising scheme for providing a ubiquitous environment in wireless
channels. However, the both MAI problems and channel estimation problems in
case of using the multiple antennas based on OFDMA system caused serious performance degradations. In this paper, we described the MAI reduction schemes in
the OFDMA-based interactive wireless system. From the results presented above,
we conﬁrmed MAI reduction by using the guard band (GB) and received diversity.
At the same time, by the considering system and channel conditions E-CAZAC
preamble sequences can provide solutions of the more ﬂexible channel estimation.
The presented results are valid for OFDMA systems with reverse link.

Acknowledgement
This research was supported by the MIC (Ministry of Information and Communication), Korea, under the ITRC (Information Technology Research Center)
support program supervised by the IITA (Institute of Information Technology
Assessment).

Performance Enhancement Schemes of OFDMA System

351

References
1. ETSI ETS 301 958, Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB).: Interaction channel for digital terrestrial television (RCT) incorporating multiple access OFDM, ETSI, Tech.
Rep., March 2002.
2. IEEE draft standard for local and metropolitan area network-part 16.: Air interface
for ﬁxed broadband wireless access systems - medium access control modiﬁcations
and additional physical layer speciﬁcations for 2-11GHz, IEEE LAN MAN Standards
Committee, 2002.
3. I. Koﬀman and V. Roman.: Broadband wireless access solutions based on OFDM
access in IEEE802.16, IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 40, pp. 96-103, April 2002.
4. Dong Jun Cho, Young Hwan You, and Hyoung Kyu Song.: Channel Estimation with
Transmitter Diversity for High Rate WPAN Systems, IEICE Trans. Commun., vol.
E87- B, no.11 Nov. 2004.
5. Y.-H. You, W.-G. Jeon, J.-W. Wee, Sang-Tae Kim, Intae Hwang, and H.-K. Song.:
OFDMA Uplink Performance for Interactive Wireless Broadcasting, IEEE Trans.
Broadcast., vol.51, no. 3, pp.383-388, 2005.
6. M. S. El-Tanany, Y. Wu, and L. Hazy.: OFDM uplink for interactive broadband
wireless: analysis and simulation in the presence of carrier, clock an timing errors,
IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 3-19, Mar. 2001.
7. M. Park, K. Ko, H. Yoo, and D. Hong.: Performance analysis of OFDMA uplink
systems with symbol timing misalignment, IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 8, pp.
376-378, Aug. 2003.
8. A. Tonello, N. Laurenti, S. Pupolin.: On the eﬀect of time and frequency oﬀsets in the
uplink of an asynchronous multi-user DMT OFDMA system, Proc. of Intemutioml
Conference on Telecommunications 2000, Acapulco, Mexico, pp.614-618, May 2225.2000.
9. R. C. Heimiller.: Phase Shift Pulse Codes with Good Periodic Correlation Properties, IRE Trans. Info. Theory IT-6, 254-257 October 1961.

