A Watermarking Method with a New SS technique
Kun Hua1 and Liang Pu2
1

Computer and Electronic Engineering Dept. University of Nebraska Lincoln,
1110 S 67th St. 68182, USA
2
School of Energy and Power Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
28 W Xianning Rd. Xi’an 710049 China
khua@unlnotes.unl.edu

Abstract. Among numerous techniques of information concealment, Spread
spectrum watermarking (SSW) has proved to yield improved results when
robustness against attack is at a premium. SSW hides information which is
called watermark by spreading its spectrum and then adding them to a host
image as a watermarked image. Spreading spectrum is done by a pseudo-noise
(PN) sequence. But in standard SSW approaches, receiver must use a separate
channel to achieve PN sequence used at the transmitter for detecting hidden
information. The unique PN sequence must have a low cross correlation and
thereby can be duplicated easily by hostile attackers. In this paper a novel
approach based on the unconventional Random Encoding Spread Spectrum is
proposed for recovering the spreading sequence of watermark signal without
any information from the transmitter. It is contributed a higher secure feature by
using of the time-varying random encoded spread spectrum.
Keywords: Data Mining, Spreading Spectrum Watermarking, Pseudo-noise.

1 Introduction
Nowadays, the digital watermarking technique is regarded as a promising means to
address such problems as copyright protection, contention authentication, device
control and signal multiplexing. The mostly important requirements for a digital
watermarking system are the watermark transparency, robustness and security.
Several kinds of digital watermarking techniques have been applied by industrial or
academic approaches.
Spread spectrum technology is an important anti-interference technology in the
watermarking. In traditional spread spectrum communications, short pseudo-noise
(PN) codes are used broadly as spread spectrum sequences. For instance, m sequence
and Gold sequence. PN codes have some noise-like characteristic. However it has
certain periodicity and can be duplicated easily, which compromises the transmission
security.
Recently, a lot of works have been done on hostile detecting by means of data
mining [1]-[4]. Saeed raised a scheme based on Genetic Algorithm (GA) [5]. The
approach is proposed for recovering PN sequence and detecting location with GA
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part III, LNCS 4489, pp. 867–873, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

868

K. Hua and L. Pu

optimization search, hence unauthorized users could detect hidden information from
the watermarked signal. For example, by using of GA optimization search, a PN
sequence with period of 63 chips and it’s location can be detected by attackers in 70
seconds.
In order to improve the disadvantage of traditional spread spectrum, the theory of
Random-Encoded Spread Spectrum (RESS) was presented in this paper, which avoids
using the fixed spreading sequences. In this system, the spreading code is obtained
from the transmission signal. To some extend, the dynamic variable spreading
sequences assure the transmission security and low probability of detection (LPD) by
attackers.
Comparing traditional spread spectrum, there are several advantages to exploit
RESS into watermarking:
(1) RESS doesn’t require a separate channel to transmit the spreading codes to the
receiver. Watermarked signal is totally “white noise” to attackers.
(2) RESS can enhance watermarking transmission security by true random
spreading sequence. Pseudo Noise sequence is just like random sequence.
(3) PN codes is fixed once they have been generated, so PN codes can be
duplicated by unauthorized attackers. But in RESS, the spreading sequence is not only
randomly generated and independent of the current symbol, but also dynamically
changing form one symbol to the next. Also we can say it’s time-varying random
codes and is hard to be duplicated.
In this paper, we proposed a novel approach based on Random-Encoded Spread
Spectrum for recovering PN sequence of watermark signal without any information
from the transmitter. It is contributed a higher secure feature and LPD by using of the
time-varying random encoded spread spectrum.
In section 2, we present the system model of the Random encoded spread spectrum
system. The processing of RESS watermarking is described in section 3. The
simulation parameters and results are presented in section 4. Conclusions of the paper
are made in section 5.

2 Random Encoded Spread Spectrum
2.1 System Description
In the RESS system model, at the transmitter, delay registers are updated from N-tap
delay of data where N is the code length. Delay registers generate the code chips that
switch at N times the data rate for signal spreading. The random nature of the digital
information source is assured by using data compression methods. The register
contents at the transmitter and receiver should be identical initially. Differential
coding (DC) is used in this system to avoid the error propagation among delay
registers.
Our approach to improving the low probability of detection performance is to
completely abandon the use of PN sequences. The random nature of the digital

A Watermarking Method with a New SS technique

869

information source is assured by applying appropriate data compression methods to
remove any redundancy in the data stream, thereby maximizing its entropy. The
binary data symbols can therefore be modeled as independent and identically
distributed Bernoulli random variables. Symbol values of +1 and -1 occur equally
likely with a probability of 1/2. As a result, the spreading sequence is not only
randomly generated and independent of the current symbol, but also dynamically
changing from one symbol to the next.
The random encoding operation at the transmitter is reversed at the receiver. The
recovered data are fed back to the N-tap delay registers that provide an estimate of the
transmitter’s spreading codes required for signal de-spreading. Data recovery is by
means of a correlation detector. As a result, random encoding makes unwanted
detection of the data by an unintended receiver practically impossible. The security of
the transmission can greatly be enhanced with this low probability of detection
communication system.

3 Watermarking
3.1 Watermarking Embedding
Watermarking Embedding is performed in DCT domain. At first, we divide host
image W into M non-overlapping 8 × 8 blocks[6]-[9],

W=

M −1

∪W

m

(u , v),1 ≤ u , v ≤ 8

(1)

m =0

So there are M DCT coefficient
and

~
W (u , v) after DCT transformation for each block,

M −1
~ M −1 ~
W = ∪Wm (u, v) = ∪ CDCT [Wm (u, v)],1 ≤ u, v ≤ 8
m =0

(2)

m =0

Embed RESS watermarking data into 8 low frequency components of every 8 × 8
blocks of host image W, that is :
M −1
8m+ 7
~ M −1 ~
Wz = ∪Wz m (u , v) = ∪ CDCT [Wm (u , v) + α m ∪ Z si ]
m =0

m =0

The next step is to do IDCT to get the watermarked image

WZ =

M −1

∪C

m =0

(3)

i =8m

−1

IDCT

[Wm (u , v)]

WZ ,
(4)

870

K. Hua and L. Pu

Fig. 1. RESS Watermarking Embedding Structure

3.2 Watermarking Extracting
To extract the watermark from the watermarked image, we first take 8 × 8 DCT and
recover the watermark image by:
M −1
~
~
Z s' = { ∪ [Wz m (u , v) − Wm (u , v)] / α m }

(5)

m=0

Fig. 2. RESS Watermarking Extracting Structure

The last step will be RESS decoding part. After this step, recovered watermark
image

Z ' is extracted and will be compared with the original watermark image Z .

4 Experimental Results
4.1 Watermarking Results
In our simulation experiments, the original host image is taken as a gray testing image
and the testing watermarking image is a 2-values image. In water marked image, we
choose PSNR as 50dB and Gaussian Noise variance as 0.01. Spreading factor N=128.
Delay register length m=7.

A Watermarking Method with a New SS technique

871

Fig.3 is the original host image and Fig.4 is the testing watermarking 2-values
image. Fig.5 is the watermarked image and Fig.6 is the recovered watermark.
Fig.3-Fig.6 show that the watermark image is totally invisible in watermarked
figure and can be recovered desirably. We can conclude that RESS can not only
achieve a similar performance as conventional PN sequence spreading spectrum do,
but also acquires higher secure feature and simpler structure without the separate
channel for spreading sequence.

Fig. 3. Original Figure

Fig. 4. Watermark image pattern

There was a shortage for regular spread spectrum watermarking algorithm: If the
spreading sequence length is not long enough, the system can not achieve the ideal
result. Thus, the original image must be very large which is hard to explore. But if we
cut the image figure smaller, the spread spectrum sequence is also shorten, and the
result is that the robustness of the whole system is influenced. But while RandomEncoded Spread Spectrum is introduced in this paper, any short sequence is still
random.
What is more, we can now select much more spreading sequences than regular
techniques[10]-[12]. This means for multi-users application in digital watermarking,
more individual information can be sent in the same time without great interference
comes from other information. This approach is still need to be proved by real
experimental results.

872

K. Hua and L. Pu

Fig. 5. Watermarked Figure

Fig. 6. Recovered Watermark

5 Conclusion
In this paper, a novel approach based on Random-Encoded Spread Spectrum is
proposed for recovering spreading sequence of watermark signal without any
information from the transmitter. It mainly contributed a higher secure feature by
using of the time-varying random Random-encoded spread spectrum instead of the
typical PN sequence. Random-Encoded Spread Spectrum can perform several
advantages over PN sequences. The watermark detecting by the hostile unauthorized
becomes almost impossible by developing the Random-Encoded Spread Spectrum
Watermarking system. Such approach has been approved to be a better alternate data
mining method which can be used in water marking technique easily. To some
extend, the dynamic variable spreading sequences also assure the low probability of
detection by attackers over the PN approach. Due to the random and dynamically
changing, coded waveform, the techniques chart a completely different approach to
spread spectrum techniques.
In multi-user application, we can select much more spreading sequences than
regular PN techniques. This means for multi-users application in digital
watermarking, more individual information can be sent in the same time without great
interference comes from other information. Such approach is still need to be proved
by real experimental results in the future.

A Watermarking Method with a New SS technique

873

References
1. Trivedi, S,Chandramouli, R.: Secret Key Estimation in Sequential Steganography, IEEE
Transaction on signal processing, Volume 53, NO. 2, Feb. (2005)
2. Asghari, V. R. , Ardebilipour, M. : Spread Spectrum Code Estimation by Genetic
Algorithm, International Journal of signal processing, VOL 1,Number 4, (2004).
3. Yen, K., Hanzo, L.: Genetic Algorithm Assisted Joint Multiuser Symbol Detection and
Fading Channel Estimation for Synchronous CDMA Systems, IEEE Transaction on
selected areas in communication, VOL. 19, NO. 6, JUNE (2001).
4. Asghari,V.R. , Ardebilipour ,M.: Spread Spectrum Code Estimation by Particle Swarm
Algorithm, International Journal of Signal Processing, 2, No. 4, (2005) 268-272,
5. Sedghi, S. Mashhadi ,H. R, Khademi ,M. : Detecting Hidden Information from a Spread
Spectrum Watermarked Signal by Genetic Algorithm 2006 IEEE Congress on
Evolutionary Computation Sheraton Vancouver Wall Centre Hotel, Vancouver, BC,
Canada July (2006) 16-21,
6. Gao,Q. Li, R. Wang, H. Dang, H, Liu, L.: Spread Spectrum Digital Watermarking
Algorithm Using Gold Codes, Journal of xi’an jiaotong university, VOL 28, NO.2, Feb.
(2004)
7. Marvel L M, Retter C T, Boncelet C GJ : Hiding information in images 1998 International
Conference on Image Processing, Chicago , USA, (1998).
8. Ruanaidh J J K O, Csurka G :A Bayesian approach to spread spectrum watermark
detection and secure copyright protection for digital image libraries IEEE Computer
Society Conference on Computer Vison and Pattern Recognition, Fort Collins, USA,
(1999).
9. Vassaux B, Bas P, Chassery J M. : A new CDMA technique for digital image
watermarking, enhancing capacity of insertion and robustness 2001 International Corrence
on Image Processing, Thessaloniki, Greece,(2001).
10. Peterson,R. L. Ziemer,R.E., Borth, D.E.: Introduction to Spread Spectrum
Communications” Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, (1995)
11. Dixon, R. C.: Spread Spectrum System New York, NY: John Wiley & sons, (1984)
12. Sarwate D. V., Pursley, M. B.: Crosscorrelation Properties of Pseudorandom and Related
Sequences, Proceedings of IEEE, vol. 68, May (1980)593-619

