Using Cyber-Infrastructure for Dynamic Data
Driven Laser Treatment of Cancer
C. Bajaj1 , J.T. Oden1 , K.R. Diller2 , J.C. Browne1 , J. Hazle3 , I. Babuˇska1,
J. Bass1 , L. Bidaut3 , L. Demkowicz1 , A. Elliott3 , Y. Feng1 , D. Fuentes1 ,
B. Kwon1 , S. Prudhomme1 , R.J. Staﬀord3 , and Y. Zhang1
1

Institute for Computational Engineering and Sciences,
2
Department of Biomedical Engineering,
The University of Texas at Austin, Austin TX 78712, USA
{oden,babuska,bass,leszek,feng,fuentes,serge,jessica}@ices.utexas.edu,
kdiller@mail.utexas.edu, {bajaj,browne,juneim}@cs.utexas.edu
3
University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Department of Diagnostic Radiology, Houston TX 77030, USA
{jhazle,jstafford,Andrew.Elliott,Luc.Bidaut}@di.mdacc.tmc.edu
http://dddas.ices.utexas.edu

Abstract. Hyperthermia based cancer treatments are used to increase
the susceptibility of cancerous tissue to subsequent radiation or
chemotherapy treatments, and in the case in which a tumor exists as
a well-deﬁned region, higher intensity heat sources may be used to ablate the tissue. Utilizing the guidance of real-time treatment data while
applying a laser heat source has the potential to provide unprecedented
control over the outcome of the treatment process [6,12]. The goals of this
work are to provide a working snapshot of the current system architecture developed to provide a real-time ﬁnite element solution of the problems of calibration, optimal heat source control, and goal-oriented error
estimation applied the equations of bioheat transfer and demonstrate
that current ﬁnite element technology, parallel computer architecture,
peer-to-peer data transfer infrastructure, and thermal imaging modalities are capable of inducing a precise computer controlled temperature
ﬁeld within the biological domain.

1

Introduction

Thermal therapies delivered under various treatment modalities permit a minimally invasive and eﬀective cancer treatment that eradicates the disease, maintains functionality of infected organs, and minimizes complications and relapse.
The physical basis for thermal therapies is that exposing cells to temperatures
outside their natural environment for certain periods of time can damage and
even destroy the cells. However, one of the limiting factors in all forms of thermal therapies, including cryotherapy, microwave, radio-frequency, ultrasound,
and laser, is the ability to control the energy deposition to prevent damage to
adjacent healthy tissue [13].
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part I, LNCS 4487, pp. 972–979, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Using Cyber-Infrastructure for Dynamic Data Driven Laser Treatment

973

Current
imaging
technology allows the
imaging of the geometry of tissue and an
overlaying temperature
ﬁeld using MRI and
MRTI (MR Temperature Imaging) technology. MRTI has the the
ability to provide fast,
quantitative temperature imaging in a variety of tissues, and the
capability of providing
biologically relevant information regarding the
extent of injury immediately following a ther- Fig. 1. Schematic of the peer to peer communication armal therapy [4]. Image chitecture used to control the laser treatment process.
guidance [12,15] has the Feedback control is achieved through the continual interpotential to facilitate action of the data, compute, and visualization modules.
unprecedented control
over bioheat transfer by providing real time treatment monitoring through temperature feedback during treatment delivery. A similar idea using ultrasound
guided cryotherapy has been studied and shows good results [13].
The ultimate goal of this work is to deliver a computational model of bioheat transfer that employs real-time, patient speciﬁc data and provides realtime high ﬁdelity predictions to be used concomitantly by the surgeon in the
laser treatment process. The model employs an adaptive hp-ﬁnite element approximation of the nonlinear parabolic Pennes equation and uses adjoint-based
algorithms for inverse analysis, model calibration, and adaptive control of cell
damage. The target diseases of this research are localized adenocarcinomas of
the breast, prostate, cerebrum, and other tissues in which a well-deﬁned tumor
may form. The algorithms developed also provide a potentially viable option to
treat other parts of the anatomy in patients with more advanced and aggressive
forms of cancer who have reached their limit of radiation and chemotherapy
treatment.

2

Software Architecture

A schematic of the software architecture embedded in the control loop is shown
in Figure 1. Figure 2 illustrates the main software modules and communication
methods between software modules. Multiple client-server applications utilizing
a remote procedure calling protocol connect the actual laboratory at M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, TX to the computing and visualization center

974

C. Bajaj et al.

in Austin, TX. Prior to treatment, the LBIE Mesher1 uses MRI data to generate a ﬁnite element mesh of the patient-speciﬁc biological domain. Goal-oriented
estimation and adaption is used to optimize
the mesh to a particular quantity of interest [9]. The tool then
proceeds to solve an
optimal control problem,
wherein the laser parameters (location of optical ﬁber, laser power,
etc.) are controlled to
eliminate/sensitize cancer cells, minimize damage to healthy cells, and
control Heat Shock ProFig. 2. Three Tier Cyber-software architecture. Compu- tein (HSP) expression.
tation, data transfer, and visualization are done on the
Upon initiation of the
backend compute nodes. A middle tier of XMLRPC contreatment process, the
nections connects the backend to the visualization clients
compute server employs
in both Austin & Houston.
real-time MRI data to
co-register the computational domain and MRTI data is used to calibrate the bioheat transfer model to
the biological tissue values of the patient. As the data server, in Houston, delivers new data intermittently to the client, in Austin, computation is compared to
the measurements of the real-time treatment and an appropriate course of action is chosen according to the diﬀerences seen. A parallel computing paradigm
built from the Petsc [2] software infrastructure is used to meet the demands
of rapid calibration and adapting the computational mesh and models to control approximation and modeling error. Volume Rover1 [1] is used to achieve

Fig. 3. Selected Slices of Canine MRI Brain Data, used for mesh generation. MRTI
thermal data and Iso-surface visualization of Canine MRI Brain Data illustrate the
location of heating [8].
1

Software available at: http://cvcweb.ices.utexas.edu/cvc

Using Cyber-Infrastructure for Dynamic Data Driven Laser Treatment

975

eﬃcient visualization of the volumetric MRI and thermal MRTI images simultaneously with the ﬁnite element prediction. From a computational point of view,
the orchestration of a successful laser treatment is to solve the problems of coregistration, calibration, optimal control, and mesh reﬁnement invisibly to the
surgeon, and merely provide the surgeon with an interface to the optimal laser
parameters and visualization of the computational prediction of the treatment
treatment.

3

Image Segmentation, Meshing, and MRTI-Registration

Figure 4 shows a quality hexahedral mesh obtained for ﬁnite element simulations
from a set of MRI data (256x256x34 voxels) of a canine brain, Figure 3. The
ﬁeld view of the MRI images was 200mm x 200mm
with each image spaced
1mm apart. First, the image processing techniques,
available
in
Volume
Rover [1], were used to
improve the quality of
imaging data. Contrast
(a)
(b)
enhancing techniques improved the contrast and
anisotropic and bilateral
diﬀusion [3] removed noise.
Two dimensional segmentation was performed via a
manual tracing of boundaries on each image slice,
(c)
(d)
and the stack of contours tiled to form an Fig. 4. Canine brain data. (a) Segmentation of the
initial water-tight triangu- canine brain boundaries from the transverse 34-slice
lated surface. Three di- stack of 256x256 MRI data. A single slice is shown in
mensional segmentation [1] gray-scale intensities, with the segmented boundary in
could not be used be- red. (b) stack of 2D contours obtained from segmencause of the anisotropy tation. (c) 8820 hexahedral mesh elements, Jacobian
in the imaging data. Af- quality > .05. (d) combined volume visualization of the
ter the geometric model 256x256x32 MRI data of a canine head, with the embedded subset of hexahedral ﬁnite element mesh of the
was obtained, geometric
segmented canine brain.
ﬂow smoothed the geometric model and a geometric
volumetric map using the signed distance function method was created. The
hexahedral mesh was generated using an octree-based isocontouring method.
Geometric ﬂow [17], pillowing [7] and the optimization method were used to
improve the mesh quality. The constructed hexahedral mesh has two important

976

C. Bajaj et al.

properties: good aspect ratios and there is at most one face lying on the boundary
for each element.
The day of treatment, a FFT-based technique is used to register the ﬁnite element mesh to the current position of the patient. The registration software has
been rigorously tested against a suite of validation experiments using phantom
materials. The phantom materials are fabricated with two materials of contrasting image density in which an inner smaller object is placed asymmetrically
within the larger object. The materials are composed of 2 % agar gel and at
least three 2 mm nylon beads are introduced as ﬁducials. The suite of data
consists of several 3D images of incremental translational and rotational rigid
body motions of the phantom material as well as images of incremental deformation of the phantom material. The data is provided for the image registration
community from the DDDAS project webpage2 .
The ﬁnal image processing step is to overlay the MRTI thermal data onto the
ﬁnite element mesh. A median and Deriche ﬁlter are used to remove the inherent
noise from the MRTI data, Figure 5. The ﬁltered MRTI data is interpolated onto
the ﬁnite element solution space. The order of interpolation is determined by the
order of the mesh.

4

Calibration, Optimal Control, and Error Estimation

Pennes model [10] has been shown [5,16,14] to provide very accurate prediction of bioheat transfer and is used as the basis of the ﬁnite element prediction.
The control paradigm involves three major problems: calibration of the Pennes
bioheat transfer model to patient speciﬁc MRTI data, optimal positioning and
power supply of the laser heat source, and computing goal oriented error estimates. During the laser treatment process, all three problems are solved in
tandem by separate groups of processors communicating amongst each other as
needed. The variational form of the governing Pennes bioheat transfer model is
as follows:
Given a set of model, β, and laser, η, parameters,
Find u(x, t) ∈ V ≡ H 1 [0, T ], H 1(Ω) s.t.
∀v ∈ V

B(u, β; v) = F (η; v)

where the explicit functional dependence on the model parameters, β, and laser
parameters, η = (P (t), x0 ), are expressed as follows
T

B(u, β; v) =

ρcp
0

Ω

∂u
v + k(u, β)∇u · ∇v + ω(u, β)cblood (u − ua ) v
∂t
T

hu v dAdt +

+
0
2

∂ΩC

Project Website: dddas.ices.utexas.edu

u(x, 0) v(x, 0) dx
Ω

dxdt

Using Cyber-Infrastructure for Dynamic Data Driven Laser Treatment
T

F (η; v) =

3P (t)μa μtr
Ω
T

0

exp(−μef f x − x0 )
v dxdt
4π x − x0
T

hu∞ v dAdt −

+
0

977

∂ΩC

μtr = μa + μs (1 − γ)

G v dAdt +
0

∂ΩN

μef f =

u0 v(x, 0) dx
Ω

3μa μtr

J
are bounded functions of u, cp and cblood are
and ω s kg
Here k s·m·K
m3
the speciﬁc heats, ua the arterial temperature, ρ is the density, and h is the
coeﬃcient of cooling. P is the laser power, μa , μs are laser coeﬃcients related
to laser wavelength and give probability of absorption of photons by tissue, γ is
the anisotropy factor, and x0 is the position of laser photon source. Constitutive
model data and details of the optimization process are given in [8,11].

5

Data Transfer, Visualization, and Current Results

Conventional data transfer methods and software rendering visualization tools
pose a major bottleneck in developing a laser treatment paradigm in which high
performance computers control the bioheat data transferred from a remote site.
The data transfer problem is addressed through the use of client-server applications that use a remote procedure calling protocol to transfer data directly
between physical memory instead of incurring the overhead of a writing to disk
and transferring data. Volume Rover [1] is able to achieve high performance interactive visualization through the use of modern programmable graphics hardware
to provide combined geometry and volume rendering displays, Figure 4. Software
rendering is limited by the memory and processor.
Computational time used to advance the Pennes model equations forward in
time is not a bottleneck. Computations are done at the Texas Advanced Computing Center on a Dual-Core Linux Cluster. Each node of the cluster contains
two Xeon Intel Duo-Core 64-bit processors (4 cores in all) on a single board,
as an SMP unit. The core frequency is 2.66GHz and supports 4 ﬂoating-point
operations per clock period. Each node contains 8GB of memory. The average
execution times of a representative 10 second simulation is approximately 1 second, meaning that in a real time 10 second span Pennes model can predict out
to more than a minute. Equivalently, in a 10 second time span, roughly 10 corrections can be made to calibrate the model coeﬃcients or optimize the laser
parameters.
The typical time duration of a laser treatment is about ﬁve minutes. During a ﬁve minute span, one set of MRTI data is acquired every 6 seconds. The
size of each set of MRTI data is ≈330kB (256x256x5 voxels). Computations
comparing the predictions of Pennes model to experimental MRTI taken from
a canine brain show very good agreement, Figure 5. A manual craniotomy of
a canine skull was preformed to allow insertion of an interstitial laser ﬁber.
A ﬁnite element mesh of the biological domain generated from the MRI data
is shown in Figure 4. The mesh consists of 8820 linear elements with a total of

978

C. Bajaj et al.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 5. (a) Contours of Pennes model prediction overlayed onto the ﬁnite element mesh.
(b),(c) Simultaneous cutline comparison of Pennes model prediction, Filtered MRTI
data, and Unﬁltered MRTI data. Cutline taken through laser source.

9872 degrees of freedom. MRTI thermal imaging data was acquired in the form
of ﬁve two dimensional 256x256 pixel images every six seconds for 120 time
steps. The spacing between images was 3.5mm. The MRTI data was ﬁltered
then projected onto the ﬁnite element mesh. Figure 5 shows a cutline comparison
between the MRTI data and the predictions of Pennes model. It is observed that
the results delivered by the computational Pennes model slightly over diﬀuses
the heat proﬁle peaks compared to measured values. However, at early times the
maximum temperature value is within 5% of the MRTI value.

6

Conclusions

Results indicate that reliable ﬁnite element model simulations of hyperthermia
treatments can be computed, visualized, and provide feedback in the same time
span that the actual therapy takes place. Combining these prediction capabilities
with an understanding of HSP kinetics and damage mechanisms at the cellular
and tissue levels due to thermal stress will provide a powerful methodology
for planning and optimizing the delivery of hyperthermia therapy for cancer
treatments.
The entire closed control loop in currently being tested on agar and ex-vivo tissue samples in preparation for the ﬁrst real time computer guided laser therapy,
which is anticipated within the upcoming year. The culmination of adaptive
hp-ﬁnite element technology implemented on parallel computer architectures,
modern data transfer and visualization infrastructure, thermal imaging modalities, and cellular damage mechanisms to provide cancer treatment tool will be
a signiﬁcant achievement in the ﬁeld of computational science.
Acknowledgments. The research in this paper was supported in part by the
National Science Foundation under grants CNS-0540033, IIS-0325550, and NIH
Contracts P20RR0206475, GM074258. The authors also acknowledge the important support of DDDAS research by Dr. Frederica Darema of NSF.

Using Cyber-Infrastructure for Dynamic Data Driven Laser Treatment

979

References
1. C. Bajaj, Z. Yu, and M. Aue. Volumetric feature extraction and visualization of
tomographic molecular imaging. Journal of Structural Biology, 144(1-2):132–143,
October 2003.
2. Satish Balay, William D. Gropp, Lois C. McInnes, and Barry F. Smith. Petsc
users manual. Technical Report ANL-95/11 - Revision 2.1.5, Argonne National
Laboratory, 2003.
3. W. Jiang, M. Baker, Q. Wu, C. Bajaj, and W. Chiu. Applications of bilateral
denoising ﬁlter in biological electron microscopy. Journal of Structural Biology,
144:Issues 1-2:114–122, 2003.
4. M. Kangasniemi et al. Dynamic gadolinium uptake in thermally treated canine
brain tissue and experimental cerebral tumors. Invest. Radiol., 38(2):102–107,
2003.
5. J. Liu, L. Zhu, and L. Xu. Studies on the three-dimensional temperature transients
in the canine prostate during transurethral microwave thermal therapy. J. Biomech.
Engr, 122:372–378, 2000.
6. R. J. McNichols et al. MR thermometry-based feedback control of laser interstitial
thermal therapy at 980 nm. Lasers Surg. Med., 34(1):48–55, 2004.
7. S. A. Mitchell and T. J. Tautges. Pillowing doublets: reﬁning a mesh to ensure
that faces share at most one edge. In Proc. 4th International Meshing Roundtable,
pages pages 231–240, 1995.
8. J. T. Oden, K. R. Diller, C. Bajaj, J. C. Browne, J. Hazle, I. Babuˇska, J. Bass,
L. Demkowicz, Y. Feng, D. Fuentes, S. Prudhomme, M. N. Rylander, R. J. Staﬀord,
and Y. Zhang. Dynamic data-driven ﬁnite element models for laser treatment of
prostate cancer. Num. Meth. PDE,, accepted.
9. J. T. Oden and S. Prudhomme. Goal-oriented error estimation and adaptavity
for the ﬁnite element method. Computers and Mathematics with Applications,
41(5–6):735–756, 2001.
10. H. H. Pennes. Analysis of tissue and arterial blood temperatures in the resting
forearm. J. Appl. Physiol., 1:93–122, 1948.
11. M. N. Rylander, Y. Feng, J. Zhang, J. Bass, Staﬀord R. J., J. Hazle, and K. Diller.
Optimizing hsp expression in prostate cancer laser therapy through predictive computational models. J. Biomed Optics, 11:4:041113, 2006.
12. R. Salomir et al. Hyperthermia by MR-guided focused ultrasound: accurate temperature control based on fast MRI and a physical model of local energy deposition
and heat conduction. Magn. Reson. Med., 43(3):342–347, 2000.
13. K. Shinohara. Thermal ablation of prostate diseases: advantages and limitations.
Int. J. Hyperthermia, 20(7):679–697, 2004.
14. J.W. Valvano and et al. An isolated rat liver model for the evaluation of thermal
techniques to measure perfusion. ASME J. Biomech. Eng., 106:187–191, 1984.
15. F. C. Vimeux et al. Real-time control of focused ultrasound heating based on rapid
MR thermometry. Invest. Radiol., 34(3):190–193, 1999.
16. L. Xu, M.M. Chen, K.R. Holmes, and H. Arkin. The evaluation of the pennes, the
chen-holmes, the weinbaum-jiji bioheat transfer models in the pig kidney vortex.
ASME HTD, 189:15–21, 1991.
17. Y. Zhang, C. Bajaj, and G. Xu. Surface smoothing and quality improvement
of quadrilateral/hexahedral meshes with geometric ﬂow. In Proceedings of 14th
International Meshing Roundtable, volume 2, pages 449–468., 2005.

