Vortex Identification in the Wall Region of
Turbulent Channel Flow
Giancarlo Alfonsi1 and Leonardo Primavera2
1

Dipartimento di Difesa del Suolo, Università della Calabria
Via P. Bucci 42b, 87036 Rende (Cosenza), Italy
alfonsi@dds.unical.it
2
Dipartimento di Fisica, Università della Calabria
Via P. Bucci 33b, 87036 Rende (Cosenza), Italy
lprimavera@fis.unical.it

Abstract. Four widely-used techniques for vortex detection in turbulent flows
are investigated and compared. The flow of a viscous incompressible fluid in a
plane channel is simulated numerically by means of a parallel computational
code based on a mixed spectral-finite difference algorithm for the numerical
integration of the Navier-Stokes equations. The DNS approach (Direct
Numerical Simulation) is followed in the calculations, performed at friction
Reynolds number Reτ = 180 . A database representing the turbulent statistically
steady state of the velocity field through 10 viscous time units is assembled and
the different vortex-identification techniques are applied to the database. It is
shown that the method of the “imaginary part of the complex eigenvalue pair of
the velocity-gradient tensor” gives the best results in identifying hairpin-like
vortical structures in the wall region of turbulent channel flow.
Keywords: turbulence, direct numerical simulation, wall-bounded flows,
vortex-eduction methods.

1 Introduction
Organized vortical structures in wall-bounded flows have been investigated by several
authors. One of the first contributions to the issue of the presence of vortices in the
wall region of turbulent shear flows is due to Theodorsen [1] who introduced the
hairpin vortex model. Robinson [2] confirmed the existence of non-symmetric archand quasi-streamwise vortices on the basis of the evaluation of DNS results. Studies
involving the dynamics of hairpin vortices in the boundary layer have been performed
by Perry & Chong [3], Acarlar & Smith [4,5], Smith et al. [6], Haidari & Smith [7]
and Singer & Joslin [8]. On these bases, a picture of vortex generation and reciprocal
interaction in the boundary layer emerges in which processes of interaction of existing
vortices with wall-layer fluid involve viscous-inviscid interaction, generation of new
vorticity, redistribution of existing vorticity, vortex stretching near the wall and vortex
relaxation in the outer region. The process of evolution of a hairpin vortex involves
the development of vortex legs in regions of increasing shear with intensification of
vorticity in the legs themselves. The leg of a vortex – considered in isolation – may
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part I, LNCS 4487, pp. 9 – 16, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

10

G. Alfonsi and L. Primavera

appear as a quasi-streamwise vortex near the wall. The head of a vortex instead, rises
through the shear flow, entering regions of decreasing shear. As a consequence, the
vorticity in the vortex head diminishes.
In spite of the remarkable amount of scientific work accomplished in this field, still
there are no definite conclusions on the character of the phenomena occurring in the
wall region of wall-bounded turbulent flows. Modern techniques for the numerical
integration of the Navier-Stokes equations (advanced numerical methods and highperformance computing) have the ability of remarkably increasing the amount of data
gathered during a research of computational nature, bringing to the condition of
managing large amounts of data. A typical turbulent-flow database includes all three
components of the fluid velocity in all points of a three-dimensional domain,
evaluated for an adequate number of time steps of the turbulent statistically steady
state. Mathematically-founded methods for the identification of vortical structures
from a turbulent-flow database have been introduced by: i) Perry & Chong [9], based
on the complex eigenvalues of the velocity-gradient tensor; ii) Hunt et al. [10] and
Zhong et al. [11], based on the second invariant of the velocity-gradient tensor; iii)
Zhou et al. [12], based on the imaginary part of the complex eigenvalue pair of the
velocity-gradient tensor; iv) Jeong & Hussain [13], based on the analysis of the
Hessian of the pressure. These techniques for vortex eduction are extensively used in
turbulence research but no work exists in which their ability in vortex detection is
systematically compared. In the present work the capability of vortex identification of
the four techniques outlined above, is analyzed.

2 Vortex-Identification Techniques
2.1 Complex Eigenvalues of the Velocity-Gradient Tensor (Method A)
Perry & Chong [9] proposed a definition of a vortex as a region of space where the
rate-of-deformation tensor has complex eigenvalues. By considering the system of the
Navier-Stokes equations, an arbitrary point O can be chosen in the flow field and a
Taylor series expansion of each velocity component can be performed in terms of the
space coordinates, with the origin in O. The first-order pointwise linear approximation
at point O is:
ui = xi = Ai + Aij x j

(1)

and if O is located at a critical point, the zero-order terms Ai are equal to zero, being
Aij = ∂ui ∂x j the velocity-gradient tensor (rate-of-deformation tensor, A = ∇u ). In the
case of incompressible flow, the characteristic equation of Aij becomes:

λ3 + Qλ + R = 0

(2)

where Q and R are invariants of the velocity-gradient tensor (the other invariant
P = 0 by continuity). Complex eigenvalues of the velocity-gradient tensor occur
when the discriminant of Aij , D > 0 . According to this method, whether or not a

Vortex Identification in the Wall Region of Turbulent Channel Flow

11

region of vorticity appears as a vortex depends on its environment, i.e. on the local
rate-of-strain field induced by the motions outside of the region of interest.
2.2 Second Invariant of the Velocity-Gradient Tensor (Method B)

Hunt et al. [10] and Zhong et al. [11] devised another criterion, in defining a eddy
zone a region characterized by positive values of the second invariant Q of the
velocity-gradient tensor. The velocity-gradient tensor can be split into symmetric and
antisymmetric parts:
Aij = Sij + Wij

(3)

being S ij the rate-of-strain tensor (corresponding to the pure irrotational motion) and
Wij the rate-of-rotation tensor (corresponding to the pure rotational motion). The
second invariant of Aij can be written as:
Q = (WijWij − S ij S ij ) 2

(4)

where the first term on the right-hand side of (4) is proportional to the enstrophy
density and the second term is proportional to the rate of dissipation of kinetic energy.
2.3

Imaginary Part of the Complex Eigenvalue Pair of the Velocity-Gradient
Tensor (Method C)

Zhou et al. [12] adopted the criterion of identifying vortices by visualizing isosurfaces
of the imaginary part of the complex eigenvalue pair of the velocity-gradient tensor
(actually the square of). By considering equation (2) and defining the quantities:
⎛ R
J = ⎜− +
⎜ 2
⎝

1

3
R 2 Q 3 ⎞⎟
+
,
4 27 ⎟⎠

⎛ R
K = −⎜ + +
⎜ 2
⎝

1

3
R 2 Q 3 ⎞⎟
+
4 27 ⎟⎠

(5)

one has:

λ1 = J + K ,

λ2 = −

J +K J −K
+
2
2

−3 ,

λ3 = −

J +K J−K
−
2
2

−3 .

(6)

The method of visualizing isosurfaces (of the square) of the imaginary part of the
complex eigenvalue pair of the velocity-gradient tensor is frame independent and due
to the fact that the eigenvalue is complex only in regions of local circular or spiralling
streamline, it automatically eliminates regions having vorticity but no local spiralling
motion, such as shear layers.
2.4 Analysis of the Hessian of the Pressure (Method D)

Jeong & Hussain [13] proposed a definition of a vortex by reasoning on the issue of
the pressure minimum, as follows “... a vortex core is a connected region
characterized by two negative eigenvalues of the tensor B = S 2 + W 2 ...“, where S

12

G. Alfonsi and L. Primavera

and W are the symmetric and antisymmetric parts of the velocity-gradient tensor.
The gradient of the Navier-Stokes equation is considered and decomposed into
symmetric and antisymmetric parts. By considering the symmetric part (the
antisymmetric portion is the vorticity-transport equation), one has:
DSij
Dt

−ν

1 ∂p
∂
Sij + Bij = −
∂xk ∂xk
ρ ∂xi ∂x j

(7)

Bij = S ik S kj + WikWkj .

(8)

where:

The existence of a local pressure minimum requires two positive eigenvalues for the
Hessian tensor ( ∂p ∂xi ∂x j ). By neglecting the contribution of the first two terms on
the left-hand side of equation (7), only tensor (8) is considered to determine the
existence of a local pressure minimum due to a vortical motion, i.e. the presence of
two negative eigenvalues of B. The tensor B is symmetric by construction, all its
eigenvalues are real and can be ordered ( λ1 ≥ λ2 ≥ λ3 ). According to this method a
vortex is defined as a connected region of the flow with the requirement that the
intermediate eigenvalue of B, λ2 < 0 .

3 Numerical Simulations
The numerical simulations are performed with a parallel computational code based on
a mixed spectral-finite difference technique. The unsteady Navier-Stokes equation
(besides continuity) for incompressible fluids with constant properties in three
dimensions and non-dimensional conservative form, is considered (i & j = 1,2,3):

∂ui
∂
∂p
1 ∂ 2 ui
(
+
ui u j ) = −
+
∂t ∂x j
∂xi Reτ ∂x j ∂x j

(9)

where ui (u ,v ,w ) are the velocity components in the cartesian coordinate system
xi (x, y, z ) . Equation (9) is nondimensionalized by the channel half-width h for
lenghts, wall shear velocity uτ for velocities, ρuτ2 for pressure and h uτ for time,
being Reτ = (uτ h ν ) the friction Reynolds number. The fields are admitted to be
periodic in the streamwise (x) and spanwise (z) directions, and equation (9) are
Fourier transformed accordingly. The nonlinear terms in the momentum equation are
evaluated pseudospectrally by anti-transforming the velocities back in physical space
to perform the products (FFTs are used). In order to have a better spatial resolution
near the walls, a grid-stretching law of hyperbolic-tangent type is introduced for the
grid points along y, the direction orthogonal to the walls. For time advancement, a
third-order Runge-Kutta algorithm is implemented and time marching is executed
with the fractional-step method. No-slip boundary conditions at the walls and cyclic
conditions in the streamwise and spanwise directions are applied to the velocity. More
detailed descriptions of the numerical scheme, of its reliability and of the performance
obtained on the parallel computers that have been used, can be found in Alfonsi et al.

Vortex Identification in the Wall Region of Turbulent Channel Flow

13

[14] and Passoni et al. [15,16,17]. The characteristic parameters of the numerical
simulations are the following. Computing domain: L+x = 1131 , L+y = 360 , L+z = 565
(wall units). Computational grid: N x = 96 , N y = 129 , N z = 64 . Grid spacing:
+
+
Δx + = 11.8 , Δy center
= 4.4 , Δy wall
= 0.87 , Δz + = 8.8 (wall units). It can be verified
that there are 6 grid points in the y direction within the viscous sublayer ( y + ≤ 5 ).
After the insertion of appropriate initial conditions, the initial transient of the flow in
the channel is simulated, the turbulent statistically steady state is reached and
calculated for a time t = 10 δ uτ ( t + = 1800 ). 20000 time steps are calculated with a
temporal resolution of Δt = 5 × 10 −4 δ uτ ( Δt + = 0.09 ). In Figure 1, the computed
turbulence intensities (in wall units) of present work are compared with the results of
Moser et al. [18] at Reτ = 180 . The agreement between the present results and the
results of Moser et al. [18] (obtained with a fully spectral code) is rather satisfactory.

Fig. 1. Rms values of the velocity fluctuations normalized by the friction velocity in wall
′ ) , (---) (v rms
′ ) , (···) (wrms
′ ) . Data from Moser et al. [18]: (+)
coordinates. Present work: (—) (u rms
′ ) , (×) (v rms
′ ) , (*) (wrms
′ ).
(urms

4 Results
In Figures 2a-b the vortical structure that occurs at t + = 1065.6 as detected with
method A, is represented and visualized from two different points of view (isosurfaces
corresponding to the 5% of the maximum value are used in all representations). The
top and side views show a structure not very well corresponding to a hairpin vortex.
Portions of head and legs are visible, being the neck almost missing. The
visualizations of the flow structure shows in practice a sketch of an hairpin, that can
be completed only by intuition. Of the four methods examined, method A gives the
less satisfactory representation of the flow structure at the bottom wall of the
computational domain at t + = 1065.6 .

14

G. Alfonsi and L. Primavera

Fig. 2. Method A. Representation of hairpin vortex: a) top view; b) side view.

Fig. 3. Method B. Representation of hairpin vortex: a) top view; b) side view.

Fig. 4. Method C. Representation of hairpin vortex: a) top view; b) side view.

In Figures 3a-b the flow structure at as educted with method B, is represented. A
hairpin-like vortical structure more complete with respect to the former case is visible.
The head of the vortex is almost complete and well defined. Of the two legs, one is
longer than the other and both are longer with respect to those of method A. In turn, a
portion of the vortex neck is missing, as can be seen from Figure 3b. Figures 4a-b
show the vortex structure extracted with method C. The Figures show a complete and
well-defined hairpin vortex, with legs, neck and head clearly represented and no
missing parts anywhere. Of the four eduction techniques tested, this is the best

Vortex Identification in the Wall Region of Turbulent Channel Flow

15

Fig. 5. Method D. Representation of hairpin vortex: a) top view; b) side view.

representation that can be obtained. From Figure 4a it can be noted that the hairpin
exhibits two legs of length comparable to those shown in Figure 3a. Figure 4b shows
a hairpin neck remarkably more thick with respect to that of Figure 3b. The results
obtained with the use of method D are shown in Figures 5a-b. Also in this case a not
complete hairpin vortex structure appears. Figure 5b shows that a portion of the neck
of the vortex is missing.

5 Concluding Remarks
The case of the flow of a viscous incompressible fluid in a plane channel is simulated
numerically at Reτ = 180 and a turbulent-flow database is assembled. Four different
criteria for vortex eduction are applied to the database and compared, showing that: i)
the method of the “complex eigenvalues of the velocity-gradient tensor” gives the less
satisfactory results in terms of vortex representation; ii) the methods of the “second
invariant of the velocity-gradient tensor” and that based on the “analysis of the
Hessian of the pressure” gives intermediate results, in the sense that a hairpin-like
vortical structure actually appears, otherwise with missing parts or not optimal
definitions; iii) the best results are obtained by using the method of the “imaginary
part of the complex eigenvalue pair of the velocity-gradient tensor”.

References
1. Theodorsen, T.: Mechanism of turbulence. In Proc. 2nd Midwestern Mechanics Conf.
(1952) 1
2. Robinson, S.K.: Coherent motions in the turbulent boundary layer. Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech.
23 (1991) 601
3. Perry, A.E., Chong, M.S.: On the mechanism of wall turbulence. J. Fluid Mech. 119
(1982) 173
4. Acarlar, M.S., Smith, C.R.: A study of hairpin vortices in a laminar boundary layer. Part 1.
Hairpin vortices generated by a hemisphere protuberance. J. Fluid Mech. 175 (1987) 1
5. Acarlar, M.S., Smith, C.R.: A study of hairpin vortices in a laminar boundary layer. Part 2.
Hairpin vortices generated by fluid injection. J. Fluid Mech. 175 (1987) 43

16

G. Alfonsi and L. Primavera

6. Smith, C.R., Walker, J.D.A., Haidari A.H., Soburn U.: On the dynamics of near-wall
turbulence. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A 336 (1991) 131
7. Haidari, A.H., Smith, C.R.: The generation and regeneration of single hairpin vortices. J.
Fluid Mech. 277 (1994) 135
8. Singer, B.A., Joslin R.D.: Metamorphosis of a hairpin vortex into a young turbulent spot.
Phys. Fluids 6 (1994) 3724
9. Perry, A.E., Chong, M.S.: A description of eddying motions and flow patterns using
critical-point concepts. Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 19 (1987) 125
10. Hunt, J.C.R., Wray, A.A., Moin, P.: Eddies, streams and convergence zones in turbulent
flows. In Proc. Center Turbulence Research 1988 Summer Prog. NASA Ames/Stanford
University (1988) 193
11. Zhong, J., Huang, T.S., Adrian, R.J.: Extracting 3D vortices in turbulent fluid flow. IEEE
Trans. Patt. Anal. Machine Intell. 20 (1998) 193
12. Zhou, J., Adrian, R.J., Balachandar, S., Kendall, T.M.: Mechanisms for generating
coherent packets of hairpin vortices in channel flow. J. Fluid Mech. 387 (1999) 353
13. Jeong, J., Hussain, F.: On the definition of a vortex. J. Fluid Mech. 285 (1995) 69
14. Alfonsi, G., Passoni, G., Pancaldo, L., Zampaglione D.: A spectral-finite difference
solution of the Navier-Stokes equations in three dimensions. Int. J. Num. Meth. Fluids 28
(1998) 129
15. Passoni, G., Alfonsi, G., Tula, G., Cardu, U.: A wavenumber parallel computational code
for the numerical integration of the Navier-Stokes equations. Parall. Comp. 25 (1999) 593
16. Passoni, G., Cremonesi, P., Alfonsi, G.: Analysis and implementation of a parallelization
strategy on a Navier-Stokes solver for shear flow simulations. Parall. Comp. 27 (2001)
1665
17. Passoni, G., Alfonsi, G., Galbiati, M.: Analysis of hybrid algorithms for the Navier-Stokes
equations with respect to hydrodynamic stability theory. Int. J. Num. Meth. Fluids 38
(2002) 1069
18. Moser, R.D., Kim, J., Mansour, N.N.: Direct numerical simulation of turbulent channel
flow up to Reτ = 590 . Phys. Fluids 11 (1999) 943

