A Two-Phase Model Based on SVM and
Conjoint Analysis for Credit Scoring
Kin Keung Lai, Ligang Zhou, and Lean Yu
Department of Management Sciences, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
{mskklai,mszhoulg,msyulean}@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract. In this study, we use least square support vector machines
(LSSVM) to construct a credit scoring model and introduce conjoint
analysis technique to analyze the relative importance of each input feature for making the decision in the model. A test based on a real-world
credit dataset shows that the proposed model has good classiﬁcation
accuracy and can help explain the decision. Hence, it is an alternative
model for credit scoring tasks.
Keywords: support vector machines, conjoint analysis, credit scoring.

1

Introduction

For ﬁnancial institutions, the ability to predict if a loan applicant or existing
customer will default or not is crucial, and an improvement in prediction accuracy can help reduce losses signiﬁcantly. Most statistic methods and optimization
techniques and some new approaches in artiﬁcial intelligence have also been used
for developing credit scoring models. A comprehensive descriptions of methods
being used in credit scoring can be found in a recent survey [1].
Each method has its advantage and disadvantage, so it is diﬃcult to ﬁnd one
model that can perform consistently better than other models in all circumstances. For the measure of classiﬁcation accuracy, AI technologies can perform
better than traditional methods; however, their black-box property make it diﬃcult for the decision makers to use them with adequate conﬁdence. In this study,
we introduce a LSSVM [2] approach with the radial basis function (RBF) kernel
and adopt an approach based on the principle of design of experiment (DOE) to
optimize the parameters [3]. In addition, the conjoint analysis method is used to
calculate the relative importance of each input feature for credit risk evaluation.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 illustrates the basic
concepts in LSSVM and the main process in conjoint analysis and describes our
method. In Section 3, we use a real-world dataset to test the proposed method
and analyze the results with conjoint analysis. Section 4 provides a conclusion
about this study.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part II, LNCS 4488, pp. 494–498, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

A Two-Phase Model Based on SVM and Conjoint Analysis

2

495

Two-Stage Model Based on SVM and Conjoint
Analysis

Given a training dataset {xk , yk }N
k=1 , we can formulate the LSSVM model in
feature space as following [2]:
min ζ(w, ξ) =

w, b, ξ

1 T
C
w w +
2
2

N
k=1

ξk2

(1)

Subject to: yk [wT ϕ(xk ) + b] = 1 − ξk, k = 1, ..., N
The classiﬁer in the dural space takes the form:
y(x) = sign

N
k=1

αk yk K(x, xk ) + b

(2)

Where the αk is the Lagrange multiplier, in this study, we chose kernel function
to be Radial-basis function (RBF): K(x, xk ) = exp(−||x − xk ||2 /σ 2 ).
In the above LSSVM model, there are two parameters to be determined, C and
σ. A method inspired by DOE proposed by Staelin [3] can reduce the complexity
sharply, relative to grid search method. The main steps of this approach are as
follows:
1. Set initial range for Cand σ as [C min, C max], [D min, D max],iter = 1;
2. While iter≤MAXITER do
2.1. According to the pattern as shown in Figure 1, ﬁnd the 13 points in the
space [(C min, D min), (C max, D max)], set C Space=C max-C min, D Space=
D max-D min;
2.2. For each of the 13 points which have never been evaluated, carry out the
evaluation: set the parameters according to coordinate of this point, run LSSVM
via k-fold cross validation, the average classiﬁcation accuracy is the performance
index of this point;
2.3. Choose the point p0(C0, D0) with best performance to be the center, set
new range of the searching space. C Space= C Space/2, D Space=D Space/2. If
the rectangle area with (C0, D0) as the center and C Space, D Space as width
and height exceeds the initial range, adjust the center point until the new search
space is contained within the [(C min, D min),(C max, D max)].
2.4. Set new searching space, C min=C0-C Space/2, C max=C0+C Space/2,
D min=D0-D Space/2, D max=D0+D Space/2, iter = iter +1;
3. Return the point with best performance, use its best parameters to create
a model for classiﬁcation.
Conjoint analysis is a technique with wide commercial uses, such as prediction
of proﬁtability or market share for proposed new product, providing insights
about how customers make trade-oﬀs between various service features, etc. For
an evaluated applicant with feature x , its utility can be deﬁned by the value
N
k=1 αk yk K(x, xk ) + b from the LSSVM model, the larger is this value, the less
is the possibility of its default. All the tested applicants can be ranked by their
utility. Then the part-worth model is selected to be the utility estimation model

496

K.K. Lai, L. Zhou, and L. Yu
Dmax

Dmin
Cmin

Cmax

Fig. 1. Sketch of two iterations search with method based on DOE

because of its simplicity and popularity. We choose multiple regression method to
estimate the part-worth, and ranking order of the applicants as the measurement
scales for dependent variables. The decision manager, are concerned about not
only the classiﬁcation accuracy of the model but also the average importance of
each attribute which can be measured by the relative importance of attribute in
conjoint analysis. For each model, we can calculate the relative importance of
attribute i as the following formula:
Ii =

max Pij − min Pij
n

(max Pij − min Pij )

× 100% j = 1, . . . Li

(3)

i=1

Where Pij is the part-worth of level j for attribute i, Li is the number of levels
for attribute i, n is the number of attributes.

3

Empirical Study

A real world data set German dataset from UCI is used. it consists of 700 good
instances and 300 bad ones. For each instance, 24 input variables described 19 attributes. 5-fold cross validation is used to evaluate the performance of each group
of parameters setting for the LSSVM model. We set MAXITER =5, searching
space of log2 C is [-5, 15], log2 σ is [-15, 5] and ﬁnally get the optimal parameters
C = 27.5 , σ = 25.0 . Then we use 10-fold cross validation to test the eﬃciency of
this model and ﬁve repetitions are conducted to reduce the stochastic variability
of model training and the testing process. The results were also compared with
other methods on the same dataset shown in Table 1.
The proposed method can provide high classiﬁcation accuracy, but a major
deﬁciency of the model is the diﬃculty in explaining the role of the input features
for making the decision. We conjoint analysis to calculate the relative importance
of each feature after ranking the utility of the testing sample. For the 10-fold cross
validation running, there are 10 group testing samples; Figure 2 illustrate the
average relative importance of each feature of the 10 group testing samples for
the LSSVM+DOE model. From this ﬁgure, we can see that only three features of
the applicants’ exceed 8%. Although some of the features have less importance,
they all contribute to the decision in the LSSVM+DOE model.

A Two-Phase Model Based on SVM and Conjoint Analysis

497

Table 1. Results from diﬀerent methods on the German credit data set
Methods
Classiﬁcation accuracy (%) Std. (%)
SVM+Grid Searcha
76.00
3.86
77.50
4.03
SVM+Grid Search + F-scorea
77.92
3.97
SVM+GAa
MOEb
75.64
–
RBFb
74.60
–
MLPb
73.28
–
LVQb
68.37
–
57.23
–
FARb
LS-SVM+DOE
77.96
5.83
a

Results from [4] ,

b

results from [5].

Fig. 2. Relative importance of features for German dataset

4

Conclusion

This study proposes a two-phrase model for credit scoring. The parameters of
the LSSVM model are optimized by a searching procedure inspired by Design
of Experiment. Then the decision from the LSSVM model is estimated by the
conjoint analysis method. The relative importance of attributes derived from
conjoint analysis provide the decision makers with some idea about what features of the applicant are of importance for the model and whether the decision is
consistent with their past experience. The results show that the proposed model
has good classiﬁcation accuracy and, in some degree, can help the decision makers to explain their decision.

References
1. Thomas, L.C.: A Survey of Credit and Behavioural Scoring: Forecasting Financial Risk of Lending to Consumers. International Journal of Forecasting 16 (2000)
149-172
2. Suykens, J.A.K., Gestel, T.V., Brabanter, J.D., Moor, B.D., Vandewalle, J.: Least
Squares Support Vector Machines. World Scientiﬁc, Siningapore (2002)
3. STAELIN, C.: Parameter Selection for Support Vector Machines. Tech. Rep.,
HPL-2002-354 (R. 1), HP Laboratories Israel, (2003)

498

K.K. Lai, L. Zhou, and L. Yu

4. Huang, C.L., Chen, M.C., Wang, C.J.: Credit Scoring with a Data Mining Approach Based on Support Vector Machines. Expert Systems with Applications
(2006) doi:10.1016/j.eswa.2006.1007.1007
5. West, D.: Neural Network Credit Scoring Models. Computers & Operations Research
27 (2000) 1131-1152

