A Multiscale, Cell-Based Framework for
Modeling Cancer Development
Yi Jiang
Theoretical Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA
jiang@lanl.gov
Abstract. We use a systems approach to develop a predictive model
that medical researchers can use to study and treat cancerous tumors.
Our multiscale, cell-based model includes intracellular regulations, cellular level dynamics and intercellular interactions, and extracellular chemical dynamics. The intracellular level protein regulations and signaling
pathways are described by Boolean networks. The cellular level growth
and division dynamics, cellular adhesion, and interaction with the extracellular matrix are described by a lattice Monte Carlo model. The
extracellular dynamics of the chemicals follow a system of reactiondiﬀusion equations. All three levels of the model are integrated into a
high-performance simulation tool. Our simulation results reproduce experimental data in both avascular tumors and tumor angiogenesis. This
model will enable medical researchers to gain a deeper understanding of
the cellular and molecular interactions associated with cancer progression and treatment.

1

Introduction

Since 2002, cancer has become the leading cause of death for Americans between
the ages of 40 and 74 [1]. But the overall eﬀectiveness of cancer therapeutic treatments is only 50%. Understanding the tumor biology and developing a prognostic
tool could therefore have immediate impact on the lives of millions of people diagnosed with cancer. There is growing recognition that achieving an integrative
understanding of molecules, cells, tissues and organs is the next major frontier
of biomedical science. Because of the inherent complexity of real biological systems, the development and analysis of computational models based directly on
experimental data is necessary to achieve this understanding. Our model aims to
capture knowledge through the explicit representation of dynamic biochemical
and biophysical processes of tumor development in a multiscale framework.
Tumor development is very complex and dynamic. Primary malignant tumors arise from small nodes of cells that have lost, or ceased to respond to,
normal growth regulatory mechanisms, through mutations and/or altered gene
expression [2]. This genetic instability causes continued malignant alterations,
resulting in a biologically complex tumor. However, all tumors start from a relatively simpler, avascular stage of growth, with nutrient supply by diﬀusion from
the surrounding tissue. The restricted supply of critical nutrients, such as oxygen and glucose, results in marked gradients within the cell mass. The tumor
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part I, LNCS 4487, pp. 770–777, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

A Multiscale, Cell-Based Framework for Modeling Cancer Development

771

cells respond both through induced alterations in physiology and metabolism,
and through altered gene and protein expression [3], leading to the secretion of
a wide variety of angiogenic factors.
Angiogenesis, formation of new blood vessels from existing blood vessels, is
necessary for subsequent tumor expansion. Angiogenic growth factors generated
by tumor cells diﬀuse into the nearby tissue and bind to speciﬁc receptors on
the endothelial cells of nearby pre-existing blood vessels. The endothelial cells
become activated; they proliferate and migrate towards the tumor, generating
blood vessel tubes that connect to form blood vessel loops that can circulate
blood. With the new supply system, the tumor will renew growth at a much
faster rate. Cells can invade the surrounding tissue and use their new blood
supply as highways to travel to other parts of the body. Members of the vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) family are known to have a predominant role
in angiogenesis.
The desire to understand tumor biology has given rise to mathematical models to describe the tumor development. But no mathematical models of tumor
growth yet can start from a single cell and undergo the whole process of tumor development. The state of the art in this eﬀort employs hybrid approaches:
Cristini et al. simulated the transition from avasular tumor growth to angiogenesis to vascular and invasive growth using an adaptive ﬁnite-element method
coupled to a level-set method [4]; and Alarcon et al. used a hybrid of cellular
automata and continuous equations for vascular tumor growth [5,6].
We have developed a multiscale, cell-based model of tumor growth and angiogenesis [7,8]. This paper aims to review and promote this model framework. The
Model section describes our model at three levels. The Parallelization section
describes the hybrid scheme that makes the model a high-performance simulation tool. The Results section shows that the model reproduces quantitatively
experimental measurements in tumor spheroids, and qualitatively experimental
observations in tumor angiogenesis. We conclude by commenting on the broad
applicability of this cell-based, multiscale modeling framework.

2

Model

Our model consists of three levels. At the intracellular level, a simple protein
regulatory network controls cell cycle. At the cellular level, a Monte Carlo model
describes cell growth, death, cell cycle arrest, and cell-cell adhesion. At the extracellular, a set of reaction-diﬀusion equations describes for chemical dynamics.
The three levels are closely integrated. The details of the avascular tumor model
has been described in [7].
The passage of a cell through its cell cycle is controlled by a series of proteins.
Since experiments suggest that more than 85% of the quiescent cells are arrested
in the G1 phase [11], in our model, the cells in their G1 phase have the highest
probability of becoming quiescent. We model this cell-cycle control through a
simpliﬁed protein regulatory network [12], which controls the transition between
G1 and S phases [7]. We model these proteins as on or oﬀ. By default this

772

Y. Jiang

Boolean network allows the cell transition to S phase. However, concentrations
of growth and inhibitory factors directly inﬂuence the protein expression. If the
outcome of this Boolean regulatory network is zero, the cell undergoes cell-cycle
arrest, or turns quiescent. When a cell turns quiescent, it reduces its metabolism
and stops its growth.
The cellular model is based on the Cellular Potts Model (CPM) [9,10]. The
CPM adopts phenomenological simpliﬁcation of cell representation and cell
interactions. CPM cells are spatially extended with complex shapes and without internal structure, as domains on the lattice with speciﬁc cell ID numbers.
Most cell behaviors and interactions are in terms of eﬀective energies and elastic constraints. Cells evolve continuously to minimize the eﬀective energy; the
CPM employs a modiﬁed Metropolis Monte-Carlo algorithm, which chooses update sites randomly and accepts them with a Boltzmann probability. The total
energy of the tumor cell system includes an interfacial energy between the cells
that describes the cell-type dependent adhesion energy, a volume constraint that
keeps the cell volume to a value that it ”intends” to maintain; and an eﬀective
chemical energy that describes the cell’s ability to migrate up or down the gradient of the chemical concentration. When the cell’s clock reaches the cell cycle
duration and the cell volume reaches the target volume, the cell will divide.
The daughter cells inherit all properties of their parent with a probability for
mutation.
Cells also interact with their environment, which is characterized by local concentrations of biochemicals. We consider two types of chemicals: the metabolites
and the chemoattractants. The former includes nutrients (oxygen and glucose),
metabolic waste (lactate), and growth factors and inhibitors that cells secret
and uptake. The latter corresponds to the chemotactic signaling molecules. The
chemicals follow the reaction-diﬀusion dynamics:
∂Mi
= di ∇2 Mi − ai .
∂t
∂Ci
= Di ∇2 Ci − γCi + B.
∂t

(1)
(2)

Here the metabolite (concentration M ) diﬀuses with the diﬀusion constant d
and is consumed (or produced) at a constant rate a. The chemoattractant, i.e.
VEGF secreted by tumor cells to activate endothelial cells, diﬀuses with diﬀusion
constant D and decays at a rate γ. The local uptake function B describes that
an endothelial cell could bind as much as VEGF is available until its surface
receptors saturate. Both the metabolic rates and the uptake function B are
functions of time and space. By assuming that (1) inside the tumor the diﬀusion
coeﬃcients are constant; and (2) each cell is chemically homogeneous, while
diﬀerent cells might have diﬀerent chemical concentrations, we can solve the
equations on a much coarser lattice than the lattice for CPM.
We use parameters derived from multicellular tumor spheroid experiments, the
primary in vitro experimental model of avascular tumors [2]. Like tumors in vivo,
a typical spheroid consists of a necrotic core surrounded by layers of quiescent
and proliferating tumor cells, as shown in Fig. 2(c). It is critical to emphasize that

A Multiscale, Cell-Based Framework for Modeling Cancer Development

773

this multicellular tumor spheroid experimental model recapitulates all major
characteristics of the growth, composition, microenvironment, and therapeutic
response of solid tumors in humans [2].
To model tumor angiogenesis, the simulation domain now corresponds to the
stroma between the existing blood vessel and an avascular tumor. The tumor is a
constant source for VEGF, whose dynamics follow Eqn. (3) and establish a concentration gradient across the stroma. Each endothelial cell becomes activated
when the local VEGF concentration exceeds a threshold value. The activated
vascular endothelial cells not only increase proliferation, decrease apoptosis rate,
but also migrate towards the higher concentration of the VEGF signal.
The stroma consists of normal tissue cells and extracellular matrix (ECM).
We model the ECM explicitly as a matrix of ﬁbers. They are a special ”cell” with
a semi-rigid volume. The interstitial ﬂuid that ﬁlls the space amongst the normal
tissue cells and the ﬁbers is more deformable than the ﬁbers. When compressed
by the growing endothelial sprout, the normal cells can undergo apoptosis and
become part of the interstitial ﬂuid. The endothelial cells can modify the local
ﬁbronectin concentration and re-organizing the ﬁber structure, as well as migrate
on the matrix through haptotaxis, or follow the gradient of adhesion from the
gradient of ﬁbronectin density.

3

Parallelization

The underlying structure for the cell system is a 3D lattice. As all operations
in the CPM are local, domain decomposition method is a natural scheme for
parallelizing the CPM. We divide the physical domain into subdomains, one for
each processor. Each processor then model the subsystem, storing only the data
associated with the subdomain, and exchanging knowledge zone information
with processors handling its neighboring subdomains. We adopt 1D domain
decomposition based on two considerations. First, it will decrease the communication overhead when the knowledge zones are more continuous. Second, this
simple decomposition allows us to store the cell information in two layers: the lattice layer and the cell information layer. As each cell occupies many lattice sites
(over 100), this two-layer information structure far more eﬃcient than storing
all cell information on the lattice.
In the Monte Carlo update, to avoid expensive remote memory access, we use
openMP, a parallel approach suited for shared memory processors. Before the
Monte Carlo update of the lattice, the Master Node gathers subdomain lattice
information and cell information from slave nodes. The Master Node performs
Monte Carlo operations parallelly using openMP, and distributes subdomain
data to corresponding slave nodes for next operation (Fig. 1) [13].
We solve the reaction-diﬀusion equations that govern the chemical dynamics
on a chemical lattice that is coarser than the cell lattice. This lattice is similarly
decomposed and the equations solved in parallel within each subdomain. To
accelerate long time simulations, we use implicit PDE sovling schemes based on
BoxMG, an MPI-based multigrid PDE solver [14].

774

Y. Jiang

MPI based
data transfering

Slave Node 1

Local data

OpenMP based
parallelization

Master Node

Slave Node 2

Slave Node 3

Fig. 1. OpenMP based parallelization in Monte Carlo operation

4

Result

In our simulations, a single tumor cell evolves into a layered structure consisting
of concentric spheres of proliferating and quiescent cells at the surface and the
intermediate layer respectively, and a necrotic core at the center of the spheroid,
reproducing the experimental structure (Fig. 2).
Fig. 3 shows the comparison between the growth curves of a simulated solid
tumor and two sets of spheroid experimental data. With 0.08 mM oxygen and
5.5 mM glucose kept constant in the medium, the number of cells (Fig. 3a) and
the tumor volume (Fig. 3b) ﬁrst grow exponentially in time for about 5–7 days.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 2. Snapshots of a simulated solid tumor at 10 days (a), and 18 days (b) of growth
from a single cell. Blue, cyan, yellow and crimson encode cell medium, proliferating,
quiescent, and necrotic cells. (c) A histological crosssection of a spheroid of mouse
mammary cell line, EMT6/R0.

A Multiscale, Cell-Based Framework for Modeling Cancer Development

775

The growth then slows down, coinciding with the appearance of quiescent cells.
In both the experiments [15,16] and simulations, spheroid growth saturates after
around 28–30 days. We ﬁt both the experimental and the simulation data to a
Gompertz function, in order to objectively estimate the initial doubling times
and the spheroid saturation sizes [3]. The doubling times for cell volume in
experiments and simulations diﬀer by a factor of two, over almost 5 orders of
magnitude. The agreement was very good.
10

5

9

10

8

3

Volume [μm ]

Number of Cells

10

10

3

10

10

Simulation

10

Experiment #1
Experiment #2

0

10

5

10

15

Time [days]

20

10

25

(a)

7

6

Simulation

5

Experiment #1
Experiment #2

4

5

10

15

Time [days]

20

25

(b)

Fig. 3. The growth curves of a spheroid with 0.08 mM O2 and 5.5 mM glucose in the
medium: (a) the number of cells and (b) the volume of spheroid in time. The solid
symbols are experimental data for EMT6/Ro[15,16]; the circles are simulation data.
The solid lines are the best ﬁt with a Gompertz function for experimental data.

In order to test the robustness of our model, we kept all the parameters in
the model ﬁxed at the values determined to produce the best ﬁt to the growth
of spheroids in 0.08 mM oxygen and 5.5 mM glucose. We then varied only the
nutrient concentrations in the medium, as was done in spheroid experiments. Our
simulations still showed good agreement between simulation and experimental
growth curves when the external conditions were changed to 0.28 mM O2 and
16.5 mM glucose in the medium [7].
In ﬁtting our model to the experimental data, we predicted a set of conditions
for the cell to undergo necrosis and the diﬀusion coeﬃcients for the growth promoters and inhibitors to be in the order of 10−7 and 10−6 cm2 /hr, respectively.
These predictions can be tested experimentally.
In tumor angiogenesis, Fig. 4 shows that our model is able to capture realistic
cell dynamics and capillary morphologies, such as preferential sprout migration
along matrix ﬁbers and cell elongation, and more complex events, such as sprout
branching and fusion, or anastomosis [8], that occur during angiogenesis. Our
model constitutes the ﬁrst cell-based model of tumor-induced angiogenesis with
the realistic cell-cell and cell-matrix intereactions. This model can be employed as
a simulation tool for investigating mechanisms, testing existing and formulating
new research hypotheses. For example, we showed that freely diﬀusing VEGF
would result in broad and swollen sprouts, while matrix bound VEGF typically
generates thin sprouts [8], supporting the recent experimental interpretations.

776

Y. Jiang

Fig. 4. Tumor angiogenesis: a typical simulated vessel sprout. The left edge of the
simulation domain is the blood vessel wall, while the right edge is the source of VEGF.
Endothelial (red) cells grow and migrate in the stroma consists of normal cells (blue
squares), matrix ﬁbers (yellow) and interstitial ﬂuids (green).

5

Discussion and Outlook

This multiscale approach treats cells as the fundamental unit of cancer development. We will further develop the model and investigate the growth of vessels into
and inside tumor, as well as tumor growth and invasion. With this framework, we
will model the development of cancer from beginning to full metastasis. We will
also be able to test the eﬀects of drugs and therapeutic strategies. Combined with
the extant data (e.g. in vitro spheroid data and in vivo angiogenesis data), this
type of model will help construct anatomically accurate models of a tumor and
its vascular system. If successfully implemented, the model can guide experimental design and interpretation. Continuously revised by new information, the ﬁnal
model could potentially enable us to assess tumor susceptibility to multiple therapeutic interventions, improve understanding of tumor biology, better predict and
prevent tumor metastasis, and ultimately increase patient survival. Furthermore,
most biomedical problems involves systems level interactions. Genome, or molecular, or single cell studies cannot possibly provide systems level behaviors. This
cell-based, multiscale modeling framework is applicable to a number of problems,
e.g. bioﬁlm formation, organogenesis, where cell-cell and cell-environment interactions dictate the collective behavior.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Nuclear Security Administration of the
U.S. Department of Energy at Los Alamos National Laboratory under Contract
No. DE-AC52-06NA25396.

A Multiscale, Cell-Based Framework for Modeling Cancer Development

777

References
1. Jemal, A.:The Journal of the American Medical Association, 294 (2005) 1255–
1259.
2. Sutherland, R.M. Cell and environment interactions in tumor microregions: the
multicell spheroid model. Science 240 (1988) 177–184.
3. Marusic, M., Bajzer Z, Freyer J.P., and Vuk-Pavlovic S: Analysis of growth of
multicellular tumour spheroid by mathematical models. Cell Prolif. 27 (1994) 73.
4. Zheng, X., Wise S.M., and Cristini V.: Nonlinear simulation of tumor necrosis, neovascularization and tissue invasion via an adaptive ﬁnite-element/level-set method,
Bull. Math. Biol. 67 (2005) 211-259
5. Alarcon, T., Byrne H.M., and Maini P.K.: A Multiple Scale Model for Tumor
Growth, Multiscale Modeling and Simulation. 3 (2004) 440–475.
6. Alarcon, T., Byrne H.M., and Maini P.K.: Towards whole-organ modelling of tumour growth, Progress in Biophysics & Molecular Biology. 85 (2004) 451 – 472.
7. Jiang, Y., Pjesivac J., Cantrell C, and Freyer J.P.: A multiscale model for avascular
tumor growth, Biophys. J. 89 (2005) 3873–3883 .
8. Bauer, A.L., Jackson T.L., and Jiang Y.: A cell-based model exhibiting branching
and anastomosis during tumor-induced angiogenesis. Biophys. J. 92 (2007) in press.
9. Glazier, J.A. and Garner F: Simulation of the diﬀerential adhesion driven rearrangement of biological cells. Phys. Rev. E 47 (1993): 2128-2154.
10. Jiang, Y., Levine H. and Glazier J.A.: Diﬀerential adhesion and chemotaxis in
mound formation of Dictyostelium, Biophys. J. 75(1998) 2615 –2625.
11. LaRue, K.E., Kahlil M., and Freyer J.P.: Microenvironmental regulation of proliferation in EMT6 multicellular spheroids is mediated through diﬀerential expression
of cycline-dependent kinase inhibitors. Cancer Res. 64(2004) 1621–1631.
12. Data from the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (kegg.com).
13. He, K., Dong S., and Jiang Y.: Parallel Cellular Potts Model (2007) in preparation.
14. Austin T., Berndt M., et al. Parallel, Scalable, and Robust Multigrid on Structured
Grids. Los Alamos Research Report (2003): LA-UR-03-9167.
15. Freyer, J.P. and Sutherland R.M.: Regulation of growth saturation and development of necrosis in EMT6/R0 multicellular spheroids by the glucose and oxygen
supply. Cancer Res. 46(1986) 3504-3512.
16. Freyer, J.P. and R.M. Sutherland. Proliferative and clonogenic heterogeneity of
cells from EMT6/Ro multicellular spheroids induced by the glucose and oxygen
supply. Cancer Res. 46 (1986) 3513-3520.

