Analysis of an Adaptive Key Selection Scheme in Wireless
Sensor Networks
Guorui Li1, Jingsha He2, and Yingfang Fu1
1

College of Computer Science and Technology
Beijing University of Technology
Beijing 100022, China
{liguorui,fmsik}@emails.bjut.edu.cn
2
School of Software Engineering
Beijing University of Technology
Beijing 100022, China
jhe@bjut.edu.cn

Abstract. Sensor networks are suitable for a variety of commercial and military
applications due to their self-organization characteristics and distributed nature.
As a fundamental requirement for security functionality in sensor networks, key
management plays a central role in authentication and encryption. In this paper,
we describe an Adaptive Key Selection (AKS) scheme for multi-deployment in
sensor networks and analyze the scheme in the aspects of security, connectivity
and overhead. Our analysis shows that the AKS scheme can greatly improve the
connectivity of sensor nodes while maintaining the security of an existing
multi-deployment scheme.
Keywords: sensor networks, security, key predistribution, multi-deployment.

1 Introduction
Recent advances in micro-electro-mechanical systems, electronics and wireless communications have made it practical now to develop and deploy low-cost, high-performance
and low-power sensor nodes. These nodes are equipped with sensing, processing and
communication capabilities. In such a network, security is important to guarantee
confidentiality, integrity and availability of transported data. As the basic requirement for
security functionality, key management plays a central role in data encryption and in authentication. However, due to energy and resource limitations in sensor nodes, many ordinary security mechanisms are deemed impractical, if not infeasible, in sensor networks.
There are currently three types of key management schemes that are commonly used
in sensor networks: trusted server scheme, self-enforcing scheme, and key predistribution scheme. The first type of scheme, i.e., the trusted server scheme, relies on a
trusted server for key distribution and management. The second type of scheme, i.e.,
the self-enforcing scheme, relies on asymmetric cryptography for key distribution and
management using public key certificates. However, the lack of a trusted infrastructure
in application environments and limited computation and energy resources in sensor
nodes make these two types of schemes undesirable. The third type of scheme, i.e., the
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 409–416, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

410

G. Li, J. He, and Y. Fu

key predistribution scheme, is one in which cryptographic keys are predistributed in all
sensor nodes prior to deployment [1]. There are already several key predistribution
schemes that have been proposed, such as the basic probabilistic key predistribution
scheme [2], the q-composite key predistribution scheme [3], the random pairwise key
scheme [3], the random subset assignment scheme [4], the grid-based key predistribution scheme [4], the closest pairwise key predistribution scheme [5], and the closest
polynomials predistribution scheme [5]. The Adaptive Key Selection scheme is developed based on the above basic schemes.
As time goes by, some sensor nodes may be destroyed, compromised or dead. Since
these nodes no longer work properly, the sensor network may become fragmented. The
consequence is that not all collected data can be transmitted to the sink node that collects the data. Therefore, new sensor nodes have to be deployed in the network to replace those out-of-function nodes to reestablish a connected network. However, little
work has been done so far to address this concern.
One simple method is to deploy a group of new sensor nodes that are loaded with
predistributed keys selected from the same key pool as that for the previously deployed
set of sensor nodes. We call this scheme the basic multi-deployment scheme. The
benefit of this scheme is that the newly deployed sensor nodes share the same group of
predistributed keys as those for the previously deployed sensor nodes so that they can
establish connections fairly easily. However, its shortcoming is equally obvious. That
is, the sensor nodes that have already been compromised will have negative impact on
the newly deployed sensor nodes. As the result, the newly deployed sensor nodes may
not be safe from the very beginning of their deployment when the percentage of the
compromised sensor nodes exceeds a certain number.
Arjan Durresi et al. proposed the Secure Continuity for Sensor Networks (SCON)
scheme [6]. In this scheme, the sensor nodes that belong to different deployment sets
are loaded with predistributed keys from different key pools. And the bridge nodes with
large memory and high computation power are deployed at the same time to help the
sensor nodes establish secure links between the sensor nodes in the new deployment set
and those in the previous deployment set. However, the probability of establishing a
secure link between any two sensor nodes that belong to two different deployment sets
is very low because the bridge node is only loaded with predistributed keys that are
randomly selected from the key pool of the new deployment set and that of the previous
deployment set. Therefore, extra help is needed from actors that possess arbitrary
moving capacity so that they can be deployed in lower connectivity areas to help sensor
nodes establish secure links.
In this paper, we describe an Adaptive Key Selection (AKS) scheme for
multi-deployment in sensor networks. This scheme can be applied to the hierarchical
wireless sensor networks in multiple deployments of sensor nodes. We use three types
of network elements in this scheme: base station, cluster head nodes and ordinary
sensor nodes. We assume that the base station stores all the predistributed keys for
every sensor node and the cluster head nodes have strong computation, memory and
communication power and can communicate with the base station using an asymmetric
encryption algorithm. Every cluster head node executes the AKS algorithm to select the
optimal key set and assists in establishing secure links between any two sensor nodes
that belong to two different deployment sets. Our analysis shows that our scheme can
greatly improve the connectivity between any two sensor nodes that belong to two

Analysis of an Adaptive Key Selection Scheme in Wireless Sensor Networks

411

different deployment sets. The flexibility of the AKS scheme ensures that it can be
combined with any key predistribution scheme described in [1-5].
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we describe the AKS
scheme. In Section 3, we analyze the connectivity, security and overhead aspects of this
scheme. In Section 4, we identify some related work in sensor network security. Finally,
in Section 5, we conclude this paper and discuss some future research directions.

2 The Adaptive Key Selection Scheme
In the AKS scheme, all sensor nodes in the network are classified into three different
types: the base station, the cluster head nodes and the ordinary sensor nodes. These
nodes perform different functions to achieve the goal, which is described in this section.
2.1 Key Determination in the Cluster Head Nodes
The strong computation, memory and communication power of the cluster head nodes
enable these nodes to use an asymmetry encryption algorithm to secure communication
with the base station node. Each cluster head node operates by following the procedure
below:
(1) A cluster head node broadcasts a query message to acquire the ID information of
its neighboring sensor nodes.
(2) After receiving a query message, a sensor node transmits its ID information to
the cluster head node.
(3) The cluster head node collects the ID information from the neighboring sensor
nodes, encrypts such information in a message using its private key Kpri and
sends the message to the base station. The base station verifies the message
using the cluster head node’s public key and retrieves the ID information.
(4) The base station encrypts the predistributed keys for the sensor nodes contained
in the message using the cluster head node’s public key Kpub and sends the resulting message to the cluster head node.
(5) The cluster head node decrypts the received message from the base station using
its private key and gets the predistributed keys for its neighboring sensor nodes.
(6) The cluster head node runs the AKS algorithm presented below to select the
optimal key set.
2.2 The Adaptive Key Selection (AKS) Algorithm
The Adaptive Key Selection algorithm works as follows:
(1) For all the sensor nodes, S1, …, Sm, that belong to the same deployment set, we
build a n × m matrix M to describe key predistribution status where n is the
number of different keys and m is the number of sensor nodes. We set Mij=1 if
sensor node Si is predistributed with the jth key, otherwise, Mij=0.
(2) We sum the matrix M by column and the resulting n × 1 vector V represents the
number of each predistributed key in the deployment set.

412

G. Li, J. He, and Y. Fu

(3) We select the maximum element in vector V and the corresponding row number
imax is the number of the optimal key selected in this round. If there is more than
one such maximum element, we just select the first such element.
(4) We set all the elements of column j to be 0 if Mimaxj=1 to exclude the nodes that
hold the selected optimal key.
(5) Repeat steps (2)-(4) until all the elements in M become 0.
When the algorithm completes, we have the queue for optimal key selection for the
deployment set. All the keys in this queue are critical keys and they form the minimum
spanning set of all the predistributed keys for the deployment set. The closer the position of a key to the front of the queue, the higher the number of sensor nodes that share
this key, and this key should, therefore, be selected with a higher priority.
2.3 Key Establishment in Ordinary Sensor Nodes

In an ordinary sensor node, key establishment includes three phases: (1) key predistribution phase, (2) direct key establishment phase and (3) path key establishment
phase. Two sensor nodes that belong to two different deployment sets can establish a
secure path key with the help of the cluster head node. The cluster head node can certainly do so for two sensor nodes in the same deployment set because it stores all the
critical keys for this deployment set. If it stores all the critical keys for different deployment sets, we can see that the length of any path key is no more than two hops.

3 Analysis
We analyze the AKS scheme in terms of security, connectivity and overhead to demonstrate its feasibility. In particular, we compare the AKS scheme with the SCON
scheme in the analysis where appropriate to show that the former is more advantageous
over the latter in some key aspects of multi-deployment in sensor networks.
3.1 Security Analysis

Fig. 1 shows the relationship between the percentage of compromised links between
sensor nodes in a new deployment and that of compromised nodes in the previous
deployment in the basic multi-deployment scheme [6]. We can thus see that the

Fig. 1. Relationship between the percentage of compromised links and that of compromised
nodes in the basic multi-deployment scheme

Analysis of an Adaptive Key Selection Scheme in Wireless Sensor Networks

413

effectiveness of a new deployment of sensor nodes is heavily influenced by the number
of compromised sensor nodes in the previous deployment set. In the SCON and the
AKS schemes, however, the sensor nodes of a new deployment set are immune to the
compromised sensor nodes of the previous deployment set, for the new nodes are
loaded with keys predistributed from a different key set. That is, the percentage of
compromised links in the SCON and the AKS scheme is 0.
3.2 Connectivity Analysis

In the SCON scheme, the number of keys that are randomly selected from the new
deployment set and predistributed into the bridge node is the same as that from the
previous deployment set. Therefore, the probability of establishing a link between any
two sensor nodes that belong to two different deployment sets is:
⎛
⎜
⎜ 1 −
⎜
⎜
⎝

C

⎞
⎟
n − k ⎟
⎟
k
C
⎟
n
⎠
k

2

where n is the size of key predistribution pool and k is the number of predistributed keys
in each sensor node. And the bridge node is predistributed with 2k number of keys.
In the AKS scheme, the probability of establishing a link between two senor nodes
that belong to two different deployment sets is higher than that in the SCON scheme.
This is because the keys stored in the cluster head node are selected from the optimal
key selection queues of the respective deployment sets. To validate our claim, we did
some simulation in which we used 200 as the number of sensor nodes for each deployment set and 1,000 as the size of the pool for predistributed keys. Each sensor node
would be predistributed with k keys, where k=0,…,100, that were randomly selected
from the key pool. Fig. 2 shows that connectivity between any two sensor nodes that

Fig. 2. The connectivity between sensor nodes that belong to two different deployment sets in the
SCON and the AKS schemes, respectively

414

G. Li, J. He, and Y. Fu

belong to two different deployment sets in the SCON scheme and that in the AKS
scheme. We can thus conclude that network connectivity using the AKS scheme is
much better than that using the SCON scheme.
Fig. 3 shows the relationship between connectivity among sensor nodes that belong
to two different deployment sets in the AKS scheme and the number of keys k in each
sensor node. It also shows the result for different K, the number of keys stored in a
cluster head node. We can thus see that the higher the number of keys K is in a cluster
head node, the higher the connectivity is between any two sensor nodes. We can also
see that even when the number of keys in a cluster head in the AKS scheme is only half
of that in the SCON scheme, the connectivity between any two sensor nodes is much
higher in the AKS scheme than that in the SCON scheme.

Fig. 3. The connectivity between sensor nodes that belong to two different deployment sets in the
AKS scheme for different key storage sizes in the cluster head nodes

3.3 Overhead Analysis

The AKS scheme would incur communication and computational overhead to the
cluster head nodes while having little impact on the ordinary sensor nodes. The communication overhead mainly results from key request and reply messages between the
cluster head nodes and the base station node, and the computational overhead mainly
results from encryption and decryption computation in the cluster head nodes for requesting and receiving keys from the base station node as well as from optimal key
selection in the AKS algorithm. That is why we require that the cluster head nodes have
the necessary computation, storage and communication power.
In order to decrease the communication overhead and the computational overhead,
we can predistribute all the keys in every deployment set to the cluster head nodes
before the actual deployment. After deployment, the cluster head nodes can collect the
ID information of its neighboring sensor nodes and only reserve the optimal keys selected using the AKS algorithm while removing all the other keys to enhance the security of key management [7].

Analysis of an Adaptive Key Selection Scheme in Wireless Sensor Networks

415

4 Related Work
Nowadays, there are many studies in the area of security in wireless sensor networks.
These studies are mostly focused on key management, authentication, and vulnerability
analysis. In addition to studies on key predistribution schemes [1-6], intrusion detection
system (IDS) is also very important to detect compromised sensor nodes and ensure the
security of the whole network [8, 9]. Furthermore, Wood and Stankovic identified a
number of DoS attacks in sensor networks [10] and Deng et al. described a path-based
DoS attack and proposed a solution using one-way hash chains to protect end-to-end
communication against this type of DoS attacks [11].

5 Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we described an Adaptive Key Selection scheme and the corresponding
algorithm for multi-deployment in sensor networks. Our analysis shows that the AKS
scheme can greatly improve the connectivity of sensor nodes while maintaining the
security in existing multi-deployment schemes. In the future, we will focus on developing methods to protect the cluster head nodes and to detect compromised sensor
nodes in order to further improve the security of sensor networks.

References
1. Du, W.L., Deng, J., Han, Y.S., Chen, S., Varshney, P.K.: A Key Management Scheme for
Wireless Sensor Networks Using Deployment Knowledge. Proc. IEEE INFOCOM 2004.
(2004) 586-597
2. Eschenauer, L., Gligor, V.D.: A Key-Management Scheme for Distributed Sensor Networks. Proc. 9th ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security. (2002)
41-47
3. Chan, H., Perrig, A., Song, D.: Random Key Predistribution Schemes for Sensor Networks.
Proc. IEEE Symposium on Research in Security and Privacy. (2003) 197-213
4. Liu, D.G., Ning, P.: Establishing Pairwise Keys in Distributed Sensor Networks. Proc. 10th
ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security. (2003) 52-61
5. Liu, D.G., Ning, P.: Location-based Pairwise Key Establishments for Static Sensor Networks.
Proc. 2003 ACM Workshop on Security in Ad Hoc and Sensor Networks. (2003) 72-82
6. Durresi, A., Bulusu, V., Paruchuri, V., Barolli, L.: Secure and Continuous Management of
Heterogeneous Ad Hoc Networks. Proc. 20th International Conference on Advanced Information Networking and Applications. (2006) 511-516
7. Simplot-Ryl, D., Simplot-Ryl, I.: Connectivity Preservation and Key Distribution in Wireless Sensor Networks Using Multi-deployment Scheme. Proc. 3rd International Conference
on Ubiquitous Intelligence and Computing. (2006) 988-997
8. Silva, A., Martins, M., Rocha, B., Loureiro, A., Ruiz, L., Wong, H.: Decentralized Intrusion
Detection in Wireless Sensor Networks. Proc. 1st ACM International Workshop on Quality
of Service & Security in Wireless and Mobile Networks. (2005) 16-23

416

G. Li, J. He, and Y. Fu

9. Roman, R., Zhou, J.Y., Lopez, J.: Applying Intrusion Detection Systems to Wireless Sensor
Networks. Proc. 3rd Consumer Communications and Networking Conference. (2006) 640-644
10. Wood, D., Stankovic, J.A.: Denial of Service in Sensor Networks. IEEE Computer, Vol. 35,
No. 10. (2002) 54-62
11. Deng, J., Mishra, S.: Defending Against Path-based DoS Attacks in Wireless Sensor Networks. Proc. 3rd ACM workshop on Security of Ad hoc and Sensor Networks. (2005) 89-96

