Stained Glass Rendering with Smooth Tile
Boundary
SangHyun Seo, HoChang Lee, HyunChul Nah, and KyungHyun Yoon
ChungAng University,
221, HeokSuk-dong, DongJak-gu, Seoul, Korea
{shseo,fanpanic,hcnah,khyoon}@cglab.cse.cau.ac.kr
http://cglab.cse.cau.ac.kr

Abstract. We introduce a new glass tile generation method for simulating Stained Glass using region segmentation algorithm and cubic spline
interpolation method. We apply a Mean shift segmentation algorithm
to a source image to extract a shape of glass tile. We merge regions
by user input and use morphological operation to remove the invalid
shape. To make the shape of glass tile, we apply cubic spline interpolation and obtain the leading and the region with smooth boundary. Next,
we re-segment the region using the spline curves. Finally we apply the
transformed colors to each region to create a whole glass tile.

1

Introduction

This study is to make the Stained Glass image that looks like manually produced
by artists using the 2D image as the input. The Stained Glass rendering is a
ﬁeld of NPR(Non-Photo realistic Rendering) and it is very much diﬀerent from
the traditional realistic rendering. While the rendering primitive of the realistic
rendering is a pixel that of the Stained Glass rendering is a region, the collection
of the pixels. Therefore the output image may be varied according to the size and
the shape of the area. In this paper, we would like to introduce a new method
to create glass tile. The Stained Glass is made by cutting and pasting the glass
therefore the unit of the Stained Glass is a glass tile. As conventional algorithm
used to create a glass tile simply using region segmentation, it could not have
the Stained Glass like feeling if the region segmentation were not appropriate.
In order to resolve this problem, we interpolated the boundaries between the
regions, re-segmented each segmented area to create the region to compose glass
tiles.

2

Related Work

Although many diﬀerent studies have been performed since the studies regarding
the NPR were started Strothotte[1], Recently, there have been many trials to
simulate the Stained Glass using computer technology.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part II, LNCS 4488, pp. 162–165, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Stained Glass Rendering with Smooth Tile Boundary

163

In Photoshop, The Stained Glass ﬁlter is one of them. The Stained Glass
ﬁlter of the Photoshop basically makes the image using Voronoi Diagram having
random Voronoi sites(Hoﬀ[5]).
Mould[2] approached to the studies on the Stained Glass in diﬀerent ways.
This method dividied the input image using the region segmentation method
based on the color, and then it mitigated the segmented regions applying the
morphological operation. However the regions created by Mould[2] method are
far from the formative structures.

3
3.1

Glass Tile Generation for the Stained Glass
Region Generation of Glass Tiles

It is very important to abstract the segments that can be expressed in glass tiles.
In this study, we used the Mean Shift segmentation algorithm(Comanicu[4]) to
generate the basic segmented regions creating the glass tiles(Fig. 1(b)).
Additionally, as the regions with unexpected shapes can be created from the
application of the segmentation algorithm, we made it possible for the user to
merge the regions through input(Fig. 1(c)).

Fig. 1. Stained glass rendering process (a) Input image (b) Mean shift segmentation
(c) Region merge (d) Morphological operation (e) Region boundary interpolation (f)
Region re-division (g) Rendered image after color transform

3.2

Interpolation of the Region Boundaries

In order to purify each segment, we used morphological operations (Fig. 1(d))and
the cubic spline interpolation(Fig. 1(e)). because the abstracted regions have
improper shaped regions created by the Mean Shift segmentation algorithm and
the rough boundaries in the form of noise.
Although Mould[2] tried to resolve those two problems using the morphological operations only, this study used it to remove the improper shaped segments
and used the cubic spline interpolation to make the rough boundary.

164

S. Seo et al.

Next, to make the boundaries of the mitigated shaped regions smooth, we
applied the cubic spline interpolation. In order to calculate cubic spline interpolation we need to select the control point. To select the control point, we deﬁned
the distance of the control point and then selected the point on the boundary
with the pre-set distance from the current control point (Fig. 2(a)).

Fig. 2. (a)Search control points for spline interpolation (b)Region re-segmentation process (c)Re-segmentation result

We applied the same method to create the leading that ﬁlls the gaps between
glasses in the actual stained glass during the interpolation process. It is to abstract the parts that did not create the segment as the leading by creating and
applying the smaller spline curves than the basic segments.
3.3

Re-segmentation of the Region

For securing the formative beauty that shown in the actual stained glass. We
re-segmented the large segment region(Fig. 1(f)).
In the re-segmentation process, we made random curve and re-segmented the
regions based on the curve.
First of all, select a random point on the region and identify two points
on the boundary near the selected point to use them as the control points.
Based on the selected three points, create a curve using the cubic spline interpolation (Fig. 2(b)). We limited the number of the control points as three
because if we use too many points on the segment it would bend the curve too
much. It is improper to apply the over-bent curve to the stained glass rendering
(Fig. 2(c)).
3.4

Determination of the Colors for Each Region

Mould[2] converted the colors in the input image to the colors that could be
used in the Middle Age to designate the colors of the glass tiles. We applied the
same method to this study. Through this process, we could have the strong color
contrast eﬀects(Fig. 1(g)).

Stained Glass Rendering with Smooth Tile Boundary

4

165

Conclusion

In this study, we created the shapes of the smooth glass tiles similar to those in
the actual stained glass by interpolating the boundaries between the segments
to simulate the stained glass image, and then created the frame shape of leading
with irregular thickness that we could ﬁnd between the glass tiles. Additionally
we created the formative characteristics that composed a meaningful segment by
gathering small glass tiles through the re-segmentation of the segment. We also
expressed the strong color contrast through the color conversion process(Fig. 3).
Additionally, to emphasize the formative shapes, we highlighted the boundaries
before re-segmentation with thick lines. As the stained glass is mainly used in
windows, we gave the round light source eﬀects to the image so that we could
get the lighting eﬀects. Fig. 3 shows the comparison between the image after the
light source eﬀect application and the image from Mould[2].
Actual stained glass is made of color glasses.

Fig. 3. Result Images

References
1. Thomas Strothotte and Stefan Schlechtweg, Non-Photorealistic Computer Graphics: Modeling, Rendering and Animation, (2002), Morgan Kaufmann, ISBN:
1-558-6078-70
2. David Mould: A Stained Glass Image Filter. In the proceedings of the 14th EUROGRAPHICS Workshop on Rendering, pp. 20-25
3. Grodecki, L., Brisac, C. : Gothic Stained Glass. Thames and Hudson, London, (1985)
4. Comanicu, D., Meer, P. : Mean shift: a robust approach toward feature space analysis. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Machine Intell, 24, 4 (2002), 603-619
5. Hoﬀ, K., Keyser, J., Lin, M., Manocha, D. and Culver, T. : Fast Computation
of Generalized Voronoi Diagrams Using Graphics Hardware. In the proceedings of
SIGGRAPH 99: 277-286
6. Gonzalez, Woods: Digital Image Processing”, Addison Wesley, (1993)
7. Adam Finkelstein, Marisa Range, :Image Mosaics, Technical Report of Princeton
Univ., (1998)

