Agile Knowledge Supply Chain
for Emergency Decision-Making Support
Qingquan Wang and Lili Rong
Institute of Systems Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, 116024 Dalian, China
dlwqq@hotmail.com, llrong@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract. Facing complex and changing emergencies decision makers need to
obtain sufficient background knowledge to make effective decisions. We outline the characteristics of requirements for decision-making around knowledge
sources, agility and the nature of knowledge products in quick responses to
emergencies. We characterize the process of knowledge management in emergencies as quotation, manufacture and supply of a special product -- Emergency
Knowledge Product. From the point of view of achieving agility, we draw on
the operational mechanism of the Agile Supply Chain (ASC) to construct Agile
Knowledge Supply Chain (AKSC), a first in this paper. According to Similarities between ASC and AKSC, here we depict definition and architecture of
AKSC. AKSC can explore a new approach to knowledge-based quick responses
in the emergency decision-making support.
Keywords: Emergency Decision-Making, Knowledge Product, Knowledge
management Agility, Agile Knowledge Supply Chain.

1 Introduction
Nowadays, humans are threatened by various unexpected disasters which include all
kinds of terror attacks, epidemics, hurricanes, tsunamis, earthquakes, air crashes,
collective food poisoning and industrial accidents. With increasing technology, population and deterioration of the environment, losses of such disasters are increasing
exponentially. An outbreak of these disasters causes immeasurable losses in lives and
property, like the 911 terror attack, SARS, the bird flu, the Indian Ocean tsunami, the
Katrina hurricane, and the Pakistan earthquake. Quick and effective decision- making
is crucial in emergency responses [1], and is closely related to background knowledge
of circumstances and experiences [2].
In the last decade, Emergency Decision Support Systems (EDSS) have gradually
introduced and integrated the technologies of knowledge management. For examples,
advanced knowledge models to support environmental emergency management in [3],
aggregation of the knowledge of geographically separate experts in [4], the EDSS
raised in [5], the expert system developed for knowledge acquisition of chemical
incidents [6], the agent-based environmental emergency knowledge system in [7].
The knowledge-based EDSS is still in its primary stage, but the maturation of knowledge-based technologies is facilitating this enterprise. [5].
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 178–185, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Agile Knowledge Supply Chain for Emergency Decision-Making Support

179

The speed and quality of background knowledge are key factors in quick-response
emergency decision-making. Mendonca deems that speed of response and quality of
knowledge is crucial factors for effective emergency response [4]. And Viviane emphasized time pressure in Collaborative Emergency Responses, described a system
which aims at storing and disseminating contextual knowledge to an emergency [8].
Therefore, there are the problems of agility in emergency responses.
Agility of knowledge system is a new research subject in the knowledge management field. Some researchers have started focusing attention on the agility of knowledge system; for example, KWM, in improving the agility of knowledge management
[9], agile knowledge sharing [10], agile knowledge workflow [11], agile knowledge
engineering methodology, RapidOWL [12], and project SAKE launched by European
Community [13]. Agility is much more prominent in the knowledge-based EDSS,
especially acquisition of background knowledge, and it is an important indicator for
evaluating the aided effectiveness of decision-making background knowledge in relieving time pressure.
The agile manufacturing field gives us a hint that the Agile Supply Chain (ASC)
can adjust itself to fit the continuous changes in market demands. A Supply Chain is a
loosely related group of companies formed to enable collaboration in achieving mutually agreed upon goals [14], and includes activities and processes to supply products
or services to end-users. The concept of ASC was introduced by Stanford University.
Researches of ASC mainly concentrate on virtual enterprises, information flow, Supply Chain reconstruction, etc. [15], [16]. From the point of view of the agility of providing background knowledge to the decision-maker, we outline the characteristics of
requirements of decision-making and apply emergency knowledge management to the
process of quotation, manufacture and supply of a special product. We draw on the
operational mechanism of ASC to construct the Architecture of the Agile Knowledge
Supply Chain (AKSC) for emergency decision-making support.
In this paper the requirements of emergency decision-making including knowledge
resources, characteristics of knowledge requirements and product requirements, are
introduced in section 2. In section 3, the nature of ASC, the definition of AKSC and
their similarities are discussed. In section 4, we present AKSC architecture. Finally, a
summary of this paper is given in section 5.

2 Requirements of Emergency Decision-Making
2.1 Requirements of Emergency Knowledge Sources
“Knowledge is not the same as information. Knowledge is information that has been
pared, shaped, interpreted, selected, and transformed”-- E. Feigenbaum.
Processing emergency raw information into knowledge is similar to processing raw
materials into products. Knowledge processing has specific sources of information. In
knowledge-based EDSS there are three main sources of ‘raw material’ information: emergency environments, contributing emergent incidents and emergency documentation,
shown in figure 1.

180

Q. Wang and L. Rong

Fig. 1. Sources of Emergency Knowledge

Information materials usually come from emergency environmental monitoring
and assessment, analysis and evaluation of emergent incidents, empirical information
from emergency documentation, and the integration of them. They constitute respectively, direct knowledge, transcendental knowledge and integrated knowledge.
Direct knowledge and transcendental knowledge have a better application in the
existing EDSS, but the most difficult thing is to integrate data, information and
knowledge from various information sources [17]. Therefore, in knowledge-based
emergency decision support we should not only provide the decision-makers with
direct knowledge and transcendental knowledge, but also integrate them effectively to
reduce the pressure on decision-makers for improved decision- making.
2.2 Requirements of Agility of Knowledge Support
“Knowledge should be presented understandably, simply, clearly”-- Z.T. Wang [18].
Knowledge in different applications requires different features. Such as generality,
complexity and implicity are main features of knowledge in Knowledge Engineering.
In the process of quick emergency response, the knowledge decision-makers receive should be correct, complete, clear and simply described. In addition to these
spatial characteristics emergency knowledge management also has characteristic
temporal agility. Any loss of agility results in a loss of its original value to decisionmakers. Emergency knowledge management agility minimizes time required for
processing of emergency knowledge in acquisition, representation and reasoning.
We can regard agility as a feature of emergency knowledge for comparison. Suppose that knowledge provided is transcendental knowledge from emergency documentation. The correctness and completeness of it can be verified and evaluated before the
emerging event. The relationships between agility and other characteristics of emergency knowledge can be illustrated roughly through a cube in Figure 2.

Agile Knowledge Supply Chain for Emergency Decision-Making Support

181

Fig. 2. Cube of Emergency Knowledge Features

With the exception of agility, the closer the points of knowledge are to A the more
implicit the emergency knowledge is; the closer to B, the more ambiguous; to C, the
more complex. By the same token, the closer they are to point O, they are more explicit, precise and simple. Point O can be expressed as (Explicit, Precise, Simple), and
Point M as (Implicit, Ambiguous, Complex). In other words, efficient decision-making
support should provide explicit, precise and simply described emergency knowledge.
The closer they are to origin O in Figure 2 the more efficient they are.
However, in practical applications agility in decision-making support is usually the
most critical factor, see figure 2. Among the knowledge points {P1, P2, P3, P4, P5},
point P4 (Agility = 0.9) has the highest probability of being accepted as the most agile.
2.3 Emergency Knowledge Features Required
“Knowledge is a product of the human spirit, mediated by language.” -- A. Sigel [19].
In response to a certain emergency, the emergency knowledge available for decision-makers often comes from different departments, various emergency documentation, diverse environments, or experience from similar cases. The acquisition of
emergency knowledge involves the process of knowledge decomposition, matching
and integration.
Knowledge and products have their respective characteristics. For example, products are usually tangible expendable exclusive, and have value; but knowledge is
intangible, unquantifiable value, re-usable and share-able, as it is shown in figure 3.
However, in the knowledge management of emergency decision-making, there are
notable similarities between product and knowledge, the intersection in Figure 3.
They both are demand-driven, subject to supply and demand matching requirements,
have their corresponding owners and transfer regularly from one to another, have their
respective raw materials, structural characteristics and functions, can be decomposed
and integrated, and are agile in generation and supply.
Therefore, in quick response emergency decision-making, the knowledge decisionmakers receive and use is a kind of product, Emergency Knowledge Product (EKP).
EKP is a product processed from dispersed emergency information, and it can be said
that the process of EKP is a special approach to knowledge representation.

182

Q. Wang and L. Rong

Fig. 3. Common Features of Knowledge and Products

Emergency decision-makers use EKP as reference to make appropriate decisions.
Each decision is incorporated as an information source into subsequent decisions.
Emergency decision-makers are either end-consumers or providers of raw materials.

3 Agile Knowledge Supply Chain
In the three knowledge requirements above we can see that emergency knowledge
management is very similar to the ASC. The main characteristic of ASC which is
distinct from the general Supply Chain is rapid reconstruction and readjustment with
the formation and dissolution of a dynamic alliance. Agility of ASC is the ability of
quick responses to survive, develop and enlarge the competitive advantages in an
uncertain and rapid changing environment. Improved Supply Chain performance
implies that a Supply Chain is capable of quickly responding to variations in customer
demands with effective cost reduction, [20] such as lead time [21].
In emergency responses, alliances among various relevant organizations and departments (Emergency Alliances) are formed according to the different types of emergent
incidents. Members of Emergency Alliances concentrate on their respective responsibilities, and establish organizational relationships based on integrative commands and
cooperation. Emergency Alliances are special virtual enterprises and constitute Supply
Chains based on knowledge management.
We construct Agile Knowledge Supply Chains (AKSC) to support emergency decision-making. They are directed toward the realization agility in decision-making support to reinforce emergency knowledge management. AKSC is a Supply Chain which
takes knowledge as a product, establishes an Emergency Alliance, gives priority to its
Command Center which directs Functional Departments, and has notable agility in
emergency decision-making support. See the similarities between ASC and AKSC
elements of reconstruction, information sharing and flow management in Table 1.

Agile Knowledge Supply Chain for Emergency Decision-Making Support

183

Table 1. Similarity between ASC and AKSC
Item
Reconstruction
Information
Sharing
Organizational
form
Drive Mode
Global Object
Output

ASC
Rapid reconstruction and readjustment according to market demand
Sharing information among enterprises in the Supply Chain to
avoid a bullwhip effect
Virtual enterprise, a dynamic
alliance based on the matching
supply and demand of products
Customer order-driven
Reduce the business risks arising
from uncertainty and variability
Goods have commercial value

Flow Manage- Integrated flows of materials,
ment
information, capital
Agility
Supply products to meet customer
demands in the shortest possible
time
Network
Promote the circulation of product, capital and information

AKSC
Rapid reconstruction and readjustment according to emergent incident
Sharing information among the emergency departments to avoid delays in
knowledge acquisition
Emergency Alliance, a dynamic alliance based on the matching supply
and demand of knowledge
Decision-maker requirement-driven
Achieve ultimate effectiveness of
emergency decision implementation
All sorts of knowledge used in emergency decision-making
Integrated flows of knowledge demands, supplies and production
Supply knowledge to meet decisionmaking demands in the shortest possible time
Facilitate knowledge re-use and
sharing

4 Architecture of AKSC
Generally, Emergency Alliances consist of Command Centers and functional departments. Emergency Alliances are usually established by Command Centers which
bring together various emergency functional departments around the requirements of
emergent incidents. So an Emergency Alliance has only one leader, its Command
Center, which is usually launched and directed by a specific level of government. The
relationships among the members of Emergency Alliances are, under unified leadership, directive, rather than the collaborative equality and mutual trust characteristic of
traditional Supply Chains. Because of changing targets, requirements and tasks of
emergent incidents the structure of an Emergency Alliance is dynamic. Members of
Emergency Alliances, and the knowledge transferred among them, constitute the
dynamic Supply Chain of emergency knowledge management.
Core technologies of the AKSC are knowledge decomposition, matching and integration, i.e. the reorganization of knowledge. It extends the knowledge management
mode for emergency management from the traditional knowledge database to flowbased knowledge, from rule driven to product driven. AKSC also has excellent extendibility to accommodate changes in incidents and organizational structure. AKSC
can integrate technologies of ontology, multi-agent, network, knowledge representation, reasoning, etc. Figure 4 shows the architecture of AKSC which mainly concerns
the Command Center in the Emergency Alliance.

184

Q. Wang and L. Rong

Fig. 4. Architecture of AKSC

5 Conclusion
This paper has analyzed three knowledge requirements for emergency decisionmaking: sources, agility and knowledge product features. We compared the knowledge management of emergency decision-making support with the Supply Chain
management, a first in this paper, and regarded emergency knowledge as practical
products. Using the operating mechanism of ASC for reference, we constructed the
AKSC to support timely and effective decision-making through the quick acquisition
of required knowledge. We briefly outline the definition, content and architecture of
AKSC in this paper.
We believe the AKSC presented in this paper breaks new ground in knowledge
management of the emergency decision-making support. However, some technical
problems remain to be solved; such as methods of EKP design, approaches to demand
description. We intend to dedicate ourselves to researching them.

Agile Knowledge Supply Chain for Emergency Decision-Making Support

185

Acknowledgement
This research is supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No,
70571011, 70431001). The authors would like to express appreciation to the team of
project EDKS for the sincere support.

References
1. Rong, L.L.: Reorganizing the Knowledge in Government Documents for Quick Response.
KSS’2005. Laxenburg, Austria (2005)
2. Jia. X.N., Rong. L.L.: Classification Based Management Method for Government Documents in Emergency Response. KSS’2006. Beijing, China. (2006)
3. Hernandez, J.Z., Serrano, J.M.: Knowledge-based Models for Emergency Management
Systems. Expert Systems with Applications, 20 (2001) 173-186
4. Mendonca, D., Rush, R., Wallace, W.A.: Timely Knowledge Elicitation from Geographically
Separate, Mobile Experts during Emergency Response. Safety Science, 35 (2000) 193-208
5. Cortés, U., Sànchez-Marrè, M., Ceccaroni, L., R-Roda, I., Poch, M.: Artificial Intelligence
and Environmental Decision Support Systems, Applied Intelligence, 13 (2000) 77-91
6. Yeh, T.H., Lo, J.G.: A Case Study of Knowledge-Based Expert System for Emergency
Response of Chemical Spill and Fire. Environ. Inform. Arc. 2 (2004), 743-755
7. Liu, K.F.R.: Agent-based resource discovery architecture for environmental emergency
management. Expert Systems with Applications, 27 (2004) 77–95
8. Viviane, B.D., Marcos, R.S.B., Jose, O.G., Jose, H.C.: Knowledge management support
for collaborative emergency response. 9th CSCWD, Coventry, UK, (2005) 1188-1193
9. Lee, H.B., Kim, J.W., Park, S.J.: KWM: Knowledge-based Workflow Model for Agile
Organization. Journal of Intelligent Information Systems, 13 (1999) 261-278
10. Melnik, G., Maurer, F.: Direct Verbal Communication as a Catalyst of Agile Knowledge
Sharing. ADC’2004. Los Alamitos, CA. (2004)
11. Holz, H., Maus, H., Bernardi, A., Rostanin, O.: From Lightweight, Proactive Information
Delivery to Business Process-Oriented Knowledge Management, Journal of Universal
Knowledge Management 2 (2005) 101-127
12. Auer, S.: RapidOWL - an Agile Knowledge Engineering Methodology. STICA 2006,
Manchester, UK. (2006)
13. Stojanovic, N., Mentza, G., Apostolou, D.: Semantic-enabled Agile Knowledge-based Egovernment. Http://www.imu.iccs.gr/sweg/papers/
14. Christopher, M.: The Agile Supply Chain: Competing in Volatile Markets. Industrial Marketing Management, 29 (2000) 37–44
15. Zhang, S.S., Gao, G.J.: Dynamic Allience and Agile Supply Chain. Computer Integration
Manufacture System, 5 (1999) 1-5
16. Lou, P., Zhou, Z.D., Chen, Y.P., Ai, W.: Study on multi-agent-based Agile Supply Chain
management. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Tech. 23 (2004) 197-203
17. Stephanopoulos, G., Han, C.: Intelligent systems in process engineering: A review. Computers Chemical Engineering, 20 (1996) 743–791
18. Wang, Z.T.: Knowledge System Engineering. Beijing: Science Publishing Company, 2004
19. Sigel, A.: Topic Maps in Knowledge Organization. http://index.bonn.iz-soz.de/ ~sigel/
20. Agarwal, A., Shankar, R., Tiwari, M. K.: Modeling the Metrics of Lean, Agile and Leagile
Supply Chain: An ANP-based Approach. Eur. J. Oper. Res., 173 (2006) 211–225
21. Mason-Jones, R., Towill, D.R.: Total Cycle Time Compression and the Agile Supply
Chain. European Journal of Operational Research, 159 (2004) 379-392

