A General Long-Time Molecular Dynamics
Scheme in Atomistic Systems: Hyperdynamics in
Entropy Dominated Systems
Xin Zhou and Yi Jiang
Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA
xzhou@lanl.gov

Abstract. We extend the hyperdynamics method developed for lowdimensional energy-dominated systems, to simulate slow dynamics in
more general atomistic systems. We show that a few functionals of the
pair distribution function forms a low-dimensional collective space, which
is a good approximation to distinguish stable and transitional conformations. A bias potential that raises the energy in stable regions, where the
system is at local equilibrium, is constructed in the pair-correlation space
on the ﬂy. Thus a new MD scheme is present to study any time-scale dynamics with atomic details. We examine the slow gas-liquid transition of
Lennard-Jones systems and show that this method can generate correct
long-time dynamics and focus on the transition conformations without
prior knowledge of the systems. We also discuss the application and possible improvement of the method for more complex systems.

1

Introduction

The atomistic molecular dynamics (MD) simulations are typically limited to
a time scale of less than a microsecond, so many interesting slow processes in
chemistry, physics, biology and materials science cannot be simulated directly.
Many new methods, such as kinetic monte carlo [1], transition path ensemble
methods [2], minimal action/time methods [3]have been developed to study the
slow processes (for a review see [4]). They all require prior knowledge of the
system, which is often hard to obtain, and they can only deal with a few special
processes inside a small part of conﬁgurational space of the system.
In many systems, the interesting slow dynamics are governed by the infrequent, fast transitions between (meta-) stable regions; yet the systems spend
most of their time in the stable regions, whose dynamics can be well described
by some time-average properties. Hence an alternative approach to describing
the long-time dynamic trajectory would be some suitable time propagator entering in/out the stable regions as well as the real short transition trajectory among
the regions. In other words, we would coarse-grain the stable regions while keeping the needed details outside the stable regions. This natural coarse-graining
technique is diﬀerent from the usual method that average some degrees of freedom. The averaging process in the latter method usually changes the dynamics,
although the static properties of systems might remain correct.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part I, LNCS 4487, pp. 826–833, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

A General Long-Time Molecular Dynamics Scheme in Atomistic Systems

827

Hyperdynamics, originally developed by Voter [5],is an example of such a
coarse-graining method. The hyperdynamics method treats the potential basins
as the stable conﬁgurational regions that are separated by saddle surfaces. A
bias potential is designed to lift the potential energy of the system in the basins,
while keeping the saddle surfaces intact. Dynamics on the biased system lead
to accelerated evolution from one stable region to another. Based on transition
state theory (TST), the realistic waiting time treal before a transition from the
basins can be re-produced statistically:
treal = Δt

exp(βΔV (ri )),

(1)

i

where Δt is MD time step, and ΔV (ri ) is the bias potential at the conformation ri , β = 1/kB T , kB is the Boltzmann constant and T is the temperature
of the system; r refers to the 3N -dimensional conformation vector throughout
this paper. The method has been applied successfully to systems in which the
relevant states correspond to deep wells in the potential energy surface (PES),
with dividing surfaces at the energy ridge tops separating these states. This is
typical of solid-state diﬀusion systems [6].However, in systems where entropy
is not negligible, the basins of PES do not completely correspond to the longtime stable regions. Hyperdynamics cannot readily apply. An extreme example
is hard sphere systems: all physical permitted conformations have the same zero
potential energy, but some conformations, which correspond to transition regions among stable regions, are rarely visited. A complication occurs even when
applying hyperdynamics in solids with fairly clearly deﬁned stable regions: after applying the bias potential, the energy landscape becomes much ﬂatter and
the system can start to have entropic-like characteristics. These eﬀects limit the
improvement in the simulation rate that can be achieved by the hyperdynamics
method over the direct MD approach [5]. Thus, although there have been some
attempts [7,8] to apply hyperdynamics to enhance conformational sampling in
biological systems, generally, accurate slow dynamics or kinetics can only be
expected for relatively simple or low-dimensional systems.
Here, we derive a more general hyperdynamics method that can be used to access very long (possibly all) time scale in ﬂuids where both entropy and potential
energy are important. A description of part of this method has appeared in [9].
We ﬁrst present explicit conditions for applying this method without using TST.
Then we give some possible collective variables for identifying the stable and
transition conformations to design suitable bias potential. We then examine the
performance of this method in simple ﬂuids. Finally we discuss the further development and application of this method in more general (and complex) systems.

2

Theory

We begin this process by introducing a time-compressing transformation,
dτ = a(r)dt,

(2)

828

X. Zhou and Y. Jiang

where dτ is a pseudo-time step, dt is the real time step, and the local dimensionless compression factor is given by a conformational function a(r), which is
≤ 1. Thus the trajectory r(t) can be rewritten as r(τ ) = r(τ (t)) in a shorter
pseudo-time interval τ , and we have,
t

dt a(r(t )) = t

τ=

drD(r; r(t); t)a(r),

(3)

0

where D(r; r(t); t) is the density probability of r(t) in the conformational space
in interval [0, t],
1 t
D(r; r(t); t) =
dt δ(r − r(t ))
(4)
t 0
The compressed trajectory r(τ ) will satisfy a new equation of motion [9]. If we
use the usual Langevin equation to simulate the evolution of system in NVT
ensemble, the new equation is,
d
Pi
Ri =
dτ
Mi
d
∂U (r)
Pi = −
− ζ (r)Pi + fi (τ ) −
dτ
∂Ri

Lij
j

∂ΔV (r)
,
∂Rj

(5)

where Ri is the ith component of conformational vector r, Mi = mi a2 (r) is the
pseudo-mass of the particle with the real mass mi . It is an equation of motion of
particles with smaller conformation-dependent mass M (r) under new potential
U (r) = V (r) + ΔV (r) where ΔV (r) = −kB T ln a(r), as well as new friction
coeﬃcient, if we neglect the zero ensemble-average term
Lij =

1 Pi Pj
− δij ,
kB T Mj

where δij is the kroneck δ-symbol. Similarly, the zero-mean white noise friction
force f (τ ) satisﬁes the ﬂuctuation-dissipation theorem of the new system,
< fi (τ )fj (τ ) >= 2kB T Mi ζ δij δ(τ − τ ).

(6)

where ζ (r) = ζ/a(r) and ζ is the friction coeﬃcient of the original system.
At the ﬁrst glance, it would not appear to be advantageous over directly
generate r(τ ) from (5), as very short time steps are necessary due to the small
mass M . However, if we only focus on the long-time dynamics, we can use a
smoother pseudo-trajectory R(τ ) to replace r(τ ), provided that the reproduced
time from R(τ ) is the same as that from r(τ ). Thus, a suﬃcient condition to
replace r(τ ) with R(τ ) is that their density probability are the same. Actually, if
the compressed factor is deﬁned as function of some collective variables, notated
as X, rather than that of r, a simpler condition is,
D(X; R(τ ); τ ) = D(X; r(τ ); τ ),

(7)

A General Long-Time Molecular Dynamics Scheme in Atomistic Systems

829

where D(X; R(τ ); τ ) and D(X; r(τ ); τ ) are the density probability of the trajectory R(τ ) and r(τ ) in the X space, respectively.
In the time-consuming regions (stable regions), similar conformations would be
visited repeatedly many times even during a ﬁnite simulation time. Thus we can assume the distribution can be approximated by D(r; r(t); t) ∝ exp(−βV (r)). Many
methods might be used to generate R(τ ) with the required distribution. One of
them is to use a realistic trajectory corresponding to the local equilibrium of a
new potential U (r) = V (r) − kB T ln a(r). Actually, if we select a(r) < 1 only in
the potential wells, we eﬀectively have the hyperdynamics presented by Voter [5].
In many cases, some collective variables X can be used to identify transition
conformations. The transition conformations related to slow dynamics always locate in some regions of X space, so we can select a(r) = a(X(r)) < 1 outside these
regions that involve transition conformations, thus the new potential is U (r) =
V (r) − kB T ln a(X(r)). For example, in polymers, the transition regions of slow
conformational transitions can be identiﬁed in the soft torsion angles space. We
require that the density probability of pseudo-trajectory in the collective-variable
space equals to that of the compressed trajectory. Thus, if we use a bias potential
to generate the pseudo-trajectory, a simple design of the bias potential is
ΔV (r) = kB T f+ (ln(D(X(r))/Dc )),

(8)

where f+ (y) = yΘ(y), Θ(y) is the step function. D(X) is the density probability
of a segment of trajectory, and Dc is a pre-selected threshold value. The design
means we compress the trajectory to make the density probability reach Dc if
the original density is larger than the value. We can repeat the biasing process:
simulating a segment of trajectory to get a bias potential, then simulating another segment of trajectory under the designed bias potentials to get another
bias potential. The sum of all bias potentials forms the total bias potential to
reach (almost) any time scale. In practice, we also add a correction the deﬁnition
of f+ (y) near y = 0 to get continuous bias force.
The key to apply hyperdynamics successfully is to design suitable bias potentials ΔV (r). Obviously, ΔV (r) should have the same symmetry as V (r). For a
simple case of N identical particles, the conformational vector {Rj } (j = 1, ···, N )
can be rewritten as a density ﬁeld, ρˆ(x) = j δ(x − Rj ). Here both x and R are
the normal 3-dimension spatial vectors. Since the neighboring conformations are
equivalent in the viewpoint of slow dynamics, ρˆ(x) can be averaged to get a smooth
function, ρ¯(x), for example, by using a Gaussian function to replace the Dirac-δ
function. If the width of the Gaussian function is small, ρ¯(x) can be used to identify diﬀerent conformations. Another similar description is the k−space density
ﬁeld, ρˆ(k) = i exp(ik · Ri ). If neglecting the eﬀects of multi-body correlations
and directional correlations, we can approximate the density ﬁeld ρ(x)
¯
to the radial pair distribution function g(z), which is deﬁned as,
g(z) =

1
4πρz 2 N

δ(rij − z),
i

(9)

j=i

where rij = |Ri − Rj |, or more exactly, some bin-average values of g(z) along z,

830

X. Zhou and Y. Jiang

g(z)hp (z)z 2 dz,

gp = 2πρ

(10)

Where hp (z) is a two-step function, unity in a special z range (ap , bp ) and zero
otherwise. Thus, each conformation corresponds to a group of gp (g vector),
the spatial neighborhood of the conformation and their symmetric companions
also correspond to the same g vector. If we select enough gp , all conformations
with the same {gp } are thought to be identical in the viewpoint of slow dynamics. Therefore, we can deﬁne the bias potential in the low-dimension g space,
ΔV (RN ) = ΔV ({gp (RN )}). To better identify conformations with not-toosmall bin size, we can add some important dynamics-related physical variables,
such as, potential V (RN ), to the collective variable group. Another important
variable is the two-body entropy s2 , presented ﬁrst by H. S. Green [10], deﬁned as,
s2 = −2πρ

[g(z) ln g(z) − g(z) + 1]z 2 dz.

(11)

The two-body entropy, which forms the main part (85% − 95%) of macroscopic
excess entropy, has been studied widely [11,12]. Actually, both gp and s2 are
functional of g(z), similarly, it is also possible to use some another functional
of g(z) to form the collective variables. In some special systems, it may be also
useful to add some special order parameters Oq to take into account possible
multi-body correlations. Finally, we have a group (of order 10) of general collective variables X = {X p }, which might involve V , s2 , some {gp } and some
possible {Oq }, to identify conformations and form an appropriate bias potential ΔV (X(RN )) = kB T f+ (ln D(X)/Dc ). The corresponded bias force on each
particle can be calculated by the chain rule of diﬀerentiation,
Δfi = −
p

∂ΔV ∂X p
.
∂X p ∂Ri

(12)

For example, from the (9), we have,
∂g(z)
1
=
∂Rk
2πρz 2 N

rˆkj
j=k

∂
δ(rkj − z)
∂z

(13)

where rˆkj is the corresponding unit vector of the distance vector rkj = Rj − Rk ,
and rkj = rjk is the length of rkj . Thus, for any functional of g(z), for example,
s2 and gp , we can easily calculate its derivative, and hence the bias force.
In practice, in order to get continuous bias forces, we replace the Dirac-δ
function by some smooth functions, for example, Epanechnikov kernel function,
3
z2
Ke (z) = √ (1 − 2 ),
5
4 5

√
√
if − 5 ≤ z ≤ 5 , otherwise, Ke (z) = 0. While
Under the replacement, we redeﬁne
gp =

1
4πρδN zp2

zp +δ/2
i

j=i

zp −δ/2

(14)
→ 0, the Ke (z) → δ(z).

Ke (z − rij )dz,

(15)

A General Long-Time Molecular Dynamics Scheme in Atomistic Systems

831

where δ and zp is the size and the center of the pth bin, respectively. It is easy
to know, while → 0, eq.(15) is same as the normal formula of pair correlation
function in bins. The s2 is redeﬁned as,
pm

s2 = −2πρδ

zp2 (gp ln gp − gp + 1),

(16)

p=1

where pm is the maximal index of the bins and we have already set a cutoﬀ
along z, gp is the bin-average value of g(z) at the pth bin, deﬁned by the (15).
Therefore, the derivative of the s2 and gp is continuous. For example,
∂s2
1
=−
∂Rk
N

rˆkj c(rkj ),

(17)

j=k

ln gp [Ke (zp + δ/2 − z) − Ke (zp − δ/2 − z].

c(z) =
p

d
Here c(z) → − dz
ln g(z) under the limit → 0.
Besides choosing some functionals of pair distribution function g(z) as the collective variables, another selection is possible, and may be better in some special
systems. For more complex systems, for example, multi-component mixtures or
macromolecular systems, etc., we should identify diﬀerent kinds of atoms and
calculate diﬀerent pair distribution function gAB (z), where A and B are the
types of atoms. An alternative method is to use energy distribution function.
For any pair-interactive potential E = u(z), such as Lennard-Jones interaction,
coulomb interaction, the distance rij of atom pairs can be replace by the interactive energy u(rij ), thus we can deﬁne the pair distribution function in energy
space,
G(E) ∝
δ(E − u(rij ).
(18)
i

j=i

Actually, G(E) is a transformation of g(z). Since the interactive energy is more
directly related to the dynamics, using G(E) replace g(z) might be a good idea in
identifying conformations. In addition, while existing many kinds of interaction
between atoms, we can deﬁne the G(E) for diﬀerent kinds of interactive energy,
for example G(Ebond ), G(Eangle ), G(Etorsion ), G(Elj ), G(Ecoul ) etc., thus it is
possible to take into account higher-order correlation. In the G(E) cases, the
bias force can be calculated similarly as that in the g(z) cases. We are testing
this idea in water condensation, details will appear elsewhere.
We have examined the general hyperdynamics method in a simple system
of N identical Lennard-Jones (LJ) particles and studied the slow gas/liquid
transition in the N V T ensemble. The main results and simulation details are
published in ref. ([9]). In such a system, the potential energy of transitional
conformations (liquid drops with critical size) is lower than that of the stable
gas phase. Thus, simple bias potential based on potential energy [13] cannot
work at all. In general, for entropy-important systems, using the potential alone
is not suﬃcient to identify the transitional conformations and then form the bias

832

X. Zhou and Y. Jiang

potential. We also found that with only two functionals of g(z), the potential
energy V and the two-body entropy s2 , as the collective variables, we were able
to correctly produce the slow dynamics. By designing suitable bias potentials,
we could reach almost any slow timescale gas-liquid transition in reasonable time
frame: we used a 106 time boost factor to ﬁnd the transition in the system with
very small saturation shown in the Fig. (1) [9]).

Fig. 1. Top: the distributions of two body entropy S2 from non-biased and biased
simulations, and the rebuilt distribution of the bias simulation. Here, the simulated
system starts from gas phase with very small saturation. Bottom: the free energy
proﬁles from the non-biased and biased simulations are compared. The inset shows the
simulated samples in the (S2 , V ) space. The observed liquid phase does not show here.

To summarize, we have extended the hyperdynamics method to more general
cases by inhomogeneously compressing time. Our approach directly generates
an explicit method to design the bias potential. In simple systems, two-body
entropy s2 as a functional of the pair distribution function provide a good approximation of the density ﬁeld in identifying the important conformations and
for constructing the bias potential without prior knowledge of the conformational
space. The method can be applied in complex ﬂuids, such as glass transition and
liquid/solid transition of single or multi component Lennard-Jones ﬂuids, water
etc., and s2 should be still the leading collective variable in the complex systems.
For more complex cases, for example, polymers, biological systems, in whole conformational space, it is possible that we will need too many collective variables
in identifying transitions, so that it is very diﬃcult to estimate the density probability in the higher-dimension collective variables. A possible improvement is
to divide the whole conformational space into some small parts, and use a few
collective variables locally in each part.

A General Long-Time Molecular Dynamics Scheme in Atomistic Systems

833

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the US DOE under contract No. DE-AC5206NA25396. We are grateful to K. Kremer, H. Ziock, S. Rasmussen and A.
F. Voter for stimulating discussions, comments and suggestions.

References
1. Bortz, A. B. and Kalos, M. H. and Lebowitz, J. L.: A new algorithm for Monte
Carlo simulation of Ising spin systems. J. Comp. Phys. 17, (1975) 10-18.
2. Bolhuis, P. G. and Chandler, D. and Dellago, C. and Geissler, P. L.: Transition
Path Sampling: Throwing Ropes over Mountain Passes in the Dark. Ann. Rev.
Phys. Chem. 53, (2002) 291-318.
3. Olender, R. and Elber, R.: Calculation of classical trajectories with a very large
time step: Formalism and numberical examples. J. Chem. Phys. 105, (1996) 92999315.
4. Elber, R.: Long-timescale simulation methods. Curr. Opin. Struct. Bio. 15, (2005)
151-156 .
5. Voter, A. F.: A method for accelerating the molecular dynamics simulation of
infrequent events. J. Chem. Phys. 106, (1997) 4665-4677.
6. Miron, R. A. and Fichthorn, K. A.: Accelerated molecular dynamics with the bondboost method. J. Chem. Phys. 119, (2003) 6210-6216.
7. Rahman, J. A. and Tully, J. C.: Puddle-skimming: An eﬃcient sampling of multidimensional conﬁguration space. J. Chem. Phys. 116, (2002) 8750-8760.
8. Hamelberg, D. and Shen, T.-Y. and McCammon, J. A.: Phosphorylation eﬀects
on cis/trans isomerization and the backbone conformation of serine-proline Motifs:
accelerated molecular dynamics analysis. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 127, (2005) 19691974.
9. Zhou, X. and Jiang, Y. and Kremer, K. and Ziock, H. and Rasmussen, S.: Hyperdynamics for entropic systems: Time-space compression and pair correlation function
approximation. Phys. Rev. E 74, (2006) R035701.
10. Green, H. S.: The Molecular Theory of Fluids. (North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1952);
11. Baranyai, A. and Evans, D. J.: Direct entropy calculation from computer simulation
of liquids. Phys. Rev. A 40, (1989) 3817-3822.
12. Giaquinta, P. V. and Giunta, G. and PrestipinoGiarritta, S.: Entropy and the
freezing of simple liquids., Phys. Rev. A 45 (1992) R6966 - R6968.
13. Steiner, M. M. and Genilloud, P.-A and Wilkins, J. W.: Simple bias potential for
boosting molecular dynamics with the hyperdynamics scheme. Phys. Rev. B 57,
(1998) 10236-10239.

