Rendering Technique for Colored Paper Mosaic
Youngsup Park, Sanghyun Seo, YongJae Gi, Hanna Song,
and Kyunghyun Yoon
CG Lab., CS&E, ChungAng University,
221, HeokSuk-dong, DongJak-gu, Seoul, Korea
{cookie,shseo,yj1023,comely1004,khyoon}@cglab.cse.cau.ac.kr
http://cglab.cse.cau.ac.kr

Abstract. The work presented in this paper shows the way to generate
colored paper mosaics using computer graphics techniques. Following two
tasks need to be done to generate colored paper mosaic. The ﬁrst one is
to generate colored paper tile and the other one is to arrange the tile.
Voronoi Diagram and Random Point Displacement have been used in
this paper to come up with the shape of the tile. And, energy value that
the tile has depending on its location is the factor to determine the best
positioning of the tile. This paper focuses on representing the overlap
among tiles, maintenance of the edge of input image, and various shapes
of tiles in the ﬁnal output image by solving two tasks mentioned above.
Keywords: Colored paper mosaic, Tile generation and Tile arrangement.

1

Introduction

Mosaic is an artwork formed by lots of small pieces called tile. It can be expressed in many diﬀerent ways depending on the type and the position of tile.
Photomosaics[1] shows the big image formed with small square tiles that are laid
out on a grid pattern. Distinctive output was driven from the process of combining multiple images into one image. While Photomosaics shows the arrangement
of tiles in a grid pattern, Simulated Decorative Mosaic[2] has tiles arranged in
the direction of the edge of input image. This shows the similar pattern found
in ancient Byzantine period. This pattern can also be found in Jigsaw Image
Mosaics[3]. The only diﬀerence is to use various shape of image tiles instead
of a single-colored square tiles. In this paper, we show especially how colored
paper mosaic among various styles of mosaic artworks can be represented using
computer graphics techniques.
To generate colored paper mosaic, following two issues need to be taken care.
The ﬁrst issue is to decide on the shape of colored paper tile and the second
one is to arrange colored paper tile. Voronoi Diagram[9] and Random Fractal have been used in this paper to come up with the shape of colored paper
tile. But the problem using Voronoi Diagram is that it makes the form of tile
too plain since it generates only convex polygon. Therefore the method represented in this paper uses the predeﬁned data of colored paper as database
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part II, LNCS 4488, pp. 114–121, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Rendering Technique for Colored Paper Mosaic

115

like Photomosaics. Then, it creates small piece of colored paper tile by clipping
Voronoi polygon repetitively from the data of colored paper. Many diﬀerent
shapes of tiles like concave polygon can be expressed since it is made from
repetitive tearing of one colored paper. And the energy value that colored paper tile has depending on its location is calculated to ﬁnd the best positioning
of colored paper tile. The location that has the biggest sum of energy value is
deﬁned as the best position. Tiles are placed at the point where the summation
of energy value is the biggest by being moved and rotated toward the nearest
edge.
1.1

Related Work

Existing mosaic studies focus on the selection, the generation, and the arrangement of tiles. We comparison the existing studies by classifying into two
groups.
The studies of ﬁrst group focus on the selection and the arrangement of tiles
since they use ﬁxed or predeﬁned shapes of tiles. Photomasaics[1] creates image formed with various small pieces of image tiles. It is an algorithm that
lays out selected image from the database in a grid pattern. It proposes an
eﬀective method of tile selection from database. But it is hard to keep the
edge of image since the shape of tile in Photomosaic is all square ones. In
the study of Simulated Decorative Mosaic[2], Hausner shows the similar pattern and techniques used in Byzantine era by positioning single-colored square
tile in the direction of the edge of input image. It uses the methods of Centroidal Voronoi Diagram (CVD) and Edge Avoidance to arrange tiles densely.
In Jigsaw Image Mosaics (JIM)[3], it shows extended technique by using arbitrary shapes of image tiles while Simulated Decorative Mosaic uses single-colored
square tiles. It proposes solution of tile arrangement with Energy Minimization
Framework.
The studies of second group propose the method only about the generation of
tiles. Park[5] proposes passive colored paper mosaic generating technique that
shape and arrangement of tiles is all done by the user’s input. The proposed
method uses Random Fractal technique for generating torn shaped colored paper
tile. However, it gives the user too much works to do. To solve the problem
passive technique has, automatic colored paper mosaic[6] using Voronoi Diagram
is proposed. The majority works are done by computer and only part the user
needs to do is to input a few parameters. It reduces heavy load of work on user
side; however, it cannot maintain the edge of image since it arranges tiles without
considering the edge. In order to solve this problem, another new technique[7]
is suggested. In this new technique, it arranges Voronoi sites using Quad-Tree
and clips the tiles according to the edge of image once it goes out of the edge.
Even though this technique can keep the edge of images, it cannot express the
real texture and shape of colored paper tearing since the polygon created using
Voronoi Diagram becomes in a convex form and each polygon is not overlapped.
Therefore, the existing study is not showing various shapes of tiles and the
overlap among them.

116

2
2.1

Y. Park et al.

Preprocessing
Data Structure of Colored Paper

The data structure of colored paper is organized with 2 layers that contain the
information such as the texture image and vertex shown as ﬁgure 1. The upper
layer means visible space of colored paper that has the color value. And the
lower layer means the white paper represented on the torn portion. To deﬁne
the data structure of colored paper in advance gives two good aspects. The ﬁrst
one is that it can express various shape of colored paper tile like concave polygon
besides convex one. This is because previously used colored paper is stored in the
buﬀer and polygon clipping is repeated using Vonoroi Diagram as necessary. The
other one is that diﬀerent type of paper mosaic can be easily done by modifying
data structure. If the image is used magazine, newspaper and so on instead of
colored paper then it will be possible to come up with paper mosaic like Collage.

Fig. 1. The data structure of colored paper object

2.2

Image Segmentation

At ﬁrst, the necessary image processing works[11] like blurring are performed
on the input image and the image is divided into several regions that have
similar color in LUV space by using Mean-Shift image segmentation technique[8].
We call the region container. And the proposed mosaic algorithm is performed
per container. However Mean-Shift segmentation can create small containers.
If mosaic processing is performed in this stage, the colored paper tiles will not
be attached to these small containers so it will result in lots of grout spaces in
the result image as show in ﬁgure 4. Therefore, there is another step needed
to integrate these small containers. To give ﬂexibility and to show individual
intention of expression, the process of integration of small containers is controlled
by the user’s input.

3
3.1

The Generation of Colored Paper Tile
Determination of Size and Color

To determine the size and the color of tile, the initial position where tile is attached is determined in advance by Hill-Climbing algorithm[4]. Hill-Climbing

Rendering Technique for Colored Paper Mosaic

117

algorithm keeps changing the position till the function value converges to optimal point. Since normally big tiles are applied primarily from boundary rather
than small ones in real life, the function is determined like equation 1 with following two factors: size and boundary. The size factor is deﬁned by D(x, y) that
means the minimum distance value between pixel (x, y) and boundary. And the
boundary factor is deﬁned by D(x, y) − D(i, j) that means the sum of diﬀerence
between neighbor pixels. Therefore, the position that has the largest value of
L(x, y) is regarded as an initial position.
x+1

y+1

D(x, y) − D(i, j) · [x = i&y = j]

L(x, y) =

(1)

i=x−1 j=y−1

The size of colored paper tile is determined by distance from boundary. At
ﬁrst, we divide boundary pixels into two groups. The ﬁrst group has smaller
value than y of initial position, And the second group has larger value than y.
Then, between two minimum distance values on each group, the small value set
as the minimum size and the large value set as the maximum size.
Colored paper that has the similar color as the one in the initial position is
selected. Colored paper is deﬁned as single-colored. First of all, square area is
built around the initial position for the size of tile and then the average value of
RGB color in that area is selected.
3.2

Determination of Shape

There are two steps to determine the shape of colored paper tile. The ﬁrst one
is to determine the overall outline of tile to be clipped and the other one is to
express torn eﬀect. Voronoi Diagram is applied to decide the overall outline of
tile. First, the area of colored paper is divided into several grids according to the
size of tile to be torn. Then, Voronoi diagram is created by placing individual
Voronoi site in each segment as shown in ﬁgure 2(b). The generated Voronoi
diagram contains multiple Voronoi polygons so it needs to be decided to clip
which polygon among them. Considering the fact that people start to clip from
the boundary of the paper in real mosaic work, the polygon located near the
boundary is decided to be torn ﬁrst. Since there is always vertex in the boundary
of colored paper as shown in ﬁgure 2(c), one of the polygons that contain vertex
is randomly chosen. Once the outline of tile is determined by Voronoi polygon,
it is necessary to apply torn eﬀect to the boundary of determined outline. This
torn eﬀect is done by applying Random Point Displacement that is one of the
Random Fractal techniques to colored paper’s layer individually. Random Point
Displacement algorithm is applied to the boundary of selected Voronoi polygons
that is not overlapped with the boundary of colored paper. The irregularity
of torn surface and white-colored portion can be expressed by perturbing the
random point of edge continuously in the vertical direction. Lastly, clip the
modiﬁed Voronoi polygon by Random Point Displacement algorithm as shown
in ﬁgure 2(d).

118

Y. Park et al.

(a) Colored paper

(b) Voronoi

(c) Torn Eﬀect

(d) Clipping

Fig. 2. The process of paper tearing

4

The Arrangement of Colored Paper Tile

There are two things to consider arranging colored paper tiles. First one is to
maintain the edge of the input image and the other one is to get rid of empty
spaces among tiles or between tile and the edge of the image. To maintain the
edges of input image, the similar technique to Energy Minimization Framework
of Jigsaw Image Mosaics is used in this paper. The energy function is deﬁned
ﬁrst depending on the position of tile and the sum of it is calculated like E(x, y)
in equation 2.
E(x, y) = Pi − Po − Pt
⎧
/T
⎨ Pi = Tmax /2 − D(x, y) where (x, y) ∈ C and (x, y) ∈
Po = Wo · D(x, y)
where (x, y) ∈
/C
⎩
where (x, y) ∈ T
Pt = Wt · D(x, y)

(2)

Pi , Po , Pt shown in the expression above mean the number of pixels located in
the inside of container, outside of container, and on the overlapped area with
other tiles. And Wo , Wt represent weight value depending on each location of
pixel. The bigger the value of sum E(x, y) is the better the position is to maintain
the edges of input image. Therefore, the tile needs to be placed where the sum
of E(x, y) is the greatest. To get rid of empty spaces among tiles and between
the tile and the edge of image, tile is moved and rotated into the direction of
the nearest edge. This movement and rotation is continuously happening till the
sum of E(x, y) from equation 2 has convergence value or is not getting bigger

(a) The best case

(b) The worst case (c) less overlapping
Fig. 3. Positioning of colored paper tile

(d) edge keeping

Rendering Technique for Colored Paper Mosaic

119

any longer. The ﬁgure 3 shows four diﬀerent situation of tile arrangement. The
ﬁgure 3(b) shows the case that the tile is positioned outside of the edge of
the image. Correction on tile’s location needs to be done since it prevents the
tile from keeping the edge of the image. Two tiles are overlapped too much
in the ﬁgure 3(c) and it also needs to be modiﬁed. The ﬁgure 3(d) shows the
optimal arrangement of the tile. We can control this by adjusting the value of Wo
and Wt .

5

Results

The ﬁgure 4, 5 and 6 shows the result image rendered by assigning the size of
tile of the source image between 4 and 100. The result shown in the ﬁgure 4
is the result of colored paper mosaic processed by only applying segmentation
algorithm to the source image. The grout space appears where is segmented

(a)

(b)

Fig. 4. The examples that have lots of grout spaces

Fig. 5. The result of colored paper mosaic

120

Y. Park et al.

Fig. 6. The result of colored paper mosaic with height map

smaller than the size 4 since the minimum size of the tile is set to 4. These smaller
containers have to be integrated into the near container in order to get rid of grout
spaces. The result of colored paper mosaic including container integration step is
shown in the ﬁgure 5. In the ﬁgure 5, the grout spaces shown in ﬁgure 4(a) are disappeared. Also, lots of small segments are removed by integration so the number
of smaller size of tiles is reduced. And we can apply the texture eﬀect to the result
image by using texture mapping, height map[10], and alpha blending as shown in
the ﬁgure 6. By adding these eﬀects, the mosaic image gets more realistic.

6

Discussion and Future Work

The work presented in this paper shows the new method to generate colored
paper tile with computer graphics techniques. The diﬀerence that this paper has
is that it can maintain the edges of the input image and express the various
shape of tile and overlaps among tiles. These three achievements are shown in
the ﬁgure 4, 5 and 6.
The proposed method has some problems. First, too many small tiles are ﬁlled
in between large tiles in the results. It is because grout spaces appear between
the tile and the edge during the process of arranging the tile. It causes the
problem to the quality of result image so it needs to be improved afterward.
Therefore, another step to consider the edge of image during the tile generation
is necessary. This additional step will reduce the generation of grout spaces
among tiles or between the tile and the edge of image. Second, the performance
of whole process is very low, since the tile arrangement is performed per pixel.
Therefore it is needed to apply GPU or any other algorithms for improving the
performance.
This paper also has some beneﬁts like following. First, the proposed method
can express the various shapes of tile and overlapping between other tiles. Second,

Rendering Technique for Colored Paper Mosaic

121

if other types of paper like newspaper are used instead of colored paper then it
will be possible to come up with another type of mosaic like Collage. It is easy
to express other type of mosaic in computer graphics by modifying the data
structure if more detailed and elaborate tile selection algorithm is applied.

References
1. Silver.R and Hawley.M (ed.): Photomosaics, New York: Henry Holt, 1997
2. Alejo Hausner : Simulating Decorative Mosaics, SIGGRAPH 2001, pp.573-580,
2001.
3. Junhwan Kim, Fabio Pellacini : Jigsaw Image Mosaics, SIGGRAPH 2002, pp.
657-664, 2002.
4. Chris Allen : A Hillclimbing Approach to Image Mosaics, UW-L Journal of Undergraduate Research , 2004
5. Young-Sup Park, Sung-Ye Kim, Cheung-Woon Jho, Kyung-Hyun Yoon : Mosaic
Techniques using color paper, Proceeding of KCGS Conference, pp.42-47, 2000
6. Sang-Hyun Seo, Young-Sup Park, Sung-Ye Kim, Kyung-Hyun Yoon : Colored Paper Mosaic Rendering, In SIGGRAPH 2001 Abstrac ts and Applications, p.156,
2001
7. Sang-Hyun Seo, Dae-Uk Kang, Young-Sup Park, Kyung-Hyun Yoon : Colored Paper Mosaic Rendering Based on Image Segmentation, Proceeding of KCGS Conference, pp27-34, 2001
8. D. Comanicu, P. Meer : Mean shift: A robust approach toward feature space analysis, IEEE Transaction on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 24, 603-619,
May 2002
9. Mark de Berg, M. V. Kerveld, M. Overmars and O. Schwarzkopf : Computational
Geometry Algorithms and Applications, Springer, pp.145-161, 1997
10. Aaron Hertzmann : Fast Paint Texture, NPAR 2002, 2002
11. Rafael C. Gonzalez and Richard E. Woods : Digital Image Processing 2nd Edition,
publish ed by Prentice Hall, 2002

