Performance Enhancement of Multimedia Data
Transmission by Adjusting Compression Rate∗
Eung Ju Lee1, Kyu Seol Lee2, and Hee Yong Youn2,**
1

S/W Lab, Telecomm Systems Division
Samusung Electronics, Suwon, Korea
eungju.lee@samsung.com
2
School of Information and Communications Engineering
Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Korea
{rinaco,youn}@ece.skku.ac.kr

Abstract. The rapid growth of wireless communication technology has spurred
various mobile applications. In this paper we propose a scheme which can improve the PSNR of multimedia data transmission using the RTP/RTCP. It is
achieved by adjusting the compression rate according to the packet loss rate, delay, or jitter in the network. The NS-2 simulation reveals that the proposed approach shows a significant improvement over the conventional scheme of fixed
compression rate. Particularly, it turns out that adjusting based on jitter is more
effective than with the other two factors.
Keywords: Compression rate, multimedia data, PSNR, RTP/RTCP, transmission interval.

1 Introduction1
Resulting from rapid growth of wireless internet, various services are available in
mobile communication environment [1]. Because of the mobility of hosts, surrounding buildings, and variation of terrain, the mobile communication channel suffers
from doppler shifts in the carrier due to relative motion between the terminals. It also
suffers from fast spatial fading due to regions of constructive and destructive interference between the signals arriving along different propagation paths. These problems
may cause variation of signal attenuation or channel fading. During a long deep fade,
data packets could be severely corrupted or completely lost [2]. Consequently, there is
a need for an efficient data transmission mechanism which improves the quality of
services with wireless networks [3,4].
HTTP and FTP are not the protocols designed for speed but stability using TCP
layer. However, the TCP has several disadvantages with respect to multimedia data
transmission; high processing overhead, network transmission delay, and lack of
multimedia functionalities. Because of such disadvantages, the real-time transport
∗

This research was supported by the Ubiquitous Autonomic Computing and Network Project,
21st Century Frontier R&D Program in Korea and the Brain Korea 21 Project in 2007.
**
Corresponding author.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 566–569, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Performance Enhancement of Multimedia Data Transmission

567

protocol (RTP) was designed operating in the UDP layer [5]. It provides end-to-end
network transport functions suitable for the applications transmitting real-time data
such as audio, video, or simulation data over multicast or unicast network. The RTP
does not address resource reservation nor guarantee quality-of-service for real-time
applications. The application transporting multimedia data by the RTP uses two ports.
One is for data transportation and the other is for control. The protocol used for control is called as real-time control protocol (RTCP), showing how many packets have
been transported and received.
Currently, data are transmitted to mobile handheld devices at a fixed compression
rate without considering operation condition such as error rate, delay, and variation in
bandwidth. Therefore, it is difficult to provide the service of high quality [6]. In this
paper we propose a scheme solving the problem by adjusting the compression rate
based on either packet loss rate, delay, or jitter with the RTP/RTCP. It significantly
improves the PSNR of the transmission compared to the conventional scheme. NS-2
simulation verifies the efficiency of the proposed approach. Particularly, it turns out
that adjustment based on jitter is more effective than the other two factors.

2 The Proposed Scheme
There exist various obstacles interfering with data transmission in wireless network
environment. Therefore, an efficient transmission mechanism which can dynamically
cope with harsh environment is needed to provide high quality service. For this we
develop a scheme which transmits multimedia data using the RTP/RTCP, while properly adjusting the compression rate according to the network condition. Figure 1
shows the flow of data in the proposed scheme.
PSNR Computation

Raw Data

Raw Data

Frame

Frame

SendApplication

SendApplication

RTP/RTCP

RTP/RTCP

UDP
IP

UDP
IP
Time, Data

Link Layer/Physical Layer
Error,Jitter,Delay
Drop Packet
Time, Data

Fig. 1. The flow of data in the proposed scheme

For data transmission, the data compression rate or transmission interval can be adjusted. By checking the sequence number and timestamp of the packets arriving at the
receiver, packet loss, delay, and jitter can be identified. The compression rate is then

568

E.J. Lee, K.S. Lee, and H.Y. Youn

decided accordingly. When the packet loss rate, delay, and jitter are high, the receiver
orders the sender to raise the data compression rate. The quality of motion picture can
be improved by adopting this approach. Also, packet loss can be prevented by increasing the transmission interval. Through proper adjustment of the operation parameters according to the network condition, users can receive better services. Packet
loss will increase if the bandwidth is not enough. Then the sender needs to reduce the
amount of data transmitted at a time and raise the compression rate by increasing the
quantization level of the transcoder. Table 1 summarizes the adjustment of compression rate and transmission interval according to the network condition represented by
packet loss, delay, and jitter.
Table 1. Adjustment of compression rate (CR) and transmission interval (TI)
delay, jitter
Packet loss
No change
Increase
Decrease

No change

Increase

Decrease

No adjustment
CR-CR++

TI++
CR --/ TI ++
CR ++/TI ++

TI-CR --/ TI -CR ++/ TI --

For simulation we choose an about 100Mbyte motion picture with frequent movement of receiver node to recognize picture collapse and frame loss. We implement
and evaluate the proposed scheme using ns-2. We adopt the link error model given by
ns-2 and assume that the channel error rate is 10%.
The operation flow is as follows. The raw data generated in the application layer
are encoded to exclude the influence of PSNR of the compression. A timestamp and
sequence number are inserted in the encoded data in the RTP/RTCP layer. The data
are encapsulated by the UDP header for real-time transmission, and then sent through
the network. The data received are passed through the UDP layer up to the
RTP/RTCP layer and then the application layer. It orders the sender to adjust the
transmission interval and compression rate using the timestamp and sequence number
obtained from the RTP by sending an RTCP packet every 0.1 second.
rate change with jitter
rate change with delay

rate change with error rate
fixed compression rate

50
45
40
35
)
30
dB
(
R
N25
S20
P
15
10
5
0

50
45
40

)35
B
30
(d
R25
N
S
P20
15
10
5
0

1

5 9 13 17 21 25 29 33 37 41 45 49 53 57 61 65 69 73
second

(a) Error rate

1

5

9 13 17 21 25 29 33 37 41 45 49 53 57 61 65 69 73
second

(b) Jitter and delay

Fig. 2. The comparison of the PSNR values with changed compression rate

Performance Enhancement of Multimedia Data Transmission

569

The simulation measures the average PSNR values while varying the compression
rate as the error rate, delay, and jitter value change. Note that varying transmission
interval may not be suitable for real-time data transmission. Therefore, we consider
varying only the compression rate.
Figure 2 shows the simulation results for each of the three cases of compression
rate adjustment according to error rate, delay, and jitter, respectively. Observe from
Figure 2(a) that the PSNR with changing compression rate based on error rate is statistically higher than with a fixed rate. Figure 2(b) shows that changing the rate based
on jitter allows higher PSNR compared with the delay-based change. The average
PSNR of the fixed compression rate, changing compression rate according to the error
rate, delay, and the jitter are 26.7dB, 29dB, 31dB, and 34.4dB, respectively. The result indicates that adjusting compression rate based on jitter allows maximum
throughput.

3 Conclusion
In this paper we have proposed a scheme for multimedia data transmission that effectively copes with unstable environment causing packet loss, delay, and variation in the
bandwidth by adjusting the compression rate and transmission interval. The simulation
using ns-2 reveals that the proposed approach significantly improves the efficiency of
transmission of motion picture compared with the conventional data transmission employing a uniform compression rate. Especially, adjusting the compression rate based
on jitter is found to be more effective than error rate or delay. Varying transmission
interval may not be suitable for real-time data transmission.
Future work will include the investigation of controlling transmission interval
along with data compression rate for achieving a better performance. We will also
consider the channel error rate, delay, and variation in bandwidth not separately but in
a unified way for better services in wireless mobile network environment.

References
1. Youn, J., Xin, J., Sun, M.-T.: Fast video transcoding architectures for networked multimedia
applications. in Proc. of IEEE Int’l Symp. on Circuits and Systems, Vol. 4. (2000) 25-28
2. Zhang, D., Shijagurumayum, S.: Personalized Content Delivery to Mobile Devices. IEEE
International Conference on Systems, Man & Cybernetics, (2003) 2533 -2538
3. Liu, S., Bovik, A.C.: A fast and memory efficient video transcoder for low bit rate wireless
communi-cations. IEEE Int’l Conf. on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, Vol. 2.
(2002) 1969-1972
4. Wang, L., Luthra, A., Eifrig, B.: Adaptive rate control for MPEG transcoder. in Proc. of
Int’l Conf. on Image Processing, Vol. 4. (1999) 266-270
5. Schulzrinne, H.: RTP: A transport Protocol for Real-Time Application. RFC 1889, (1996)
6. Kasai, H., et. al.: Rate control scheme for low-delay MPEG-2 video transcoder. in Proc. of
Int’l Conf. on Image Processing, Vol. 1. (2000) 964-967

