Coupled Navier-Stokes/DSMC Method for
Transient and Steady-State Gas Flows
Giannandrea Abbate1 , Barend J. Thijsse2 , and Chris R. Kleijn1
1

Dept. of Multi-Scale Physics & J.M.Burgers Centre for Fluid Mechanics, Delft
University of Technology,
Prins Bernhardlaan 6, Delft, The Netherlands
G.Abbate@klft.tn.tudelft.nl,C.R.kleijn@tudelft.nl
http://www.msp.tudelft.nl
2
Dept. of Material Science and Engineering, Delft University of Technology,
Mekelweg 2, Delft, The Netherlands
B.J.Thijsse@tnw.tudelft.nl
http://www.3me.tudelft.nl

Abstract. An adaptatively coupled continuum-DSMC approach for compressible, viscous gas ﬂows has been developed. The continuum domain
is described by the unsteady Navier-Stokes equations, solved using a
ﬁnite volume formulation in compressible form to capture the shock. The
molecular domain is solved by the Direct Simulation Monte Carlo method
(DSMC). The coupling procedure is an overlapped Schwarz method with
Dirichlet-Dirichlet boundary conditions. The domains are determined
automatically by computing the Kn number with respect to the local
gradients length scale. The method has been applied to simulate a 1-D
shock tube problem and a 2-D expanding jet in a low pressure chamber.
Keywords: Direct Simulation Monte Carlo; Coupled Method; Hybrid
Method; Rareﬁed Gas Flow; Navier-Stokes solver.

1

Introduction

In several applications we are faced with the challenge to model a gas ﬂow transition from continuum to rareﬁed regime. Examples include: ﬂow around vehicles
at high altitudes [1], ﬂow through microﬂuidic gas devices [2], small cold thruster
nozzle and plume ﬂows [3], and low pressure thin ﬁlm deposition processes or
gas jets [4].
It is always very complicated to describe this kind of ﬂows; in the continuum regime (Kn
1), Navier-Stokes equations can be used to model the ﬂow,
whereas free molecular ﬂow (Kn
1) can be modelled using Molecular Dynamics models. For the intermediate Knudsen number ranges (Kn = 0.01 − 10),
neither of the approaches is suitable. In this regime the best method to use is
DSMC (Direct Simulation Monte Carlo). The computational demands of DSMC,
however, scale with Kn−4 and when the Knudsen number is less than ∼ 0.05,
its time and memory expenses become inadmissible.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part I, LNCS 4487, pp. 842–849, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Coupled N-S/DSMC Method for Transient and Steady-State Gas Flows

843

Diﬀerent solutions have been proposed to compute such ﬂows. The most standard uses a continuum solver with analytical slip boundary conditions [5]. This
method is suitable only in conditions where Kn < 0.1 and the precise formulation of the slip boundary conditions is strongly geometry dependent. For
this reason, several hybrid continuum/molecular models have been proposed,
for instance: Molecular Dynamics (MD) and Navier-Stokes (N-S) equations [6],
Boltzmann and N-S equations [7], Direct Simulation Monte Carlo (DSMC) and
Stokes equations [2], DSMC and incompressible N-S equations [8], and DSMC
and N-S equations [9,10,11,12,13].
In particular, Garcia et al.[9] constructed a hybrid particle/continuum method
with an adaptive mesh and algorithm reﬁnement. It was a ﬂux-based coupling
method with no overlapping between the continuum and the DSMC regions.
On the contrary, Wu and al. [10] and Schwartzentruber and al. [11,12] proposed an ’iterative’ coupled CFD-DSMC method where the coupling is achieved
through an overlapped Schwarz method with Dirichlet-Dirichlet type boundary
conditions. However, both Wu and al. [10] and Schwartzentruber and al. [11,12]
methods are only suitable for gas ﬂow simulations under steady-state conditions,
while the method that we propose has been applied both to transient and steadystate gas ﬂow simulations.
We consider, in the continuum regime, the compressible N-S equations and,
in the transitional regime, DSMC because it is several order of magnitude more
eﬃcient than MD and the Boltzmann equations solvers. The coupling of the two
models is reached through an overlapped Schwarz method [10] with DirichletDirichlet boundary conditions. It is an adaptative method in which, during the
computations, the Kn number with respect to the local gradients is computed to
determine and divide the CFD (Computational Fluid Dynamics) domain from
the DSMC one.

2
2.1

The Coupling Method
The CFD Solver

The CFD code used is a 2-D, unsteady code based on a ﬁnite volume formulation
in compressible form to capture the shock. It uses an explicit, second-order, ﬂuxsplitting, MUSCL scheme for the Navier-Stokes equations.
Because a high temperature ﬂow has to be modelled, a power-law temperature
dependence was used for the viscosity μ and a model coming from kinetic gas
theory for the thermal conductivity κ. The density was computed from the ideal
gas law.
2.2

The Molecular Algorithm: DSMC

The 2-D DSMC code developed is based on the algorithm described in [14].
A ”particle reservoirs” approach was used to implement the inlet (outlet)
boundary conditions. A Maxwell-Boltzmann or a Chapmann-Enskog velocity
distributions can be used to generate molecules in those reservoirs.

844

2.3

G. Abbate, B.J. Thijsse, and C.R. Kleijn

Schwarz Coupling

We describe in this section two diﬀerent strategies developed and implemented
to couple the Navier-Stokes based CFD code to the DSMC code: One for steady
state ﬂow simulation, the other for unsteady ﬂow simulations.
Steady Formulation: We propose a hybrid coupling method based on the
Schwarz method [10] and consisting of two stages.
In the ﬁrst stage the unsteady N-S equations are integrated in time on the
entire domain Ω until a steady state is reached. From this solution, local Kn
numbers with respect to the local gradients length scales [15] are computed
according to
λ
| Q|
(1)
Q
where λ is the mean free path length and Q is a ﬂow property (density, temperature etc.); The values of KnQ are used to split Ω in the subdomains ΩDSMC
(Kn > Knsplit − ΔKn), where the ﬂow ﬁeld will be evaluated using the DSMC
technique, and ΩCF D (Kn < Knsplit ), where N-S equation will be solved. For
Knsplit a value of 0.05 was used. Between the DSMC and CFD regions an overlap region is considered, where the ﬂow is computed with both the DSMC and
the CFD solver; the value of ΔKn can be chosen in ”ad hoc” manner in order
to vary the overlap region size.
In the second stage, DSMC and CFD are run in their respective subdomains
with their own time steps (ΔtDSMC and ΔtCF D , respectively), until a steady
state is reached. First DSMC is applied; molecules are allocated in the DSMC
subdomain according to the density, velocity and temperature obtained from
the initial CFD solution. A Maxwell-Boltzmann or a Chapmann-Enskog distributions can be chosen to create molecules. It is important to say that the grid is
automatically reﬁned in the DSMC region in order to respect the DSMC requirements. The boundary conditions to the DSMC region come from the solution in
the CFD region. As described in the previous section for the inlet (outlet) boundary, outside the overlapping region some ”particle reservoirs” are considered. In
these cells molecules are created according to density, velocity, temperature and
their gradients of the solution in the CFD region, with a Maxwell-Boltzmann or
a Chapmann-Enskog distributions. After running the DSMC, the N-S equations
are solved in the CFD region. The boundary conditions comes from the solution
in the DSMC region averaged over the CFD cells.
Once a steady state solution has been obtained in both the DSMC and N-S
region, the local KnQ numbers are re-evaluated and a new boundary between
the two regions is computed. This second stage is iterated until in the overlapping region DSMC and CFD solutions diﬀer less than a prescribed value.
We made an extensive study of the inﬂuence of various coupling parameters,
such as the size of the overlap region (4 − 59 mean free path lengths) and the
amount of averaging applied to the reduce DSMC statistical scatter (averaging
over 5, 30 and 50 repeated runs). The inﬂuence of these parameters on the ﬁnal
solution was found to be small.
KnQ =

Coupled N-S/DSMC Method for Transient and Steady-State Gas Flows

845

Unsteady Formulation: In the unsteady formulation, the described coupling
method is re-iterated every coupling time step Δtcoupling >> ΔtDSMC , ΔtCF D ,
starting on the solution at the previous time step. As expected, in order to avoid
instabilities, it was necessary to keep the Courant number (based on the coupling time step, the molecules most probable velocity, and the CFD grid cell
size) below one.
In the second stage, after every coupling step, the program compares the predicted DSMC region with the one of the previous step. In the cells that still
belong to the DSMC region, we consider the same molecules of the previous
time step whose properties were recorded. Molecules that are in the cells that no
longer belong to the DSMC region are deleted. In cells that have changed from
CFD into a DSMC cell, new molecules are created with a Maxwell-Boltzmann
or a Chapmann-Enskog distribution, according to the density, velocity and temperature of the CFD solution at the previous time step.
At the end of the every coupling step molecule properties are recorded to set
the initial conditions in the DSMC region for the next coupling step.

3
3.1

Results
1-D Shock-Tube Problem

The unsteady coupling method was applied to the unsteady shock tube test case
(ﬁg.1).

Fig. 1. Shock tube test case

The code models a ﬂow of Argon inside an 0.5m long tube between two tanks
in diﬀerent thermo-ﬂuid-dynamic conditions. In the left tank there are a pressure
of 2000P a and a temperature of 12000K, while in the tube and in the right tank
there are a pressure of 100P a and a temperature of 2000K. When the membrane
that separates the two regions breaks a shock travels in the tube from left to
right. Upstream from the shock, the gas has high temperature and pressure, but
gradient length scales are very small. Downstream of it both temperature and
pressure are lower, but gradient length scales are large. As a result, the local
Kn number KnQ is high upstream of the shock and low downstream. In the
hybrid DSMC-CFD approach, DSMC is therefore applied upstream, and CFD
downstream. The continuum grid is composed of 100 cells in x direction and 1
cell in y direction, while the code automatically reﬁnes the mesh in the DSMC
region to fulﬁll its requirements. In the DSMC region molecules were created
with the Chapman-Enskog distribution. It was demonstrated, in fact, that in a

846

G. Abbate, B.J. Thijsse, and C.R. Kleijn

hybrid DSMC/CFD method a Chapman-Enskog distribution is required when
the viscous ﬂuxes are taken into account, while a simple Maxwellian distribution
is adequate when the continuum region is well approximated by the Euler equations [9]. The particle cross section was evaluated using the Variable Soft Sphere
(VSS) model because it is more accurate than the Variable Hard Sphere (VHS)
one to model viscous eﬀect. The coupling time step is Δtcoupling = 2.0×10−6sec.
and the ensemble averages of the DSMC solution to reduce the scattering were
made on 30 repeated runs. In addition to the hybrid approach, the problem was
also solved using CFD only and DSMC only (which was feasible because of the
1-D nature of the problem). The latter is considered to be the most accurate.
In ﬁg.2 the pressure inside the tube after 3.0 × 10−5 sec., evaluated with the hybrid (Schwarz coupling) method is compared with the results of the full DSMC
simulation and the full CFD simulation.

Fig. 2. Pressure and Kn number in the tube after 3.0 × 10−5 sec

In the same picture also local Knudsen number KnQ , computed using the
hybrid method, is compared with the full CFD simulation.
From the results shown in ﬁg.2, it is clear that the full CFD approach fails
due to the high values of the local Kn number caused by the shock presence. The
full CFD approach predicts a shock thickness less than 1 cm, which is unrealistic
considering the fact that the mean free path near the shock is of the order of
several centimeters. In the full DSMC approach, therefore, the shock is smeared
over almost 20 cm. The results obtained with the hybrid approach are virtually
identical to those obtained with the full DSMC solver, but they were obtained
in less than one ﬁfth of the CPU time.
3.2

2-D Expanding Jet in a Low Pressure Chamber

The steady-state coupling method was applied to a steady state expanding neutral gas jet in a low pressure chamber (ﬁg.3).
The code models an Argon jet, at a temperature of 6000K and Mach number
1, injected from the top in a 2-D chamber of dimensions 0.32m × 0.8m, through
a slot of 0.032m. The pressure inside the chamber is kept at a value of 10P a
through two slots of 0.04m wide disposed on its lateral sides at a distance 0.6m
from the top. Walls are cooled at a temperature of 400K. The continuum grid

Coupled N-S/DSMC Method for Transient and Steady-State Gas Flows

847

Fig. 3. Expanding jet in a low pressure deposition chamber test case

Fig. 4. Kn number and CFD/DSMC domains splitting

is composed of 50 cells in x direction and 160 in y direction while the code automatically reﬁnes the mesh in the DSMC region to fullﬁll its requirements. In
the DSMC region, molecules were created with the Chapman-Enskog distribution and the particle cross section was evaluated using the VSS model. Fig.4
shows the Knudsen number in the chamber, respectively evaluated with reference to the inlet dimension (KnL ) and to the local temperature gradient length
scale (KnT ). The pressure does not change a lot in the domain. Around the
inlet the temperature is high and, because of the presence of a shock, gradient
length scales are small. In the rest of the chamber the temperature is lower and

848

G. Abbate, B.J. Thijsse, and C.R. Kleijn

Fig. 5. Velocity and temperature ﬁelds in the deposition chamber

gradient length scales are large. As a result the Kn number is high around the
inlet and low in the rest of the domain. In the right-hand side of Fig.4, the resulting division between the DSMC, CFD and overlapping regions is shown.
In ﬁg.5 the velocity and temperature ﬁelds, evaluated with the hybrid (Schwarz
coupling) method, are compared with the results of a full CFD simulation. It is
evident that the DSMC region inﬂuences the ﬂow ﬁeld and its eﬀects are present
in a region wider then the DSMC and overlapping regions alone. Far away from the
DSMC region, however, the full CFD and the hybrid method give the very similar
results.

4

Conclusions

A hybrid continuum-rareﬁed ﬂow simulation method was developed to couple a
Navier-Stokes description of a continuum ﬂow ﬁeld with a DSMC description of
a rareﬁed one. The coupling is achieved by an overlapped Schwarz method implemented both for steady state and transient ﬂows. Continuum subdomain boundary
conditions are imposed on the molecular subdomain via particle reservoirs. The
molecular subdomain boundary conditions are imposed on the continuum subdomain using simple averaging. The subdomains are determined automatically by
computing the Kn number with respect to the local gradients length scale on a
preliminary Navier-Stokes solution.
The method has been applied to a shock tube and to a 2-D expanding jet in
a low pressure chamber problems showing its capability of predicting the ﬂow
ﬁeld even where a CFD solver fails.

Coupled N-S/DSMC Method for Transient and Steady-State Gas Flows

849

Acknowledgments. We thank Profs. D.C.Schram and M.C.M.Van de Sanden
for usefull discussions and the DCSE (Delft Centre for Computational Science
and Engineering) for ﬁnancial support.

References
1. F.Sharipov, Hypersonic ﬂow of rareﬁed gas near the brazilian satellite during its
re-entry into atmosphere, Brazilian Journal of Physics, vol.33, no.2, June 2003
2. O.Aktas, N.R.Aluru, A combined Continuum/DSMC technique for multiscale
analysis of microﬂuidic ﬁlters, Journal of Computational Physics 178, 342–372
(2002)
3. C.Cai, I.D.Boyd, 3D simulation of Plume ﬂows from a cluster of plasma thrusters,
36th AIAA Plasmadynamics and Laser Conference, 6-9 June 2005, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, AIAA-2005-4662
4. M.C.M.van de Sanden, R.J.Severens RJ, J.W.A.M.Gielen et al. (1996), Deposition
of a-Si:H and a-C:H using an expanding thermal arc plasma, Plasma sources Science
and Technology 5 (2): 268–274
5. B.Alder, Highly discretized dynamics, Physica A 240 (1997) 193-195
6. N.G.Hadjiconstantinou, Hybrid Atomistic-Continuum formulations and moving
contact-line problem, Journal Computational Physics 154, 245–265 (1999)
7. P.Le Tallec, F.Mallinger, Coupling Boltzmann and Navier-Stokes Equations by half
ﬂuxes, Journal Computational Physics 136, 51–67 (1997)
8. H.S.Wijesinghe, N.G. Hadijconstantinou, Discussion of hybrid AtomisticContinuum methods for multiscale hydrodynamics, International Journal for multiscale Computational Engineering, 2(2)189-202 (2004)
9. A.L.Garcia, J.B.Bell, W.Y.Crutchﬁeld, B.J.Alder, Adaptative mesh and algorithm
reﬁnement using Direct Simulation Monte Carlo, Journal of Computational Physics
154, 134-155 (1999)
10. J.S.Wu, Y.Y.Lian, G.Cheng. R.P.Koomullil, K.C.Tseng, Development and veriﬁcation of a coupled DSMC-NS scheme using unstructured mesh, Journal of Computational Physics 219, 579-607 (2006)
11. T.E.Schwartzentruber, L.C.Scalabrin, I.D. Boyd, Hybrid Particle-Continuum Simulations of Non-Equilibrium Hypersonic Blunt Body Flows, AIAA-2006-3602, June
2006, San Francisco, CA.
12. T.E.Schwartzentruber, I.D. Boyd, A hybrid particle-continuum method applied to
shock waves, Journal of Computational Physics, 215, No. 2, 402-416 (2006).
13. A.J.Lofthouse, I.D.Boyd, M.J.Wright, Eﬀects of Continuum Breakdown on Hypersonic Aerothermodynamics, AIAA-2006-0993, January 2006, Reno, NV.
14. G.A.Bird, Molecular gas dynamics and Direct Simulation Monte Carlo, Claredon
Press Oxford Science, 1998
15. Wen-Lan Wang, I.D.Boyd, Continuum Breakdown in Hypersonic Viscous Flows,
40th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, January 14-17, 2002, Reno,
NV

