Construction of Virtual Learning Environments of
Lushan Mountain
Weijun Yang1, Jianhua Gong1, Lihui Zhang1, and Hongli Fan2
1

Institute of Remote Sensing Applications, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
P.O.Box9718, Beijing, 100101, P.R. China,
wjy172@163.com
2
Institute of Automotive Industry
ShiYan, HuBei, 442002, P.R. China

Abstract. Organizing a fieldwork in LuShan Mountain consumes much money and
time, but the result is not effective. This demands a virtual learning environment of
LuShan Moutain. Some methods of data collection based on mobile equipments are
adopted. The data collection system constructs a collaborative 3D modeling
environment, in which students can do goecollaboration. In this paper, some
technologies to support data collection are discussed.
Keywords: Virtual Learning Environment, Virtual Geographic Environment,
Virtual Geographic Fieldwork, Data Collection, Collaborative 3D Modeling.

1 Introduction
A virtual geographic environment (VGE) is a multi-user shared, intelligent, and virtual
environment representing the real geographic environment to conduct geo-spatial
analysis, to carry out geo-visualization, to support collaborative work, planning and
decision making, as well as to serve training, geographic education, and entertainment
[2]. VGE can represent the natural world and enables a person to explore and interact
with objects in cyberspace.
In this paper, some technologies such as collaborative 3D modeling between multi
PCs or mobile equipments are discussed.

2 Virtual Geographic Fieldwork
Virtual learning environment uses the combination of long-distance communication
tools and multimedia technologies such as VR to provide an online learning path for
students. Virtual learning environment (VLE), not only provides rich teaching
patterns and teaching contents, but also helps improve learners’ ability of analyzing
problems and exploring new concepts [5]. VR is the most feasible technology for us
to create VLE. Virtual geographic fieldwork is a key application of VGE in the field
of geographic fieldwork. It also forms a virtual learning environment of Lushan
Mountain.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part III, LNCS 4489, pp. 563–566, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

564

W. Yang et al.

Lushan Mountain, situated in the north of Jiangxi Province, at 115°52'116°08E'29°26-29°41'N, occupies an area of 302 square kilometers. Lushan Mountain
is famous for its beautiful natural landscape. Not just so, because of its special terrain,
geology, etc, it has become a perfect fieldwork place for students of many majors,
such as GIS, Geology, Remote Sensing, etc. Why a virtual geographic fieldwork is
necessary?
First, organizing such a fieldwork consumes so much money and time. And
students often complain that the result is not effective. The data collection became a
mess because of no trim and no accumulation. It’s like a travel more than a fieldwork.
Second, the data collection will certainly do some destroy to the environment of
Lushan Mountain. This is also a problem in the outdoor fieldwork. Third, the
information stored in the computer can be permanent, but specimens, such as plants,
cannot last a long time.
These all call for a virtual fieldwork system, students can explore in the virtual
geographic environment and acquire knowledge in a virtual 3D scene. Above
disadvantages can be avoided. So, at the first, we need a data collection system, which
can be applied to the data collection of virtual fieldwork. It forms an environment in
which many modelers can do collaborative 3D modeling.

3 Data Classification and Structure
The data of outdoor fieldwork can be classified to six categories, such as plant, rock,
soil, terrain, geology and artificial object.
Dem and image objects are the information of the terrain. Point, linear, surface,
body objects are base types of CyberCity GIS. Point object is implemented to afford
the ability to integrate with CAD models. The point object can describe such features
as trees, annotations, static CAD models. Trees are represented by transparent
textures [3]. Some artificial objects can be represented by CAD models of point
object and inserted to the scene.
The virtual geographic fieldwork is required to afford the ability of spatial analysis.
So the data structure is very important. Similar to the formal data structure (FDS) [1]
[4] [6], the CyberCity models are grouped into six different object types: DEM object,
image object, point object, linear object, surface object, and body object. 3D point
object, the cube object, has the simplest spatial extension (the 3D position, the
azimuth and the box size) and sometimes special attributes such as CAD models in
3DS format.

4 Offline Data Collection Though PDA
The first method is offline data collection though PDA. Students can collect the text
and picture information though PDA. The position information is acquired by GPS.
After coming back, they transport the data to the PC and build the 3D models. The
data collection and modeling are separate. So an environment of offline data
collection is constructed.

Construction of Virtual Learning Environments of Lushan Mountain

565

In the process of data collection, a linkage file is created. In this file, the relationship
of the information such as pictures, texts, videos and position is recorded. After the
students come back, they can add the data to the database in a collaborative 3D
modeling environment. Some support technologies must be adopted to support it. The
most important one is to integrate some theories of 3D interactive visualization to the
collaborative 3D modeling environment, such as dynamic loading by data page, view
frustum culling, etc.

5 Online Data Collection Though Mobile Phone
The second method is online data collection though mobile phone. The students
collect the information though mobile phone and GPS. After some simple data
handling in mobile phone, they can send the data to the database server directly after
simple handling. At the same time, the 3D scene is built. After data collection, the 3D
data is created at the same time. So an environment of online data collection is
constructed.
J2ME is Sun Microsystems' answer to a consumer wireless device platform. J2ME
allows developers to use Java language and the J2ME wireless toolkit to create
applications and programs for wireless and mobile devices. The Connected Limited
Device Configuration (CLDC) is the J2ME configuration for smaller handheld
devices that are usually battery operated and low in memory with limited processing
power and low bandwidth. CLDC defines the base set of application programming
interfaces and a virtual machine for resource-constrained devices like mobile phones,
pagers, and mainstream personal digital assistants. When coupled with a profile such
as the Mobile Information Device Profile (MIDP), it provides a solid Java platform
for developing applications to run on devices with limited memory, processing power,
and graphical capabilities.
In MIDP, there are two methods to communicate between MIDlet and Servlet. The
first method is using Java Server Pages as server component. The second method is
communicating with Servlet directly. Java Server Pages are mainly applied in the
representation layer of WEB applications. Servlet is more adapted to handle logic or
communicate with client as a control. HTTP protocol is adopted to visit web data and
service.

6 Collaborative 3D Modeling
6.1 Collaborative Modeling Between PCs
Integrating interactive visualization to 3D modeling is a revolutionary change to
traditional 3D modeling method based on subareas. It forms an environment in which
many modelers can carry collaborative work. Some technologies, such as network,
3D interactive visualization, etc, are used to establish this environment. Many
modelers can create 3D models in a large scene with great amount of data. Thus, a
collaborative 3D modeling environment is constructed to support 3D modeling for
3DGIS, CyberCity GIS, virtual reality, VGE, 3D game, etc.

566

W. Yang et al.

6.2 Collaborative Modeling Between Mobiles
Because there is no 3D graphic interface on mobile equipments, the theories of
collaborative modeling between PCs are not used on them. But if there is a demand of
graphic interface on mobile equipments in the future, the theories are also useful.
6.3 Collaboration Between Mobiles and PCs
In some applications, the PCs and mobiles may be both needed. So the collaboration
between PCs and mobile equipments must be considered. Four communication
patterns are put forward. These are S2S (Static to Static), M2S (Mobile to Static),
S2M (Static to Mobile), and M2M(Mobile to Mobile). S2S means the communication
between the persons using different computers in the rooms. M2S means the outdoor
person with mobile equipment communicates with the person using computer in the
room. S2M means the person using computer in the room communicates with the
outdoor person with mobile equipment. M2M means the communication between the
outdoor persons with mobile equipments. In the collaborative modeling between
mobiles, only the pattern M2S is implemented. But in other applications, some other
patterns may be used.

Acknowledgements
This research is partially supported by the National High-tech R&D Program (863
Program) No. 2006AA12Z204 and the Knowledge Innovation Program of the Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Grant No. Kzcx2-yw-126-01.

References
1. Gong, J., Li, D.: Object-oriented and Integrated Spatial Data Model for Managing Image,
DEM, and Vector Data, Photogrammetric Engineering & Remote Sensing (2000),
66(5):619-623.
2. Gong, J., Lin, H.: A geographical perspective on online virtual reality (2001), pp.62-63.
3. Jurgen, D.: An object-oriented approach for integrating 3D visualization systems and GIS,
Computers & Geosciences, 26 (2000) 67-76
4. 4.Molenaar, M.: A topology for 3D vector maps, ITC Journal (1992), (1): 25-33.
5. Pan, Z., Cheok, A., Yang, H.: Virtual reality and mixed reality for virtual learning
environments. Computers & Graphics (2005)
6. Wang, X.: A Hybrid GIS for 3-D City Models, In: International Archives of
Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing (2000). Vol. XXXIII, Part B4, pp. 1165-1172.

