Privacy Protection for a Secure u-City Life
Changjin Lee, Bong Gyou Lee, and Youngil Kong
Graduate School of Information, Yonsei University
134 Shinchondong, Seoul 120-749, Korea
{cjlee,bglee,okay777}@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract. Recently, projects to construct an innovative brand-new city,
termed a u-City (ubiquitous City), are being carried out in many countries.
The u-City is a future-oriented city which combines ubiquitous information
services with city. It has emerged as an alternative for improving the quality
of life for human beings and reaching the balanced development among
cities. Although a number of privacy problems are anticipated, there are very
few researches on the protection of privacy in the u-City. In this study, we
describe the privacy guidelines for modern cities as well as the privacy issues
in the u-City, and provide suggestions for privacy protection to establish a
safe u-City.
Keywords: Ubiquitous Computing, u-City, Personal Information, Privacy
Protection.

1 Introduction
Ubiquitous computing technologies have been applied to many fields including public
service, education, health, and transportation. These technologies are being combined
with city, and then make it possible to build up a new city, u-City. The u-City is a
sophisticated and intelligent city where information can be easily exchanged among
people, objects and environments inside the city based on the ubiquitous network. The
u-City is aimed to improve the quality of people’s life in the city by building up a
human-centered city, and to accomplish balanced development among cities by
specializing their own strength [1].
However, in the u-City, private information becomes readily available and as such,
privacy issues may become a serious problem. Since most projects to construct the
u-City are in the very early stage, there is few research on privacy issues in the u-City.
In this research, therefore, we look into various issues in privacy violation which
should be considered in the process of u-City planning, and then make suggestions for
a safer u-City life.
We briefly explain the features of u-City in chapter 2. The privacy issues in the
u-City are described in chapter 3. In chapter 4, we provide some suggestions for
privacy protection in the u-City. Conclusion and future direction of a secure u-City
are presented in chapter 5.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 685–692, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

686

C. Lee, B.G. Lee, and Y. Kong

2 What Is the u-City?
The u-City is different from the Digital Cities which are currently being constructed
in many countries over the world. The Digital City collects and organizes the digital
information of the corresponding physical city, and provides a public information
space for people living in and visiting the city to interact with each other [2].
However, the u-City is a complex of u-Home, u-Work, u-Transportation,
u-Environment, u-Health, u-Education, and u-Government based on ubiquitous computing technologies such as USN (Ubiquitous Sensor Network), RFID
(Radio Frequency Identification), and FTTH (Fiber To The Home) as shown in
Figure 1 [3].

Fig. 1. The Concept of u-City

The differences between a modern city, Digital City and u-City are summarized in
Table 1.
Table 1. Modern City vs. Digital City vs. u-City
Modern city
Distance centric
Spatial, temporal limitation
Real space
Environment
and energy problem
Limitation
on accommodating
new function
Producer centric
Unbalanced development
among region

Digital city
Information centric
Spatial, temporal limitation
relieved
Division of real and virtual
space
Environment and energy
problem
Limitation
on accommodating
new function
Producer centric
Unbalanced development
among region

u-City
Human centric
No spatial, temporal
limitation
Convergence of real and
virtual space
Environment friendly city
Efficient city management

Consumer centric
Balanced development
among region

Privacy Protection for a Secure u-City Life

687

3 Privacy Issues in the u-City
3.1 Guidelines for Privacy Protection by International Organizations
Traditionally, ‘privacy’ is defined in various ways. It does not have specific or definite
legal connotation [4] and as such the concept of ‘privacy’ can be too broad. Thus, this
paper will focus on the information privacy related to protection of personal
information. ‘Privacy’ means the right or obligation of an individual or entities to
collect, use and disclose personal information [5], and personal information refers to any
type of information that identify or can identify an individual or an entity [6].
So far, international efforts have focused on the protection of privacy with regards
to collecting, processing and distribution of personal information. OECD was first to
provide guidelines on the protection of privacy (Guidelines Governing the Protection
of Privacy and Transborder Flows of Personal Data) in 1980 as the development of
electronic data processing technique made mass data transfer possible [7]. Since then,
development of new guidelines on privacy has followed in the UN, EU and APEC
with a view to providing their members with references on privacy protection.
The OECD Guidelines Governing the Protection of Privacy and Transborder Flows
of Personal Data is composed of 8 principles ; 1) Collection Limitation Principle, 2)
Data Quality Principle, 3) Purpose Specification Principle, 4) Use Limitation
Principle, 5) Security Safeguard Principle, 6) Openness Principle, 7) Individual
Participation Principle, 8) Accountability Principle. The Guidelines provide
recommendations to the member countries although no binding force exists.
The OECD Guidelines had a direct effect on the privacy guidelines or rules
developed later such as the UN Guidelines for the Regulation of Computerized
Personal Data Files (1990) [8], EU Directive on the Protection of Individuals with
regard to the Processing of Personal Data and on the Free Movement of Such Data
(1995) [9] and APEC Information Privacy Principles (2004) [10]. Thus, these
guidelines accommodate most of the 8 principles suggested in the OECD Guidelines
and build upon the OECD Guidelines by adding new text relevant to each situation.
The OECD Guidelines function as the basic principle for privacy protection and
can be seen in the Privacy Laws of many countries such as England, Sweden, Canada,
Hong Kong, Australia, and New Zealand. UN Guidelines recommend that member
countries reference the guidelines when making privacy laws or procedures of their
countries. The EU Directive provides principles and standards for processing personal
data and the Directive has been adopted by the domestic laws of its member countries.
Also, in October 2004, APEC adopted guidelines on privacy in October 2004.
Based on the OECD Guidelines, the APEC “Information Privacy Principles” added 3
new principles; Preventing Harm , Notice, Choice.
3.2 Privacy Issues in the u-City
The u-City is a new space where physical space and electronic space are integrated
into one, quite different from the concept of digital city, in which a modern city or a
physical space is simply being reflected or applied to an electronic space. In other
words, in the u-City, computers, which are interconnected by ubiquitous networks, are
embedded in human beings, objects, and environments and offer further convenience

688

C. Lee, B.G. Lee, and Y. Kong

for residents. However, the side-effect is that private information becomes readily
available and as such, privacy issues may become a serious problem. Privacy issues
that may appear in the u-City will be reviewed based on the OCED Principles for the
Protection of Privacy.
First, in the u-City, there is a high possibility for the Collection Limitation
Principle to be violated. One of the key technologies in the u-City is sensing and tag
technologies such as RFID, which enable large amounts of private information to be
collected in real-time regardless of one’s own will. For example, by analyzing RFID
information of a purchased item by an individual, one can speculate about the
individual’s patterns of consumption, social status, current physical location, or
health-related information regardless of the individual’s will. Thus, personal data can
be collected through illegal means without the consent of the subject. Furthermore,
under the environment of the u-City, it may sometimes be impossible to notify in
advance and ask for consent from the subject for collecting data. As a result, the uCity is highly vulnerable to infringement of the Collection Limitation Principle.
Second, in the u-City, there is also a high possibility of violating the Data Quality
Principle. As previously explained in the Collection Limitation Principle, in the
u-City, immense amounts of personal data—both necessary and unnecessary—are
collected in real-time through computers that are embedded in every object. These
data may not all be relevant to the purpose of use, causing inconsistencies in data.
This problem can raise problems with the quality of personal data.
Third, the u-City can raise problems with the Purpose Specification Principle. For
example, in addition to purpose-specified personal data, other data such as individual
location can be collected by identifying the course of movement of an individual
through using a telematic service. Also, using RFID chips, sensitive information such
as medical conditions or patterns of consumption can also be collected.
Fourth, in terms of the Use Limitation Principle, the u-City is not much different
from a modern city since both are exposed to the same danger of using personal data
for purposes other than those specified in accordance with the Purpose Specification
Principle. The only difference between the two cities is the amount of personal data
collected.
Fifth, compared with modern cities, the u-City has a higher possibility of violation
of the Security Safeguard Principle. In the u-City, computers are embedded in every
device and as each device is interconnected, more personal data is exposed to larger
number of people than in modern city. Thus, the danger of personal data being used
by malicious users such as hackers increases in the u-City, causing such risks as
unauthorized access, destruction, use, modification or disclosure of data.
Sixth, the Openness Principle is also easily violated in the u-City compared to the
modern city. In modern cities, which are internet-based, personal data is collected
openly mainly through websites or via off-line. Most websites or data controllers
notify their subscribers about the policies of protection of private information.
However, in the u-City, personal data can often be collected without previous consent
or recognition of the data subject and the means to notify the subscribers of policies
on private information protection are limited. Thus, in the u-City, the Openness
Principles are more difficult to implement than in modern cities.

Privacy Protection for a Secure u-City Life

689

Table 2. Possibility for Privacy Violation(Modern City vs. u-City)
OECD Principle

Modern
city
limitation Low

u-City

Example of privacy invasion in u-City

Collection
principle
Data quality
Principle
Purpose specification
principle
Use limitation
Principle
Security safeguard
Principle
Openness principle

Very high

Impossible to notify a subject about
collection of her or his information
Discordance among collected private
information
Possibility of data analogy without
purpose of collection
Abuse of private information in
monitoring and pursuing a subject
Possibility of security violation by
hacking mobile networks
Limited means to notify privacy
protection policy to a subject
Impossible to identify data controller

Individual
participation principle
Accountability
principle

Medium

High

Low

High

High

High

High

Very high

Medium

High

Medium

High

Low

High

Vagueness of data controller and the
location of responsibilities

Seventh, in the u-City, a large spectrum of personal data—not only one’s
identification information but also one’s current location, current status and so on—
are collected and processed in real-time basis regardless of one’s own will. Therefore,
it is impossible in reality for the subject to identify data controllers, who have his or
her personal data. Thus, in the u-City, the Individual Participation Principle is difficult
to adhere to.
Table 3. Privacy Issues in the u-City
Category
Information
collection

Information
processing

Information
dissemination

Privacy issues
Information collection without consent by an information subject
A breach of notification during the collection of private information
Collection of private information by illegal means such as hacking
Collection of private information by illegal monitoring or pressure
Outflow of private information by internal data controller
Outflow of private information by an unauthorized person
Outflow of private information by careless manipulation
Outflow of private information by lack of technical measures
Rejection of an information subject’ requests to change and delete their
private information
Retention of private information after duration of use is expired
Abuse of private information without notice to an information subject
Information sharing with third party without an information subject’s
agreement
Violation of security agreement of private information
Outflow of sensitive information that can put subjects in danger or hurt the
fame
Illegal appropriation of other’s ID
Intentional outflow of other people’s incorrect information

690

C. Lee, B.G. Lee, and Y. Kong

Last, in the u-City, the data controller for specific data is often unclear and difficult
to be identified since there are so many channels available to gain access to personal
data. Thus, personal data may become poorly managed within the u-City, which in
turn, may give rise to infringement of the protection of private information.
Based on the 8 Principles for the Protection of Privacy, Table 2 below summarizes
the possibilities of privacy violations that can occur under modern city versus u-City.
Solove (2005) presented the taxonomy of harmful activities on privacy, consisting
of information collection, information processing and information dissemination. This
taxonomy provides a framework to classify risks with regards to privacy. Thus,
privacy issues in u-City can be arranged using the taxonomy as Table 3.

4 Suggestions for Privacy Protection in the u-City
In order to achieve privacy-protected and safe u-City life, measures to protect privacy
should be considered in various aspects including regulatory and technological
framework based on the privacy issues mentioned on the previous chapter.
4.1 Regulatory and Institutional Suggestions in Building a Safe u-City
Firstly, in order to strengthen privacy protection in u-City, relevant regulation that
reflects the specific characteristics of u-City should be introduced to provide with
clear procedures for obtaining consent, providing notification, etc. In u-City, personal
activities are exposed to pervasive sensors. As it is sometimes difficult to obtain
consent or make notification to the data subject in the u-City environment, the
problem of personal information control arises.
However, obtaining consent of the data subject in collecting personal data,
specifying the purpose for which personal data are collected, and providing notice
regarding the collection and use of personal data is the essential principles that should
be observed in order to protect privacy. These basic principles for privacy protection
should be ensured in the u-City environment as well. In this context, efforts should be
paid to seek appropriate measures to protect privacy in the u-City by providing clear
process for obtaining consent and making notification that reflects the circumstances
of u-City.
Secondly, regulatory framework should be prepared to protect anonymity of
delicate personal data that can be collected in the u-City environment. In the u-City
environment, delicate information such as a person’s locational and circumstantial
information can be induced by combining information collected through sensors,
RFID Tags. For example, by analyzing the RFID tag of a medical product which is
purchased by an AIDS patient, information that the person is HIV–positive can be
induced. When such information is disclosed, the data subject can face the danger of
being excluded from society as a result of privacy infringement
Thirdly, regulatory tool to protect personal data from development of new
technologies should be devised. In the u-City environment, the continuous evolution
of ubiquitous computing infra technology can result in infringement of privacy as new
devices and media are being developed. However, with the current legal system, it is
inevitable to face certain dead zones due to the fast development of technology that

Privacy Protection for a Secure u-City Life

691

outruns the development of new regulation. Thus, institution of neutral regulation that
can protect privacy regardless of emergence of new technology is required.
Lastly, clear legal standard should be provided on the limitation of personal data
collection. Privacy infringement can also occur in the u-City environment by service
providers’ profiling of wide range of personal data through various channels.
Therefore, legal framework to regulate profiling personal data should be introduced.
4.2 Technical Suggestions in Building a Safe u-City
Another challenge that should be tackled in building safe u-city besides shaping up
new legal and institutional framework is developing new technologies to protect
privacy. Alongside the already existing PETs (Privacy Enhancing Technologies) such
as P3P, Privacy Policy Statements Generators, cookie control, SW encryption, and
anonymity technology, advanced technologies for the u-city environment need to be
developed. Continuous R&D efforts for the development of advanced technologies
(such as technologies on encryption to prevent information leakage, safe information
processing in the wire and wireless network, PETs on data transfer and containment,
authentication, and personal identification management) are called for.
In addition, the protection of personal locational and circumstantial information
should be ensured in the u-City environment by realizing the integrated PETs that can
protect anonymity in addition to the current ID management technology. Anonymity,
tracking and traffic analysis are the fields which have not deserved a due consideration yet, but in the u-City environment, these areas are the essential requirement that
need to be ensured to protect personal data.
Also, as the existing infra technologies keep developing and new technologies keep
appearing, seamless R&D efforts to deal with the novel technological challenge is
required to build a safe u-city.

5 Conclusion
Different from traditional cities, the u-City is the forthcoming intelligent city,
engrafting highly sophisticated ubiquitous IT technologies such as sensing & RFID
technologies, context-aware technology, mobile network technology, and so on.
However, due to these advancements, the u-City raises many new problems relating
to private information. Because the concept of the u-City is quite new, not only is
there a lack of related research in general, but studies on the implication of the u-City
on privacy protection are also scarce.
Thus this paper has carefully observed several types of privacy issues that may
arise under the environment of the u-City in comparison with traditional cities. It also
has suggested legal, institutional and technical complementary measures to solve
privacy problems in the u-City. In terms of legal and institutional aspects, measures
should be taken to provide previous notification and ask for the consent of the data
subject to enhance privacy protection in the u-City. Also, the necessities of taking
measures relating to guarantee of anonymity for sensitive information, establishment
of value-neutral laws to prepare for new technologies and laws on profiling of

692

C. Lee, B.G. Lee, and Y. Kong

personal data are explained in the paper. For technical aspects, the paper has proposed
a future direction of how the PETs should develop under the environment of the
u-City.
In addition, for establishing the safe u-City, raising individual awareness for
protection of private information, expanding self-regulatory movements, and training
specialists for personal data protection should be pursued along with legal,
institutional and technical measures. Furthermore, overemphasis on privacy
protection may have a danger of undermining the overall efforts to achieve the u-City.
Therefore, achieving a stable equilibrium of private information protection and a wise
use of personal data for informatization should always be at our focal interest.

References
1. Kim, M. S., New City in the Era of Ubiquitous: u-City, Korean National Assembly Library
Press, Vol. 325 (2006) 40-45
2. Ishida, T., Isbister, K. (ed.): Digital Cities: Experiences, Technologies and Future
Perspectives, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 1765. Springer-Verlag (2000)
350-363
3. Park, J. S., Lim, H. B., The Concept of u-City and Business Strategy, Communication
Market, Korea Telecom Management Institute, Vol. 59 (2005) 3-4
4. Solove, D. J., A Taxonomy of Privacy, University of Pennsylvania Law Review, Vol. 154,
No. 3 (2006) 477-560, Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=667622.
5. Kim, T. J., Lee, S. W., Lee, E. Y., Privacy Engineering in ubiComp, ICCSA 2005, Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 3482 (2005) 1279-1288
6. US: US Safe Harbor Privacy Principles (2000)
7. OECD, Guidelines Governing the Protection of Privacy and Transborder Flows of
Personal Data (1980)
8. UN, Guidelines for the Regulation of Computerized Personal Data Files (1990)
9. EU, Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October
1995 on the Protection of Individuals with regard to the Processing of Personal Data and
on the Free Movement of Such Data (1995)
10. APEC, APEC Privacy Framework (2004)

