Similarity Measurement of XML Documents
Based on Structure and Contents
Tae-Soon Kim1, Ju-Hong Lee1,*, Jae-Won Song1, and Deok-Hwan Kim2
1

Dept. of Computer Science & Information Engineering, Inha University, Incheon, Korea
2
Dept. of Electronics Engineering, Inha University
{kts429, sjw}@datamining.inha.ac.kr,
{juhong, deokhwan}@inha.ac.kr

Abstract. Researches on the similarity measure between XML documents are
being progressed in order to effectively control and retrieve various XML
documents. Previous works mostly suggest similarity-measuring methods focusing only on the tag structure of XML documents. However, they have a
problem of incorrectly calculating the semantic similarity of XML contents. In
this paper, we propose a new similarity measurement method considering not
only the structural information of tags in XML documents but also the semantic
information of tags and text content information related with the tags. Our experiments demonstrate that our proposed method improves the accuracy of
similarity, compared to the previous works.

1 Introduction
As the use of XML [2] is increased, many researches for calculating and controlling
the similarity between XML documents are being actively progressed in order for
efficient document organization, navigation and retrieval of a large amount of documents [1,5,6,9,12].
Lian et al. [5] summarized XML documents into an S-graph which reflects structural information. It is used to measure the similarity using only the tag structural
information of XML documents. Patrick et al. [9] proposed a measure on the structural similarity among XML documents and DTDs, which is natural to understand and
fast to calculate. Bergamashi et al. [1] proposed a method of calculating the similarity
between DTDs or schemas of XML documents. These previous works presented the
similarity measure using only the structural information of tags. Our preliminary work
[3] proposed the vector model to reflect the structural information and semantic information of tags in XML documents.
In this paper, in order to increase the accuracy of semantic similarity between
XML documents, we suggest the enhanced similarity measurement method using
vector model which considers not only the structural information of tags but also the
semantic information of tags and the text content information of XML documents
*

Corresponding author.

Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part III, LNCS 4489, pp. 902–905, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Similarity Measurement of XML Documents Based on Structure and Contents

903

since the semantic information of XML documents are included in tag structure and
text content within tags.
This paper is organized as follows: Chapter 2 describes the vector model combining path term and content term and presents a new similarity measure for XML documents. Chapter 3 shows various experiments and result analysis. Finally, Chapter 4
concludes this work.

2 Vector Model for Similarity Between XML Documents
Our preliminary work proposed the vector model which considers the tag path as a
term to reflect the structural information and semantic information of tags in XML
documents simultaneously [3]. But, text contents of an XML document, differently
from a general document, is included in a tag. Since the words in the text with the
same frequency may have different importances depending on the tag in which they
are, the weight of the word in the text must be reflected appropriately according to the
importance of the related tags. As an example, in the XML document including some
research paper, some tags such as title and abstract have relatively a few words, but
the importance of the words within this tags are high. Some tags such as Introduction
may have more words than others, but the importances of their words are relatively
lower than those of words within title and abstract tags.
We call the text words within tags as content terms. CTW (Content Term Weight)
is a weight value of a content term in a XML document. The CTW is the product of
CTWF (Content Term Weighted Frequency) and CTIDF (Content Term Inverse
Document Frequency). CTWij of jth content term in ith document is shown in equation
(1).
CTW ij = CTWF ij × CTIDF

j

(1)

CTWFij is shown in equation (2).
n ⎛
⎛
⎛ # content term in ith document ⎞ ⎞ ⎞⎟
⎟⎟
CTWFij = ∑ ⎜ cfreqikj × ⎜1 + log⎜
⎜ # content term in k th tag ⎟ ⎟ ⎟
⎜
⎜
k =1
⎝
⎠⎠⎠
⎝
⎝

(2)

Where k is the index of tags in a document and cfreqikj is the frequency of jth content
term included in kth tag of ith document. (1+log(#content term in ith document / #content term in kth tag)) is the formula to calculate the tag importance based on the number of included words. Note that the log function is used to lower the differences of
values.
CTIDFj is shown in equation (3)
CTIDF j = log

N
DF j

(3)

Where N is the total number of documents, and DFj is the number of documents in
which the jth content term appears.

904

T.-S. Kim et al.

The similarity using CTW is called content term similarity(CTS). In vector model,
the similarity measure between document di and document dj can be quantified as the
cosine value of adjacent angle between two vectors as shown in equation (4).
t

CTS (d i , d j ) =

Di ⋅ D j
Di × D j

=

∑ CTW

× CTWkj

ki

k =1

t

∑

CTWki2 ×

k =1

(4)

t

∑

CTWkj2

k =1

where t refers to the number of total terms within di and dj, Di = (CTW1i, CTW2i,
…CTWti), and Dj = (CTW1j, CTW2j, … CTWtj), respectively [10].
The similarity measure of the general vector model considers text content only. In
the case of the XML document, however, we should consider the importance of tags
to measure the similarity between XML documents. The overall similarity between
XML documents is calculated as the weighted sum of path term similarity (PTS) and
content term similarity (CTS) shown in equation (5). Here, the weights of PTS and the
weights of CTS are represented as pw and cw, respectively.
⎧sim(d1 , d 2 ) = pw × PTS (d1 , d 2 ) +cw × CTS (d1 , d 2 )
⎨
pw + cw = 1
⎩

(5)

3 Test and Evaluation
In experiments, we used 1200 XML documents taken from SIGMOD [11],
O’REILLY [8], and NIAGARA [7]. We applied the K-means algorithm using the
similarity of general vector model, the similarity of S-graph based method, and the
similarity of the proposed method. Table. 1 illustrates their purity values [4]. The
experimental results demonstrate that the proposed method yields more accurate performance than S-graph based method and the general vector model.
Table 1. Performance comparison of various methods in terms of purity

SIGMOD
NIAGARA
O’REILLY

similarity of general
vector model
0.4728
0.5385
0.4682

S-graph

Proposed method

0.5055
0.8154
0.7533

0.6678
0.8912
0.8723

4 Conclusion
The previous methods are mostly based on graph since they considered only structural
information of tags in XML documents. In order to measure more accurate semantic
similarity, the semantic information of tags, and the text content information must be
included in the similarity measure as well as the structural information of tags. In this
paper, therefore, we introduce a new effective semantic similarity measure between

Similarity Measurement of XML Documents Based on Structure and Contents

905

XML documents, which uses the vector model in order to reflect three kinds of information in the similarity measure simultaneously. This method undoubtedly can
measure more accurate semantic similarity between XML documents because almost
all information about semantic meaning of XML documents is reflected in the similarity measure.

Acknowledgement
This research was supported by the MIC(Ministry of Information and Communication), Korea, under the ITRC(Information Technology Research Center) support program supervised by the IITA(Institute of Information Technology Assessment).

References
1. Bergamashi, S., Castano, S.: Semantic Integration of Semistructured and Structured Data
Sources. SIGMOD Record 28 (1999) pp. 54-59.
2. Brau, B., Bray, J.: Extensible Markup Language (XML) 1.0. W3C Recommendation,
http://www.w3.org/Tr/Rec-xml
3. Kim, T.S., Lee, J.H.: Semantic Structural Similarity for Clustering XML documents. Inha
University
Technical
Report
(2006),
http://webbase.inha.ac.kr/TechnicalReport/tech_04.pdf
4. Li, T., Ma, S.: Document Clustering via Adaptive Subspace Iteration. the 27th annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval,
Sheffield, United Kingdom (2004) pp. 218-225.
5. Lian, W. , Wai-lok, D.: An Efficient and Scalable Algorithm for Clustering XML Documents by Structure. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 16 (2004) pp.
82-96.
6. Marcos, C., Lozano, S.: A DTD for an XML-Based Mathematical Modeling Language.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg 2660 (2003) pp.
968-977.
7. NIAGARA Experimental Data, http://www.cs.wisc.edu/niagara/data.html
8. O’REILLY XML Data, http://www.xml.com/pub/rg/Example_Files
9. Patrick, K.L., Ng, Vincent T.: Structural Similarity between XML Documents and DTDs.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg 2659 (2003) pp.
412-241.
10. Salton, G., Buckley, C.: Term-weighting approaches in automatic text retrieval. Information processing and Management: an International journal 24 (1988) pp.513-524
11. SIGMOD Record data, http://www.acm.org/sigs/sigmod/record/xml
12. Young, K.N., Joseph G., Guilian W.: A Metadata Tool for Retrieval from Heterogeneous
Distributed XML Documents. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer-Verlag, Berlin
Heidelberg 2660 (2003) pp. 1020-1029.

