The Origin of Volatility Cascade of the Financial
Market
Chunxia Yang1 , Yingchao Zhang1 , Hongfa Wu1 , and Peiling Zhou2
1

School of Information and Control Engineering,
Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, Nanjing Jiangsu, 210044,
P.R. China
2
Department of Electronic Science and Technology,
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei Anhui, 230026, P.R. China

Abstract. Based on the self-organized dynamical evolutionary of the investors structure, a reﬁned dissipation market model is constructed. Unlike multifractal cascade-like ideas, this model provides a realistic (agent
based) description of ﬁnancial markets and reproduces the same multifractal scaling properties of price changes as the real, which indicate that
the self-organized dynamical evolutionary of the investors structure may
be the origin of the volatility statistical structure.
Keywords: self-organization, multifractal, cascade, ﬁnancial market
model, volatility.

1

Introduction

The modelling of random ﬂuctuation of asset prices is of obvious importance in
ﬁnance, which can be used in practice for volatility ﬁltering and option pricing.
The universal features of price changes have attracted widespread attention and
concern to construct a useful model. The simplest feature of ﬁnancial time series,
uncovered by Bachelier in 1900, is the linear growth of the variance of the return
ﬂuctuations with time scale[1]. More precisely, if one denotes V (t) the price of
an asset at time t ,the return rτ (t) at time t and scale τ is simply the relative
variation of the price from t to t + τ : rτ (t) = (V (t + τ ) − V (t))/V (t) lnV (t +
τ ) − lnV (t); if mτ is the mean return at scale τ , the following property holds to
a good approximation:
(rτ (t) − mτ )2

e

σ 2 τ.

(1)

where e denotes the empirical average. This behavior typically holds for τ from
a few minutes to a few years, equivalent to the statement that relative price
changes are uncorrelated. Linear growth of the variance of the ﬂuctuations with
time is typical of the Brownian motion which was proposed as a model of market
ﬂuctuation by Bachelier. In this model, returns are not only uncorrelated but
actually independent and identical Gaussian random variables. However, due to
intensive statistical studies during the last decade, this model suﬀers the impugnation and the challenge of actual ﬁnancial data such as the real-life markets are
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 114–120, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

The Origin of Volatility Cascade of the Financial Market

115

of return distributions displaying peak-center and fat-tail properties[2,3,4], one
can observe volatility clustering and a non-trivial ”multifractal” scaling[5,6,7],
and so on. These universal features portray a world of non Gaussian random
walks that Mandelbrot started exploring for us in the sixties, charting out its
scrubby paths, on which increasing scientists devote themselves to look for the
origin of the market ﬂuctuation[6,8,9,10,11,12]. One of the contributions is that
Mandelbrot’s cascades have been used to account for scale invariance properties
in statistical ﬁnance[9]. Recently, Bacry, Muzy and Delour introduced a modiﬁed
model that captures the essence of cascades (BMD model) [12]. All these models
explains the multi-scaling property through the notion of cascade from coarse
to ﬁne scales. But, such description using multifractal, cascades-like ideas is still
mostly phenomenological. Here, without any postulate, we proposed a model
with the same multifractal scaling properties as the reality which arise from a
realistic (agent based) description of ﬁnancial markets and help understand the
underlying mechanisms.

2

Model

Cont and Bouchaud successfully applied percolation theory to modeling the ﬁnancial market (CB model), which is one of the simplest models able to account
for the main stylized fact of ﬁnancial markets, e.g. fat tails of the histogram of
log-returns[13]. Based on it, our model incorporates the following components
diﬀerent from the original CB model: (1) A cluster, deﬁned as a set of interconnected investors, grows in a self-organized process. (2) The eﬀect of ”herd
behavior” on the trade-volume is magniﬁed step by step during the cluster’s
self-organized accumulating process. (3) Some encountering smaller clusters will
form a bigger cluster through cooperating or one defeating the rivals. (4) An
inﬁnite cluster may exist without the need to tune p to pc and its trade activity
inﬂuences price ﬂuctuation. (5) The number of investors participating in trading
will vary dynamically.
2.1

Dynamic of Investor Groups

Initially, M = 100 investors randomly take up the sites of a L∗L lattice. Then for
each cluster, a strategy is given: buying, selling, or sleeping, which are denoted
by 1, -1 and 0 respectively. In reality, the circle of professionals and colleagues
to whom a trader is typically connected evolves as a function of time: in some
cases, traders are following strong herding behavior and the eﬀective connectivity parameter p is high; in other cases, investors are more individualistic and
smaller p seems more reasonable. In order to take the complex dynamics of interactions between traders into account, we assume that it undergoes the following
evolution repeatedly:
(1) Growth: most of investors would like to imitate the strategies which have
been adopted by many others, which induces ”herd behavior” occurring. In this
sense the herd behavior is ampliﬁed. Specially, the aﬀection of the herd behavior

116

C. Yang et al.

will be magniﬁed gradually with the increase of the number of investors adopting
this strategy, i.e., with the growth of the clusters. During cluster’s growth, a
number of new investors will be attracted by it and become its members. In
other words, every cluster will absorb new investors with the probability:
Pd (τ ) = Pd (τ − 1) + k(NT − N (τ − 1)).

(2)

where k is a kinetic coeﬃcient controlling the growth speed and NT is a threshold parameter (It has been validated that the value of the parameters k and NT
could be any value. These two parameters have no eﬀects on the self-organization
process of the clusters[14]). N (τ −1)is the number of the agents along it’s boundary, deﬁned as a set made up of agents which belong to a cluster and at least
border on a site which isn’t part of this cluster, at the last time step τ − 1. The
new participating investor will take up the empty sites around the old clusters
and imitate the same strategy as that of it. The probability Pd is obviously limited to the range [0, 1] so that we have to impose Pd = 0 and Pd = 1 if the
recurrence relationship Equ (2) gives values for Pd < 0 or Pd > 1.
(2) New cluster’s birth: some investors will randomly and independently enter
the market with the probabilityPn . These investors don’t belong to an arbitrary
existing cluster and will take up the empty sites.
(3) Cooperation: encountering clusters will operate cooperation and conﬂiction between them. When their strategies are same, they are thought to cluster
together to form a new group of inﬂuence. Or there would be conﬂiction between
them. The consequence of conﬂiction is that losers would be annexed by the winner and that a new and bigger cluster whose strategy inherent the winner’s will
be formed. The probability of cooperation or conﬂiction is as follow, i.e., some
a cluster will cooperate with or defeat others with the probability
Pm (k) =

|skτ |
.
n
j
j=1 |sτ |

(3)

where |sjτ | is the size of j-th cluster at time step τ .
(4) Metabolism: in reality, no matter how huge has the size of a group ever
been it would collapse due to diﬀerent inﬂuences such as government decision on
war and peace. Some new clusters will come into the world in the wake of aging
clusters’ death. The probability with which an aging cluster will die is:
Po =

x+y
.
2L

(4)

where x or y is the width of this cluster occurring on the lattice in the x or y
direction. Equ.(4) indicates that the probability with which a cluster disbands
would increase with the cluster growth. Once a spanning cluster exists, it would
surely die. When a cluster disbands, all its members would leave the market and
the sites where the death cluster ever occupied will be taken up by new investors

The Origin of Volatility Cascade of the Financial Market

117

with the probability Pn . Such occupied sites form a few new clusters. Every new
cluster would be given a strategy randomly.
Although each cluster could trade with others at every trading step, the evolutionary frequency of the network topology should not be so often. Thus, we
assume that the network structure of the market composed by investor groups
would evolve every N trading steps. With the evolutionary of this artiﬁcial stock
market, the number of investors participating in trading isn’t constant. The network will take on diﬀerent structure; the aﬀection of the herd behavior on the
trade-volume is gradually magniﬁed. Cooperation and conﬂiction among clusters are always operating. Without any artiﬁcial adjustment of the connectivity
probability p to pc , spanning cluster may exist, whose activity would inﬂuence
the price ﬂuctuation.
2.2

Trading Rules

Each cluster trades with probability a (called activity); if it trades, it gives equal
probability to a buying or selling with demand proportional to the cluster size.
The excess demand is then the diﬀerence between the sum of all buying orders
and selling orders received within one time interval. The price changes from
one time step to the next by an amount proportional to the excess demand. To
explain the “volatility”, Stauﬀer introduces the feedback mechanism between the
diﬀerence of the ”supply and demand” and activity of the investors[15]. Whereas
in our model, the diﬀerence of the “supply and demand” not only aﬀects the
activity probability but also the probability with which the active clusters choose
to buy or sell. The probability a evolves following
a(t) = a(t − 1) + lr(t − 1) + α.

(5)

where r is the diﬀerence between the demand and supply, l denotes the sensitivity
of a to r and α measures the degree of impact of external information on the
activity. α ∈ [−0.005, 0.005] is a random variable obeying Gaussian distribution
of mean value 0 and standard deviation 1.Each active cluster choose to buy or
sell with probabilities 2a(t)(1 − ps (t)) and 2a(t)ps (t) respectively. For r > 0,
ps (t) = 0.5 + d1 r(t − 1), while for r < 0, ps (t) = 0.5 + d2 r(t − 1). According
to Kahneman and Tversky, it is asymmetry that agents make their decisions
when they are in face of gain and loss [16].When |r| varies within certain range,
the degree of depression following some lost is twice that of happiness following
the same quantity of proﬁt. Therefore in our model we assume d2 = 2d1 .The
diﬀerence between the demand and supply is:
m

sign(sjt )(|sjt |)γ .

r(t) =

(6)

j=1

where m is the total number of clusters occurring on the market and |sjt | is the
size of j-th cluster at trading time step t. γ measures the degree of impact of
each cluster’s trade-volume on the price, 0 < γ < 1 allowing for a nonlinear

118

C. Yang et al.

dependence of the change of (the logarithm of the) price as a function of the
diﬀerence between supply and demand[17]. So the evolution of the price is:
V (t) = V (t − 1) exp(λr(t)).

(7)

where λ is a coeﬃcient adjusting the market ﬂuidity.

3

Simulation and Analysis

Here we set a(0) = 0.09, r(0) = 0, V (0) = 1, Pd (0) = 0.4, k = 0.0001, NT = 50,
l = λ = L12 , L = 100, d1 = 0.00005, γ = 0.8, Pn = 0.6,M = 100, N = 50. The
model can iterate for a period of any length. More simulations have been done
indicating that the return distribution of the present model obeys L´evy form
in the center and displays fat-tail property, in accord with the stylized facts
observed in real-life ﬁnancial time series. Furthermore, this model reveals the
power-law relationship between the peak value of the probability distribution
and the time scales in agreement with the empirical studies on the Hang Seng
Index[18]. For the L´evy stable processes ﬁrst suggested by Mandelbrot as an
alternative, the return distribution is identical (up to a rescaling) for all τ . As
mentioned in empirical studies, the distribution of real returns is not scale invariant, but rather exhibits multi-scaling, in the sense that higher moments of
price changes scale anomalously with time:
Mq (τ ) = (|rτ (t) − m ∗ τ |)q

e

Aq τ ζq .

(8)

where the index ζq is not equal to the Brownian walk value q/2 [8,9,10,11,12].
References [19] illustrates the empirical multifractal analysis of Standard and
Poor’s Gomposite Index return. The estimated spectrum ζq has a concave shape
that is well ﬁtted by the parabola:
ζq = q(1/2 + λ2 ) − λ2 q 2 /2.

(9)

Fig. 1. First ﬁve absolute moments of the model as a function of the time period τ in
double logarithmic representation

The Origin of Volatility Cascade of the Financial Market

119

Fig. 2. ζq spectrum estimate versus q

where λ2
0.03. The coeﬃcient λ2 that quantiﬁes the curvature of the ζq
is called, in the framework of turbulence theory, the intermittency coeﬃcient.
Correspondingly in the ﬁnance parlance,λ2 measures the intensity of volatility
ﬂuctuations.
The multifractal scaling properties of our model are numerically checked in
Fig.1 and Fig.2 where one can recover the same features as that of the Standard
and Poor’s Gomposite Index. The ﬁtting parabola is
ζq = −0.265 + q(0.6 + λ2 ) − λ2 q 2 /2.

(10)

where λ2
0.074.This indicates that our model has repuduced multifractal
scaling properties of price changes.

4

Conclusion

Based on the self-organized dynamical evolutionary of the investors structure,
a reﬁned dissipation market model is constracted. In BMD model, the existence of the two independent statistical process, one for returns and another for
the volatility, may not be very natural. But in this model, the two processes
syncretized each other. Furthermore, unlike multifractal cascade-like ideas, this
model provides a realistic (agent based) description of ﬁnancial markets and
repuduces multifractal scaling properties of price changes, which indicate that
the self-organized dynamical evolutionary of the investors structure may be the
origin of the volatility statistical structure.
Acknowledgments. This work has been supported by the National Science
Foundation of China under Grant No.70471033 and 70571075, the College Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (06KJD520122) and the Liu Da Ren Cai
Gao Feng Program of Jiangsu Province (06-A-027).

120

C. Yang et al.

References
1. Bachelier L.: Ann. Sci. Ecole Norm. Sup. 3 (1900) 21-86
2. Gopikrishnan P., Plerou V., Amaral L. A. N., et al.: Scaling of the distribution of
ﬂuctuations of ﬁnancial market indices. Phys. Rev. E. 60 (1999) 5305-5316
3. Mantegna R. N., Stanley H. E.: Scaling behaviour in the dynamics of an economic
index. Nature. 376 (1995) 46-49
4. Wang B. H., Hui P. M.: The distribution and scaling of ﬂuctuations for Hang Seng
index in Hong Kong stock market. Eur. Phys. J. B. 20 (2001) 573-579
5. Ghashghaie S., Breymann W., Peinke J., Talkner P., Dodge Y.: Turbulent Cascades
in Foreign Exchange Markets. Nature. 381 (1996) 767-770
6. Mandelbrot B. B.: Fractals and Scaling in Finance. Springer, New York (1997)
7. Schmitt F., Schertzer D., Lovejoy S.: Multifractal analysis of Foreign exchange
data. Applied Stochastic Models and Data Analysis. 15 (1999) 29
8. Mandelbrot B. B.: The variation of certain speculative prices. J. Business. 36 (1963)
394
9. Mandelbrot B. B.: Intermittent turbulence in self-similar cascades: divergence of
high moments and dimension of the carrier. J. Fluid Mech. 62 (1974) 331
10. Arneodo A., Muzy J. F., Sornette D.: Direct Causal Cascade in the Stock Market.
Eur. Phys. J. B. 2 (1998) 277-282
11. Muzy J. F., Delour J., Bacry E.: Modelling ﬂuctuations of ﬁnancial time series:
from cascade process to stochastic volatility model. Eur. Phys. J. B. 17 (2000)
537-548
12. Bacry E., Delour J., Muzy J. F.: Multifractal random walk. Phys. Rev. E. 64 (2001)
026103
13. Cont R., Bouchaud J. P.: Herd behavior and aggregate ﬂuctuations in ﬁnancial
markets. Marcroeconomic dynamics. 4 (2000) 170-196
14. Cavalcante F. S. A., Moreira A. A. et al.: Self-organized percolation growth in
regular and disordered lattices. Physica A. 311 (2002) 313-319
15. Stauﬀer D., Jan N.: Sharp peaks in the percolation model for stock markets. Physica A. 277 (2000) 215-219
16. Kaheman D., Tversky A.: Prospect theory: an analysis of decision under risk.
Econometrica. 47 (1979) 263-291
17. Farmer J. D.: Market force, ecology and evolution. Industrial and Corporate
Change. 11 (2002) 895-953
18. Muzy J. F., Bacry E., Arneodo A.: The multifractalformalism revisited with
wavelets. Int. J. of Bifurcat and Chaos. 4 (1994) 245
19. Borland L., Bouchaud J. P., Muzy J. F., Zumbach G.: The Dynamics of Financial
Market——Mandelbrot’s Multifractal Cascades, and Beyond. cond-mat/0501292 v1

