An Exact Algorithm for the Servers Allocation, Capacity
and Flow Assignment Problem with Cost Criterion and
Delay Constraint in Wide Area Networks
Marcin Markowski and Andrzej Kasprzak
Wroclaw University of Technology, Chair of Systems and Computer Networks
Wybrzeze Wyspianskiego 27, 50-370 Wroclaw, Poland
{marcin.markowski, andrzej.kasprzak}@pwr.wroc.pl

Abstract. The paper deals with the problem of simultaneously assignment of
server’s allocation, channel capacities and flow routes in the wide area network
in order to minimize the criterion composed of the leasing capacity cost and the
building cost of the network. An exact algorithm, based on the branch and
bound method, is proposed to solve the problem. Some interesting features, observed during the computational experiments are reported.
Keywords: Server allocation, CFA problem, Wide Area Networks.

1 Introduction
The optimization problems, considered always when the wide area network must be
built or modernized, consist in assignment of resource allocation (i.e. servers, replicas
of servers), capacities of channels and flow routes. The optimal arrangement of
resources and optimal choice of capacities and flow routes let us obtain the most efficient and economical solution. Designing of the wide area computer networks is always a compromise between the quality of service in the network [1] and the costs
needed to build and to support the network. Then those two criterions are often used
during the designing process, usually one of them is the optimizing criterion and the
other is considered as constraint. In our previous papers [2, 3, 4] we have considered
two-criteria and three-criteria problems based on designing the wide area networks,
assuming that the maximal support cost of the network is bounded. Sometimes it is
useful to formulate the optimizing problem in the other way – how to minimize the
cost of the network, when the acceptable quality level is known. Then in the paper the
problem of server’s allocation, capacity and flow assignment with the cost criterion
and delay constraint is considered. In our opinion it is well-founded to consider two
kind of cost: the building cost of the network, borne once and the supporting cost,
borne regularly. Then the criterion function is composed of two ingredients: the regular channel capacity leasing cost and the disposable server cost. We assume that
maximal acceptable total average delay in the network is given as the constraint. Then
the problem considered here may be formulated as follows:
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part I, LNCS 4487, pp. 442 – 445, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

An Exact Algorithm for the Servers Allocation, Capacity

443

given:

user allocation at nodes, set of possible nodes for each server, maximal
value of the total average delay in the network, traffic requirements useruser and user-server, set of capacities and their costs for each channel,
minimize: linear combination of the capacity leasing cost and server cost,
over:
servers allocation, channel’s capacity and multicommodity flow,
subject to: multicommodity flow constraints, channel capacities constraints, server
allocation constraints, total average delay constraint.
We consider the discrete cost-capacity function because it is the most important
from practical point of view for the reason that the channels capacities can be chosen
from the sequence defined by ITU-T recommendations. Such formulated problem is
NP-complete as more general than the capacity and flow assignment problem (CFA)
with discrete cost-capacity function which is NP-complete [5].
The literature focusing on the server’s allocation, capacity and flow assignment
problem is very limited. Some algorithms for this problem with different delay criterion may be found in [2, 3, 4, 6]. The formulated here problem uses cost criterion and
take into account the maximal acceptable average delay in Wide Area Network as
constraint. In the literature such formulated problem has not been considered yet.

2 Problem Formulation
Let Xr be the set of binary variables determining capacities of channels and Yr be the
set of binary variables determining servers allocation at nodes [3, 4]. (Xr ,Yr) is called
a selection. Let ℜ be the family of all selections satisfying assumed constraint. Let
U(Yr) be the server cost (the connecting cost of all servers at nodes) and
T(Xr ,Yr) be the minimal average delay per packet in WAN given by the Kleinrock’s
formula [7]. Let T max be the maximal acceptable average delay per packet.
Let Q(Xr ,Yr)=αD(Xr)+βU(Yr), where α and β are positive coefficients α, β ∈[0, 1],
α + β =1. Then, the considered problem is formulated as follows:

min Q( X r , Yr )

(1)

( X r , Yr ) ∈ ℜ

(2)

T ( X r , Yr ) ≤ T max

(3)

( X r ,Yr )

subject to

3 The Branch and Bound Algorithm
The problem (1-3) is NP-complete. Then the branch and bound method can be used to
construct the exact algorithm for solving the considered problem. The detailed description of the calculation scheme of the branch and bound method may be found in
the paper [8]. The branch and bound method involves constructing two important
operations specific for the problem (1-3): lower bound and branching rules.
The lower bound of the criterion function for every possible successor (Xs ,Ys)
generated from (Xr ,Yr) must be computed. Since traffic requirements in the network

444

M. Markowski and A. Kasprzak

depend on server allocation, then obtaining the lower bound for the problem (1-3) is
difficult. We propose, the lower bound may be obtained by relaxing some constraints
and by approximating the discrete cost-capacity curves with the lower linear
envelope [5].
The purposes of the branching rules is to find the variable from (Xr ,Yr) for complementing and generating a successor of the selection (Xr ,Yr) with the least possible
value of criterion function Q. The choice criterions should be constructed in such a
way that complementing reduces value of criterion Q and the increase of total average
delay in the network is as minimal as possible [3, 4].

4 Computational Results
The presented algorithm was implemented in C++ code and extensive numerical
experiments, for many different networks, have been performed. Experiments
were conducted with two main purpose in mind: first, to examine the impact of
various problem parameters on the solution (i.e. on the value of criterion Q) and
second, to test the computational efficiency of the algorithm.
The typical dependence of the optimal value of Q on T max for different values
of parameters α and β is presented in the Fig. 1. It follows from computational
experiments that the dependence of Q on T max is decreasing function. The following conclusion follows from the computer experiments (Fig.1).
Conclusion 1. There exists such acceptable total average delay T*max , that problem (1-3) has the same solution for each T max greater or equal to T*max .
Let NT = ((T max − Tmin ) /(T*max − Tmin )) ⋅ 100% be the normalized maximal acceptable total average delay per packet in the network - problem (1-3) has no
solution for T max < Tmin . Normalized value let us compare results obtained for
different network topologies. Let P(u , v) , in percentage, be the arithmetic mean
of the relative number of iterations for NT∈[u,v] calculated for all considered
networks. Fig. 2 shows the dependency of P on divisions [0%,10%), ...,
[90%,100%] of NT. It follows from Fig. 2 that the exact algorithm is especially
effective from computational point of view for NT ∈ [50%, 100%].
Q

α = 0,8, β = 0,2

285000

α = 0,4, β = 0,6

210000
135000
60000
0,0010

0,0015

0,0020

0,0025

0,0030

Fig. 1. Typical dependence of the optimal value of Q on T max

T

max

An Exact Algorithm for the Servers Allocation, Capacity

445

P [%]

20
10
0
[0,10)

[10,20) [20,30) [30,40) [40,50) [50,60) [60,70) [70,80) [80,90) [90,100]
NT [%]

Fig. 2. The dependence of P on normalized maximal average delay per packet NT

5 Conclusion
In the paper the exact algorithm for solving the server allocation, channel capacities
and flow assignments problem with cost criterion and delay constraint is proposed.
Such formulated problem has not been considered in the literature yet. It follows from
computational experiments that the presented algorithm is effective from computational point of view for greater values of acceptable average delay in the network
(Fig. 2). Moreover, we are of the opinion that the Wide Area Network property formulated as conclusion 1 is very important from practical point of view. This property
shows that the values of the acceptable average delay are limited.
This work was supported by a research project of The Polish State Committee for
Scientific Research in 2005-2007.

References
1. Walkowiak, K.: QoS Dynamic Routing in Content Delivery Network, Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, Vol. 3462 (2005), 1120-1132
2. Markowski, M., Kasprzak, A.: An Exact Algorithm for Host Allocation, Capacity and Flow
Assignment Problem in WAN, Internet Technologies, Applications and Societal Impact,
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston (2002), 73-82
3. Markowski, M., Kasprzak, A.: The Web Replica Allocation and Topology Assignment
Problem in Wide Area Networks: Algorithms and Computational Results, Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, Vol. 3483 (2005), 772-781
4. Markowski, M., Kasprzak, A., The Three-Criteria Servers Replication and Topology Assignment Problem in Wide Area Networks, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 3982
(2006), 1119-1128
5. Pioro, M., Medhi, D.: Routing, Flow, and Capacity Design in Communication and Computer Networks, Elsevier, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, San Francisco (2004)
6. Chari, K.: Resource Allocation and Capacity Assignment in Distributed Systems, Computers Ops Res., Vol. 23, No. 11 (1996), 1025-1041
7. Fratta, L., Gerla, M., Kleinrock, L.: The Flow Deviation Method: an Approach to Store-andForward Communication Network Design, Networks 3 (1973), 97-133
8. Wolsey, L.A.: Integer Programming. Wiley-Interscience, New York (1998)

