Focus and Attitude in Computer-Mediated Peer
Assessment: ePortfolios Methods in Chinese Context
Youmei Wang
Dept. of Educational Technology, Wenzhou University, China
ymwang@wzu.edu.cn

Abstract. Peer-assessment has become more popular in the instructional
assessment area.Eportfolios was used as an important tool to facilitate
computer-mediated peer assessment in online instruction. This study adopted
quantitative approaches to explore the focus and attitude of onymous or
anonymous peer-assessment with WePS (Web-based ePortfolios System) in
Chinese context. Findings showed that Onymous group members paid
attention to the response of their learning peers,that the onymous group had
more confidence in peer-assessing and they thought that their assessment was
more effective than anonymous groups,and that Onymous groups members
recognized peer’s assessment on their learning more than the anonymous
one.Compared with the realted studies in western context this findings is
different in some aspects.
Keywords: Computer-Mediated Peer Assessment. ePortfolios. Focus. Attitude.

1 Introduction
Eportfolios is a collection of authentic and diverse evidence, drawn from a larger
archive representing what a person or organization has learned over time on which the
person or organization has reflected, and designed for presentation to one or more
audiences for a particular rhetorical purpose (NLII, 2003; Barrett, 2003). And now
eportfolios is being an approach to assess learning performance of students in many
educational institution. Eportfolios assessment belongs to authentic assessment and
formative assessment, aiming to break through the traditional assessment ways such as
quantification assessment and paper test (Wang, 2003), and it is a trend to build the
web-based eportfolios assessment system to evaluate performance of online learning,
which depended on the implementation of peer-assessment and self-assessment(Barrett,
2003). Online learners tend to play a hidden role, and identity of learner will affect on
the performance of learning (He, 2002), so it is an important issue to study the problems
of onymous or anonymous learner in the process of assessment and learning. Based on
the previous studies, this study carried out an experimental method to discuss the quality
and effectiveness of peer-assessment with different anonymities with computermediated eportfolios system in Chinese context.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part III, LNCS 4489, pp. 501–507, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

502

2

Y. Wang

A Review of Relevant Literature

2.1 On Peer-Assessment
Topping (1998) put forward a definition regarding peer-assessment. According to his
definition, Peer-assessment is that students attempt to play the role as teacher to give
assessment on their classmates at the same grade. After studying 109 articles on peerassessment in the ERIC database, Topping pointed out that some scholars had already
used this kind of assessment technique in various subjects including science,
information and social study, and that the peer-assessment has reached a certain level
of reliability and effectiveness. Peer-assessment technique can be used to improve the
high-order thinking and learning motivation of students, which is a good assessment
model for adult learners.
Jack McGourty had also found that there were consistency between selfassessment and peer-assessment; and some learning outcomes that cannot be tested in
traditional assessment may be reflected in peer-assessment. Peer-assessment can not
only engage students better in study, but also improve the quality of students learning
and students’ ability of criticism and provide them with opportunities to take part in
the assessment. And students could help each other and improved their learning
performance (Falchikov, 1995). Topping (1998) analyzed 31 studies about applying
peer-assessment into various projects in higher education during the year of 1980 to
1996, which was related to the reliability of peer-assessment. By calculating the
correlation coefficient between peer-assessment and professionals assessment,
Topping (1998) found 25 among 31 research articles showed that peer-assessment has
high reliability.
2.2 Computer-Mediated Peer-Assessment
Yong Zhao (1998) systematically summarized anonymous computer-mediated
assessment. He took on a research to study aspects of assessment such as attention
focus, critical and cognitive slack of students. His experimental courses were
educational introduction to students and Spanish, which is an important course in two
American universities. His experiment chose 22 and 23 students as samples
respectively; he studied the influence of anonym on students’ cooperative learning
and discussed the anonymous peer-assessment. It was found that anonym has doubleside function, it can make the testees more critical but it also lowers the quality of
assessment in the process of peer-assessment. However, the framework of this study
came from western culture for its experimental background, and it still needs
validating whether it can be analogized to eastern thoughts and learning environment,
about which I talked with the famous expert on eportfolios——Dr. Helen Barrett.
Based on her work experience in Singapore, She thought there is an obvious
difference in self-reflection and peer-assessment between western and eastern
students, which is the root of the framework for our study.

Focus and Attitude in Computer-Mediated Peer Assessment: ePortfolios Methods

503

3 Method
3.1 Learning Environment
The study was carried out by the WePS online, which was a web-based eportfolios
system developed by us (Wang, 2004). WePS is different from other eportfolios
systems in that it is integrated learning eportfolios、 course portfolios and teaching
course portfolios(Fig.1).In practice we look upon eportfolios as a kind of aggregation
in which learner can represent their learning objectives, activities, outcomes,
performance, efforts, progress and reflection about learning process and result under
an eportfolios learning environment. So each student had a learning space online;
actually it was a portal for student to learning. Students can collect the learning
artifacts, assess himself and others, write the reflection on learning and development,
and there are powers for everyone to access others eportfolios with teachers accredit.

Fig. 1. Web-based ePortfolios System Interface

3.2 Task and Design
The time of study span was two years. And we took 40 students majored educational
technology coming from Wenhou university in China. They learned with WePS1.0
and took on eportfolios-based assessment each other for a long time. The
experimental course was systematically instructional design and project management.
In this study we choose one time randomly (this time is mid-term assessment) to
analyse and test. Without being told the purpose of the experiment, 40 students were
required to finish the eportfolios task including analyzing, designing and concluding
constructivist cases after web-based learning the same as before. The scale for
eportfolios was provided to them before learning. After finishing the task, they were
to post their artifacts online with the requirements and carry through self-assessment
and peer-assessment, which included qualitative and quantitative assessment, and then

504

Y. Wang

complete the questionnaires (38 of which were valid) provided by the teacher, the
questions in which are all Likert’s scale.
3.3 Sample and Design
The samples were organized in such way as is shown in the following table 1, based
on the partition of anonymous and onymous peer-assessment:
Table 1. Sample and design
Group
definition
Anonyous
group

Random
grouping
Choose
20 students
randomly in
terms of
seats

Onym-us
group

The
same as
above

Onymous
requirement
Register;
hand in works
and assessment
without real
name. All the
information is
anonymous.
Register and
hand in works
and assessment
with real name

eportfolios
task
Complete
tasks combining
consultation
with self-doing.

Assessment
requirement
Assess at
least one
anonymous
and onymous
peer

Complete
tasks combining
consultation
with self-doing.

Assess at
least one
anonymous
and onymous
peer

3.4 Research Questions
(1)Difference of focus in the process of assessment between two groups.
(2)Difference of attitude in the process of assessment between two groups.
3.5 Data Collection and Processing
The experimental data came from three aspects: the first was from the questionnaires
on online learning, which was an attitudinal scale and converted into 5 scored
statistically; the second from the score of eportfolios assessment (including selfassessment and peer-assessment) (max.100-score); the third from the quantitative
assessment from teacher on assessors’ qualitative assessment, taking a 5-scale
(5=Strongly agree and 1=Strongly disagree). Finally SPSS11.0 and EXCEL2003 were
used to analyze the data.

4 Data Analysis and Results
The main purpose of this study was to discuss the attitude to and effect of different
onymous peer-assessment in eportfolios. For the samples were not many, it was
reasonable to adopt the methods of comparison of effect size and t-test, and we were
mainly concerned difference of effect size to explore the impact that different
onymous peer-assessment has on learning.

Focus and Attitude in Computer-Mediated Peer Assessment: ePortfolios Methods

505

4.1 Difference of Focus in the Process of Assessment Between Two Groups
Referencing the scale proposed by Yong Zhao (1998), we set two questions to discuss
the difference of focus in the process of assessment between two groups. The first
question was: “I have thought of how the author will respond to my assessment when
I assess others’ eportfolios”, the result indicated that comparatively, as the assessors,
onymous group paid more concerns about the response of the assessees to their
assessment during the process. As to the second question: “when assessing others, I
pay more attention to the quality of the peers’ task and content rather than author
themselves or other aspects”. Both two groups thought they paid more attention to the
quality of the peers’ task and content rather than author themselves. But it was
obvious that more testees of onymous group agree on this view than the other
group(Fig. 1 and Fig.2 shows the results).

Fig. 2. Distribution of response on question one

Fig. 3. Distribution of response on question two

506

Y. Wang

When converting the qualitative table into 5-score scale and conducting singlesample t-test (two-tailed test, df=36, the same as follows), we found that the answers
of two groups on the two questions had no “significance of difference”
(Q1:p=.17>.05;Q2:p=.10>.05).
4.2 Difference of Attitude in the Process of Assessment Between Two Groups
In the web-based collaborative peer-assessment process, were there any differences in
assessors’ attitude to assessment between two groups? We designed two questions to
test and found that the onymous group members had more confidence in their
assessment for their companions and their assessment were more effective than the
anonymous group, and there were “significance of difference” (P<.05) .However,
both the two groups thought that they were diligent and responsible in this process,
and there were no “significance of difference” (P>.05).
Table 2. Self-cognition of the two groups on their assessment on their peers
groups

Anonymous
group
Onymous
group
t-value

“my assessment can promote
the peer’s learning”
M
SD
3． 26
0． 73
3． 84

0． 60

2． 66（ P<.05）

“I fulfill the responsibility of
peer-assessment seriously”
M
SD
3． 89
0． 57
3． 95

0． 52

0.297（ P>.05）

5 Comparison with Other Researches
As mentioned above, there were few studies in the field of peer-assessment with
eportfolios. We mainly compared this one with the experimental results of Yong Zhao
(1998), which were conducted in the CMC learning environment. The results were
identical in the anonymous assessment that anonymous assessment was helpful to
improve criticality but had lower quality. However, our study showed that on the
focus during the process of assessment there were significance of difference between
onymous and anonymous assessment, comparatively, more members of onymous
groups were more concern of the author’s response on their assessment and more
about the content of eportfolios rather than the author himself, but there were no
significance of difference between two groups. In contrast, the conclusion of Yong
Zhao was that in the condition of anonymous assessment, the assessors concern more
of content. The difference may be caused by different attitude of western and oriental
students on collaborative learning and their comprehension of collaborative
assessment, at the same time it may be related with teachers’ direction of the
experiments. Certainly, it was a very important factor that the supporting environment
of these two experiments was different. Yong Zhao adopted e-mail assessment in the
CMC, and we adopted independent web-based eportfolios system supporting
assessment and study.

Focus and Attitude in Computer-Mediated Peer Assessment: ePortfolios Methods

507

6 Conclusion
Based on a two-year experimental research, the following conclusions were drawn:
• Onymous group members paid attention to the response of their learning peers
when conducting assessment, and they argued that they paid more attention on
portfolio content per se and there were no obvious differences between the two
groups;
• The onymous group had more confidence in peer-assessing and they thought that
their assessment was more effective than anonymous groups. Both onymous and
anonymous groups thought they were responsible in their assessment on others;
• Onymous groups members recognized peer’s assessment on their learning more
than the anonymous one;
At last we must pointed out that, in this kind of studies, many factors such as
samples、 course and experiment platform will affect the results. So we think this
experimental data and conclusions are correct in a specifically context. And it
provides a kind of thought and can be used as a reference for the implement of elearning and online instruction in the future. We hope that it can be of some help for
the development of web-based instruction and its evaluation.
Acknowledgments. I thank the people, Dr. Helen Barrett, who talked with me about
difference in self-reflection、 peer-assessment and implement of eportfolios between
western and eastern students.

References
1. Barrett, H. Presentation at First International Conference on the e-Portfolio, Poiters, France
(2003), October 9, 2003. http://electronicportfolios.org/portfolios/eifel.pdf,2005-12-10
2. Barrett, H. “Electronic Portfolios as Digital Stories of Deep Learning: Emerging Digital Tools
to Support Reflection in Learner-Centered Portfolios.” (2005) http://electronicportfolios.org/
digistory/epstory.html,2006-5-4
3. Belanoff, Pat & Dickson, Marcia (eds.). Portfolios: Process and Product. Poutsmouth:
Heinemann (1991).
4. Falchikov, N. Peer feedback marking: Developing peer assessment. Innovations in
Education & Training International(1995), 32, 175-187
5. He Kekang, Instructional system design, Beijing Normal University Press (2002), Beijing,
China
6. Keith Topping, Peer assessment between students in colleges and universities. Educational
Research(1998), 68(3), 249-276.
7. Wang Youmei, Web-based eportfolios system in e-learning environment, Open Education
Research(2004), 51(5), 56-58
8. Yong Zhao.The Effects of Anonymity on Computer-mediated Peer Review. International
Journal of Educational Telecommunications (1998), 4(4), 311-345.

