Modelling Short Range Alternating Transitions
by Alternating Practical Test Functions
Stefan Pusca
Politehnica University, Department of Applied Sciences, Bucharest, Romania

Abstract. As it is known, practical test-functions [1] are very useful
for modeling suddenly emerging phenomena. By this study we are trying to use some speciﬁc features of these functions for modeling aspects
connected with transitions from a certain steady-state to another, with
emphasis on he use of short range alternating functions. The use of such
short range alternating functions is required by the fact that in modern
physics (quantum physics) all transitions imply the use of certain quantum particles (ﬁeld quantization) described using associated frequencies
for their energy. Due to this reason, a connection between a wave interpretation of transitions (based on continuous functions0 and corpuscle
interpretation of transitions (involving creation and annihilation of certain quantum particles) should be performed using certain oscillations
deﬁned on a limited time interval corresponding to the transition from
one steady-state to another.
Keywords: transitions, test functions, short range phenomena.

1

Introduction

As it is known, basic concepts in physics connected with interaction are the
wave and corpuscle concepts. In classical physics the corpuscle term describes
the existence of certain bodies subjected to external forces or ﬁelds, and the
wave concept describes the propagation of oscillations and ﬁelds. In quantum
physics, these terms are closely interconnected, the wave train associated to a
certain particle describes the probability of a quantum corpuscle (an electron or
a photon) to appear; the results of certain measurements performed upon the
quantum particle are described by the proper value of the operators corresponding to the physical quantity to be measured, the action of these operators having
yo be considered in a more intuitive manner also. Certain problems connected
with measurement procedures on closed-loop trajectories in special relativity and
non-commutative properties of operators in quantum physics [2] imply a more
rigorous deﬁnition of measurement method and of the interaction phenomena,
classiﬁed from the wave and from the corpuscular aspect of matter, so as to avoid
contradiction generated by terminological cycles [3]. Logic deﬁnition for the class
of measuring methods based on the wave aspect of matter and for the class of
measuring methods based on the corpuscular aspect of matter upon interaction
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part II, LNCS 4488, pp. 1053–1059, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

1054

S. Pusca

phenomena, based on considerations about a possible memory of previous measurements (operators) in case of a sequence of received pulses were presented in
[4], trying to obtain expressive pattern classes (similar to those presented in [5]).
As a consequence, aspects connected with memory of previous measurements
corresponding to action of systems upon received wave-trains have to be raken
into consideration.
Moreover, this aspect implies an intuitive interpretation for the dependence
of the mass of a body inside a reference system. Thus, it was shown that for
the case when the Lorentz transformation doesn’t generate a pulse (for example
when the relative speed between the material body and the wave is equal to c,
the speed of light in vacuum), the mass m is equal to ∞ , which means that no
interaction due to the received pulse exists. This manner the notion on inﬁnite
mass is connected with the absence of interaction) [8]. So m = ∞ for a body
inside a reference system S shows that we can’t act upon the material body
using wave pulses emitted in system S; however, changes in the movement of
the body (considered in system S ) due to other external forces seem to be
allowed. The absence of interaction is connected also with absence of estimation
for space coordinates of the wave source (the general case being presented in
[9]). This aspect can be considered as a suddenly emerging phenomenon, while
the interaction disappears when the relative speed v between the system which
emits the wave and the system which receives it becomes equal to c.
Yet the problem is more complex if a high energy pulse interacts with a
single or with a small number of elementary (small) particles. In this case the
total energy of the particles (according to relativistic expression E = mc2 can
be much smaller than the energy of the received pulse which interacts with
them. For a correct analysis (according to previous considerations) the small
(elementary) particles should be considered as associated wave trains interacting
with a high-energy environment (some scaling aspects [10] appearing). The high
energy pulses would be much less aﬀected by interaction, which means that
it is the element performing the transformation; associated wave-train of the
particles would be the much more aﬀected by interaction, being the element
which undergoes the transformation. In the most general case, the study of wave
transformations according to Lorentz formulae in a certain environment must
be performed in the reference systems where the total momentum is zero (by
analogy with the study of collisions in the reference system associated to the
center of mass).
For an improved analysis of phenomena we must ﬁnd an approach able to connect transitions corresponding from one steady state of a system to another using
a formalism based on functions deﬁned on limited time intervals. Smooth transitions (based on practical test-function, similar to wavelets) where presented in
[2], but that study has presented an algorithm for generating smooth transitions
for any derivative of the function f describing the transitions, avoiding alternating function. On the contrary, for allowing an approach able to explain also the
creation and annihilation of quantum particles by interactions in modern physics
(deﬁned on an extremely small time interval dt around the interaction moment

Modelling Short Range Alternating Transitions

1055

of time), the use of such alternating functions is recommended, so as to appear
certain frequencies usually associated to energy of quantum particles in modern
physics. So the algorithm presented in [9] should be improved.

2

Connections with Test Functions

For modeling phenomena connected with wave-train transformation in a certain
environment, we could use the formalism of topological solitary waves with arbitrary charge [3] or of harmonic wavelets [4]. However, the disappearance of
interaction when the relative speed v equals c implies the absence of certain
state-variables at that very moment of time when v = c, when v pass from a
value less than c to a value greater than c; this is similar to aspects connected
with integration of functions similar to test functions on a working interval [5]
- a certain number of derivatives vanishing at the end of this interval. Speciﬁc
features from modeling solitary waves in composite materials [6] could be useful,
avoiding mathematical possibilities of generating acausal pulses [7] (the Lorentz
transformation of a received wave-train does not generate any wave without
a certain received wave to exist, and it acts instantly). Stochastic aspects of
Schroedinger equation imply a probability of measuring a certain value for a
physical quantity connected with an associated wave, not a probability of appearing diﬀerent associated waves (see [8] for a wavelets analysis of Schroedinger
equation).
From basic mathematics it is known that the product ϕ(t)g(t) between a
function g(t) which belongs to C ∞ class and a test-function ϕ(t) which diﬀers
to zero on (a, b) is also a test-function, because:
a) it diﬀers to zero only on the time interval (a, b) where ϕ(t) diﬀers to zero (if
ϕ(t) is null, then the product ϕ(t)g(t) is also null)
b) the function ϕ(t)g(t) belongs to the C ∞ class of functions, while a derivative
of a certain order k can be written as
k

Ckp ϕ(t)(p) g(t)(k−p)

(ϕ(t)g(t))(k) =

(1)

p=0

(a sum of terms represented by a product of two continuous functions).
Yet for practical cases (when phenomena must be represented by diﬀerential
equations), the ϕ(t) test functions must be replaced by a practical test functions
f (t) ∈ C n on R (for a ﬁnite n - considered from now on as representing the order
of the practical test function) having the following properties:
a) f is nonzero on (a, b)
b) f satisﬁes the boundary conditions f (k) (a) = f (k) (b) = 0 for k = 0, 1, ..., n and
c) f restricted to (a, b) is the solution of an initial value problem (i.e. an ordinary diﬀerential equation on (a, b) with initial conditions given at some point in
this interval).
The generation of such practical test functions is based on the study of diﬀerential equations satisﬁed by the initial test functions, with the initial moment

1056

S. Pusca

of time chosen at a time moment close to the t = a moment of time (when the
function begins to present non-zero values).
By using these properties of practical test-functions, we obtain the following
important result for a product f (t)g(t) between a function g(t) which belongs
to C ∞ class and a practical test-function of n order f (t) which diﬀers to zero
on (a, b):
General Property for Product: The product g(t)f (t) between a function g(t) ∈
C ∞ and a practical test function f of order n is represented by a practical test
function of order n.
This is a consequence of the following two properties:
a) the product g(t)f (t) diﬀers to zero only on the time interval (a, b) on which
f (t( diﬀers to zero.
b) the derivative of order k for the product g(t)f (t) is represented by the sum
k

Ckp f (t)(p) g(t)(k−p)

(f (t)g(t))(k) =

(2)

p=0

which is a sum of terms representing products of two continuous functions for
any k ≤ n, ( n being the order of the practical test-function f ) - only for k > n
discontinuous functions can appear in the previous sum. Integral properties of
practical test functions of certain order has been presented in [9]. For this, it
was shown that the integral ϕ(t) of a test function φ(t) (which diﬀers to zero on
(a, b) interval) is a constant function on the time intervals (−∞, a] and [b, +∞);
it presents a certain variation on the (a, b) time interval, from a constant null
value to a certain Δ quantity corresponding to the ﬁnal constant value. This
aspects was used for modeling smooth transitions from a certain state to another
when almost all derivatives of a certain function are equal to zero at the initial
moment of time. The absence of interaction at the time moment tin (when v = c),
considered as initial moment of time, suggested that all (or a great number) of
derivatives of functions x = x(t), y = y(t), z = z(t) (the space coordinates) are
null for t = tin and present a certain variation at a time interval close to tin
(when v is no longer equal to c.
In the general case when a function f and a ﬁnite number of its derivatives
f (1) , f (2) , ..f (n) present the variations from null values to values Δ, Δ1 , Δ2 , ...Δn
on the time interval [−1, 1], a certain function fn which should be added to the
null initial function so as to obtain a variation Δn for the derivative of n order
was studied. By multiplying the exponential bump-like function (a test-function
on [−1, 1]) with the variation Δn of the derivative of n order and by integrating
this product n + 1 times we obtain:
rating this product n + 1 times we have simply obtained:
-after the ﬁrst integration: a constant value equal to Δn at the time moment
t = 1 (while the integral of the bump-like test function on [−1, 1] is equal to 1,
and a null variation on (1, +∞).

Modelling Short Range Alternating Transitions

1057

- after the second integration (when we integrate the function obtained at previous step): a term equal to Δn (t − 1) and a term equal to a constant value cn1
(a constant of integration) on the time interval (1, +∞).
-after the n +1 integration: a term equal to Δn (t − 1)n /n! and a sum of terms
having the form cni (t − 1)i /i! for i ∈ N, i < n (cni being constants of integration) on the time interval (1, +∞) and so on. Corrections due to the fact that
function fn previously obtained has non-zero variations dn−1 , dn−2 , ..d1 for its
derivatives of order n − 1, n − 2, ..1 these values were substracted from the set
Δn−1 , Δn−2 , ..Δ1 before passing to the next step, when the bump-like function
was multiplied by the corrected value Δn−1 − dn−1 , Finally, by integrating this
product n times we obtained in a similar manner a function with a term equal
to Δn (t − 1)n−1 /(n − 1)! and a sum of terms having the form cni (t − 1)i /i! for
i ∈ N, i < n−1 (cni being constants of integration) on the time interval (1, +∞),
being noticed that the result obtained after n integration possess the n − 1 order
derivative equal to Δn−1 , a smooth transition for this derivative from the initial
null value being performed. So the second function which must be added to the
initial null function is the integral of n-1 order for the bump-like function multiplied by this variation Δn−1 (noted as fn−1 ). The function f2 has a null value
for the derivative of n order, so the result obtained at ﬁrst step is not aﬀected.
We must take care again to the fact that the function fn−1 previously obtained
has non-zero variations d1n−1 , d1n−2 , ..d11 for its derivatives of order n − 1, n − 2, ..1
and so we must once again substract these values from the previously corrected
set Δn−1 − dn−1 , Δn−2 − dn−2 , ..Δ1 − d1 before passing to the next step. Finally
we obtain all functions fn+1 , fn , ...f1 which represent the terms of function f
modeling the smooth transition from an initial null function to a function having a certain set of variations for a ﬁnite number of its derivatives on a small
time interval. The procedure can be also applied for functions possessing a ﬁnite
number of derivatives within a certain time interval by time reversal ( t being
replaced with −t).ere substracted from the set Δn−1 , Δn−2 , ..Δ1 before passing
to the next step, when the bump-like function was multiplied by the corrected
value Δn−1 − dn−1 , Finally, by integrating this product n times we obtained in a
similar manner a function with a term equal to Δn (t − 1)n−1 /(n − 1)! and a sum
of terms having the form cni (t − 1)i /i! for i ∈ N, i < n − 1 (cni being constants of
integration) on the time interval (1, +∞), being noticed that the result obtained
after n integration possess the n − 1 order derivative equal to Δn−1 , a smooth
transition for this derivative from the initial null value being performed. So the
second function which must be added to the initial null function is the integral of
n-1 order for the bump-like function multiplied by this variation Δn−1 (noted as
fn−1 ). The function f2 has a null value for the derivative of n order, so the result
obtained at ﬁrst step is not aﬀected. We must take care again to the fact that the
function fn−1 previously obtained has non-zero variations d1n−1 , d1n−2 , ..d11 for its
derivatives of order n − 1, n − 2, ..1 and so we must once again substract these
values from the previously corrected set Δn−1 − dn−1 , Δn−2 − dn−2 , ..Δ1 − d1
before passing to the next step. Finally we obtain all functions fn+1 , fn , ...f1
which represent the terms of function f modeling the smooth transition from an

1058

S. Pusca

initial null function to a function having a certain set of variations for a ﬁnite
number of its derivatives on a small time interval. The procedure can be also
applied for functions possessing a ﬁnite number of derivatives within a certain
time interval by time reversal ( t being replaced with −t).
Next step consists in considering the previously obtained functions the argument of a complex function F . In [10] has been presented the similitude between
coeﬃcients appearing in case of partial fractal decomposition and the electric
ﬁeld intensity E depending on distance a − b (in electrostatics). If we write the
decomposition
1
a−b

1
=
(x − a)(x − b)

1
x−a

−

1
a−b

1
x−b

(3)

and compare the coeﬃcient 1/(a − b) of each term with the electromagnetic ﬁeld
E=

Q
4π

Q
a−b

(4)

for the classical case in electrostatics when in a point situated in xd = b is
received an electric ﬁeld emitted by a body with Q charge, situated in a point
xs = a (the unidimensional case) - without taking the sign into consideration we can notice that coeﬃcient 1/(a − b) is also the coeﬃcient of Q/(4π ). This
has suggested that such coeﬃcients of 1/(x − a) correspond to certain physical
quantities noticed in point x = b and associated to a ﬁeld emitted in the point
x = a. It also suggested that the whole system Sa,b should be described as
Sa,b =

Q
4π

1
(x − a)(x − b)

(5)

and it can be decomposed in phenomena taking place in point x = a or x =
b by taking into consideration the coeﬃcient of 1/(x − a) or 1/(x − b) from
partial fraction decomposition. Mathematically, these coeﬃcients ca , cb can be
written as
(6)
ca = lim (x − a)Sa,b , cb = lim (x − b)Sa,b
x→a

x→b

By simply replacing coeﬃcients a, b appearing in denominators expressions with
M1 exp iF1 , M2 exp iF2 (complex functions with arguments F1 , F2 determined
using the previous algorithm) we obtain a smooth transition for the denominator
of partial fractions involved in interaction, certain frequencies appearing. Thus
is an important step for improving aspects presented in [10], where the necessity
of using functions depending of time for coeﬃcients appearing on denominators
expressions for partial functions corresponding to physical quantities has been
already mentioned.

3

Conclusions

This study has shown that the use of such short range alternating functions is
required by the fact that in modern physics (quantum physics) all transitions

Modelling Short Range Alternating Transitions

1059

imply the use of certain quantum particles (ﬁeld quantization) described using
associated frequencies for their energy. Due to this reason, a connection between
a wave interpretation of transitions (based on continuous functions0 and corpuscle interpretation of transitions (involving creation and annihilation of certain
quantum particles) has been performed using certain oscillations deﬁned on a
limited time interval corresponding to the transition from one steady-state to
another.
Acknowledgment. This work was supported by the National Commission of
Romania for UNESCO, through a pilot grant of international research involving Politehnica University, Salerno University, IBM India Labs and Shanghai
University.

References
1. Toma, G. : Practical test-functions generated by computer algorithms, Lecture
Notes Computer Science 3482 (2005), 576–585
2. Toma, C.: The advantages of presenting special relativity using modern concepts,
Balkan Physics Letters Supplement 5 (1997), 2334–2337
3. D’Avenia, P., Fortunato, D., Pisani, L. : Topological solitary waves with arbitrary
charge and the electromagnetic ﬁeld, Diﬀerential Integral Equations 16 (2003)
587–604
4. Cattani, C.: Harmonic Wavelets towards Solution of Nonlinear PDE, Computers
and Mathematics with Applications, 50 (2005), 1191–1210
5. Toma, C. : An extension of the notion of observability at ﬁltering and sampling
devices, Proceedings of the International Symposium on Signals, Circuits and Systems Iasi SCS 2001, Romania 233–236
6. Rushchitsky, J.J., Cattani, C., Terletskaya, E.V.: Wavelet Analysis of the evolution
of a solitary wave in a composite material, International Applied Mechanics, 40, 3
(2004), 311–318
7. Toma, C.: The possibility of appearing acausal pulses as solutions of the wave
equation, The Hyperion Scientiﬁc Journal 4 1 (2004), 25–28
8. Cattani, C.: Harmonic Wavelet Solutions of the Schroedinger Equation, International Journal of Fluid Mechanics Research 5 (2003), 1–10
9. Toma, A., Pusca, St., Moraraescu, C.: Spatial Aspects of Interaction between HighEnergy Pulses and Waves Considered as Suddenly Emerging Phenomena, Lecture
Notes Computer Science 3980 (2006), 839–847
10. Toma, Th., Morarescu, C., Pusca, St.: Simulating Superradiant Laser Pulses Using Partial Fraction Decomposition and Derivative Procedure, Lecture Notes Computer Science 3980 (2006), 771–779

