Aerosol Optical Thickness Retrieval over Land from
MODIS Data on Remote Sensing Information Service
Grid Node
Jianping Guo1,3, Yong Xue1,2,*, Ying Wang 1,3, Yincui Hu1,3, Jianqin Wang4 ,
Ying Luo1,3, Shaobo Zhong1,3, Wei Wan1,3, Lei Zheng1,3, and Guoyin Cai1,3
1

State Key Laboratory of Remote Sensing Science, Jointly Sponsored by the Institute of
Remote Sensing Applications of Chinese Academy of Sciences and Beijing Normal University,
Institute of Remote Sensing Applications, Chinese Academy of Sciences, PO Box 9718,
Beijing 100101, China
2
Department of Computing, London Metropolitan University, 166-220 Holloway Road,
London N7 8DB, UK
3
Graduate University, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
4
College of Information and Electrical Engineering, China Agricultural University, PO Box
142, Beijing, 10083,China
jpguo_irsa@hotmail.com, y.xue@londonmet.ac.uk

Abstract. The signal at the top of the atmosphere will certainly contain
information about both the surface and the atmosphere. To derive the
geophysical parameters from satellites remote sensing images, the atmospheric
effects must be decoupled. Aerosol Optical Thickness (AOT), an important
aerosol optical property, should be correctly determined to remove the
atmospheric effect. The retrieval process is great time-consuming and the EMS
memory required is too large for a personal computing to run efficiently.
Therefore, to facilitate the process smoothly, SYNTAM model is used to
retrieve AOT over a wide range of land including China and one European area
from MODIS data on the Remote Sensing Information Service Grid Node
(RSIN, http://www.tgp.ac.cn) deployed at Institute of Remote Sensing
Applications, Chinese Academy of Sciences. AOT retrieval results show that
the RSIN Grid service is high efficient and has the potential to be applied to the
remote sensing parameter inversion.
Keywords: Aerosol Optical Thickness Retrieval, MODIS Data, Remote
Sensing Information Service Grid Node.

1 Introduction
Aerosols are important components of the atmosphere that influence the Earth’s
energy balance both directly (by scattering and absorbing radiation) and indirectly (by
serving as nuclei for cloud formation), and affect hydrological cycle (IPCC, 2001).
*

Corresponding author.

Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part II, LNCS 4488, pp. 569 – 576, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

570

J. Guo et al.

They also affect public health and reduce visibility (Jacovides et al., 1994). Aerosol
particles have heterogeneous spatial and temporal distributions with life spans on the
order of days to weeks (IPCC 2001). Satellite observations of aerosol concentrations
are thought to contribute greatly to reduce the large uncertainty in current estimates of
aerosol-caused radiative forcing (Varotsos et al., 2006).
AOT can be retrieved from a wide range of satellites sensors including Moderate
Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS), MISR (Multiangle Imaging
SpectroRadiometer), AVHRR (Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer),
POLDER (Polarization and Directionary of the Earth's Reflectances). The operational
retrieval of the AOT over sea suggests that the algorithm is matured. Derivation of
AOT over land, however, remains great uncertainty due to its high variation of land
type. DDV method has been proposed among researchers to retrieve aerosol
properties over such dark targets as water bodies and vegetation areas (Liu et. al.,
1996).
MODIS is a sensor with the ability to characterize the spatial and temporal
characteristics of the global aerosol field. Launched aboard NASA’s Terra and Aqua
satellites in December 1999 and May 2002, MODIS has 36 channels spanning the
spectral range from 0.41 to 15μm representing three spatial resolutions: 250m, 500m,
and 1km. The aerosol retrieval makes use of seven of these channels (0.47–2.1μm) to
retrieve AOT and properties (Kaufman et al., 1997).
When assuming the aerosol optical property invariable and the temporal
differences between the two satellite overpasses over the same region ignored, the
Synergy of TERRA and AQUA MODIS data (SYNTAM) algorithm is used to
retrieval AOT from MODIS (Tang et al. 2005).
Grid computing aggregates heterogeneous resources and provides hardware and
software services, supporting application and services composition, workflow
expression, scheduling, and execution management and service level agreements
based allocation of resources. It has been an enabled environment for data sharing and
processing.
Researchers and corporations have developed different types of grid computing
platforms including support resource pooling or sharing such as SETI@Home,
Condor, and Alchemi harnessing idle CPU cycles from desktop computers in the
network, Globus, EU DataGrid, and Gridbus allow sharing of computational and
distributed data resources. Guo et al., (2005) proposed a grid-based spatial
epidemiology applicationa for scientists from both biological and spatial information
fields. With respect to remote sensing applications based on grid service Aloisio et al.
(2004) proposed a grid architecture, then after that, the grid platform of remote
sensing data processing is developed (Aloisio et al. 2003).
In this paper we focus on the implementation of aerosol optical thickness retrieval
on RSIN developed by Telegeoprocessing Research Group in Institute of Remote
Sensing Applications (IRSA), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), providing more
than ten geophysical parameter retrieval functions (Luo et al., 2006). The remainder
of this paper is organized as follows: in Section 2, the algorithm of AOT retrieval is
introduced in detail. The architecture and process of the AOT retrieval service are
presented in Section 3. Two AOT retrieval experiments over China and one European

Aerosol Optical Thickness Retrieval over Land from MODIS Data

571

area are performed on RSIN. Finally, some conclusions are drawn about the AOT
retrieval implementation by means of Grid service platform-RSIN, and future work is
discussed.

2 SYNTAM Model
The Synergy of Terra and Aqua MODIS data (SYNTAM) algorithm is used to
retrieval AOT in this paper. The aerosol retrieval model bases on Equation (1) (Xue
and Cracknell 1995).
'

Aj,λi =

(a j −b)ε (0.00879λi −4.09+β jλi −α ) secθ j '

(Aj,λi b − a j ) + a j (1− Aj,λi )e
'

(a j −b)ε (0.00879λi −4.09+β jλi −α ) secθ j '

.

(1)

( Aj,λi b − a j ) + b(1− Aj,λi )e
'

'

where j=1,2, respectively stands for the observation of TERRA and AQUA; i=1,2,3,
respectively stands for three visible spectral bands with central wavelength at 0.47μm,
0.55μm, 0.66μm; λ is the central wavelength. A is the Earth’s surface reflectance. A＇
is the Earth’s system reflectance (Tang, et al.2005).
The SYNTAM algorithm infers the surface-leaving and path radiance contributions
to total observed radiance without any assumption regarding the absolute surface
reflectance and the land type, but with assumption regarding the invariance of
wavelength exponent α during time intervals of Terra and Aqua satellites overpass
time (10:30, 13:30, local time, respectively).
The process of AOT retrieval using SYNTAM includes fourfold as follows: first of
all, the input images from both Terra and Aqua should be georeferenced before coregistration are performed. Secondly, the radiance calibration is performed to get the
correct physical parameters including sensor zenith angle, solar zenith angle, and top
of atmosphere reflectance. Thirdly, cloud should be screened and removed. Finally
all pixel values, as input parameters, are to SYNTAM to derive AOT. The retrieval
results may be post-processed and then provided to the end users through the RSIN
Grid service.

3 AOT Retrieval Services on RSIN
3.1 Remote Sensing Information Service Grid Node
Remotely sensed data is one of the most important spatial information sources, so are
the researches on architectures and technical supports of remote sensing information
analysis.
RSIN, a significant part of the research on SIG, aims at integrating data, traditional
algorithm and software, and computing resource distributed, provide one-stop service
to everyone on Internet, and make good use of everything pre-existing. The node can
be very large, which contains many personal computers, supercomputers or other

572

J. Guo et al.

nodes. It also can be as small as just on personal computer. Figure 1 describes the
architecture of Remote sensing information analysis and service Grid node. The node
is part of the SIG, but it also can provide services independently. There’re two entries
to the node (Luo et al., 2006):
1. A portal implemented by JSP. User can visit it through Internet browses, such as
Internet Explorer and others.
2. A portal implemented by web service and workflow technology. It is special for
SIG. Other Grid resources and Grid systems can integrate with our node through
this portal.

Fig. 1. RSIN web page (URL: http:/www.tgp.ac.cn)

3.2 Grid Implementation of AOT Retrieval
Generally speaking, the retrieval process consists of data preparing, data preprocessing, AOT retrieval and post-processing of results. So the Grid service of the
SYNTAM AOT retrieval is partitioned into four sub services correspondingly. These
sub services are implemented one by one. Upon receiving the user’s order of the AOT
retrieval service via grid portal, the grid manager initialized an AOT retrieval service
and run the data searching sub service to find the MODIS data among the data
resource in the Grid pool. Then the data query results are sent to the data preprocessing service. The pre-process service sends the pre-process job to the
computing resource and then collect the returned results. The pre-processed MODIS
data finally is transferred to the SYNTAM processing service. After processing
among computing resource on RSIN, the RSIN collects all of the retrieved AOT

Aerosol Optical Thickness Retrieval over Land from MODIS Data

573

results and then post-processes them. The final results are sent to the user via the Grid
portal. At the same time, the job status is simultaneously monitored by a grid pool
manager.
In the following paragraphs, data query schemes, data pre-processing, job
management and AOT post-processing are discussed in detail.
3.2.1 Data Query
The MODIS data are distributed on RSIN, whose metadata describe the information
of the MODIS data, which includes range, producer, quality, date and time,
processing methods, satellite, and so on. The data searching service search the
registered metadata based on SQL and find out where the required data hosted in.
Then query results then returned to the data pre-processing service.
3.2.2 Data Pre-processing
Before going to SYNTAM AOT retrieval process, geometrical corrections (including
calibration, geo-reference, merging and clipping etc) and radio-metrical calibration
should be performed. After that, 16 input parameters required in SYNTAM are in
ASCII format and poised to be input to the next phase.
Geo-referencing of MODIS data is time consumable and computationally intensive.
Combined with the calibration, the geo-reference task is submitted to the Grid. The
algorithms and the partition strategy can be found in the paper from Hu et al. (2005).
The merging, clipping and format transfer are combined to a unity one. When it
concerns to regional or global scale, the partition strategy must be considered if there
are no high-powered computer that could handle the merging process in the Grid
pool. We apply dynamic filling methods to fulfill the task. Firstly, the request range is
divided into regular pieces according to the available computers’ amount. The sub
range information and the geo-referenced data are sent to the job nodes in the grid
environment. Secondly, the job nodes search the data within the specified range and
fill the data into the correct location. After the required 16 parameter files are ready
on the job node, the SYNTAM AOT services start up.
3.2.3 Job Management and Post-processing
The task is partitioned into many sub jobs, which are identified by unique Grid job
identifiers. The job manager monitors the job status (running or idle) during the
process. Finished status is reached whenever user retrieves all the output files
produced by a job. The job is check-pointed for later restart. When a chosen resource
refuses to accept the job, the job is vacated and waiting for the manager to reallocate
to other computing element. The grid manager collects all the results returned from
the job nodes. The results are merged dynamically. After all of the results are merged,
the merged files are transformed to the format, which the user required and then the
transformed files are finally transferred to the user.

4 Experiments and Results
MODIS level 1B data for Europe covering north France and part of England,
Netherlands and China, acquired from NASA on July 2, 2006, and November 3,
2004, respectively, are input to RSIN.

574

J. Guo et al.

In respect of the AOT retrieval in Europe, Figure 2 shows the preliminary results.
The retrieval results are tested with collocated Aeronet in-situ data in Western Europe
where 4 Aeronet sites can be available. Figure 3 shows that AOT measurements in
Oostende Aeronet site is compared with the collocated MODIS measurements
averaging over the area within 5km around Oostende. It shows good agreements
between SYNTAM retrieval and MODIS Aeronet measurements. The average
difference between SYNTAM retrieval AOT value and Aeronet measurements is
0.0165.

Fig. 2. AOT retrieval from MODIS data on RSIN for a part of Europe on July 2, 2006

5 Conclusions
The implementation of the AOT retrieval on RSIN is discussed and tested. In order to
check for consistent AOD retrievals, validation for 4 AERONET sites has been
incorporated. It is shown in the few examples in this paper that the retrieved AOD
compares favorably with the collocated AERONET sun-photometer measurements.
Our tests are based on RSIN. The experiments are successful but there are some
aspects we should improve in the future. For example, the load balance on RSIN is to
be improved. Moreover, the partition strategy doesn’t consider the difference among
the computing elements. When the job is submitted to node with lower computing
ability, the whole efficiency will be affected. Otherwise, when there are high power
computers in the grid pool, it may be more efficient to submit most of jobs to them. A
scheme should be added in order that able person should do more work. Another

Aerosol Optical Thickness Retrieval over Land from MODIS Data

575

aspect we should improve is the data management. In our experiments, the database is
file based. When the data are centralized in one node, the transferring way will be
jam-packed In the future the distributed database should be build with the dynamic
replica scheme to reduce the pressure on the data source nodes.

D
''
Fig. 3. AOT in Oostende (N 5113'30
, E 02D 55'30'' ), as a function of wavelength

Acknowledgement
This publication is an output from “Multi-scale Aerosol Optical Thickness
Quantitative Retrieval from Remotely Sensing Data at Urban Area” (40671142) and
"Aerosol fast monitoring modelling using MODIS data and middlewares
development" (40471091) funded by NSFC, China. We are grateful to the MODIS
team for making available data used here. Many thanks go to the PI investigators of
the mentioned AERONET sites used in this paper and Sina-EU Dragon program.

References
1. Aloisio, G., Cafaro, M.: A dynamic Earth observation system. Parallel Computing (2003)
1357-1362
2. Aloisio, G., Cafaro, M., Epicoco, I., Quarta, G.: A problem solving environment for
remote sensing data processing. In Proceeding of ITCC 2004: International Conference on
Information Technology: Coding and Computing held in Las Vegas, NV, USA on 5-7
April 2004,Vol.2. 56-61
3. Cannataro, M.: Clusters and grids for distributed and parallel knowledge discovery.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science (2000) Vol. 1823, 708-716
4. Guo Jianping, Yong Xue, Chunxiang Cao, Wuchun Cao, Xiaowen Li, Jianqin Wang,
Liqun Fang: eMicrob: a Grid-based Spatial Epidemiology Application. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science (2005) Vol. 3516, 472-475
5. Hu Yincui, Xue Yong, Tang Jiakui, Zhong Shaobo, Cai Guoyin: Data-parallel
Georeference of MODIS Level 1B Data Using Grid Computing. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science (2005) Vol. 3516, 883-886

576

J. Guo et al.

6. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 2001–The Scientific Basis (contribution of
working group I to the Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (2001)
7. Jacovides, C.P., Varotsos, C., Kaltsounides, N.A., Petrakis, M., Lalas, D.P.: Atmospheric
turbidity parameters in the highly polluted site of Athens basin. Renewable Energy (1994)
4 (5), 465-470
8. Kaufman, Y.J., Tanré, D., Remer, L.A., Vermote, E., Chu, A., and Holben, B.N.: Remote
sensing of tropospheric aerosol from EOS-MODIS over the land using dark targets and
dynamic aerosol models. J. Geophys. Res. (1997) Vol.102, 17051-17067
9. Luo Ying, Yong Xue, Yincui Hu, Chaolin Wu, Guoyin Cai, Lei Zheng,Jianping Guo, Wei
Wan, Shaobo Zhong: Remote Sensing Information Processing Grid Node with LooseCoupling Parallel Structure. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (2006) Vol. 3991,
876-879
10. Luo Ying, Yong Xue, Chaolin Wu, Yincui Hu, Jianping Guo, Wei Wan, Lei Zheng,
Guoyin Cai, Shaobo Zhong, Zhengfang Wang: A Remote Sensing Application Workflow
and Its Implementation in Remote Sensing Service Grid Node. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science (2006), Vol. 3991, 292 -299
11. Running, S.W., Justice, C.O., Salomonson, V.V., Hall, D., Barker, J., Kaufman, Y.J.,
Strahler, A.H., Huete, A.R., Muller, J.P., Vanderbilt,V., Wan, Z.M., Teillet, P., Carneggie,
D.: Terrestrial remote sensing science and algorithms planned for EOS/MODIS.
International Journal of Remote Sensing (1994), 15(17), 3587– 3620
12. Tang Jiakui, Xue Yong, Yu Tong, Guan Yanning: AOT Determination by Exploiting the
Synergy of TERRA and AQUA MODIS (SYNTAM). Remote Sensing of Environment
(2005), 94 (3), 327-334
13. Varotsos, C.A., Ondov J. M., Cracknell A. P., Efstathiou, M.N., Long-range persistence in
global Aerosol Index dynamics. International Journal of Remote Sensing (2006), 27 (16),
3593-3603
14. Xue, Y., Cracknell, A.P.: Operational Bi-Angle Approach to Retrieve the Earth Surface
Albedo from AVHRR data in the Visible Band. International Journal of Remote Sensing
(1995), 16(3), 417-429

