An Energy-Efficient Routing Method of Wireless Sensor
Networks
Sun Ting1, Lu Dongxin2, and Yang Yongtian1
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin
150001, China
{sunting, yangyongtian}@hrbeu.edu.cn
2
ZTE Software Engineering, The Torch Street 999, Nan Chang 330029, China
lu.dongxin@ztenc.com.cn

Abstract. In wireless sensor networks(WSNs), as sensor nodes are characterized by having specific requirements such as limited energy availability, low
memory and reduced processing power, energy efficiency is a key issue in designing the network routing. In the existing clustering-based routing protocols
for the WSNs, the cluster-heads are usually selected randomly and do a lot of
work, which may cause unbalanced energy consumption and thus short network
lifetime. Based on this approach, the paper proposes a method that a clusterhead distributes energy load evenly among its members based on their energy
usage by chain. With the chain, in a cluster, different node is selected as Agent
Node to send the data to cluster-head at different cluster cycle. The new method
balances the nodes’ power depletion. Simulation results show that it has better
power management performance and can prolong the lifetime of the network.
Keywords: Wireless Sensor Networks, Routing Method, Cluster, Chain.

1 Introduction
As a distributed sensing network, wireless sensor networks consist of many small
intelligent types of equipment [1]. Since sensor nodes carry limited and generally
irreplaceable power source, the routing protocols designed for the WSN must take the
issue of energy saving into consideration. Clustering-based routing protocol is a popular protocol proposed for the WSN to minimize the consumption of the energy of the
sensors.
There have existed many cluster-based routing protocols [2][3], but they still have
many problems. In this paper, based on the cluster-based routing model, we propose a
new routing transmission method, with which a cluster-head distributes energy load
evenly among its members based on their energy usage by chain.
This paper is organized as follows. Related works are introduced in Section 2. In
Section 3, we present the new routing method and its building process. Simulation
results are given in Section 4. Finally we summarize the main results and discuss
future research direction in Section 5.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part III, LNCS 4489, pp. 129–132, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

130

T. Sun, D. Lu, and Y. Yang

2 Related Works
Low Energy Adaptive Clustering Hierarchy (LEACH), described in [2], is probably
one of the more referenced protocols in the sensor networks area. The recent researches on the routing with the hierarchical structure such as PEACH [4] and
EDACH [5] employ a similar approach as LEACH. As an improved version to
LEACH, LEACH-C [6] uses a centralized clustering algorithm to produce better
clusters, thus achieves better performance.
The transmission model used in LEACH can lighten the centralized consumption of
nodes’ energy to a certain extent. However, the randomly election of the cluster-heads
can cause unbalance energy consumption in the nodes. On the other hand, in the cluster, the nodes near the cluster-head still need to transfer other nodes’ data just like the
routers and need more energy. Sub-clustering method [3] improves the LEACH partly,
but increases the computation work and management load of the cluster-head. In order
to resolve these problems, in this paper we present a new routing method with which a
chain is built in every cluster, which can resolve these problems better.

3 Chain in Cluster
Each nodes i maintains a unique identification, ID(i), a cluster identification to which
i belongs, CID(i), and its remaining battery power, CRP(i). Its location is L(i). After
the clusters are built, the cluster-head check all the member nodes' information and
select the node with most residual energy as its' agent node. At the same time the
cluster-head broadcasts all nodes location information in the cluster, every node select
the closest neighbor to form a chain according to these information. When the clusterhead receives the data collection request from the sink, the agent node transfers the
request to the two ends of the chain and the data begin to flow from the two ends to it.
At the same time, the middle nodes will aggregate these data and finally the agent
node transfers these data to cluster-head and cluster-head transfers them to sink node.
As shown in Figure 1, the method balances the nodes’ power consumption.
Member Node
Cluster-head
Agent Node
Sink Node

Fig. 1. One Node as Agent Node

As the agent node consumes more energy than other nodes within the chain, the cluster-head elects another node with the most residual power as agent node in next cluster
cycle. That is, when a cluster cycle is over, nodes are informed about their newly elected
agent node. Nodes within a chain transmit to their newly elected agent node.

An Energy-Efficient Routing Method of Wireless Sensor Networks

131

4 Simulation Results
For the simulation, we use the OPNET network simulator. The environment consists
of 150 nodes distributed randomly in a 100m × 100m area. Each node is equipped
with the initial energy of 5 joules. We compare the new method with LEACH routing
method and recent research work Sub-cluster routing method.

Fig. 2. Number of Nodes Alive

From the Figure 2, we can draw a conclusion that at first new method has the
similar performance with other methods. However, with the increase of number of
rounds, new approach has better result than conventional approaches. The reason is
that, in LEACH, cluster-heads not only transmit the data to sink, but also aggregates
all the information that accepted from the member nodes, which need more energy.
And in LEACH, the nodes near the cluster-head, as routers to transmit other nodes'
data also need more energy. These works can make the nodes die soon. In sub-cluster
method, the cluster-head also need to aggregate the information that accepted from
the sub-cluster-heads. In our new method, the work is distributed to the member
nodes and the data attending cluster-head has been aggregated. With this method, all
the nodes in the cluster have more balanced power consumption. The number of
nodes alive is larger.
Figure 3 shows us the results of nodes’ power consumption with the change of
network distribution range. When the distribution range of network is small and the
nodes density is high, new model and sub-cluster method have not better performance
than traditional model, because they have more computation to form the chain and
sub-cluster in the cluster. With the increase of network distribution range, the transmission distance between the nodes increases also. In LEACH, the member nodes of a
cluster have to transmit their data to cluster-head with long distance. The sub-cluster
method improves it by reducing the overhead of re-clustering and shorter transmission
distance. With our method, the nodes of the chain only need forward their data to the
nearby neighbor. New method shows us its advantages. It has lower power consumption and will prolong the lifetime of network.

132

T. Sun, D. Lu, and Y. Yang

Fig. 3. Energy Consumption

5 Conclusion and Future Works
In this paper, we introduced a new method to prolong the lifetime of WSNs. Simulation results show that the new method has better performance when the network range
is increased. But as we all know, the routing protocol of WSNs is application-based.
We will study the performance of our approach under various conditions. For example, we will consider nodes’ mobility and fault. So, we should do more things to improve the performance of the new method in the future.

References
1. Hill J, Szew Czyk R, Woo A, Hollar S. System architecture directions for networked sensors. Proceedings of the 9th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for
Programming Languages and Operating Systems. 2000, 93-104
2. W. Heinzelman， A. Chandrakasan， Hbalakrishnan． Energy-efficient communication protocol for wireless microsensor networks． The Hawaii Int'l Conf. System Sciences, Hawaii,
IEEE Computer Society, 2000
3. Kyung-Won Nam, Jun Hwang, Cheo-Min Park, Young-Chan Kim. Energy-Efficiency
Method for Cluster-Based Sensor Networks. ICCSA 2005, LNCS 3480, 2005, pp 11701176
4. K.T. Kim and H.Y. Youn.: PEACH: Proxy-Enable Adaptive Clustering Hierarchy for Wireless Sensor network: Proceeding of The 2005 International Conference On Wireless Network, pp. 52-57, June 2005.
5. K.T. Kim and H. Y. Youn.: Energy-Driven Adaptive Clustering Hierarchy (EDACH) for
wireless sensor networks: EUC LNCS3823, pp. 1098-1107, 2005.
6. Heinzelman, W., Chandrakasan, A., Balakrishnan, H.: An Application-Specific Protocol
Architecture for Wireless Microsensor Networks. IEEE Trans. on Wireless Communications 1(4) (2002) 660-670

