A Transformer Condition Assessment System Based on
Data Warehouse and Data Mining
1

Xueyu Li , Lizeng Wu2, Jinsha Yuan1, and Yinghui Kong
1

1

Department of Electronics and Communication, North China Electric Power University
No.204, Qingnian Road, Baoding, 071003, China
2
Beijing No.2 Co-generation Plant No. 52, Lian Hua Chi Dong Lu, Beijing, China
lxueyu@gmail.com
lizengwu@yahoo.com.cn
yuanjinsha@sohu.com
kongyh@sina.com

Abstract. A framework of transformer condition assessment system is
proposed in this paper. In this system, we use a data warehouse, a multi-agent
system and data mining techniques respectively to collect transformers' testing
data, design the framework of the software, and evaluate transformers'
conditions. The proposed system prototype had been tested with realistic
transformers with reliable performance. The present framework is open and
flexible, therefore the objective system is easy to be maintained and developed
further.
Keywords: Transformer condition assessment, data mining, multi-agent
system.

1 Introduction
Power utilities are under continuous pressure to reduce maintenance expenditures
while maintaining a high level of component reliability. As a result, condition based
maintenance (CBM) has been developed to cut down the maintenance cost and
increase the level of system and component reliability. An open substation main
equipment state monitoring system framework, which used data warehouse
technologies to collect all kinds of data and used data mining and Open Architecture
Agent technologies to set up an open architecture, is proposed in this paper.

2 A New Transformer Condition Assessment System
The new overall transformer condition assessment system (TCAS) is a hybrid system
that is composed of a data collection subsystem and a condition analysis subsystem.
The former collects transformers’ on-site monitoring data, off-line present and
historical testing data, nameplate parameters, and historical operating records into a
data warehouse. The later uses the data in the data warehouse to evaluate the
conditions of all concerned transformers in an electric utility.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part II, LNCS 4488, pp. 978–981, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

A Transformer Condition Assessment System Based on Data Warehouse

979

2.1 Data Collection Subsystem
Data warehouse is used in the data collection subsystem for data collection. In
addition, an OLAP tool is included in the subsystem to enable easy and efficient data
analysis tasks by the users.
2.2 Condition Analysis Subsystem
2.2.1 Architecture of the Transformer Condition Analysis Subsystem
The transformer condition analysis subsystem includes the following seven
application agents:
AA={AAThreshold_Alarm,
AATrend_Analysis,
AAEventTree_Analysis,
AACluster_Analysis,
AAClassification_Analysis, AAForecasting, AACondition_Assessment}
The above application agents work together to evaluate transformers’ conditions.
The knowledge of these agents can be described as follows:
KAAThreshold_Alarm = {dissolved gases concentrations, gases production speeds,
electric testing data, ratio limit, speed limit, electric data limits}
KAATrend_Analysis = {dissolved gases concentrations, gases production speeds,
electric testing data }
KAAEvent Tree_Analysis = {entrance circuit short, continuous high temperature,
sustained overload, environmental abnormity, fault analysis}
KAACluster_Analysis = {dissolved gases concentrations, dissolved gases relative ratios,
electric testing data, grey relation clustering algorithm }
KAAClassification_Analysis = {dissolved gases relative ratios, electric testing data,
Bayesian network classifier }
KAAForecasting = {dissolved gases concentrations, dissolved gases relative ratios,
electric testing data, grey prediction algorithm}
KAACondition_Assessment = {threshold analysis results, trend analysis results, event tree
analysis results, cluster analysis results, classification results, forecasting results,
Bayesian network model}
2.2.2 Application Agents
2.2.2.1 Threshold Alarm Agent. Standard value analysis agent is used to compare the
actual tested value derived from testing data, on-line monitoring data and other data
with standard values of transformer condition.
2.2.2.2 Trend Analysis Agent. The quality indices of a transformer usually change
with time extension. If they change slowly and they are within the ranges of their
standard values, the transformer is in normal condition. If they change sharply,
usually a hidden failure or defect occurs in the transformer even though they are
within the ranges of their standard values.
2.2.2.3 Event Tree Analysis Agent. Event tree analysis and fault tree analysis are two
main methods to do the transformer fault analysis. When an event, such as external
short circuit, continuous high environmental temperature, sustained overload, happen,
the event tree analysis agent can find it from recorded data and then do condition
assessment.

980

X. Li et al.

2.2.2.4 Cluster Analysis Agent. Cluster analysis agent is responsible for finding the
testing data's distribution patterns and relations of attributes. Cluster analysis agent
responds to the request of the facilitator agent to make the cluster analysis. The grey
correlation method is used to extract the failure types.
2.2.2.5 Classification Analysis Agent. The naïve Bayesian classifier learns from
training data the conditional probability of each attribute Ai given the class label C.
Classification is then done by applying Bayes rule to compute the probability of C
given the particular instance of A1, ... , An, and then predicting the class with the
highest posterior probability.
2.2.2.6
Forecasting Agent. Forecasting agent responds to the request of the
facilitator agent, which provides the agent community with a number of services for
routing and delegating tasks and information among agents, to make the transformer
failure forecast. In grey model GM(1,1), stochastic variables are seen as Grey
Variables, irregular original data are cumulated to be regular series, and then, a
differential equation model is formed and settled. When the grey theory is used to
predict transformers’ dissolved gases values, the posteriori error of each gas can be
about 5% or less than 5% [11].
2.2.2.7 Transformer Condition Assessment Agent. The threshold analysis, trend
analysis, event tree analysis, cluster analysis, classification analysis, and parameter
forecasting are comprehensively analyzed through using the Bayesian network. The
transformer condition is divided into five states, excellent, better, normal, worse and
fault. Transformer condition node has seven parent nodes, which are all middle nodes
just like threshold analysis result node.

3 Applications
We are developing a transformer condition assessment system for an electric utility.
The initial results expressed in table 1 are suitable to actual transformers’ conditions.
Table 1. Initial results

Voltage grade
(kV)

Capacity
(kVA)

Count of Tr.

110
110
110
110
220
220

31500
20000
40000
50000
120000
180000

28
7
12
4
19
4

(E: Excellent, B: Better, N: Normal, W: Worse, F: Fault.)

E
11
6
7
3
17
4

Transformers’
Conditions
B N W
14 1
1
1 0
0
4 1
0
1 0
0
1 0
0
0 0
0

F
1
0
0
0
1
0

A Transformer Condition Assessment System Based on Data Warehouse

981

In order to test the diagnosis’ accuracy of the system, some examples in [2] are
tested again, and the results are excellent agreement with transformers’ actual faults.

4 Conclusions
In this paper, we presented some general guidelines of developing an intelligent
transformer condition assessment system to help electric utilities optimize the
maintenance activities. This proposed framework is open and flexible, so the
objective system is easy to be maintained and further developed. A data warehouse
has been used to integrate all kind of transformer condition parameters. OAA is
employed to compose the multi-agent system that is the main part of the proposed
system. Seven application agents are designed to evaluate transformers’ conditions
synthetically. The initial filed test results got from tests of some transformers based
on a prototype system developed by the authors have proven that the framework
system is able to produce accurate condition assessment results and is promising for
further implementation. Moreover, the maintenance and further development of the
objective system is feasible since the present framework is open and flexible.

References
1. Jie Cheng and Russell Greiner: Comparing bayesian network classifiers. In Proceedings of
the 15th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI'99), Morgan Kaufmann
Publishers (1999) 101--107.
2. Mang-Hui Wang: A Novel Extension Method for Transformer Fault Diagnosis, IEEE
Transactions on Power Delivery, 18(1) (2003) 164-169

