Vanishing Waves on Semi-closed Space Intervals
and Applications in Mathematical Physics
Ghiocel Toma
Department of Applied Sciences, Politehnica University, Bucharest, Romania

Abstract. Test-functions (which diﬀer to zero only on a limited interval
and have continuous derivatives of any order on the whole real axis) are
widely used in the mathematical theory. Yet less attention was given to
intuitive aspects on dynamics of such test functions or of similar functions considered as possible solution of certain equations in mathematical
physics (as wave equation). This study will show that the use of wave
equation on small space interval considered around the point of space
where the sources of the generated ﬁeld are situated can be mathematically represented by vanishing waves corresponding to a superposition
of travelling test functions. As an important consequence, some directions for propagating the generated wave appears and the possibility of
reverse radiation being rejected. Speciﬁc applications for other phenomena involving wave generation (as the Lorentz formulae describing the
generation of a wave with diﬀerent features after the interaction with the
observer’s material medium are also presented.
Keywords: vanishing waves, test functions, semiclosed intervals.

1

Introduction

Test-functions (which diﬀer to zero only on a limited interval and have continuous derivatives of any order on the whole real axis) are widely used in the
mathematical theory of distributions and in Fourier analysis of wavelets. Yet
such test functions, similar to the Dirac functions, can’t be generated by a differential equation. The existence of such an equation of evolution, beginning
to act at an initial moment of time, would imply the necessity for a derivative
of certain order to make a jump at this initial moment of time from the zero
value to a nonzero value. But this aspect is in contradiction with the property of
test-functions to have continuous derivatives of any order on the whole real axis,
represented in this case by the time axis. So it results that an ideal test-function
can’t be generated by a diﬀerential equation (see also [1]); the analysis has to be
restricted at possibilities of generating practical test-functions (functions similar
to test-functions, but having a ﬁnite number of continuous derivatives on the
whole real axis) useful for wavelets analysis. Due to the exact form of the derivatives of test-functions, we can’t apply derivative free algorithms [2] or algorithms
which can change in time [3]. Starting from the exact mathematical expressions
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part II, LNCS 4488, pp. 1045–1052, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

1046

G. Toma

of a certain test-function and of its derivatives, we must use speciﬁc diﬀerential
equations for generating such practical test-functions.
This aspect is connected with causal aspects of generating apparently acausal
pulses as solutions of the wave equation, presented in [4]. Thus, such testfunctions, considered at the macroscopic scale (that means not as Dirac-functions)
can represent solutions for certain equations in mathematical physics (an example being the wave-equation). The main consequence of this consists in the
possibility of certain pulses to appear as solutions of the wave-equation under
initial null conditions for the function and for all its derivatives and without any
free-term (a source-term) to exist. In order to prove the possibility of appearing
acausal pulses as solutions of the wave-equation (not determined by the initial
conditions or by some external forces) we begin by writing the wave-equation
1 ∂2φ
∂2φ
− 2 2 =0
2
∂x
v ∂t

(1)

for a free string deﬁned on the length interval (0, l) (an open set), where φ
represents the amplitude of the string oscillations and v represents the velocity
of the waves inside the string medium. At the initial moment of time (the zero
moment) the amplitude φ together with all its derivatives of ﬁrst and second
order are equal to zero. From the mathematical theory of the wave-equation we
know that any solution of this equation must be a superposition of a direct wave
and of a reverse wave. We shall restrict our analyze at direct waves and consider
a supposed extension of the string on the whole Ox axis, φ being deﬁned by the
function
1
exp ( (x−vt+1)
2 −1 ) for |x − vt + 1| < 1
(2)
φ(τ ) =
0 for |x − vt + 1| ≥ 1
where t ≥ 0. This function for the extended string satisﬁes the wave-equation
(being a function of x-vt , a direct wave). It is a continuous function, having
continuous partial derivatives of any order for x ∈ (−∞, ∞) and for x ≥ 0. For
x ∈ (0, l) (the real string)the amplitude φ and all its derivatives are equal to zero
at the zero moment of time, as required by the initial null conditions for the real
string (nonzero values appearing only for x ∈ (−2, 0) for t = 0, while on this
interval |x − vt + 1| = |x + 1| < 1). We can notice that for t = 0 the amplitude φ
and its partial derivatives diﬀer to zero only on a ﬁnite space interval, this being
a property of the functions deﬁned on a compact set (test functions). But the
argument of the exponential function is x − vt ; this implies that the positive
amplitude existing on the length interval (−2, 0) at the zero moment of time will
move along the Ox axis in the direction x = +∞. So at some time moments
t1 < t2 < t3 < t4 < . . . after the zero moment the amplitude φ will be present
inside the string, moving from one edge to the other. It can be noticed that the
pulse passes through the real string and at a certain time moment tf in (when
the pulse existing at the zero moment of time on the length interval (−2, 0) has
moved into the length interval (l, l + 2)) its action upon the real string ceases.
We must point the fact that the limit points x = 0 and x = l are not considered

Vanishing Waves on Semi-closed Space Intervals and Applications

1047

to belong to the string; but this is in accordance with the rigorous deﬁnition of
derivatives (for these limit points can’t be deﬁned derivatives as related to any
direction around them).
This point of space (the limit of the open space interval considered) is very
important for our analysis, while we shall extend the study to closed space
intervals. Considering small space intervals around the points of space where
the sources of the generated ﬁeld are situated (for example, the case of electrical
charges generating the electromagnetic ﬁeld), it will be shown that causal aspects
require the logical existence of a certain causal chain for transmitting interaction
from one point of space to another, which can be represented by mathematical
functions which vanishes (its amplitude and all its derivatives) in certain points
of space. From this point of space, an informational connection for transmitting
the wave further could be considered (instead of a tranmission based on certain
derivatives of the wave). Thus a kind of granular aspect for propagation along
a certain axis can be noticed, suitable for application in quantum theory. As
an important consequence, by a multiscale analysis and the use of non-Markov
systems, some directions for propagating the generated wave will appear and the
possibility of reverse radiation will be rejected. Finally. speciﬁc applications for
other phenomena involving wave generation (as the Lorentz formulae describing
the generation of a wave with diﬀerent features after the interaction with the
observer’s material medium) will be also presented.

2

Test-Functions for Semi-closed Space Intervals

If we extend our analysis to closed intervals by adding the limit of the space
interval to the previously studied open intervals (for example by adding the
points x = 0 and x = l to the open interval (0, l), we should take into account the
fact that a complete mathematical analysis usually implies the use of a certain
function f (t) deﬁned at the limit of the working space interval (the point of space
x = 0, in the previous example). Other complete mathematical problems for the
wave equation or for similar equations in mathematical physics use functions
f0 (t), fl (t) corresponding to both limits of the working space intervals (the points
of space x = 0 and x = l in the previous example) or other supplementary
functions.
The use of such supplementary functions deﬁned on the limit of the closed
interval could appear as a possible explanation for the problem of generating
acausal pulses as solutions of the wave equation on open intervals. The acausal
pulse presented in the previous paragraph (similar to wavelets) travelling along
the Ox axis requires a certain non-zero function of time f0 (t) for the amplitude of
the pulse for the limit of the interval x = 0. It could be argued that the complete
mathematical problem of generating acausal pulses for null initial conditions on
an open interval and for null functions f0 (t) and fl (t) corresponding to function
φ (the pulse amplitude) at the limits of the interval x = 0 and x = l respectively, would reject the possibility of appearing the acausal pulse presented in
the previous paragraph. The acausal pulse φ presented implies non-zero values

1048

G. Toma

for f0 and fl at the limit of the closed interval at certain time moments, which
represents a contradiction with the requirement for these functions f0 and fl to
present null values at any time moment. By an intuitive approach, null external
sources would imply null values for functions f0 and fl and (as a consequence)
null values for the pulse amplitude φ.
Yet it can be easily shown that the problem of generating acausal pulses on
semi-closed intervals can not be rejected by using supplementary requirements
for certain functions f (t) deﬁned at one limit of such space intervals. Let us
simply suppose that instead of function
φ(τ ) =

1
exp ( (x−vt+1)
2 −1 ) for |x − vt + 1| < 1
0 for |x − vt + 1| ≥ 1

(3)

presented in previous paragraph we must take into consideration two functions
φ0 and φl deﬁned as
φ0 (τ ) =
and
φl (τ ) =

1
exp ( (x−vt+m)
2 −1 ) for |x − vt + 1| < 1
0 for |x − vt + m| ≥ 1

(4)

1
− exp ( (x+vt−m)
2 −1 ) for |x − vt + 1| < 1
0 for |x + vt − m| ≥ 1

(5)

with m selected as m > 0, mn − 1 > l (so as both functions φ0 and φl to have
non-zero values outside the real string and to be asymmetrical as related to
the point of space x = 0. While function φ0 corresponds to a direct wave (its
argument being (x − vt)) and φl corresponds to a reverse wave (its argument
being (x + vt)) it results that both functions φ0 and φl arrive at the same time
at the space origin x = 0, the sum of these two external pulses being null all
the time (functions φ0 and φl being asymmetrical, φ0 = −φl ). So by requiring
that φ(t) = 0 for x = 0 (the left limit of a semi-closed interval [0, l) ) we can
not reject the mathematical possibility of appearing an acausal pulse on a semiclosed interval.
This pulse is in fact a travelling wave propagating from x = −∞ towards
x = ∞ which vanishes at the point of space x = 0. Moreover, its derivatives
are also equal to zero at this point of space for certain time moments (when
both travelling pulses cease their action in the point of space x = 0). This pulse
is a solution of the wave-equation on the semi-closed interval [0, l), and can be
very useful for considering a transmission of interaction on ﬁnite space-intervals
(in our case the interaction being transmitted from x = l towards x = 0).
From this point of space, at the time moments when the amplitude and all
its derivatives are equal to zero the interaction can be further transmitted by
considering an informational connection; the mathematical form of the pulse is
changed, a new wave should be generated for the adjacent space interval and
a mathematical connection for transmitting further the interaction ( towards
x = −∞) is not possible while the pulse amplitude and all its derivatives vanish
at this time moments at the point of space x = 0. This aspect implies a step-by

Vanishing Waves on Semi-closed Space Intervals and Applications

1049

step transmission of interaction starting from an initial semi-closed interval (its
open limit corresponding to the source of the ﬁeldd, for example) to other space
intervals. This corresponds to a granular aspect of space suitable for applications
in quantum physics, where the generation and annihilation of quantum particles
should be considered on limited space-time intervals. For this purpose, speciﬁc
computer algorithms and memory cells corresponding to each space interval
should be used. The informational connection from one space interval to another
should be represented by computer operations of data initialization.

3

Aspects Connected with Spherical Waves

A possible mathematical explanation for this aspect consists in the fact that we
have used a reverse wave (an acausal pulse) propagating from x = ∞ towards
x = −∞, which is ﬁrst received at the right limit x = l of the semi-closed interval
[0, l) before arriving at the point of space x = 0. It can be argued that in case
of a closed space interval [0, l] we should consider the complete mathematical
problem, consisting of two functions f0 (t), fl (t) corresponding to both limits of
the working space intervals (the points of space x = 0 and x = l. But in fact the
wave equation corresponds to a physical model valid in the three-dimensional
space, under the form
1 ∂2φ
∂2φ ∂2φ ∂2φ
+ 2 + 2 − 2 2 =0
2
∂x
∂y
∂z
v ∂t

(6)

and the one-dimensional model previously used is just an approximation. Moreover, the source of the ﬁeld is considered at a microscopic scale (quantum particles like electrons for the case of the electromagnetic ﬁeld, for example) and
the emitted ﬁeld for such elementary particles presents a spherical symmetry.
Transforming the previous equation in polar coordinates and supposing that the
function φ depends only on r (the distance from the source of the ﬁeld to the
point of space where this emitted ﬁeld is received), it results
∂2U
1 ∂2U
− 2 2 =0
2
∂r
v ∂t

(7)

U = rϕ

(8)

where
An analysis of the ﬁeld emitted from the space origim towards a point of space
r = r0 (where the ﬁeld is received) should be performed on the space interval
(0, r] (a semi-closed interval); the point of space r = 0 can not be included in the
working interval as long as the solution φ(r) for the ﬁeld is obtained by dividing
the solution U (r) of the previous equation (in spherical coordinates) through
r (the denominator of the solution φ being zero, some supplementary aspects
connected to the limit of functions should be added, but still without considering
a solution for the space origin).

1050

G. Toma

Thus an asymmetry in the required methods for analyzing phenomena appears. In a logical manner, by taking also into consideration the free-term (corresponding to the source of the ﬁeld) situated in the point of space x = 0 (the
origin) it results that the use of function depending on x − vt (mentioned in the
previous paragraph) or r − vt (for the spherical waves) represents also a limit
for the case of a sequence of small interactions acting as external source (freeterm)- changes in the value of partial derivatives as related to space coordinates
- changes in the partial derivatives of the amplitude as related to time - changes
in the value of the function, so as the possibility of appearing acausal pulses
(not yet observed) to be rejected. Such a causal chain can be represented in a
mathematical form as a diﬀerential equation able to generate functions similar
to test functions, deﬁned as practical test functions only as an approximation at
a greater scale of space-time for the case when the length and time intervals corresponding to such equations with ﬁnite diﬀerences are very small. Moreover, a
certain direction for the transmission of interaction appearing, it results that the
possibility of reverse radiation (a reverse wave generated by points of space where
a direct wave has arrived) should be rejected in a logical manner (a memory of
previous phenomena determining the direction of propagation). Mathematically,
an analysis at a small spatial and temporal scale based on continuous functions for transmitting interactions from one point of space to another (similar to
continuous wave function in quantum physics describing the generation and annihilation of elementary particles) should be described by non-Markov processes
(phenomena which should be analyzed by taking into account the evolution in
a past time interval).

4

Applications at Relativistic Transformation of Waves

An application of such non-Markov processes should be the analysis of Lorentz
transformation in special relativity, when a certain wave-train interacts with
the observer’s material medium. The usual interpretation of special relativity
theory considers that the Lorentz formulae describe the transformation of the
space-time coordinates corresponding to an event when the inertial reference
system is changed. These formulae are considered to be valid at any moment
of time after a certain synchronization moment (the zero moment) irrespective
to the measuring method used. However, there are some problems connected to
the use of mechanical measurements on closed-loop trajectories with analysis
performed on adjoined small time intervals. For example, if we consider that
at the zero moment of time, in a medium with a gravitational ﬁeld which can
be neglected, two observers are beginning a movement from the same point of
space, in opposite directions, on circular trajectories having a very great radius
of curvature, so as to meet again after a certain time interval, we can consider
the end of each small time interval as a resynchronization moment and it results
that time dilation appears on each small time interval. Yet if we consider that
the time intervals measured after a resynchronization procedure can be added to
the previously measured time intervals (the result being considered as related to

Vanishing Waves on Semi-closed Space Intervals and Applications

1051

the initial time moment) a global time dilation appears. If the time is measured
using the age of two plates, it results that the plate in a reference system S2 is
older than the other in reference system S1 , (having a less mechanical resistance)
and it can be destroyed by it after both observers stop their circular movements.
However, the same analysis can be made by starting from another set of small
time intervals considered in the other reference system, and ﬁnally results that
the plate in reference system S1 is older than the other in reference system S2 ,
(having a less mechanical resistance) and it can be destroyed by it after both
observers stop their circular movements. But this result is in logic contradiction
with the previous conclusion, because a plate can not destroy and in the same
time be destroyed by another one.
A logical attempt for solving this contradiction can be made by considering
that Lorentz formulae are valid only for electromagnetic phenomena (as in the
case of the transversal Doppler eﬀect) and not in case of mechanical phenomena or any phenomena involving memory of previous measurements. Using an
intuitive approach which considers that the Lorentz transformation represents
physical transformation of a wave-train when this interacts with the observer’s
material medium, such logical contradiction can be avoided (see [5], [6] for more
details). Yet the memory of past events can not be totally neglected. The transformation of a received wave into another wave which moves along the same
direction, with certain mathematical expressions describing how space-time coordinates corresponding to the case when the received wave would have been not
aﬀected by interaction are transformed into space-time coordinates corresponding to the transformed wave train (according to the Lorentz formulae valid on
the space and time intervals corresponding to the received wave-train) requires a
certain memory for the received wave train necessary for performing the transformation (other way no local time dilation would appear). This aspects is similar
to the requirement of using non-Markov processes for justifying how a certain
direction of propagation for the generated wave appears.

5

Conclusions

This study has shown that some solutions of the wave equation for semi-closed
space interval considered around the point of space where the sources of the generated ﬁeld are situated (for example, the case of electrical charges generating
the electromagnetic ﬁeld) can be mathematically represented by vanishing waves
corresponding to a superposition of travelling test functions. It is also shown that
this aspect requires the logical existence of a certain causal chain for transmitting
interaction from one point of space to another. As an important consequence, by
a multiscale analysis and the use of non-Markov systems, certain directions for
propagating the generated wave appeared and the possibility of reverse radiation
was rejected. Speciﬁc applications for other phenomena involving wave generation (as the Lorentz formulae describing the generation of a wave with diﬀerent
features after the interaction with the observer’s material medium) have been
also presented. Unlike other mathematical problems (Cauchy problem) based on

1052

G. Toma

long-range dependence (see also [7], where statistical aspects are also taken into
consideration), this study presents aspects connected to short-range interactions.
Asymptotic properties are taken into account for the mathematical problem for
functions having the limit ∞ (null denominator at the limit of the working semiclosed interval) instead of an approach based on relaxation phenomena, as in [8].
In future studies, such aspects will be extended to mathematical models describing step changes in a certain environment (similar to aspects presented in [9],
[10] with step changes presented in [11]. The aspects presented in this study can
be extended at closed space intervals, by considering that at the initial moment
of time, at one of the spatial limits of the interval arrives a direct wave and a
reverse wave (asymmetrical as related to this point of space) represented both
by sequences of extended Dirac pulses having the same spacelemgth d = L/k (k
being an integer and L being the length of the whole interval). As a consequence,
after a certain time interval, a set of oscillations represented by stationary waves
with null derivatives of certain orders at both spatial limits will apeear.
Acknowledgment. This work was supported by the National Commission of
Romania for UNESCO, through a pilot grant of international research involving Politehnica University, Salerno University, IBM India Labs and Shanghai
University.

References
1. Toma, C. : Acausal pulses in physics-numerical simulations, Bulgarian Journal of
Physics (to appear)
2. Morgado, J. M., Gomes, D.J. : A derivative - free tracking algorithm for implicit
curves with singularities, Lecture Notes in Computer Science 3039 (2004) 221–229
3. Federl, P., Prudinkiewiez, P. : Solving diﬀerential equations in developmental models of multicellular structures using L-systems, Lecture Notes in Computer Science
3037 (2004) 65–82
4. Toma, C.: The possibility of appearing acausal pulses as solutions of the wave
equation, The Hyperion Scientiﬁc Journal 4 1 (2004), 25–28
5. Toma, C.: A connection between special relativity and quantum theory based on
non-commutative properties and system - wave interaction, Balkan Physics Letters
Supplement 5 (1997), 2509–2513
6. Toma, C.: The advantages of presenting special relativity using modern concepts,
Balkan Physics Letters Supplement 5 (1997), 2334–2337
7. Li, M., Lim, S.C.: Modelling Network Traﬃc Using Cauchy Correlation Model with
Long-Range Dependence, Modern Physics Letters,B 19 (2005), 829–840
8. Lim, S.C., Li, M. : Generalized Cauchy Process and Its Application to Relaxation
Phenomena, Journal of Physics A Mathematical and General 39 (2004), 2935–2951
9. Lide, F., Jinhai, L., Suosheng C.: Application of VBA in HP3470A Data Acquisition
System, Journal of Instrunebtation and Measurements 8 (2005), 377–379
10. Lide, F., Wanling, Z., Jinha, L., Amin, J.: A New Intelligent Dynamic Heat Meter,
IEEE Proceedings of ISDA 2006 Conference, 187–191
11. Xiaoting, L., Lide, F.: Study on Dynamic Heat Measurement Method after Step
Change of System Flux, IEEE Proceedings of ISDA 2006 Conference, 192–197

