Modeling Inlay/Onlay Prostheses with Mesh
Deformation Techniques
Kwan-Hee Yoo1, Jong-Sung Ha2, and Jae-Soo Yoo3
1

Dept. of Computer Education, Chungbuk National University, Korea
khyoo@chungbuk.ac.kr
2
Dept. of Game and Contents, Woosuk University, Korea
jsha@woosuk.ac.kr
3
School of EECE, Chungbuk National University, Korea
yjs@chungbuk.ac.kr

Abstract. This paper presents a method for effectively modeling the outer
surfaces of inlay/onlay prostheses restoring teeth that are partially destroyed.
We exploit 3D mesh deformation techniques: direct manipulation free-form
deformation (DMFFD) [9] and multiple wires deformation (MWD) [10] with
three kinds of information: standard teeth models, scanned mesh data from the
plaster cast of a patient's tooth, functionally guided plane (FGP) measuring the
occlusion of the patients' teeth. Our implementation can design inlay/onlay
prostheses by setting up various parameters required in dentistry during
visualizing the generated mesh models.
Keywords: Prostheses modeling, inlay/onlay, mesh deformation.

1 Introduction
Many artificial teeth prostheses are composed of cores and crowns [1]: the cores
directly contact the abutment to increase the adhesive strength to the crowns that are
revealed to the outside sight when the artificial teeth prostheses are put in.
Inlay/onlays can be regarded as a kind of single crowns, which are used for
reconstructing only one tooth that are partially destroyed. In general, a tooth adjoins
with adjacent teeth and also contacts other teeth at the opposite side when the upper
and lower jaws occlude. The adjoining surfaces at the adjacent side are said to be
adjacent surfaces, and the contact surfaces at the opposite side during the occlusion
are called occlusal surfaces. The inlay is a prosthesis fabricated when little dental
caries or established prostheses are on the two surfaces, while the onlay is a prosthesis
fabricated when its cusp in tongue side exists soundly but other parts are destroyed.
In modeling inlay/onlays with CAD/CAM and computer graphics techniques, the
most important subject is how to model their 3D shapes same as the dentists want to
form. That is, the adhesive strength to the abutment must be maximized. Furthermore,
the appropriate adjacency with neighboring teeth and the accurate occlusal strength to
the opposite tooth has to be guaranteed. Previous researches for modeling
inlay/onlays can be divided to two categories: 2D image-based [2-5] and 3D meshbased [6,7].
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part II, LNCS 4488, pp. 154–157, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Modeling Inlay/Onlay Prostheses with Mesh Deformation Techniques

155

Our method adopts the mesh-based modeling approach similarly to the GN-1
system [7]. In this paper, however, differently to taking a side view of 3D scanners for
producing mesh models in the GN-1 system, an inlay/onlay is modeled by dividing its
surface into two parts: an inner surface adhering to the abutment and an outer surface
revealed to the outside sight. The inner surfaces of inlay/onlays are modeled same as
the results of Yoo et al. [8] with the 2D Minkowski sum: compute a new model that is
the expansion of a terrain model with expansion values given by users. This paper
focuses on modeling the outer surface, which is just the union of two subparts: the
adjacent and occlusal surfaces, by deforming the corresponding standard tooth
according to the inherent features of each tooth.

2 Modeling the Outer Surfaces of Inlay/Onlays
The standard teeth models include the information of axes and geometric features for all
teeth in the upper and lower laws. First, the standard teeth are transformed and aligned
to the patient’s teeth by referencing the arrangement information of the former such as
adjacent points, tongue side points, lingual side points, and the positional information of
the latter. And then, adjacent surfaces are generated with the technique of direct
manipulation free-form deformation (DMFFD) [9] to a standard tooth by considering
the contact points. On the other hand, occlusal surfaces are generated by applying the
technique of multiple wires deformation (MWD) [10] to the two corresponding
polygonal lines that are, respectively, extracted from a standard tooth and FGP.
The DMFFD [9] is an extended version of free form deformation (FFD) [11],
which directly controls the points on the mesh for the deformation. For an arbitrary
point X and a set P of control points, they define the deformation equation as the
following matrix form X = BP . Here the matrix B is obtained by the B-spline
blending function with the three parametric values that are determined from the
given X . Then, the transformed point X ' is represented as B( P + ΔP) , that is,
ΔX = BΔP . For moving a given point X in the amount of ΔX , the amount ΔP for
moving control points can be inversely computed as.
ΔP = B + X .

(1)

In the above equation, the B + is a pseudo inverse of the matrix B . If we apply FFD
to X with the computed ΔP , X is transformed into X ' . Hence, it is possible to
deform a mesh intentionally, if we apply FFD to all vertices of the mesh after
computing ΔP for each vertex with the same method.
The deformation technique of multiple wires deformation (MWD) [10] is used for
more naturally deforming the wired curves representing geometric features of cusp,
ridge, fissure, and pit, which are extracted after scanning the FGP. A wired curve is
represented as a tuple < W , R, s, r , f > , where W and R are the free-form parametric
curves that are the same in an initial state, s is a scalar for adjusting the radial size in
the curve circumference, r is a value representing the range effecting the curve
circumference, and f is a scalar function defined as f : R + → [0,1] . The function f
guarantees the C1-continuity at least, and satisfies the properties of
1
f (0) = 1, f ( x) = 0 for x ≥ 1 and f ' (1) = 0 . Our implementation uses the C -continuous

156

K.-H. Yoo, J.-S. Ha, and J.-S. Yoo

function f ( x) = ( x 2 − 1) 2 , x ∈ [0,1] as in [10]. As R is deformed into W , an arbitrary
point p on R will be deformed accordingly. Let p R be the point nearest to R , and
pW be the corresponding point in W . Then, p R and pW have the same curve
parametric value. When W is deformed, the point p moves to p ' as.
p ' = p + ( pW − p R ) f ( x ) .

(2)

In Equation (2), f ( x) is a function with three parameters R , p , and r , where r
represents a range. Generally, we define x =

p − pR
r

. We can move the point p to

p ' by deforming W with an expansion parameter s for changing the wire size.

p ' = p + ( s − 1)( p − p R ) f ( x) + ( pW − p R ) f ( x) .

(3)

Definitely, the above equation has the property that the expansion parameter s
moves the point p in the direction p − p R . This principle of wire deformation is
extended for deforming the multiple wires. Let Δpi be the variation value of p when
the wire Wi is deformed. Then, the deformed point p ' in deforming all wires
Wi , i = 1,", n is written as.
n

p' = p +

∑ Δpi f i ( x) m
i =1

n

∑
i =1

.

(4)

f i ( x) m

The parameter m is used for locally controlling the shapes of the multiple wires, i.e.,
it controls the effects of Wi and si during the deformation. For example, the effects
of Wi and si rapidly increase according to the increasing value of m when f i (x)
approaches to 1.
In modeling the occlusal surfaces, Ri is the curve interpolating all points of the the
geometric features lines of cusp, ridge, fissure, and pit. The wired curve Wi
corresponding to Ri is determined by more complicated computations; for each
segment Li of the polygonal lines, we compute the intersection line segment Li '
between FGP and a z-axis parallel plane passing Li , cut Li ' so that it has the same xand y- coordinates with the end points of Li , and finally obtain a curve interpolating
all points of the cut line segments. Since the two curves interpolates the same number
of points, we can get the parametric value of the curves for any point on Wi . In our
implementation, we use the Catmull-Rom curve for the interpolating curves, and the
one suggested by Singh et al. [10] for the function f . Our implementation assigns the
values 1, 5, and 1 to si , ri and m , respectively. For the all of points p on the
standard tooth, W , and R , we compute pR and pW and then obtain Δpi with
Equation (4). By applying Equation (5) to Δpi of all wired curves and f , we can get
the finally deformed point q' .

Modeling Inlay/Onlay Prostheses with Mesh Deformation Techniques

157

3 Experiments and Future Works
Our system for modeling inlay/onlays is implemented in the environments of
Microsoft Foundation Class (MFC) 6.0 and OpenGL graphics library on PC. Fig. 1
illustrates the designed outer surface for an onlay.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 1. Designing the outer surface for an onlay; (a) a standard tooth model, (b) a scanned FGP
model, (c) a finally designed onlay, and (d) an onlay put in on the abutment

For more accurate modeling, several parameters can be set up through a simple
interface as the designed inlay/onlays are visualized. Currently, our implementation
gets the adjacent points manually for designing the adjacent surfaces of inlay/onlays.
In future, an automatic method for determining such adjacent points is needed to be
developed. It is another research subject to simulate the teeth occlusion by using the
FGP and the geometric features of teeth.
Acknowledgements. This work was partially supported by the Korea Research
Foundation Grant funded by the Korean Government (MOEHRD) (KRF-2006D00413).

References
1. Yoon, C.G., Kang, D.W., Chung, S.M.: State-of-arts in Fixed Prosthodontics, Jongii Press,
Korea (1999)
2. Myszkowski, K., Savchenko, V.V., Kunii, T.L.: Computer modeling for the occlusal
surface of teeth, Proc. of Conf. on Computer Graphics International (1996)
3. Savchenko, V.V., Schmitt, L.M.: Reconstructing occlusal surfaces of teeth using a genetic
algorithm with simulated annealing type selection, Proc. of Solid Modeling (2001) 39-46
4. Yoo, K.Y., Ha, J.S.: User-Steered Methods for Extracting of Geometric Features in 3D
Meshes, Computer-Aided Design and Applications, Vol. 2 (2005)
5. Sirona Corporation, http://www.sirona.com (1985)
6. Nobel Digital Process Corporation, Procera Systems, Nobel Digital Process Corporation,
Sweden (2001)
7. GC Corporation, GN-I Systems, GC Corporation, Japan (2001)
8. Yoo, K.Y., Ha, J.S.: An Effective Modeling of Single Cores prostheses using Geometric
Techniques, Journal of Computer-Aided Design, Vol. 37, No. 1 (2005)
9. Hsu, W.M., Hughes, J.F., Kaufman, H.: Direct manipulation of free-form deformations, In
Computer Graphics (SIGGRAPH '92), Vol. 26 (1992) 177-184
10. Singh, K., Fiume, E.: Wires: A Geometric Deformation Techniques, SIGGRAPH (1998)
11. Sederberg, T., Parry, S.: Free-form deformation of solid geometric models, In Computer
Graphics (SIGGRAPH’86) (1986) 151-160

