Traffic Routing Through Off-Line LSP Creation
Srecko Krile and Djuro Kuzumilovic
University of Dubrovnik, Department of Electrical Engineering
and Computing, Cira Carica 4, 20000 Dubrovnik, Croatia
srecko.krile@unidu.hr

Abstract. In the context of dynamic bandwidth allocation the QoS path
provisioning for coexisted and aggregated traffic could be very important
element of resource management. As we know all traffic in DiffServ/MPLS
network is distributed among LSPs (Label Switching Path). Packets are
classified in FEC (Forwarding Equivalence Class) and can be routed in relation
to CoS (Class of Service). In the process of resource management we are
looking for optimal LSP, taking care of concurrent flows traversing the network
simultaneously. For better load-balancing purposes and congestion avoidance
the LSP creation can be done off-line, possible during negotiation process. The
main difference from well known routing techniques is that optimal LSP need
not to be necessarily the shortest path solution as it is in the case of typical online routing (e.g. with OSPF protocol).
Keywords: on-demand resource allocation, dynamical bandwidth management,
end-to-end QoS routing, SLA in DiffServ/MPLS networks.

1 Introduction
Using dynamic service negotiation approach for SLA (Service Level Agreement) the
problem of QoS path provisioning has to be in firm correlation with bandwidth
management; see [1]. Aggregated flow consisted of numerous LSPs (Label Switching
Path) is coming to LSR (Label Switched Router) and has to be routed to egress router.
All traffic, traversing simultaneously a DiffServ/MPLS domain, is distributed among
LSPs as the resultant of the routing protocol. Some of LSPs generally traverse
through the same path across the network, so they coexist on the same link with
congestion probability; see [2]. In that sense the network operator has to find the
optimal LSP for each aggregated flow without any possible congestion in the
network; see [6]. In the context of on-demand resource allocation the load balancing
technique is necessary. The main condition is: the sufficient network resources must
be available for the priority traffic at any moment. In this paper such off-line routing
technique is proposed. Proposed heuristic algorithm helps in bottleneck detection on
the path and maintains high network resource utilization efficiency.
A brief explanation: During SLA negotiation the RM (Resource Manager) module
can apply any shortest path-based routing algorithm (e.g. OSPF - Open Shortest Path
First) to generate the initial LSP. At the next step all simultaneous flows caused by
former contracted SLAs have to be taken in calculation, too (correlation with other
LSPs); see [4]. The BB (Bandwidth Broker) will therefore check if there are enough
resources to satisfy the requested CoS in the specified path. With such congestion
control/expansion algorithm the RM can predict sufficient link resources to satisfy all
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part I, LNCS 4487, pp. 628–631, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Traffic Routing Through Off-Line LSP Creation

629

traffic demands. If the optimal routing sequence has any congested link, that link has
to be eliminated from initial LSP and procedure starts again. Alternatively, adding
capacity arrangement (short-term) can produce extra cost [6]. If the calculation finds
the path without congestions on the path, new SLA can be accepted and related LSP
is stored in database of BB. In the moment of service invocation stored LSP can be
easily distributed from BB to the MPLS network to support explicit connection [5]. In
opposite the SLA cannot be accepted or it must be re-negotiated.
The proposed routing technique can be seen as the capacity expansion problem
(CEP) without shortages. The mathematical model explanation is given in the section
2. Heuristic algorithm development and testing results are discussed in the section 3.

2 CEP for Load Balancing Purpose
The routing problem explained above can be seen as the capacity expansion problem
(CEP) without shortages and it can be formulated as Minimum Cost MultiCommodity Flow Problem (MCMCF). Such problem (NP-complete) can be easily
represented by multi-commodity the single (common) source multiple destination
network. The diagram on fig. 1. shows the network flow representation of such
problem with multiple QoS levels. Links connect M core routers (LSR) on the path.
Transmission link capacities on the path are capable to serve traffic demands for N
different QoS levels (service classes). The N levels are ranked from i = 1, 2,..., N,
from higher to lover quality level. Order number of the link is denoted with m, m = 1,
…., M+1. ri,m denotes traffic demand increment for additional capacity for each link
on the path. Ii,m represents the relative amount of idle capacity on the link; Ii1 = 0,
Ii,M+1 = 0. xi,m represents the amount of used capacity and yi,j,m the amount of capacity
for quality level i on the link m redirected to satisfy the lower quality level j.
O
R 1,N

I 1,1 =0

I 1,3

I 1,2
1,1

(service classes)

r 2,1

I N ,1 =0

r 2,2
Y 2,N ,1
1, 1 ,2,

N,1
r N ,1

Y 1,N ,1
1,1 ,

I N ,2

Y 1,2,M

I 2,3

. . .I

2,2

.
.
.

I 2,M +1 = 0

2,M

2,M
r 2,M

Y 2,N,2
2,

N ,2

y 1N ,2

I N ,3

...

r N ,2

link 1
ingress router

r 1,M
Y 1,1,2

I 2,2

2,1

.
.
.

I 1,M +1 = 0
1,M

r 1,2
Y 1,2,1

Q oS levels

I 1,M

...

1,2

r 1,1

I 2,1 =0

X 1,M

X 1,2

X 1,1

.
.
.

Y 2,N ,M

I N ,M

y 1N ,M

I N ,M +1 = 0
N ,M

r N ,M

link 2

...

interior routers on the path

link M +1
egress router

Fig. 1. The network flow representation of the CEP with application for congestion control

Let G (A, E) denote a network topology, where E is the set of nodes, representing
link capacity states and A, the set of arcs representing traffic flows between routers. In
this paper we talk about one-dimensional link weight vectors for M+1 links on the

630

S. Krile and D. Kuzumilovic

path {wi,m, m ∈ A, i = 1, …, N} with only one constraint, the capacity bounds, denoted
with Li,m (L1,m L2,m, … LN,m). For a non-additive measure (e.g. bandwidth) definition of
the single-constrained problem is to find a path from ingress to egress node with
minimum link weight along the path. The flow situation on the link depends of
expansion and conversion values (xi,m , yi,j,m). It means that the link weight (cost) is the
function of used capacity: lower amount of used capacity gives lower weight. If the
link expansion cost corresponds to the amount of used capacity, the objective is to
find optimal routing policy that minimizes the total cost on the path. Generalizing the
concept of the capacity states we can define a capacity point:

αm = (I1,m, I2,m, ... , IN,m)

(1)

α1 = αM+1 = (0, 0, ... , 0)

(2)

Each column on the flow diagram (fig. 1.) represents a capacity point, consisting of N
capacity state values for each. i-th QoS level. Each link capacity is capable to serve
different service classes. The capacity class labeled with i is primarily used to serve
demands of that service class but it can be used to satisfy traffic of lower QoS level j
(j > i). Formulation (2) implies that idle capacities or capacity shortages are not
allowed on the link between edge and interior router.
The network optimization can be divided in two steps. In the first step we are
calculating the minimal expansion weights between all pairs of capacity points. The
calculation of each weight value we call it: capacity expansion sub-problem (CES).
Let Cm be the number of capacity point values at router position m. The total
number of all sub-problem is:
M
⎡ M +1 ⎤
N d = ∑ Ci ⋅ ⎢ ∑ C j ⎥
i =1
⎣ j =i+1 ⎦

(3)

In the CEP we have to find many cost values du,v(αu, αv+1) that emanate two capacity
points, from each node (u, αu) to node (v+1, αv+1) for v ≥ u. It is very important to
reduce that number; see [3]. In the second step of network optimization we are
looking for the shortest path in acyclic network with former calculated weights
between node pairs (capacity points). It has to be noted that the optimal routing
sequence for traffic (caused by new SLA) need not to be the shortest path solution.

3 Heuristic Approach and Results
The optimal flow theory enables separation of such extreme flows that cannot be a
part of an optimal expansion solution from those which can be. So, many of
expansion solutions are not acceptable. It can be shown that a feasible flow in the
network (given in fig. 1.) corresponds to an extreme point solution only if it is not the
part of any cycle (loop) with positive flows. This result holds for all single source
networks. With such heuristic approach (denoted with BasicH) the near-optimal result
is possible but significant computational savings appear, on average over than 50 %.
In real situation we can introduce some limitations on capacity state values,
talking about different heuristic options: a) the total capacity of a capacity point can
be negative but in acceptable limits (adding capacity from network provider). That

Traffic Routing Through Off-Line LSP Creation

631

option is denoted with AH. b) The capacity state value inside of a capacity point can
be negative, but the total sum of the link capacity is positive (denoted with RH). c)
Only no-negative capacity values are allowed (denoted with PH). d) Only null
capacity values are allowed (TH - Trivial Heuristic option).
The heuristic algorithm with above mentioned options was tested in relation to
efficiency of algorithm with exact approach. The basic heuristic approach (BasicH)
requires effort of O(M3N4Ri2(N-1)). For other heuristic options the complexity is
significantly reduced (see fig. 2) but in all cases it is much over than O(M3N2), that is
the complexity for a trivial heuristic solution (TH). For only few test-examples all
algorithm options found the best expansion sequence, providing the minimal cost no
matter of which heuristic approach is used. Only in the trivial heuristic option the
significant deterioration of the best result is present.
The proposed heuristic algorithm with different options can be efficiently applied in
off-line routing and on-demand resource allocation, helping us in congestion avoidance
and load-balancing purpose. After the starting LSP is defined (e.g. with shortest pathbased algorithm) we can check congestion probabilities on each link on the path. We
can start with the algorithm of low complexity (TH or PH option). If the congestion
appears we can apply more complex algorithm (RH, AH or BasicH). If the congestion
still exists the adding capacity is necessary or the SLA negotiation has to be continued.

Fig. 2. Trend of the complexity changes for each heuristic option and the average value of the
result deterioration

References
1. Sarangan, V., J.-C. Chen: Comparative Study of Protocols for Dynamic Service Negotiation in
the Next-Generation Internet, IEEE Comm. Mag.,Vol.44, No.3 (2006) 151-156
2. Haddadou and all: Designing Scalable On-Demand Policy-Based Resource Allocation in IP
Networks, IEEE Comm. Mag., Vol.44, No.3, (2006) 142-149
3. Krile, S., Kuzumilovic, D.: The Application of Bandwidth Optimization Technique in SLA
Negotiation Process, Proc. of 11th CAMAD, Trento, (2006) 115-121
4. Bhatnagar, S.; Ganguly, S.; Nath, B.: Creating Multipoint-to-Point LSPs for Traffic
Engineering, IEEE Comm. Mag., Vol.43., No.1, (2005) 95-100
5. Yu Cheng and all: Virtual Network Approach to Scalable IP Service Deployment and
Efficient Resource Management, IEEE Comm. Mag., Vol.43, No. 10, (2005) 76-84
6. Anjali, T., Scoglio, C., de Oliveira, J.C.: New MPLS Network Management TechniquesBased
on Adaptive Learning, Trans. on Neural Networks, Vol.16, No.5, (2005) 1242 - 1255

