Learning Assessment Model in Web-Learning Based on
Rough Set
Yan Li1 and Chen Yang2
1

School of Physics & Information Engineering, Jianghan University, Wuhan 430056,
P.R. China
junlzeng@126.com
2
Engineering Research Center for Information Technology on Education, Center China
Normal University, Wuhan 430079, P.R. China
ly_lj1975@sina.com

Abstract. Assessment is a powerful technique for improving Web-Learning
achievement. In this paper we outline a learning assessment model to
assessment learning effect for improving learning efficiency. This learning
assessment model is based on the rough set theory. In Web-Learning process,
learners' data are collected. And, the model used attribute reduction to reduce
many factors that in the learning process. It found the key factors which affect
the learning effect. Then, the association rules among factors have been
concluded. Finally, this learning assessment model is experimented at Jianghan
University.
Keywords: Learning Procedure Assessment; Rough Set; Attribute Reduction.

1 Introduction
Learning assessment is a powerful technique for learners to improving Web-Learning
achievement. There are some methods for assessment, such as fuzzy and probability,
which need accessional information. Moreover, this is difficult to get such accessional
information. So, we find rough set is a better method for learning assessment. This
paper constructed a learning assessment model based on rough set. The learning
assessment model used rough set to assess Web-Learning. The reason is that rough set
doesn't need any accessional information. It directly discovers connotative knowledge
[1]. We used rough set to analyze every learner's learning characteristics in the
process of Web-Learning. It had reduced many factors in the learning process. And it
found the key factors which affect the learning effect. Then it concluded the
association rules between factors. Finally, the paper evaluated the learners' learning
process using the rule according to the learning assessment model. Therefore, learners
could get personal learning assessment and improve his or her learning efficiency.

2 Learning Assessment Framework
2.1 Knowledge Express
Learning assessment is not only to assess the learning result, but also to assess all the
influential factors in learning process. These factors which affect the learning effect
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part III, LNCS 4489, pp. 603–606, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

604

Y. Li and C. Yang

can be divided into subjective factors and objective factors. This system mainly assess
the learning process from the factors: learning background, learning time, learning
content, learning difficulty, teaching pattern, presentation style. Followings are the
concrete description.
The learning assessment model uses decision table S=(U, C {d}, V, f ) to
represent the knowledge system. U={x1, x2, x3, …, xm} is composed by learning
process. xi (1≤i≤m) is the learning process of knowledge point i. C={C1 , C2 , C3 , C4 ,
C5 , C6} is the condition attribute set. It is corresponding to {learning background,
presentation style, learning content, learning difficulty, teaching pattern, learning
time}. d is the decision attribute, which represents the learning effect degree. In V, the
value range of each condition attribute is defined as the followings: learning
background C1={1, 2, 3}={excellent, generic, poor} reflects learner’s learning status;
presentation style C2={1, 2, 3}={video, text, animation}; learning content C3={1, 2,
3}={concept, rule, advanced rule}; learning difficulty C4={1, 2, 3}={easy, mezzo,
difficult}; teaching pattern C5={1, 2, 3}={prelection pattern, drilling pattern,
exploring pattern}; learning time C6={1, 2, 3}={long, mezzo, short}; learning effect
D={1, 2, 3}={ excellent, generic, poor}.

∪

2.2 Learning Assessment Model
Learning assessment model is information module, data pretreatment module,
decision table, attribute reduction, rule reduction and learning assessment. Figure 1
gives the flow structure.

Collection Information

Pretreament Data

Produce Decision Table

Attribute Reduction

Rule Reduction

Learner
Learning Progress

Learning Characteristics

Attribute Characteristic

Assessment Result

Rule Match

Rule Base

Assessment Decision Rule

Fig. 1. Flow Structure of Learning Assessment Model

Information module mainly collects learning characteristic data, such as learning
path, learning content and so on. Data pretreatment module deals with documents or
other data from database. It eliminates redundant information. According to the value
range of attribute, it converts consecutive and semantic data to characteristic value.
Then initialization decision table. Attribute reduction is to avoid irrelevant or weak
relevant attribute. And it gets the key factor which affects the learning result. Now,
there are many attribute reduction methods, such as partition matrix, extendibility
principle[2]. This model uses the heuristic arithmetic based on partition matrix. That
makes core as start. Attribute frequency p(ck) stands the heuristic formula to reduce
condition attribute. p(ck) is the times of ck in T. Figure 2 is the arithmetic flow.

Learning Assessment Model in Web-Learning Based on Rough Set

Input Initialization
Decision Table S;
Attribute Set
C→CR

Unite element In
Decision Table S

Calculate Partition
Matrix T(S)

605

Calculate Core of
T(S) and add It to
Attribute Set H

R=H

P(cq)=max{P(ck)};
R=RU{cq}

Make Partition Item
as Φ;
CR=CR-R

Calculate
Attribute s
Frequency P (ck) In
CR

’

No
Partition Item
are all Ф
Yes
Reduction Attribute
Set R

Fig. 2. Arithmetic Flow of Attribute Reduction

If there are several least attribute reduction set. The learning assessment model will
have a better standard to make the best attribute reduction set. The standard is from
difficult or easy degree of test and control. Condition attribute set R is the key factors
which affect learner’s efficiency. The condition attribute set R is one of the attribute
assessment indexes in the assessment model.
Decision rule reduction: attribute reduction reduces condition attribute, but it is not
necessary to each decision rule. Decision rule reduction uses decision making logic to
eliminate the needless reduction attribute. Then a high performance decision rule is
produced. These rules reflect the associated relation between learning characteristic
factor and learning efficiency. This module reduces decision rule according to
decision table of reduced attribute set and produces assured rules to form rule base.
Learning assessment: First it analyses attribute reduction set R to help WebLearning system decide teaching tactic and teach course. The influential degree of
every attribute index is confirmed by the concept of attribute importance in rough set.
Secondly, learning process is assessed on the basis of rules base. The concrete method
is to match between the characteristic factor and associated rules in rules base.
According to matched rule, learner’s learning process is evaluated. And learner can be
given his or her advantage and shortcoming. Learner may be told the appropriate
advice to get efficient learning. There are some situations in the rule match.
•
•
•
•

No matched rule
Only one matched rule
Many matched rules, and consistent conclusion
Many matched rules, but no consistent conclusion

If there is no matched rule, that is to say the knowledge is not enough to make a
believable assessment. If there is only one matched rule or consistent conclusion, it
shows that conclusion of matched rule is output firstly, then give corresponding
assessment according to importance of attribute. If there is no consistent conclusion, it

606

Y. Li and C. Yang

will have a synthetical assessment and select the best assessment rule. For example,
d1, d2, … dr are different assessment conclusions. And r1, r2, … rm are the decision
rules which support di. Then formula 1 is the assessment function of di.
V (d i ) = ∑ cov j / ∑ (cov j / con j )

(1)

In the above formula: covj =|Xi∩Yj|/|Yj| is the coverage of assessment rule
rj(1≤j≤m), and conj=|Xi∩Yj|/|Xi| is the confidence of assessment rule rj. The coverage
reflects the coverage degree in the equivalent decision class. The confidence reflects
the probability of the trueness conclusion based on this decision rule. According to
assessment function, v(d1), v(d2),…, v(dr) can be calculated. The biggest function
value is selected as the best assessment for learner’s learning.
This model was experimented on network teaching course of data structure in the
Electronic Information Department, we found this method is welcome.

3 Conclusion
This paper has set up a learning assessment model on the basis of rough set. The
model analyzes learning characteristics in the learning process. And the model finds
association rule among factors which affect the learning efficiency. Then the model
uses these rules to realize learning assessment. The model’s functions are as follow:
One is to clear the irrelevant or weak relevant attributes to get the key attributes. The
other is finding association rule between learning characteristics and learning
efficiency to get optimum teaching tactic and teaching pattern. At the end, assess the
learning behavior in learning process to help Web-Learning decide next teaching
activity. In the end, it improves teaching efficiency.

References
1. Pawlak, Z., Grzymalw-Busse, J., Slowinski, R., Ziarko, W.: Rough sets. Communications
of the ACM. 11 (1995) 89-95
2. Keyun Hu, Yuchang LU, Chunyi SHI: Advances in rough set theory and its applications.
Journal of Tsinghua University(Science and Technology). 1 (2001) 64-68
3. Greco, S., Matarazzo, B., Slowinski, R.: Rough sets methodology for sorting problems in
presence of multiple attributes and criteria. European Journal of Operational Research.138
(2002) 247-259
4. Rasmussen, K. L., Davidson, G.: Hypermedia and Learning Styles: Can Performance Be
Influenced. J of Education Multimedia and Hypermedia. 4 (1998) 291-308

