Dynamics Simulation of Conducting Polymer
Interchain Interaction Eﬀects on Polaron
Transition
Jos´e Rildo de Oliveira Queiroz and Geraldo Magela e Silva
Institute of Physics
University of Bras´ılia, 70.917-970,
Bras´ılia, Distrito Federal, Brazil
{magela,rildo}@fis.unb.br
http://www.fis.unb.br

Abstract. Eﬀects of interchain interaction on the polaron-bipolaron
transition on conjugated polymer are investigated. We use the Su-Schrieﬀer-Heeger model combined with the Pariser-Parr-Pople model modiﬁed to include interchain interaction, and an external electric ﬁeld. We
study the dynamics within the Time-Dependent Unrestricted HartreeFock approximation. We ﬁnd that removing an electron from interacting
conducting polymer chains bearing a single positively charged polaron
leads to the direct transition of polaron to bipolaron state. The transition which is produced is single-polaron to bipolaron transition whose
excitation spectrum explains the experimental data. We also ﬁnd that
depending on how fast the electron is removed, a structure that contains
a bipolaron coupled to a breather is created.
Keywords: Polaron, Dynamics, Interchain-Interaction, Transition.

1

Introduction

Properties of organic light-emitting diodes, transistors and lasers are due to
conjugated polymers.[1,2] Their semiconductor properties are related to the nonlinear electronic response of the coupled electron-lattice system.[3] These nondegenerate ground state π-electron materials are able to form, by the electronlattice interaction, self localized electron states called polaron and bipolaron.
Bipolarons and polarons are though to play the leading role in determining
the charge injection, optical and transport properties of conducting polymers.[4]
Bipolarons and polarons are self-localized particle-like defects associated with
characteristic distortions of the polymer backbone and with quantum states
deep in the energy gap due to strong electron-lattice coupling. A polaron has
a spin ±1/2 and an electric charge ±e, whereas a bipolaron is spinless with a
charge ±2e.
A critical problem in the understanding of these materials is the consistent
description of the dynamics of mechanism of creation, stability and transition of
polarons to bipolarons.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part II, LNCS 4488, pp. 304–311, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Dynamics Simulation of Conducting Polymer Interchain Interaction Eﬀects

305

UV-Vis-NIR spectroscopy studies on poly(p-phenylene vinylene) combined
to the follow-up of the kinetics of doping with iodine vapor were reported and
interpreted as direct observations of the formation of polaronic charge carriers.[1]
However, by following diﬀerent doping levels with I2 doping, bipolaron formation
is identiﬁed as well showing that polarons and bipolarons coexist in the oxidized
polymer. These results corroborate the ﬁndings of Steinm¨
uller et al[5] where the
evolution of the gap states of bithiophene as a model system for polythiophene for
diﬀerent n-doping levels was followed by ultraviolet photo-emission spectroscopy
(UPS) and electron-energy-loss spectroscopy (EELS).
The polaron-bipolaron transition problem was explicitly addressed by Cik et
al in poly(3-dodecyl thiophene) in connection with temperature changes.[6] They
found that when the sample was heated and subsequently cooled, there was an
ampliﬁcation of the diamagnetic inter- and intra-chain bipolarons. Kaufman et al
study of polypirrole[7] by optical-absorption spectroscopy and ESR also pointed
that the metastable states possess spin, while the stable states do not.
Many eﬀorts have been devoted to describe the polaron-bipolaron conundrum
theoretically. Electronic structure calculations,[8] extensions of the Su-SchrieﬀerHeeger model,[9,10] the Pariser-Parr-Pople model,[11] as well as combinations of
them[12] have been used to determine the relative prevalence of each excited state
in various regimes. Several diﬀerent approaches[9,12,13,14] point to bipolaron
system been more stable than the polaron system when dopants are taken into
account.
Two mechanisms have been put forward to explain the transition from polaron to bipolaron states. Polarons recombination into bipolaron,[6,7,15] where
the bipolaron is generated when polarons with the same electric charge meet
each other; and single-polaron to bipolaron transition,[1,13,16] where the polaron structure is transformed by the addition of one extra charge.
Here, we report the results of dynamical calculations on polaron-bipolaron
transition mechanism with interacting chains. We use the Su-Schrieﬀer-Heeger
model[17] modiﬁed to include the Coulomb interaction via extended Hubbard
model, Brazovskii-Kirova (BK) symmetry breaking terms, the action of an external electric ﬁeld, and interchain interactions.[12] The time-dependent equations
of motion for the lattice sites and the π-electrons are numerically integrated
within the Time-Dependent Hartree-Fock approximation.
Stafstr¨
om et al have used a similar approach to treat polaron migration between chains (ref. [20]). Nevertheless, they did not consider electron Coulomb
interaction and symmetry breaking terms. Furthermore, open end boundary conditions were used.
In agreement with UV-Vis-NIR spectroscopy,[1] UPS and EELS measurements,[5] our theoretical studies of the transition indicate that the single-polaron
to bipolaron transition is the preferred mechanism of polaron-bipolaron transition in conjugated polymers.
We ﬁnd that a breather mode of oscillation is created at the lattice in connection with the transition around the bipolaron. The breather amplitude is

306

J.R. de Oliveira Queiroz and G.M. e Silva

associated with how fast the extra charge is added to the system. Moreover, the
created bipolaron is trapped by the breather.

2

Model

A SSH-Extended Hubbard type Hamiltonian modiﬁed to include an external
electric ﬁeld and interchain interaction is considered. The Hamiltonian is given
by:
(1)
H = H1 + H2 + Hint
where,
(tji,i+1 Cj†i+1,s Cji,s + H.c)

Hj = −
i,s

+U
i

1
1
(nji↑ − )(nji↓ − )
2
2
(nji − 1)(nji+1 − 1)

+V
i

+
i

K 2
y +
2 ji

i

M 2
u˙ ,
2 ji

j = 1, 2

(2)

and
q

t⊥ (C1†i,s C2i,s + C2†i,s C1i,s )

Hint = −

(3)

i=p,s

Vp (C1†m,s C1m,s + C1†m+1,s C1m+1,s )

+

(4)

s
†
(Ci,s ) is the creation (annihilation) operator of a π electron with spin s at
Ci,s
†
the ith lattice site, ni,s ≡ Ci,s
Ci,s is the number operator, and ni = s ni,s .
yn ≡ un+1 − un , where un is the displacement of nth CH-group from equilibrium
position in the undimerized phase. tjn,n+1 = exp(−iγA)[(1 + (−1)nδ0 )t0 − αyjn ],
t0 is the transfer integral between the nearest neighbor sites in the undimerized
chains, t⊥ is the hopping integral between sites with the same index on diﬀerent
chains from p site to q site, α is the electron-phonon coupling, δ0 is the BK
symmetry-breaking parameter. M is the mass of a CH group, K is the spring
constant of a σ-bond, U and V the on-site and nearest-neighbor Coulomb repulsion strengths, respectively. γ ≡ ea/( c), e is the absolute value of the electronic
charge, a the lattice constant, and c the light velocity. The relation between the
time-dependent vector potential A and the uniform electric ﬁeld E is given by
˙ We use as parameters the commonly accepted values for conjugated
E = − 1c A.
˚−2 , α = 4.1eV A
˚−1 , U = 0 to
polymers: t0 = 2.5eV , t⊥ = 0.075eV , K = 21eV A
˚ δ0 = 0.05t0 , Vp = 0.2eV , and a bare optical phonon
1.8t0 , V = U/2, a = 1.22A,
energy ωQ =
4K/M = 0.16eV .[19]

Dynamics Simulation of Conducting Polymer Interchain Interaction Eﬀects

307

The dynamics of the lattice part is made with the Euler-Lagrange equations
and the Schr¨
odinger π-electrons equation of motion is solved within the unrestricted time-dependent Hartree-Fock approximation. It should be pointed out
that both equations depend explicitly on the occupation number of the oneparticle electronic states.[12]
In order to perform the dynamics, an initial self-consistent state is prepared
solving the equations of motion for the lattice and π-electrons simultaneously.[20]
Periodic boundary conditions are considered. The initial state is taken in equilibrium (E = 0). Therefore, we have u˙ n = 0 for all n in the initial state.
The equations of motion are solved by discretizing the time variable with a
step Δt. The time step Δt is chosen so that the change of ui (t) and A(t) during
this interval is always very small in the electronic scale.[12]

3

Simulation Results

One more hole is injected in polymer chains bearing already positively charged
polarons. Since charged excitations defects can be created by quite diﬀerent
means: photoexcitations, chemical doping or direct charge injection via electronic
device, we performed simulations where the extra electron is taken from the
system during diﬀerent time intervals (ΔT ). We varied ΔT from 0 to 100 fs. The
shorter time intervals simulate photoexcitations and the direct charge injection.
The longer time intervals account for the diﬀerent impurity addition procedures
associate with chemical doping. The electron is taken from the highest occupied
level using the following expression
OF (t) =

π(t − ti )
1
[1 + cos(
)]
2
ΔT

(5)

for t between ti and ti + ΔT . Here, ti is the time when the hole injection begins
and OF (t) is the occupation number of the Fermi level.
We have considered two polymeric interacting chains with N = 60 sites each,
containing initially two positively charged polaron in all simulations. We use a
mean charge density ρ¯i (t), derived from the charge density ρi (t), and the order
parameter y¯i (t) [yi (t) = ui+1 (t) − ui (t)] to analyze the simulations.[19] The
dynamics of the system is followed during 100,000 time steps spanning 400 fs.
A smooth transition of one of the polarons to a bipolaron, in its respective
chain, is obtained after the adiabatic removal (ΔT > 80 fs) of the third electron.
Figure 1 shows the time evolution of the energy levels neighboring and inside
the energy gap. It can be seen that the energy levels associated with the polaron
move in the middle-gap direction assuming a bipolaron conformation. The small
oscillation of the levels are due to lattice oscillations induced by the hole injection
perturbation.
Figure 2 presents bond length order parameter of chains 1 and 2. It should be
noted that we use periodic boundary conditions, therefore, the order parameter
of chain 1 (Fig. 2(a)) represents a polaron around site 1 (it begins at site 45,
it goes until site 60 and it continues from site 1 to site 15). Positively charged

308

J.R. de Oliveira Queiroz and G.M. e Silva
Energy Gap

1.5

Energy (eV)

0.5

−0.5

−1.5
0

100

200
Time (fs)

300

400

Fig. 1. Time evolution of energy levels inside and around the gap in an adiabatic
transition. The spin up levels are shown. The system changes from polaron levels (t <
80 fs) to bipolaron levels conﬁguration (t > 100 fs).

polarons repel each other. They stay apart from each other as far as possible.
The polaron-bipolaron transition occurs in chain 2. This clear transition happens in chain 2 as an apparent spontaneous symmetry breaking. Nevertheless,
the presence of an impurity on chain 2 leads to a symmetry breaking and the
association of one polaron to it. It is obtained that the polaron associated with
the impurity makes the transition to bipolaron.
Eﬀects of interchain interaction were addressed by varying the extent of the
interacting region (p and q in the Hamiltonian). For the transitions where two
chains interact only on half of their length (p=31 and q=60), one polaron stays
in the interacting region and the other stays in the non-interacting region due
again to Coulomb repulsion. It is obtained that the polaron-bipolaron transition
happens with the polaron in the interacting region. Therefore, the interchain
interaction is also eﬀective in promoting the transition.
Figure 3 presents a very special case where two polarons merge to create a
bipolaron. This case is quite the originally suggested process for the polaronbipolaron transition.[21] Here, after the hole injection, there appears an exciton lasting for about 200 f s and then the bipolaron takes place in the lattice.
Nevertheless, it should be noted that this happens when one chain has a high
density of polarons and the other one has initially none of them. It can be
clearly seen that two polarons in chain 1 merges to a single bipolaron and another polaron appears in chain 2 due to interchain interaction and Coulomb
repulsion.
The fast removal of the third electron (ΔT < 80 fs) leads to the appearance of
a breather oscillation mode in the lattice. This breather appears at the bipolaron
position. As a matter of fact, the bipolaron is trapped by the breather.[19]

Dynamics Simulation of Conducting Polymer Interchain Interaction Eﬀects

309

Polarons on Neighboring Chains
0.12

Bond Length Order Parameter (Angstrom)

0.08

0.04

Chain 1

(a)

Chain 2

(b)

0
0.12

0.08

0.04

0

0

10

20

30
Sites

40

50

60

Fig. 2. Evolution of the bond length order parameter of two neighboring chains. Solid
line: initial conﬁguration; dotted line: ﬁnal conﬁguration. The polaron on chain 1 (Fig.
2(a)) remains stable after the extra electron is adiabatically taken from the system,
but the polaron on chain 2 (Fig. 2(b)) makes a transition and becomes a bipolaron.
Polarons on the Same Chain
0.1

Chain 1

0.08
0.06
0.04

Charge Density (e)

0.02
0
0.1

Chain 2

0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0

0

10

20

30
Sites

40

50

60

Fig. 3. Charge density of chains corresponding to simulation of Fig. 4. The initial
polarons on chain 1 (solid line) coalesce on a bipolaron (dotted line). There is also the
creation of a polaron on chain 2 (dotted line).

This trapping of the Bipolaron leads to a reduction of the Bipolaron mobility. Furthermore, the breather oscillation frequency could be detected by infrared

310

J.R. de Oliveira Queiroz and G.M. e Silva

spectroscopy and its presence in association with bipolarons should have eﬀects
on the overall conduction properties of the material.
The distinction between adiabatic and non-adiabatic injection eﬀects is
thought to be associated to the relaxation processes involved at the electronic
level.

4

Conclusions

Eﬀects of interchain interaction on the transition of polarons to bipolarons on
two interacting conjugated polymeric chains were investigated. This study was
carried out through numerical calculations.
It should be noted that our purpose is a qualitative description of the transition process on conducting polymers in general. The adopted parameter values
are most that of polyacetylene because they are well known values. There was
no attempt to ﬁt the parameters to any speciﬁc polymer. Nevertheless, there
was a remarkable accordance between the experimental values of the subgap
transitions obtained in reference [1] for poly(p-phenine vinylene) doped with I2 ,
F eCl3 and H2 SO4 and our results. There, for example, the major subgap energy
diﬀerences for polarons were 1.81 eV for I2 ; 2.07 eV for H2 SO4 ; and 2.08 eV for
F eCl3 , whereas the same energy diﬀerences in our simulations varied from 1.93
to 2.12 eV .
We present theoretical results pointing to direct single-polaron to bipolaron
transition as the favored mechanism of bipolaron formation. This result is in
accordance with previous results on polaron and bipolaron dynamics calculations[12] where a pair of polarons do not spontaneously merged to produce a
bipolaron.
Since we considered diﬀerent characteristic time intervals for the hole insertion in the chain, in order to simulate diﬀerent ways of bipolaron generation
(photoproduction, chemical doping or direct charge injection), we obtained different responses from the lattice. It is found that the non-adiabatic electron
removal led to the formation of an associated breather oscillation mode in the
chain. Moreover, the breather interacts with the newly formed bipolaron trapping it around its position. The trapping and depinning of bipolarons from
breathers have direct inﬂuence on the mobility of that charge carrier in the
chain.
Based in our numerical simulations, we suggested two experimental approaches to better understand the polaron-bipolaron transition mechanism. First, the
veriﬁcation of the presence and quantity of breathers associated with diﬀerent
transition regimes. Second, the change in bipolarons mobility due to the trapping
eﬀect of breathers.
Acknowledgments. We thank CAPES, FINATEC and CNPQ for ﬁnancial
support.

Dynamics Simulation of Conducting Polymer Interchain Interaction Eﬀects

311

References
1. Fernandes, M. R., Garcia, J. R., Schultz, M. S., and Nart, F. C.: Polaron and
bipolaron transitions in doped poly(p-phenylene vinylene) ﬁlms. Thin Sol. Films
474 (2005) 279.
2. Burroughes, J., Bradley, D. D. C., Brown, A. R., Marks, R. N., Mackay, K., Friend,
R. H., Burn, P. L., and Holmes, A. B.: Light-emitting diodes based on conjugated
polymers. Nature 347 (1990) 539.
3. Jeckelmann, E., and Baeriswyl, D.: The metal-insulator transition in polyacetylene:
variational study of the Peierls-Hubbard model. Synth. Met. 65 (1994) 211.
4. Furukawa, Y.: in P rimary P hotoexcitations in Conjugated P olymers, edited by
N. S. Sariciftci (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1997) 496.
5. Steinm¨
uller, D., Ramsey, M. G., and Netzer, F. P.: Polaron and bipolaronlike states
in n-doped bithiophene. Phys. Rev. B 47 (1993) 13323.
6. Cik, G., Sersen, F., and Dlhan, L. D.: Thermally induced transitions of polarons
to bipolarons in poly(3-dodecylthiophene). Synth. Met. 151 (2005) 124.
7. Kaufman, J. H., and Colaneri, N.: Evolution of Polaron States into Bipolarons in
Polypyrrole. Phys. Rev. Lett. 53 (1984) 1005.
8. Geskin, V. M., and Bredas, J. -L.: Polaron Pair versus Bipolaron on Oligothiophene
Chains: A Theoretical Study of the Singlet and Triplet States. ChemPhysChem 4
(2003) 498.
9. Saxena, A., Brazovskii, S., Kirova, N., Yu, Z. G., and Bishop, A. R.: Stability of
bipolarons in conjugated polymers. Synth. Met. 101 (1999) 325.
10. Xie, S-J., and Mei, L-M.: Transition between bipolaron and polaron states in doped
heterocycle polymers. Phys. Rev. B 50 (1994) 13364.
11. Yao, K. L., Han, S. E., and Zhao, L.: The polaron and bipolaron states of
poly(phenylene vinylene). J. Chem. Phys. 114 (2001) 6437.
12. e Silva, G. M.: Electric-ﬁeld eﬀects on the competition between polarons and bipolarons in conjugated polymers. Phys. Rev. B 61 (2000) 10777.
13. Irle, S., and Lischka, H.: Combined ab initio and density functional study on polaron to bipolaron transitions in oligophenyls and oligothiophenes. J. Chem. Phys.
107 (1997) 3021.
14. Bredas, J. L., Scott, J. C., Yakushi, K., and Street, G. B.: Polarons and Bipolarons
in polypyrrole: Evolution of the band structure and optical spectrum upon doping.
Phys. Rev. B 30 (1984) 1023.
15. Farias, G. A., da Costa, W. B., and Peeters, F. M.: Acoustical polarons and bipolarons in two dimensions. Phys. Rev. B 54 (1996) 12835.
16. Verbist, G., Peeters, F. M., and Devreese, J. T.: Large bipolarons in two and three
dimensions. Phys. Rev. B 43 (1991) 2712.
17. Su, W. P., Schhrieﬀer, J. R., and Heeger, A. J.: Soliton excitations in polyacetylene.
Phys. Rev. B 22 (1980) 2099; 28 (1983) 1138.
18. Johansson, A., and Stafstr¨
om, S.: Polaron Dynamics in a System of Coupled Conjugated Polymer Chains. Phys. Rev. Lett 86 (2001) 3602.
19. Lima, M. P., and e Silva, G. M.: Dynamical evolution of polaron to bipolaron in
conjugated polymers. Phys. Rev. B 74 (2006) 224304.
20. Pinheiro, C. da S., and e Silva, G. M.: Use of polarons and bipolarons in logical
switches based on conjugated polymers. Phys. Rev. B 65 (2002) 94304.
21. Moses, D., Wang, J., Yu, G., and Heeger, A. J.: Temperature-Independent Photoconductivity in Thin Films of Semiconducting Polymers: Photocarrier Sweep-Out
Prior to Deep Trapping. Phys. Rev. Lett 80 (1998) 2685.

