A Simulation-Based Hybrid Optimization Technique for
Low Noise Amplifier Design Automation
Yiming Li1 , Shao-Ming Yu2 , and Yih-Lang Li2
1

Department of Communication Engineering, National Chiao Tung University, 1001 Ta-Hsueh
Rd., Hsinchu City 300, Taiwan
ymli@faculty.nctu.edu.tw
2
Department of Computer Science, National Chiao Tung University, 1001 Ta-Hsueh Rd.,
Hsinchu City 300, Taiwan
smyu@mail.ymlab.org, ylli@cs.nctu.edu.tw

Abstract. In this paper, a simulation-based optimization technique for integrated
circuit (IC) design automation is presented. Based on a genetic algorithm (GA),
Levenberg-Marquardt (LM) method, and circuit simulator, a window-interfaced
prototype of computer-aided design (CAD) is developed for IC design. Considering low noise amplifier (LNA) IC, we simultaneously evaluate specifications
including S parameters, K factor, noise figure, and input third-order intercept
point in the optimization process. If the simulated results meet the aforementioned constraints, the prototype outputs the optimized parameters. Otherwise,
CAD activates GA for global optimization; simultaneously, LM method searches
solutions with the results of GA. The prototype then calls a circuit simulator to
compute and evaluate newer results until all specifications are matched. More
than fifteen parameters including device sizes, passive components, and biasing
conditions are optimized for the aforementioned constraints. For LNA IC with
0.18μm metal-oxide-silicon filed effect transistors, benchmark results confirm
the functionality of the implemented prototype.
Keywords: Optimization, computational performance, circuit design, parameter
tuning, DaCO, LNA.

1 Introduction
Computer-aided circuit simulation and analysis plays a crucial role in radio-frequency
(RF) integrated-circuit (IC) design and implementation. Designers are requested to tune
parameters of circuits (e.g., low noise amplifier (LNA)) to achieve a specified communication system. The parameters includes active and passive device parameters, device
size, circuit layout, width of wires, and biasing condition. It may require a very experienced electronic engineer to accomplish complicated works; in particular, for RF
complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) ICs [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. Circuit simulation tool has been used in IC design in the past decades. Optimization techniques
continuously benefit the communities of electronic design automation [6, 7, 8].
In this paper, based on hybrid evolutionary and gradient-based methods [6, 7, 8,
9, 10, 11, 12] and circuit simulation tool [13], we propose a simulation-based hybrid
optimization technique for optimal circuit design with application to LNA ICs. This
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 259–266, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

260

Y. Li, S.-M. Yu, and Y.-L. Li

optimization methodology was proposed for model parameter extraction of sub-100
nm CMOS devices and optimal characterization of heterojunction bipolar transistor in
our recent works [6, 8]. This approach is generalized to IC design optimization; in particular, for analog and RF circuits. For a given LNA circuit, the hybrid optimization
methodology simultaneously considers the electrical specifications [1,2,3] such as S11 ,
S12 , S21 , S22 , K factor, the noise figure, and the input third-order intercept point in
the optimization process. First of all, preliminary parameters as well as the netlist for
circuit simulation [6, 13] are loaded. A circuit simulation tool will be performed for the
circuit simulation and then the results are used in the evaluation of specification. Once
the specification meets the aforementioned seven constraints, the optimized parameters
will be outputted. Otherwise, we activate the genetic algorithm (GA) for the global optimization; in the meanwhile, the Levenberg-Marquardt (LM) method searches the local
optima according to the GA’s results. The numerical optimization method does significantly accelerate the evolution process. We repeatedly call circuit simulator to compute
and evaluate newer results until the specification is matched. A window-interfaced prototype of the computer-aided design (CAD), along with the proposed methodology,
is successfully implemented and used for optimal design of LNA ICs. One of wellknown circuit simulation tools, HSPICE [13], is successfully integrated in our CAD
prototype. Other simulators, such as ELDO, SPECTRE, SmartSPICE can similarly be
integrated by utilizing the command mode of these tools. To verify the validity of the
developed prototype, several testing experiments are organized, where we simultaneously consider the characteristic optimization of passive and active devices, and power
dissipation. More than fifteen parameters including device sizes, capacitance, inductance, resistance, and biasing conditions are optimized with respect to the aforementioned seven constraints. For the LNA with the 0.18 μm CMOS technology, benchmark
results including the convergence property and the sensitivity of optimized parameters
computationally confirm the robustness and efficiency of the proposed simulation-based
hybrid optimization technique.
This paper is organized as follows. In Sec. 2, we introduce the framework of the
proposed optimization technique. In Sec. 3, the achieved results are discussed. Finally,
we draw conclusions.

2 The Simulation-Based Hybrid Optimization Technique
In modern IC design, it is a real challenge to solve multidimensional optimization problems by using either conventional numerical method [6, 9, 10, 11, 12] or soft computing
techniques [6, 7, 8]. Our idea of the simulation-based hybrid optimization technique
takes a GA to perform global search, and while the evolution seems to be saturated, the
LM method is then enhancing the searching behavior to perform the local search.
Two stages, shown in Fig. 1(a), are performed in the optimal design of ICs. The
model parameters of CMOS transistors are first optimized [6]. For a set of given measured current-voltage (I-V) data of CMOS devices and a selected equivalent circuit
model, the model parameters are optimized by using the developed hybrid intelligent
optimization methodology [6]. With the optimized device parameters, we then move to
the part of circuit design optimization. For a circuit to be optimized, we automatically

A Simulation-Based Hybrid Optimization Technique

Transistors to
be exttracted

Intelligent
extraction

Extracted
parameters

Hybrid optimization methodology
Locally optimized
solution

Device parameter extraction
Optimization
kernel

Circuit-level
parameters

Circuit to be
optimized

Circuit
simulation

Circuit script
generation

No
Meet the
spec. ?

261

GA for global
optimization

LM method for local
optimization

Enhanced solution
Score

Evaluation

Yes
Parameters
Output the
design

Simulated result
Circuit simulator

Circuit design optimization

(a)

(b)

Fig. 1. (a) Functional blocks and (b) optimization flow for the proposed simulation-based hybrid
optimization technique

parse and generate the corresponding netlist of the circuit for the circuit simulation and
result evaluation. If the result meets the target, we then output the final optimized data.
If the error between the target and result does not meet the stopping criterion, the established optimization kernel will enable the circuit parameter extraction in a global sense,
where the number of parameters to be extracted depends upon the specification that we
want to be achieved. According to the optimized results, the netlist is updated and the
next optimization is repeated.
The GA, shown in Fig. 1(b), firstly searches the entire problem space. During this
period, the GA-searched candidates are passed to an adopted circuit simulator [13], to
retrieve the results of circuit simulation, where a set of ordinary differential equations is
numerically solved. According to the specified targets of S11 , S12 , S21 , S22 , K factor,
the noise figure, and the input third-order intercept point, the results are then evaluated

V DD
Rload

V DD
Lload
Cmatch2

W2 /L2

VB2

Cmatch1 Cin

Port 2
Cmatch3

W 1/L1

Lbond

Port 1
Lmatch1

Lchoke

Ldeg

VB1

(a)

(b)

Fig. 2. (a) A logo of the developed CAD prototype and (b) The explored LNA circuit two cascade
0.18 μm MOSFETs

262

Y. Li, S.-M. Yu, and Y.-L. Li

to measure the fitness score, which guides the evolutionary process of GA. Once a solution is obtained, the LM method will perform local searches. The local optima are
right the GA’s initial values for further optimization. The simulation-based hybrid optimization technique has successfully been implemented, where a window-based CAD
prototype–DaCO (i.e., device and circuit optimization) is advanced, shown in Fig. 2(a).

Fig. 3. The initial state (symbol) and a final optimized result (line) for the parameter of (a) S11 ,
(b) S12 , (c) S21 (d) S22 , (e) NF, and (f) IIP3, respectively

3 Results and Discussion
The explored LNA IC, shown in Fig. 2(b), focuses on the working frequencies ranging
from 2.11GHz to 2.17GHz, where the Lload and Rload are the compact models of

A Simulation-Based Hybrid Optimization Technique

263

on-chip spiral inductors. The choke inductor Lchoke working at high frequency is
assumed to be fixed at 1uH and Cin is an external signal couple capacitor which is
fixed at 20pF. The compact model BSIM 3v3 is adopted for the 0.18 μm metal-oxidesemiconductor field effect transistors (MOSFETs). There are more than fifteen parameters to be extracted in the designed 0.18 μm MOSFET LNA IC. Figure 3(a) shows the
initial state (symbol) and an optimized result (line) of S11 parameter. The acceptable
result is when S11 < −10 dB within the working frequency range. It is clearly that Fig.
3(a) states that the result has achieved to this goal. We note that the amplitude of the
input sinusoidal signal within the working frequency range is with 1.0 V, VB1 = 0.75
V, and VB2 = 2.7 V shown in Fig. 2(b). Figure 3(b) is result of S12 parameter. The acceptable result is when S12 < −25 dB within the working frequency range. It confirms
the achieved results with much more improvements than the original one. Figure 3(c) is
the result of S21 , where a larger S21 is expected in the optimization process. Typically,
we do not define an engineering specification for S21 in this testing case. However, a
large S21 is good for optimal design of LNA ICs. Compared with the initial data, the
obtained result is slightly shifted due to a compromise among all physical constraints at
the same time. It could be further improved by performing more evolutions. Figure 3(d)
shows the result of S22 . The goal is the same with the parameter S11 , (i.e., the result is
acceptable if S22 < −10 dB within the working frequency range. Very good result, -20
dB, is achieved when we refer to the setting of standard goal. Once the S parameters are
optimized, not shown here, we can also calculate the K factor accordingly [1,2,3]. Figure 3(e) shows the result of the noise figure (NF). The desired specification is that NF
< 2 within the working frequency range. The obtained result is a little bit shifted away
due to a global compromise among all electrical characteristics. Figure 3(f) indicates
the initial state and an optimized result of the input third-order intercept point (IIP3).
For the optimization criterion of IIP3, we ask that the amplitude of output > -20dB and
is as large as possible. As shown in Fig. 3(f), the optimized IIP3 = -26.
Considering low power consumption for portable communication systems, the VB1
and VB2 are two parameters to be optimized now. Table 1 shows the optimized parameters of the investigated experiment and the table 2 shows the corresponding optimized
characteristics for the experiment. Results shown in both tables confirm the validity
of the method. The sensitivity examination is now designed as follow. The prototype
optimizes a category of parameter meanwhile locks other parameters. The LNA IC parameters to be optimized are classified into three categories illustrated in the table 3. It
reveals that the geometry parameters, shown in Fig. 4(a), contribute the most improvement, while the input and output categories have little improvement after 120 generations. This phenomenon indicates that the geometry of the active devices is sensitive
and more difficult to be optimized than passive device parameters. By considering the
testing case, Fig. 4(b) shows a comparison of the score convergence behavior among
population sizes, where the mutation rate is fixed at 0.5. The fitness score versus the
number of generation suggests that the convergency does not have a satisfied result if
the population size is too small. According to our experience, the population size =
50 is good for the optimal design of LNA IC. In addition, Fig. 5(a) shows the fitness
score convergence behavior for the circuit optimization with different mutation rate,

264

Y. Li, S.-M. Yu, and Y.-L. Li
Table 1. A list of the optimized parameters for the testing experiment
Element
Cmatch1
Cmatch2
Cmatch3
Lbond
Ldeg
Lmatch1
Rload
Lload
VB1
VB2
L

Unit
F
F
F
H
H
H
Ω
H
V
V
H

Range
300 ∼ 800
1 ∼ 10
1 ∼ 10
1 ∼ 10
0.1 ∼ 5
1 ∼ 10
1P 5 ∼ 5P 5
1P 5 ∼ 5P 5
0.5 ∼ 1.5
0.5 ∼ 5
0.13 ∼ 0.3

Test
657.738 f
4.505 p
4.951 p
1.058 n
1.155 n
5.257 n
3P5.l
3P5.l
0.69 V
1.96 V
0.25 u

Table 2. A list of the extracted results
Specification
Target
S11
< -10dB
S22
< -10dB
S12
< -25dB
S21
as large as possible
K
>1
NF
<2
IIP3
> -10

Test
-35.1dB
-19.1dB
-38.3dB
11.3dB
11.1
1.17
0.3

Table 3. Three categories of the circuit parameter of the LNA IC
Category
Parameters
Geometry
L1 , W1 , L2 , and W2
Input Cmatch1, Lmatch1, Lbond, Lchoke, Cin, Ldeg, VB1, and VB2
Output
Lload, Rload, Cmatch2, and Cmatch3

where the population size = 50. The results suggest that the mutation = 0.5 keeps the
population diversity and finally has better evolutionary results.
Finally, the computational efficiency of the proposed hybrid optimization technique
is investigated. Figure 5(b) shows the score convergence behavior comparison of the
standard GA and the hybrid optimization technique. The setting is with the population
size = 50 and mutation = 0.5. As shown in this figure, the proposed methodology is
superior to the pure GA after 60 generations. The proposed method shows no significant
advantage at the beginning because the LM method has not been triggered yet. Once the
LM method is activated, based on the result of GA to perform local optimization, the
GA follows the local optima obtained by the LM method to keep evolving. Under this
mechanism, our hybrid optimization methodology shows better trend of convergence
and the robustness of our proposed methodology hence is held.

A Simulation-Based Hybrid Optimization Technique

265

Fig. 4. (a) A verification of the sensitivity analysis for the three cataloged parameters. (b) The
fitness score versus the number of generations with respect to different population size.

Fig. 5. (a) The fitness score versus the number of generations with respect to different (a) mutation
rates and (b) for the pure GA and the proposed hybrid optimization methodology

4 Conclusions
In this paper, a simulation-based hybrid optimization technique for optimal design
of LNA IC has been advanced. Based upon the GA, the LM, and one of the wellknown circuit simulators, HSPICE, a CAD prototype named DaCO has successfully
been implemented. Different testing cases for the designed LNA circuit with the 0.18
μm MOSFETs have been examined to show the validity, efficiency, and robustness
of the method. This window-based CAD prototype can interface to any existing CAD

266

Y. Li, S.-M. Yu, and Y.-L. Li

software and benefits advanced IC design and chip fabrication. The developed prototype
is now available in the public domain [14].

Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by the National Science Council of TAIWAN under Contract NSC-95-2221-E-009-336, Contract NSC-95-2752-E-009-003-PAE, and
by the MoE ATU Program, Taiwan, under a 2006-2007 grant.

References
1. Pozar, D. M.: Microwave Engineering. John Wiley & Sons (2005)
2. Misra, D. K.: Radio-Frequency and Microwave Communication Circuits Analysis and
Design. John Wiley & Sons (2004)
3. Leung, B.: VLSI for Wireless Communication. Prentice Hall (2002)
4. Gupta, R., Allstot, D. J.: Parasitic-aware design and optimization of CMOS RF integrated
circuits. Dig. IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp., (1998) 1867–1870
5. Vancorenland, P., Van der Plas, G., Steyaert, M., Gielen, G., Sansen, W.: A layout-aware
synthesis methodology for RF circuits. Proc. IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Computer Aided Design
(2001) 358–362
6. Li, Y., Cho, Y.-Y.: Intelligent BSIM4 Model Parameter Extraction for Sub-100 nm MOSFET
Era. Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 43 (2004) 1717–1722
7. Man, K. F., Tang, K. S., Kwong, S., Halang, W. A.: Genetic Algorithm for Control and Signal
Processing. Springer (1997)
8. Li, Y., Cho, Y.-Y., Wang, C.-S., Huang, K.-Y.: A Genetic Algorithm Approach to InGaP/GaAs HBT Parameter Extraction and RF Characterization. Jpn. J. Appl. Phys.. 42
(2003) 2371-2374
9. Li, Y.: A Parallel Monotone Iterative Method for the Numerical Solution of Multidimensional
Semiconductor Poisson Equation. Comput. Phys. Commun. 153 (2003) 359–372
10. Li, Y., Sze, S. M., Chao, T.-S.: A Practical Implementation of Parallel Dynamic Load Balancing for Adaptive Computing in VLSI Device Simulation. Eng. with Comput. 18 (2002)
124–137
11. Zhang, J. Z., Chen, L. H.: Nonmonotone LevenbergVMarquardt Algorithms and Their Convergence Analysis. J. Optim. Theory Appl. 92 (1997) 393–418
12. Han, Q. M.: A Levenberg-Marquardt method for semidefinite programming. J. Numer. Methods Comput. Appl. 19 (1998) 99–106
13. Shur, M.S., Fjeldly, T.A.: Silicon and Beyond, Advanced Circuit Simulators and Device
Models. World Scientific Publishing Co. (2000)
14. DaCo – a prototype for device and circuit optimization. Available: http://140.113.87.143/
ymlab/

