Chinese Ancient-Modern Sentence Alignment
Zhun Lin and Xiaojie Wang
School of Information Engineering, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
Beijing, China, 100876
xjwang@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract. Bi-text alignment is useful to many Natural Language Processing tasks
such as machine translation, bilingual lexicography and word sense
disambiguation. Most of previous researches are on different language pairs.
This paper presents a diachronic alignment of Ancient and Modern Chinese.
Because of the long history of Chinese culture and Chinese writing, lots of
Ancient Chinese texts are waiting to be translated into modern Chinese,
especially, the comparative study of Ancient and Modern Chinese is a very
important way to understand some characteristics in Modern Chinese. After
describing some characteristics in Ancient-Modern Chinese bi-texts, we first
investigate some statistical properties of Ancient-Modern bi-text corpus,
including the correlation test of text lengths between two languages and the
distribution test of length ratio data. We then pay more attention to n-m(n>1 or
m>1) alignment modes which are prone to mismatch.

1 Introduction
Text alignment is an important task in Natural Language Processing (NLP). It can be
used to support many other NLP tasks. For example, it can be utilized to construct
statistical translation models [1], and to acquire translation examples for
example-based machine translation [2]. It can be helpful in bilingual lexicography [3].
The approaches to text alignment can be classified into two types: statistical-based
and lexical-based. The statistical-based approaches rely on non-lexical information
(such as sentence length, co-occurrence frequency, etc.) to achieve an alignment task
[4]. The method proposed in [5] is based on the assumption that in order for the
sentences in a translation to correspond, the words in them must also correspond. Their
method made use of lexical anchor points to lead an alignment at the sentence level.
It has been shown that different language pairs are in favor of different information
in alignment. For example, [6] found that the sentence-length correlation between
English and Chinese is not as good as between English and French. Also, there is less
cognate information between Chinese-English pair than that in English-French pair,
while the alignment of Chinese-Japanese pair can make use of information of Hanzi
commonly appearing in both languages [7]. Currently, most methods rely on either or
both of above two ideas [8]. The approaches combining both length and lexical
information, such as [9], seem to represent the state of the art.
Chinese has a long history. It had been changed from Ancient Chinese to Modern
Chinese gradually. A lot of Ancient Chinese texts are waiting to be translated into
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part II, LNCS 4488, pp. 1178 – 1185, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Chinese Ancient-Modern Sentence Alignment

1179

modern Chinese, Ancient-Modern Chinese alignment will be helpful in both example
based machine translation and statistic machine translation. Although the two
languages are very different in some aspects, but many of the Modern Chinese
characteristics can be found in the Ancient Chinese [10], they have close relationship.
Therefore, the comparative study of Ancient-Modern Chinese may give useful cues on
understanding some characteristics in Modern Chinese.
In this paper, we present our current work on Ancient-Modern Chinese Sentence
alignment. Combination of both length-based information and lexicon-based
information is proved to be the state of art approach to bi-text alignment [8]. So we will
also combine these two kinds of information in our alignment algorithm. But for
Ancient-Modern pairs, as we will see, they are some special features in alignment. In
Ancient-Modern pairs, Hanzi characters, which commonly occur in both languages, is
obviously a useful feature for alignment, they are used for improving sentence
alignment with great significance.
The remainder of paper is organized as follows: section 2 describes some
characteristics in Chinese Ancient-Modern bi-text corpora, shows what we can get in a
sentence level alignment. Section 3 describes several information sources we use in our
approach, and how to combine these information sources for improving alignment.
Where, we investigate the length correlation between two languages and the
distribution of length ratio between them. We use a deliberate measure to deal with
several different kinds of alignment. We then implement several experiments and
evaluate different effects brought from different information sources in section 4, and
give some discussions on the interesting results. Finally we draw some conclusions.

2 Some Characteristics Ancient-Modern Chinese Bi-texts
Even though Ancient Chinese and Modern Chinese are similar on lots of aspects, there
are many sentence alignment modes between them. n-m (n>1 or m>1) modes, which
are to be prone to mismatch, are also common in practice.
Table 1. An example of Ancient-Modern Chinese bi-text: one Ancient Chinese sentence is
aligned with two Modern sentences

Mode
1:2

2:1

2:2

Ancient Chinese

Modern Chinese

徒手遇蜥蜴， 变色而却 两手空空，遇到一条四
步，人之情也。
脚蛇，也会吓得脸上变色
而后退。
这是一般人的通常心理
前日范希文 贬官后，与 前几天范希文 贬官以
足下相见于安道家。
后，我和您在安道家中会
面，您极力诋毁讥笑希文
足下诋诮希文为人。 的为人。
故辄布区区，伏惟幸 因此就写了区区此
信，恭敬地希望您明察。
察，不宣。
不多言了，欧阳修再
修再拜。
拜。

1180

Z. Lin and X. Wang

Some examples about various alignment modes are given in table 1. There is 1-2, 2-1
and 2-2 alignment respectively. The statistics of our data aligned manually show these
kinds of alignment are more 10%, while less than 1.5% of the alignments contain 3 or
more sentences in one language.
Both Ancient Chinese and Modern Chinese are composed of Hanzi Character, for
example, “ ” is the same character in both ancient and modern Chinese. The
alignment of Ancient-Modern Chinese pairs can make use of information of Hanzi
information commonly appearing in both texts.

手

3 The Approach to Sentence Alignment
We use dynamic programming to find overall optimal alignment paragraph by
paragraph. We combine both length-based information and Hanzi-based information to
measure the cost for each possible alignment between Ancient-Modern Chinese strings.
Before we give the measure function, we first define a few notations. Let s i denote
the i th sentence in Ancient Chinese, | si | denote the number of character it includes,
sij denote the string from the i th sentence to the j th sentence in Ancient Chinese
text, t u denote the u th sentence in Modern Chinese, t uv denote the string from the
u th sentence to the v th sentence in Modern Chinese text. j < i means that sij is an
empty string, and so does t uv . Let d (i, u; j , v) be the function that computes the cost
of aligning sij with t uv . We divide d (i, u; j , v) into three parts, as shown in (1), to
reflect that we utilize three information sources to compute the cost.

d (i, u; j , v) = L(i, u; j , v) + M (i, u; j , v) − αH (i, u; j , v)

(1)

Where L (i, u; j , v) depends on length ratio of the paired two strings sij and t uv ,
different length ratios cause different L (i, u; j , v) ; M (i, u; j , v ) depends on the
alignment mode in the pair, that is, depending on how many sentences involved in this
pair at both sides, different n-m modes cause different M (i, u; j , v ) . H (i, u; j , v ) is
the contribution from Hanzi characters common in both strings.
We first describe how to use length-based information, and then Hanzi-based
information. We give a deliberate measure on multiple alignments which are prone to
mismatch.
3.1 Length and Mode
To utilize the length information in Ancient-Modern Chinese alignment, we make an
investigation on length correlation between these two languages. We also check if the
normal hypothesis of the length ratio is appropriate for this language pair. Following
Gale and Church (1991), we use alignment data at paragraph-level to do the correlation
and normal test. 205 paragraphs in our Ancient-Modern corpus are randomly chosen
for these tests.

Chinese Ancient-Modern Sentence Alignment

1181

The correlation test is to examine if the lengths of Ancient Chinese texts are related
to their Modern translations. That is, if longer texts in Ancient Chinese tend to be
translated into longer texts in Modern Chinese. Figure 1 shows that the lengths (in
characters) of Ancient and Modern Chinese paragraphs are highly correlated.

Fig. 1. Paragraph lengths are highly correlated in Ancient-Modern Chinese bi-texts. The
horizontal axis shows the length of Ancient Chinese paragraphs, while vertical scale shows the
lengths of the corresponding Modern Chinese paragraphs.

Fig. 2. The length-rate data of Ancient-Modern Chinese bi-texts is approximately normal, The
horizontal axis shows the length-ratio, while the vertical axis shows the frequency of each ratio.

In [4], they based their distance measure on an assumption that each character in one
language gives rise to a random number of characters in other language. They assume
those random variables are independent and identically distributed with a normal
distribution. They check the English-French pair for this assumption, and estimate
parameters for the normal distribution. This assumption is not clear to Ancient-Modern
Chinese pair. For making use of the same kind of length-based information in

1182

Z. Lin and X. Wang

alignment, we thus give an investigation on if this assumption can be held in
Ancient-Modern Chinese pair. We also use the paragraph-based data to do the test. We
use 205 length ratios from 205 Ancient-Modern Chinese paragraphs as samples.
Figure 2 is the histogram for these ratios.
We can find that length ratio data is approximately normal with mean μ =1.6
and Std. Deviation σ =0.21. Then following [4], we compute L (i, u; j , v) using
equation (2).

L(i, u; j , v) = −100 * log(2 * (1 − Pr(| (| tuv | | sij | − μ ) σ |)))

(2)

To compute the cost for different alignment mode, we aligned 407 Ancient-Modern
Chinese sentence pairs manually. Then we estimate the probabilities of different
alignment modes using frequencies of these modes occurring in data. The result is
listed in Table 2.
Supposed that j − i = n means the string sij including n Ancient Chinese
sentences, specially, we use n = −1 to denote that there is no sentence in sij .
Similarly, when v − u = m means the string t uv including m Modern Chinese
sentences and m = −1 means that there is no sentence in t uv , the cost for mode
n − m can be computed by equation (3).

M (i, u; j , v) = −100 *log(Pr(n − m))

(3)

Table 2. the frequencies of different alignment modes

Mode(n-m)
0-1, 1-0
1-1
1-2
2-1
2-2
Others
Total

Frequency f(n-m)
1
350
21
18
11
6
407

Probability Pr(n-m)
0.002
0.861
0.052
0.044
0.027
0.014
1

3.2 Hanzi Information
Another source of information is Hanzi occurring commonly in both Ancient and
Modern Chinese. We include totally 2366 Hanzi character pairs in a dictionary.
Following [7], we use different measures as in equation (4) and (5) for different
alignment mode. The equation (5) is for 2-2 mode, and the equation (4) is for other
modes. By including some length-related information in these measures, we can also
control the alignment length.

⎧0
⎪h (i,0; u ,0)
⎪ 1
H (i , u ; j , v ) ⎨
⎪h1 (i,0; u ,0) + h2 (i , j; u ,0)
⎪⎩h1 (i,0; u ,0) + h3 (i,0; u , v )

＝

j <i|v >u

0 − 1or1 − 0

j = i&v = u

1−1

j = i +1& v = u 2 −1
j = i & v = u +1 1− 2

(4)

Chinese Ancient-Modern Sentence Alignment

1183

Where h1 (i,0, u ,0) = | si ∩ t u | min{si , t u } , here we use the relative number of
commonly occurring Hanzi to measure the similarity between two strings,
h2 (i, j , u,0) = (| s j ∩ t u | − | si ∩ s j ∩ t u |) s j , which is the relative number of
commonly occurring Hanzi only in s j and tu but not in s i , similarly, we use
h3 (i,0, u, v) to denote (| s i ∩ t v | − | s i ∩ t u ∩ t v |) t v , which is the relative
number of commonly occurring Hanzi only in s i and t v but not in t u . For 2-2 mode,
we use (5) as a measure.
The three items in the right of equation (5) are the measures for three different ways
of merging si and s j and matching with t u and t v in Chinese-Japanese alignment.

H (i, u; j , v)＝ min{ h1 (i,0; u ,0) + h2 (i, j; u ,0) + h1 (0, j;0, v),
h1 (i,0; u,0) + h3 (i,0; u, v) + h1 (0, j;0, v),
h1 (i,0;0, v) + h1 (0, j; u;0)}

(5)

This completes the description of distance measure. We finally use dynamic
programming to find the overall least cost in matching. Let D (i, u ) be total distance
aligning sentences from first one to i th in Ancient Chinese and sentences from first
one to u th in Modern Chinese, the recurrence then can be described in (6).

D ( j , v) = min{D (i − 1, u − 1) + d (i, j; u , v)}

(6)

4 Experiments and Evaluations
We use 205 Chinese Ancient-Modern paragraph pairs in our experiments, which
include total 1528 Ancient Chinese sentences and 1583 Modern sentences respectively.
To estimate αparameter in equation 1, we align another 53 paragraphs which include
440 Ancient Chinese sentences and 452 Modern Chinese sentences. We use it as
training data in our experiments when αis needed.
Our purpose of this experiment was to test a variety of information sources in the
sentence alignment of Ancient-Modern Chinese. Table 3 is the results.
Table 3. How different factors effect the accuracy(+: used, -: not used)

H
+
+
+
+
-

L
+
+
+
+

M
+
+
+
+

Accuracy(%)
80.33
56.01
92.43
79.59
52.09
52.50
78.70

We can find Hanzi information(H) is the most helpful one for alignment, when only
one information source is used, H achieves the best accuracy.

1184

Z. Lin and X. Wang

It is interesting that we can get the best result by combining only H with M instead of
combining all three information sources in other language pairs such as
Chinese-Japanese [7]. We think the reason is our H measure combines enough length
constraint information, while length information itself is not so helpful in
Ancient-Modern Chinese alignment.
We can find from Table 3 than length information give the worst performance. when
only the length information is considered, the alignment result inclines to match the
length rate with 1.6. When length rates locate in symmetrical position of a normal
distribution, for example 1.4 and 1.8, they have the same probability. In this case,
length information is not helpful in distinguish the situation in Figure 3, where 1-1 and
2-1 alignment have same probability.
0.4

1.4

1.0
Fig. 3. one length rate is 1.4 (1-1), the other is 1.8(2-1), they have the same probability

When only the alignment mode information is considered, the alignment result more
inclined to match the 1-1 mode.
But when there are more sentences in Modern Chinese, things will be changed, for
example, when there is one Ancient Chinese sentence and two Modern Chinese
sentences left. Two alignment sets can be possible, one is (1:2), another s (1:1 and 0:1).
the costs of these two sets are listed in Table 4. As we can see, the cost of (1-1,0-1)
mode is larger than others, so 1-2 mode is used.
Table 4. Two kinds of alignment: 1-1,0-1(or 0-1, 1-1) and 1-2 mode

Mode
1-1,0-1
1-2

Probability Pr(n-m)
0.861, 0.002
0.052

cost
276
128

5 Conclusions
This paper describes an Ancient-Modern Chinese alignment at the level of sentence by
combining both length information and Hanzi character information. We give a detail
description on some characteristics in Ancient-Modern Chinese bi-texts. We check the
correlation between the lengths of Ancient Chinese text and Modern Chinese text, and

Chinese Ancient-Modern Sentence Alignment

1185

find that length ratio data fits normal hypothesis approximately. We pay a special
attention on n-m alignment where n or m is greater than 1, and use a similarity measure
based on Hanzi information to get better accuracy than normal one. Experiments show
our proposal is very helpful.
We will extend our program to manage clause alignment in our future works. By
analyzing the sentence alignment, we find that there are less alignment modes in clause
alignment than that in sentence alignment. Therefore, we can expect to achieve higher
accuracy for Ancient-Modern Chinese clause alignment.

References
[1] Peter F. Brown, Jennifer C. Lai, Robert L. Mercer: Aligning Sentences in Parallel Corpora.
Proceedings of 29th Annual Conference of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(1991) 169-176.
[2] Hiroyuki Kaji, Yuuko Kida, Yasutusgu, Morimoto: Learning Translation Templates from
Bilingual Text. In Proceedings of the fifteenth International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, Nantes, France (1992) 672-678.
[3] Jörg Tiedemann: Recycling Translations - Extraction of Lexical Data from Parallel
Corpora and their Application in Natural Language Processing, Doctoral Thesis. Studia
Linguistica Upsaliensia 1, ISSN 1652-1366, ISBN 91-554-5815-7.
[4] William A. Gale, Kenneth W. Church: A Program for Aligning Sentences in Bilingual
Corpora. In Proceedings of 29th Annual Conference of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (1991) 177-184.
[5] Martin Kay, Martin Roscheisen: Text-Translation Alignment. Computational Linguistics.
Vol. 19, No. 1 (1993) 121-142.
[6] Wu Dekai: Aligning a Parallel English-Chinese Corpus Statistically with Lexical Criteria.
In Proceedings of the 32st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, (1994) 80-87.
[7] Wang Xiaojie, Ren Fuji: Chinese-Japanese Clause Alignment. Computational Linguistics
and Intelligent Text Processing, 6th International Conference (2005) 400-412
[8] Jean Veronis: From the Rosetta stone to the information society—A survey of parallel text
processing. In Parallel Text Processing. J. Veronis (eds.) (2000) 25-47 Kluwer Academic
Publishers. Printed in Netherland.
[9] I. Dan Melamed: Pattern recognition for mapping bitext correspondence. In Parallel Text
Processing, J. Veronis (eds.), Kluwer Academic Publishers. Printed in Netherland.
(2000)25-47
[10] Changxu Sun: Introduce to Ancient-Chinese lexicon, Shanghai dictionary Press (2005)(in
Chinese)

