An Heuristic Method for GPS Surveying
Problem
Stefka Fidanova
IPP – Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Acad. G. Bonchev str. bl.25A, 1113 Soﬁa,
Bulgaria
stefka@parallel.bas.bg

Abstract. This paper describes metaheuristic algorithm based on simulated annealing method,which is a nature-inspired method, to analyze
and improve the eﬃciency of the design of Global Positioning System
(GPS) surveying networks. Within the context of satellite surveying, a
positioning network can be deﬁned as a set of points which are coordinated by placing receivers on these point to determine sessions between
them. The problem is to search for the best order in which these sessions
can be observed to give the best possible schedule. The same problem
arise in Mobile Phone surveying networks. Several case studies have been
used to experimentally asses the performance of the proposed approach
in terms of solution quality and computational eﬀort.

1

Introduction

The continuing research on naturally occurring social systems oﬀers the prospect
of creating artiﬁcial systems that generate practical solutions to many Combinatorial Optimization Problems (COPs). Metaheuristic techniques have evolved
rapidly in an attempt to ﬁnd good solutions to these problems within a desired
time frame [9]. They attempt to solve complex optimization problems by incorporating processes which are observed at work in real life [2,4]. The paper
proposes simulated annealing algorithm which provide optimal or near optimal
solution for large networks with an acceptable amount of computational eﬀort.
The Global Positioning System is a satellite-based radio-navigation system
that permits land, sea and airborne users to determine their three-dimensional
position, velocity and time. This can be achieved 24 hours a day in all weather.
In addition the satellite navigation system has an impact in all related ﬁelds in
geoscience and engineering, in particular on surveying work in quickly and eﬀectively determining locations and changes in locations network. The purpose of
surveying is to determine the locations of points on the earth. Measuring tapes
or chains require that the survey crew physically pass through all the intervening terrain to measure the distance between two points. Surveying methods
have undergone a revolutionary change over that last few years with the deployment of the satellite navigation systems. The most widely known space systems
are: the American Global Positioning System (GPS), the Russian GLObal Navigation Satellite System (GLONASS), and the forthcoming European Satellite
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 1084–1090, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

An Heuristic Method for GPS Surveying Problem

1085

Navigation System (GALILEO). In this paper, it is the use of GPS to establish surveying networks that is being investigated. GPS satellites continuously
transmit electrical signals to the earth while orbiting the earth. A receiver, with
unknown position on the earth, has to detect and convert the signals transmitted
from all of the satellites into useful measurements. These measurements would
allow a user to compute a three-dimensional coordinates position for the location
of the receiver.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The general framework for GPS
surveying network problem as a combinatorial optimization problem is described
in Section 2. Then the search strategy of the simulated annealing is explained
in Section 3. The metaheuristic algorithm applied to GPS surveying network is
outlined and the general case of the problem is addressed, by presenting several
case studies and the obtained numerical results in Section 4. The paper ends
with a summary of the conclusions and directions for future research.

2

Formulation of the GPS Surveying Network Problem

A GPS network is distinctly diﬀerent from a classical survey network in that
no inter-visibility between stations is required. In GPS surveying, after deﬁning
the locations of the points for an area to be surveyed, GPS receivers will be
used to map this area by creating a network of these coordinated points. These
points, control stations within the context of surveying, are ﬁxed on the ground
and located by an experienced surveyor according to the nature of the land
and the requirements of the survey [7]. At least two receivers are required to
simultaneously observe GPS satellites, for a ﬁxed period of time, where each
receiver is mounted on each station. The immediate outcome of the observation
is a session between these two stations. After completing the ﬁrst stage of sessions
observation and deﬁning the locations of the surveyed stations, the receivers are
moved to other stations for similar tasks till the whole network is completely
observed according to an observation schedule. The total cost of carrying out the
above survey, which is computed upon the criteria to be minimized, represents
the cost of moving receivers between stations. The problem is to search for the
best order, with respect to the time, in which these sessions can be observed to
give the cheapest schedule V, i.e.:
C(Sp )

M inimize : C(V ) =
p∈R

where: C(V ) is the total cost of a feasible schedule V ;
Sp is the route of the receiver p in a schedule;
R is the set of receivers R = {1, . . . , r};

3

Simulated Annealing Method

The Simulated Annealing (SA) is a generalization of an optimization method
for examine the equations of state and frozen states of n-body systems. The

1086

S. Fidanova

original Metropolis scheme [8] was that an initial state of a thermodynamic
system was chosen at energy E and temperature T , holding T constant the
initial conﬁguration is perturbed and the change of energy dE is computed. The
current state of the thermodynamic system is analogous to the current solution to
the combinatorial problem, the energy equation for the thermodynamic system
is analogous to the objective function and ground state is analogous to the global
minimum. The key objective of this paper is to ﬁnd an eﬀective solution in a
short period of time with close to least cost for a given GPS network using
Simulated Annealing method.
SA is a heuristic method that has been implemented to obtain good solutions
of an objective function deﬁned on a number of discrete optimization problems.
This method has proved to be a ﬂexible local search method and can be successfully applied to the majority of real-life problems [1,3,5,6,10,12]. The origin of
the algorithm is in statistical mechanics. The fundamental idea is to allow moves
resulting in solutions of worse quality than the current solution in order to escape
from local minimum. The probability of doing such a move is declared during the
search. The algorithm starts by generating an initial solution and by initializing
the so-called temperature parameter T . The temperature is decreased during the
search process, thus at the beginning of the search the probability of accepting
uphill moves is high and it gradually decreases. This process is analogous to the
annealing process of metals and glass, which assume a low energy conﬁguration
when cooled with an appropriate cooling schedule. Regarding the search process,
this means that the algorithm is the result of two combined strategies:
– random walk;
– iterative improvement.
The ﬁrst phase permits the exploration of the search space. The advantages
of the algorithm are:
– Simulated Annealing is proved to converge to the optimal solution of the
problem;
– An easy implementation of the algorithm makes it very easy to adapt a local
search method to a simulated annealing algorithm.
In order to implement SA for GPS surveying problem a number of decisions
and choices have to be made. Firstly , the problem speciﬁc choices, which determine the way in which the GPS surveying is modeled in order to ﬁt into the SA
framework. In other words, it involves the deﬁnition of the solution space Q and
neighborhood structure I, the form of the objective function C(V ) and the way
in which a starting solution V is obtained. Secondly, the generic choices which
govern the working of the algorithm itself, are mainly concerned with the components of the cooling parameters: control parameter T and its initial starting
value, the cooling rate F and the temperature update function, the number of
iterations between decreases L and the condition under which the system will
be terminated [11]. The performance of the achieved result is highly dependent
on the right choice of both speciﬁc and generic desisions.

An Heuristic Method for GPS Surveying Problem

1087

The SA procedure used in this work is designed and developed essentially from
practical experience and the requirement of the GPS surveying. A simple constructive procedure is proposed to obtain an initial (starting) feasible scheduling
V for the GPS surveying. The aim of this simple procedure is to obtain quickly
an initial schedule. The structure of the SA algorithm is shown below:
1. The Problem Speciﬁc Decisions
Step 1. Formulation the problem parameters;
Step 2. Determination of the initial schedule, generate a feasible solution V ;
2. The Problem Generic Decisions
Initialization the cooling parameters:
Set the initial starting value of the temperature parameter, T > 0;
Step 3. Set the temperature length, L;
Set the cooling ratio, F ;
Set the number of iterations, K = 0.
3. The Generation Mechanism, Selecting and Acceptance Strategy of Generated Neighbors
Select a neighbor V of V where V ∈ I(V )
Step 4. Let C(V ) = the cost of the schedule V
Compute the move value Δ = C(V ) − C(V )
If Δ ≤ 0 accept V as a new solution and set V = V
ELSE
Step 5. IF e−Δ/T > Θ set V = V ,
where Θ is a uniform random number 0 < Θ < 1
OTHERWISE retain the current solution V .
4. Updating the Temperature
Updating the annealing schedule parameters using the
Step 6.
cooling schedule Tk+1 = F ∗ Tk k = {1, 2, . . .}.
5. Termination of the Solution
Step 7. IF the stopping criteria is met THEN
Show the output
Step 8. Declare the best solution
OTHERWISE Go to step 4.

4

Simulated Annealing Algorithm for GPS Surveying

To understand the simulated annealing method, the Local Search (LS) strategy
is throughly introduced. It is based on the concept of searching the local neighborhood of the current schedule [14]. The LS procedure perturb a given solution to generate diﬀerent neighborhoods using a move generation mechanism. In

1088

S. Fidanova

general, neighborhood for large-size problems can be much complicated to search.
Therefor, LS attempts to improve an initial schedule v to a GPS network by a
series of local improvements. A move generation is a transition from a schedule
V to another one V ∈ I(V ) in one step (iteration). These schedules are selected
and accepted according to some pre-deﬁned criteria. The returned schedule V
may not be optimal, but it is the best schedule in its local neighborhood I(V ).
A local optimal schedule is a schedule with the local minimal cost value. The
basic steps for the LS procedure are as follows:
–
–
–
–

Compute the cost value C(V ) of the current schedule V ;
Generate a schedule V ∈ I(V ) and compute its cost value C(V );
If C(V ) < C(V ) then, V replaces V as a current schedule;
Otherwise, retain V and generate other moves until C(V ) < C(V ) for all
V ∈ I(V );
– Terminate the search and return V as the local optimal schedule.

The local search is an essential part of the simulated annealing method. In
Saleh [13], a practical local search procedure that satisﬁes the GPS requirements
has been developed. In this procedure, which is based on the sequential session interchange the potential pair-swaps are examined in order (1, 2), (1, 3),. . ., (1, n),
(2, 3), (2, 4), . . ., (n − 1, n), n is the number of sessions. The solution is represented by graph. The nodes correspond to the sessions and the edges correspond
to the observation order.

i+1

i

j

j+1

k

k+1

Before the sessions exchange

Third sequence of exchanges
Before the sessions exchange

j↔k+1

j↔k

j↔j+1
First sequence of exchanges

i↔i+1
i

i+1

j
i+1↔j

j+1

i+1↔j+1

i↔k+1

i↔k

i↔j+1

i↔j

k

i+1↔k

k↔k+1

k+1

i+1↔k+1

Second sequence of exchanges
j+1↔k

j+1↔k+1

Fourth sequence of exchanges

Fig. 1. The sequential local search procedure

In our algorithm we apply diﬀerent local search procedure. We choose the
potential pair-swaps randomly, in [13] they are chosen sequentially. When the
best neighbor solution is equal to the global best solution, we choose randomly

An Heuristic Method for GPS Surveying Problem

1089

new current solution from the set of neighbors. The aim is to prevent Δ = 0 and
thus to prevent repetition of the same solutions. It is a way for diversiﬁcation of
the search process.

5

Experimental Results

In this section some experimental results are reported. We compare simulated
annealing algorithm used in [13] with our variant of the simulated annealing. Like a test problems we use real data of Malta and Seychelles GPS networks. The Malta GPS network is composed of 38 sessions and the Seychelles
GPS network is composed of 71 sessions. We use 6 large test problems too
from http://www.informatik.uni-heidelberg.de/ groups/ comopt/ software/ TSLIB95/ ATSP.html. These test problems consist from 100 to 443
sessions.
Table 1. Comparison of simulated annealing algorithms applied to various types of
GPS networks
Test

Nodes

sequential LS

random LS

Malta

38

1345

1035

Seychelles

71

986

965

rro124

100

125606

59033

ftv170

170

6942

5179

rbg323

323

3787

1867

rbg358

358

2762

1749

rbg403

403

4852

2757

rbg443

443

6509

3111

We use the following parameters for both algorithms: initial temperature is
20% of the result, ﬁnal temperature is 3, cooling parameter is 0.99, number of
iterations is 10 times the number of the nodes, number of swaps is 120% of the
number of the nodes. The programs are written on C++ language and are run
on Pentium 4 PC with 2.8 GHz 512 RAM. The reported results are average over
25 runs of the algorithms.
Comparing the both simulated annealing algorithms, our algorithm outperforms other for all tested problems. In our algorithm we include random search
and we prevent repeating of same solutions. It is a way for diversiﬁcation of the
search, to climb the hills and thus the algorithm has a greater possibility to ﬁnd
new and better solutions.

1090

6

S. Fidanova

Conclusion

In this paper a new simulated annealing algorithm for GPS surveying problem has
been developed and compared with the algorithm used by Saleh in [13]. A comparison of the performance of the both simulated annealing algorithms applied on
various GPS networks is reported. The obtained results are encouraging and the
ability of the developed techniques to generate rapidly high-quality solutions for
observing GPS networks can be seen. The problem is important because it arises
in wireless communications like GPS and mobile phone communications and can
improve the services in the networks. Thus the problem has an economical importance. For future work we will investigate the inﬂuence of the parameter settings
and their dependence of the number of the nodes and the expected results.
Acknowledgments. The author is supported by European community grant
BIS 21++.

References
1. Arts E., Van Loarhoven P.: Statistical Cooling: A General Approach to Combinatorial Optimization Problems, Phillips Journal of Research 40, (1985), 193–226
2. Bonabeau E., Dorigo M., Theraulaz G.: Swarm Intelligence: From Natural to
Artiﬁcial Systems, Oxford University Press, New York.(1999)
3. Cerny V.: A Thermodynamical Approach to the Traveling Salesman Problem: An
Eﬃcient Simulated Annealing Algorithm, J. of Optimization Theory and Applications 45, (1985), 41–51
4. Corne D., Dorigo M., Glover F. (eds.): New Ideas in Optimization, McCraw Hill,
London.(1999)
5. Dowsland K.: Variants of Simulated Annealing for Practical Problem Solving In
Rayward-Smith V. ed., Applications of Modern Heuristic Methods, Henley-onThames: Alfred Walter Ltd. in association with UNICOM, (1995)
6. Kirkpatrick S., Gelatt C.D., Vecchi P.M.: Optimization by Simulated Annealing,
Science 220, (1983),671–680
7. Leick, A.: GPS Satellite Surveying, 2nd. edition. Wiley, Chichester, England.(1995)
8. Metropolis N., Rosenbluth A., Rosenbluth M., Teller A., Teller E.: Equation of
State Calculations by Fast Computing Machines, J. of Chem Phys. 21(6), (1953),
1087–1092
9. Osman I.H., Kelly J.P.: Metaheuristics:An overview. In Osman I.H., Kelly J.P. eds.
Metaheuristics:Theory and Applications, Kluwer Acad. Publisher.(1996)
10. Osman I.H., Potts C.N.: Simulated Annealing for Permutation Flow-Shop Scheduling, Omega 17, (1989), 551–557
11. Reeves C. R. (ed.): Modern Heuristic Techniques for Combinatorial Problems,
Oxford, England, Blackwell Scientiﬁc Publications, (1993)
12. Rene V.V.: Applied Simulated Annealing, Berlin, Springer, (1993)
13. Saleh H. A., and Dare P.: Eﬀective Heuristics for the GPS Survey Network of
Malta: Simulated Annealing and Tabu Search Techniques. Journal of Heuristics N
7 (6), (2001), 533-549
14. Schaﬀer A. A., Yannakakis M.: Simple Local Search Problems that are Hard to
Solve, Society for Industrial Applied Mathematics Journal on Computing, Vol 20,
(1991), pp. 56-87

