A Research on Local Mean in Empirical Mode
Decomposition
Yong-Ping Huang, Xue-Yao Li, and Ru-Bo Zhang
National Laboratory on Machine Perception, Peking University, Beijing, P.R. China
College of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Engineering University,
Harbin 150001, P.R. China
{hwangyungping, lixueyao, zrb}@hrbeu.edu.cn

Abstract. The conventional Empirical mode decomposition (EMD) method uses
envelope mean interpolated by cubic spline fitting, which is sensitive to extrema.
An efficient method for finding the local mean is generated by using support
vector regression machines. The analysis results indicate that the proposed
algorithm has higher performance in the ability of frequency separation,
insensitive to the sampling frequency and can eliminate mode mixing in smallamplitude sine waves intermittence.
Keywords: Empirical Mode Decomposition, Support Vector Regression
Machines, Mode Mixing, Local Mean, Hilbert-Huang Transform.

1 Introduction
Empirical mode decomposition (EMD) introduced by Huang [1], is a method for
decomposing non-linear and multi-component signals. The intrinsic mode functions
(IMFs) resulting from EMD are obtained in the sifting process, which requires that a
local mean should be defined [2]. So the critical part of EMD method is how to find
the local mean. The conventional EMD proposed by Huang use envelope mean, the
mean of upper and lower envelopes which interpolate all the local maxima or minima
by the cubic spline, as local mean, but it is not the real one. In addition, the cubic
spline fitting suffers overshoot or undershoot.
To find the real local mean, at present there are some solution approaches, such as
the stationary-point EMD method (SPEMD) introduced by Zhong [3], a new envelope
algorithm using subsection power function proposed by Qin [4], the B-spline
approach for empirical mode decomposition adopted by Chen [5].However, all these
approaches use curve interpolation, which is sensitive to extrema, calculated by a
parameter interpolation equation. This major and serious disadvantage will lead some
difficulties when extrema are untrue or corrupted by intermittency.
Therefore, it is necessary to find a better method that is insensitive to extrema and
has a robust performance. For the insensitive ability and robustness in interpolation,
we introduce SVRM to estimate the local mean in sifting process, and the EMD
algorithm based on SVRM is proposed.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part III, LNCS 4489, pp. 125–128, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

126

Y.-P. Huang, X.-Y. Li, and R.-B. Zhang

2 The Local Mean Based on SVRM
In sifting process, SVRM is trained by local extrema (include local minima and
maxima) of time series, then predicts directly the local mean. For the simplicity and
the high generalization performance of SVRM, we choose the RBF kernel function
and linear ε -insensitive loss function in SVRM. It is well known that SVRM
generalization performance depends on a good setting of parameters [6].
For the adaptive and computation of analytical selection method, we adopt the
analytical approach to choose the parameters. In the case of a signal y=f(x), the extrema
are (ex1 , ey1 ),", (exi , eyi ),", (exn , ey n ) , where exi and eyi are the coordinates and
the corresponding y value of extrema, n is the number of extrema. Note that the extrema
should be sorted by coordinate order for computing the information between adjacent
extreme. The analytical parameter selections used in sifting process are given as
follows, the regularization parameter C:

C = max( ey + 3δ ey , ey − 3δ ey )
here ey and

δ ey

(1)

are the mean and the standard deviation of the y value of extrema. In

addition, the following RBF kernel parameter γ :

γ = max( dis _ ex + δ dis _ ex , dis _ ex − δ dis _ ex )
where dis _ ex and

(2)

δdis_ ex are the mean and the standard deviation of the coordinate

distances between adjacent extrema. The parameter of insensitive loss function ε is:

ε=

dis _ ey
2

(3)

where dis _ ey is the mean of the y value distances between adjacent extrema.

3 Experiments
To illustrate the behavior of the local mean based on SVRM, we used the
conventional EMD introduced by Huang [1] to compare the algorithm using the local
mean based on SVRM (hereinafter EMD-SVRM for short). First, we generated a
synthetic signal of two superimposed tones:

f ( x) = a1 sin(2π f1 x) + a2 sin(2π f 2 x), x ∈ [ 0,10π ]

(4)

where both f1 and f2 are the frequency of sine tones, respectively. The local mean
based on SVRM and the envelope mean are shown in Fig.1. The fluctuation in the
SVRM-based local mean is considerable, which implies that the sifting process can
separate the tones. As proposed in Ref [10], the conventional EMD can not accurately
separate two superimposed tones when the frequency proportion 0.5 < f 2 f1 < 2.0 . So

A Research on Local Mean in Empirical Mode Decomposition

127

Fig. 1. Illustration of the envelope mean and the local mean using SVRM: (a) the signal in thin
solid line, with the upper and lower envelopes in dot-dashed lines and the envelope mean in
thick solid line; (b) the signal in thin solid line and the local mean based on SVRM in thick
solid line. The signal tested is of the form in Eq.4 with f1 = 1 and f2 = 1.5 with unit amplitude.

Fig. 2. Comparison of the corrcoef and the rms between the first IMF and the actual high
frequency component: (a) calculated results of corrocoef; (b) calculated results of rms

we compare the performance in different sampling frequencies and different
frequency proportions f 2 f 1 ∈ (1.0, 2.0] .
Fig.2 presents calculated results of the correlation coefficient (corrcoef) and the
root mean square error (rms) between the first IMF and the actual high frequency
component. No substantial differences in the results of the second IMF, we omit them
for the sake of brevity. The measured results show the significant improvement of the
proposed algorithm including separate components that are similar in frequency that
would be inseparable with conventional one. And the EMD-SVRM algorithm is less
insensitive to sampling frequency for the good performance when sampling frequency
fs=5Hz, while the performance of conventional EMD is unstable and big fluctuation.
In this test, we consider the small-amplitude and high-frequency sine waves
intermittent in large-amplitude tones. The signal is given as following:
85
y = sin(8π x) + 0.03sin(200π x) ⎡⎣u ( x − 300
) − u ( x − 100
)⎦
300 ⎤

) − u ( x − 180
)⎤
+0.03sin(200π x ) ⎣⎡u ( x − 165
300
300 ⎦

(5)

where x ∈ [0,1] and the sample frequency fs is 300Hz. Using the conventional EMD, we
will obtain the first three components which contain seriously mixed modes especially
the first IMF, as shown in Fig.3.a. And with the EMD-SVRM algorithm, the result is
given in Fig.3.b. Clearly, the small-amplitude sine wave intermittent was separated
from the large-amplitude tones and the amplitude of the third IMF component is very
small. The test shows the EMD-SVRM algorithm can eliminate the mode mixing
caused by intermittency and do not need the intermittency criterion introduced by
Huang [1].

128

Y.-P. Huang, X.-Y. Li, and R.-B. Zhang

Fig. 3. Comparison of the IMF components between the conventional EMD and the EMDSVRM for the intermittency tones: (a) the first three IMF components from conventional EMD
algorithm; (b) the first three IMF components from EMD-SVRM approach

4 Conclusions
The local mean based on SVRM is designed to overcome the deficiency of sensitivity
to extrema, and adopt the generalization performance of SVRM. Compared with
conventional one, our approach shows significant improvements over frequency
separation and good performance of eliminating mode mixing in intermittency. Future
work include finding better model selection especially the analytic parameter selection
and using the ν -SVR instead the ε -SVR may get better performance.
Acknowledgements. This work was supported by the China National Science
Foundation (Grant No.60475016) and the Foundational Research Fund of Harbin
Engineering University (HEUF 04092).

References
1. Huang, N.E., Shen, Z.: A new view of nonlinear water waves: the Hilbert spectrum. A. Rev.
Fluid Mech, Vol. 31. (1999) 417-457
2. Deering, R.， Kaiser, J.F.: The use of a masking signal to improve empirical mode
decomposition. ICASSP2005, Vol. 4. (2005) 485-488
3. Zhong, Y.M.: Research on theoretic evidence and realization of directly-mean EMD
method. Chinese Journal of mechanical engineering, Vol. 17. (2004) 399-404
4. Qin, S.R., Zhong, Y.M.: A new envelope algorithm of Hilbert–Huang Transform.
Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing, Vol. 20. (2006) 1941–1952
5. Chen, Q.H., Huang, N.E., Riemenschneider, S.: A B-spline approach for empirical mode
decompositions. Advances in Computational Mathematics, Vol. 24. (2006) 171–195
6. Cherkassy, V., Ma, Y.Q.: Practical selection of SVM parameters and noise estimation for
SVM regression. Neural Networks, Vol. 17. (2004) 113-126

