Artificial Immunity-Based Discovery for Popular
Information in WEB Pages
Caiming Liu, Xiaojie Liu, Tao Li, Lingxi Peng, Jinquan Zeng, and Hui Zhao
School of Computer Science,
Sichuan University
610065 Chengdu, China
liucaiming@gmail.com

Abstract. An artificial immunity-based discovery method for popular information is proposed. Principles of evolution and concentration of antibodies in artificial immune system are simulated. Key words in web pages are extracted and
simulated as antibody and antigen. Antibodies are evolved and excreted dynamically. Concentration of antibodies is computed to attain accurately the degree of popular measurement in quantity. The proposed method improves the
intelligent degree of information discovery and provides a new way to discover
WEB information.
Keywords: artificial immune, popular information, information discovery,
antibody, concentration.

1 Introduction
WEB pages comprise a great deal of information. How to extract useful knowledge
from WEB pages is focused by researchers. Intelligent methods are needed to compute degree of popular measurement in quantity.
Artificial immune system (AIS) which simulates the characters of learning and
self-adaptation [1, 2] of biological immune system uses the way of clone selection
and mutation principles to recognize foreign harmful antigens [3, 4]. Furthermore, if
an antigen damages body greatly, the antibody which recognizes the antigen excretes
many similar antibodies [5, 6]. Concentration of this kind of antibody will increase
quickly. The antibody concentration can be used to judge the harmful measurement of
relative antigen [7].
In this paper, the former principles is used for reference. Key words in the WEB
pages are extracted to be simulated as antibodies which will be evolved in our model
automatically. Their concentration is computed to judge the degree of popular measurement of WEB information.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the proposed principle is
introduced. In Section 3, simulations and experimental results are showed. Finally,
Sections 4 contains our conclusions.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 166–169, 2007.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Artificial Immunity-Based Discovery for Popular Information in WEB Pages

167

2 Proposed Principle of Information Discovery
2.1 Information Simulation
Key words are extracted to find popular information hid in WEB pages. The key

＋∞

words extracted from WEB pages are simulated as antigens. Let U = U G i be the
i =1

state space of antigen, where G is Chinese or English word library.
Let antibody represent information of key words. Antibody is defined as
D = Keyword , age, count, type . D is a four-tube group. It is consisted of key word
information (keyword), the live generations of antibody (age), the amount of antigens
which antibody matches (count) and the classification of the information (type).
Antibody is consisted of mature antibody and memory antibody. Mature antibody
needs to match enough number ( δ ) of antigens in its lifecycle λ M to evolve into
memory antibody. Or else, it dies. The type of antibody which is extracted in the first
time is the key word self. Mature antibody M is described in equation (1).
M = {x x ∈ D ∧ x.age < λ M ∧ x.count < δ }

(1)

Where, λ M is the lifecycle of antibody, δ is threshold of evolution.
Memory antibody R is evolved by mature antibody. It denotes that information
emerges frequently recently. Memory antibody can live in a long lifecycle λ R even it
doesn’t match any antigens in long period of time.
2.2 Evolution of Antibody
Mature antibody is extracted from WEB pages newly or generated by clone selection
to recognize new information. If mature antibody can not match enough antigens in
its lifecycle, it tends toward death. Once its matching count arrives at the threshold δ
(i. e. count ≥ δ ), it will be activated and evolved into memory antibody. During the
period λ M , some mature antibodies match few antigens. This kind of antibody will
die soon. If a key word appears in a high frequency, matching count of its relative
antibody will be accumulated to threshold δ sharply. Its relative antibody will be
evolved into memory quickly. This represents the key word is popular.
Memory antibody denotes a key word is popular. It has long lifecycle λ R . However, λ R is not infinite. The past popular information may not appear again or emerge
in low frequency in future. When a memory antibody can not match any key words in
the period λ R , its affinity count decreases in a time interval Tint erval ( count is decreased by 1). When the affinity is equal to 0, memory antibody is degenerated as
mature antibody. If the memory antibody matches antigen again, its affinity increase
( count is added by 1). If it becomes popular again, its affinity ascends quickly.

168

C. Liu et al.

2.3 Degree Computation of Popular Measurement
To discover relative information, memory antibody excretes new mature antibody
rapidly by the way of copy, mutation, and etc. By computing the concentration of
antibody, the popular degree of relative information can be worked out. According to
the type of antibody, its concentration is obtained. The concentration represents the
popular degree. Equation (2) describes antibody concentration.
⎛
⎞
⎜
⎟
⎜
⎟
2
− 1⎟
hr (ri ) = c⎜
⎛
⎞
⎜
⎟
−⎜ ∑ ri .type + ∑ mi .type ⎟
⎜
⎟
⎜
⎟
⎠
⎝1+ e ⎝
⎠

(2)

Where, hr (ri ) denotes the popular degree of information similar to memory antibody
ri , the lager the hr (ri ) , the relative key word is more popular; mi is mature antibody
and in the same kind of ri ; c is a constant number, c > 0 .

3 Experimental Results
In our experiments, two portal web sites and two BBSes are chosen to test the efficiency of proposed method. Choices of monitor spots are shown in table 1. The four
columns of table 1 represent the following parameters respectively: name of web site,
lifecycle λ M (see section 2.1) of mature antibody, lifecycle of memory antibody
λ R (see section 2.1) and degeneration time interval Tint erval (see section 2.2) of memory
antibody.
Table 1. Monitor spots and configuration of parameters

Monitor spot
Web site 1
Web site 2
BBS 1
BBS 2

λM

λR

Tint erval

One week
One week
Four days
Four days

One day
One day
Five hours
Two hours

Half day
Half day
1.5 hours
1.5 hours

A great lot of key words are extracted from pages of former web sites. These key
words are simulated as antibodies. We monitor the four web sites from September to
November in 2006. Through evolvement of antibody, concentration of antibody is
worked out. According to the concentration, we obtain the popular degree of some
information by equation (2), as is shown in figure 1. The larger popular degree is, the
more popular the key word is. It is National Day of Chinese in October 1. So, people
pay much attention to the key word “national day” whose concentration ascends
sharply.

3RSXODUGHJUHH

Artificial Immunity-Based Discovery for Popular Information in WEB Pages

169






1DWLRQDOGD\
:HDWKHU






'DWH



Fig. 1. The measurement of popular information

4 Conclusion
In this paper, key words in WEB pages are simulated as antibodies and antigens.
Antibody evolution and clone selection principles in AIS are used to evolve antibodies dynamically. Degeneration of memory antibody is proposed to simulate popular
information degradation. Concentration of antibody forms automatically. The concentration represents popular degree of information in quantity. The experimental results
show that our method can get the popular degree of information efficiently.
Acknowledgments. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No.60373110, No.60573130 and No.60502011, the
National Research Foundation for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education of China
under Grant No.20030610003, the New Century Excellent Expert Program of Ministry
of Education of China under Grant No. NCET-04-0870, and the Innovation Foundation
of Sichuan University under Grant No.2004CF10.

References
1. Li, T.: Computer Immunology[M]. Publishing House of Electronics Industry, Beijing
(2004)
2. Forrest, S., Hofmeyr, S. A., Somayaji, A.: Computer immunology[J]. Communications of
the ACM, Vol. 40(10) (1997) 88-96
3. De Castro, L. N., Timmis, J. I.: Artificial Immune Systems: A Novel Computational Intelligence Approach[M]. London: Springer-Verlag, 2002
4. Hofmeyr, S. A., Forrest, S.: Architecture for an Artificial Immune System[J]. Evolutionary
Computation, Vol. 8(4) (2000) 443-473
5. Hofmeyr, S. A., Forrest, S.: Immunity by design: an artificial immune system[C]. In: Genetic Evolutionary Computation Conf, San Francisco, CA, (1999) 1289-1296
6. Timmis, J., Neal, M., Hunt, J.: An artificial immune system for data analysis. Biosystems,
Vol. 55(1/3) (2000) 143-150
7. Li, T.: An immunity based network security risk estimation. Science in China(Series E),
Vol. 35(8) (2005) 798-816

