A Discrete Parameter-Driven Time Series Model for
Traffic Flow in ITS
Yow-Jen Jou1 and Yan-Chu Huang2
1

2

Department of Finance and Information Management,
National Chiao Tung University, Taiwan
Institute of Statistics, National Chiao Tung University, Taiwan

Abstract. The traffic condition information is critical to signal control and traffic queue management for intelligent transportation systems (ITSs). This work
formulates the dynamic traffic flows by a parameter-driven discrete time series
model. A modified Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm is proposed to estimate the parameters of the model. The conditional expectation given y in the E
step of the EM algorithm is replaced by the marginal expectation. Applications
of the model and the algorithm are illustrated by analyzing the traffic flow data.
Through the data collected by the detectors, the traffic condition about the network can be estimated, smoothed and predicted. This model can be embedded in
a chip for signal control and queue management procedures of ITSs.

1 Introduction
Intelligent transportation systems deal with subjects involving the application of advanced technologies such as information and communication technologies to improve
the traffic management. Traffic congestion occurs daily in most urban areas, posing a serious threat to the environment. Appropriate traffic management procedures are increasingly required with the deployment of more efficient traffic control systems within the
ITSs complex that handles information, including traffic flow prediction, on a real-time
basis. Although signalized intersections have been investigated in recent decades using
various methods, the merits of signal control have not been fully realized [2]. Managing
traffic more efficiently requires sustaining the road system in a free-flow condition as
long as possible. Therefore, this work presents, for the first time, a parameter-driven
model for a time series of counts to describe the evolution of the traffic flow. The parameters are then estimated, followed by forecasting of the future traffic flow.
Discrete time series model has attracted considerable attention recently [1], [3], [4].
Cox [1] characterized time series models into two categories: parameter-driven and
observation-driven models. These models result in very complex likelihoods which require computation intensive solution like expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm. In
this paper, the conditional expectation given y in the E step of the EM algorithm is replaced by the marginal expectation. This is a more efficient algorithm for the estimation
of the parameter-driven model. Therefore, the proposed model can be embedded in the
signal control chip as a system on chip (SoC) [2]. The chip can be used for advanced
traffic management systems, advanced traveler information systems and advanced public transportation systems.
Y. Shi et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2007, Part IV, LNCS 4490, pp. 291–294, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

292

Y.-J. Jou and Y.-C. Huang

2 Model Specifications and Methodology
This section describes the parameter-driven model and discusses the modified EM algorithm. Two methods are proposed to smoothen and estimate the response variable.
2.1 The Model
Let {Yt }N
t=1 denote a time series of counts with nonnegative integer values which comprise the response process. This study use a parameter-driven model to account for the
{Wt }, which is assumed to be a stationary Gaussian AR(1) latent process. Conditional
on {Wt } the observations are independent Poisson random variables with means λt ,
written as
(1)
Yt |λt ∼ P o(λt ),
where {λt } is defined as λt = exp(Wt + α Ut ) , and
Wt = ρWt−1 + εt ,

(2)

where {εt } is iid N (0, σε2 ) . The parameter vector θ = (ρ, σε2 , α ) .
Although an elegant and straightforward means of describing the relationship between the response variable and the covariates, the parameter-driven model makes it
intractable to analyze the likelihood function analytically. This problem can be solved
using currently available computational power.
2.2 The Modified EM Algorithm
Let Xt = (yt , Wt ) denote the complete-data random vector of interest at time t, let X =
(X1 , . . . , XN ) represent the realization of the complete-data, let Y = (y1 , . . . , yN ) be
the observed data and let W = (W1 , . . . , WN ) be the latent process which will be
treated as missing values.
In the presence of latent process, which is treated as missing data, only the log likelihood function lX (θ|y) = log fX (y, W |θ)dW is observed. Each iteration of the EM
algorithm involves two steps:
– E step: From Q(θ |θ) = Eθ (lX (θ )|y);
– M step: Maximize Q(•|θ).
Eθ (•|y) denotes the conditional expectation given Y = y , where θ represents the true
parameter and lX (θ ) is the log-likelihood of X. Because the conditional expectation
given y of lX (θ|y) is intractable, the EM algorithm is adjusted by replacing the marginal
expectation with the conditional expectation given y. The procedure of the modified EM
algorithm is completed when the changes are within the tolerance. To determine the
precision of the parameter estimation, the estimated information matrix is calculated
ˆ = E(−∂ 2 lX (θ)/∂θ∂θ | ˆ), and the estimated variance-covariance matrix is
by I(θ)
θ=θ
ˆ = I −1 (θ).
ˆ
ˆ
V ar(θ)

A Discrete Parameter-Driven Time Series Model for Traffic Flow in ITS

293

2.3 Fitting and Prediction
The models in Eqns. (1) and (2) are considered, and the EM algorithm is found to be
readily applicable. Furthermore, since
Eθ (λt |y) = exp(α Ut )Eθ (exp(Wt )|y)

(3)

for all t, fitting and prediction are easily conducted.
The l-step prediction can be obtained from
Eθ (λN +l |y) = exp(α UN +l + (1 − ρ2l )σε2 /2(1 − ρ2 ))Eθ (exp(ρl WN )|y)

(4)

Two methods are proposed for smoothing and predicting the response variable. In
method 1, unconditional expectations are used for all the terms involving the latent
process. Meanwhile, in method 2, the estimated conditional expectation of the latent
process is substituted by the simulated results.

3 Numerical Example: ITS Traffic Flow
To management traffic more efficiently, maximizing the periods for which road systems
are in a free-flow condition is preferable. The data analyzed in this study were obtained
by RTMS (Remote Traffic Microwave Sensor) from the intersections before the rush
hour. The data are taken at ten-second intervals. The notations used in the model are
listed as follows:
Y : Traffic flow (volume); this value indicates the detected flow,
u : Occupancy; the percentage of time during which vehicles traverse a given point, and
N : The number of data.
This study applied the parameter-driven model to analyze traffic flow as an illustration of the application of the proposed approach. The covariate vector in the model is
given by Ut = (1, ut ) . The previous section adopted the latent AR(1) model, and
the modified EM algorithm was used for the estimation. The starting values for ρ
and σ 2 are 0.5 and 0.5. Furthermore, the starting values of α are obtained by fitting
a log-linear model to the data, assuming no temporal dependence, namely (α0 , α1 )
are (0.682636, 2.550254) . The value of Q(•|θ) is maximized and the approximate
ML estimates are obtained by ρˆ = 0.707559(0.022361), ˆσ 2 = 0.332942(0.014899),
α
ˆ = (0.350308(0.025593), 2.580916(0.129314)). The figures in parentheses are the
estimated standard errors, obtained from the inverse information matrix. Fitted results
are shown in Fig. 1 in which dots represent the observations. The thinner solid line
connects the fitted data simulated using method 1, and the average error between the
ˆt |/n = 1.181 . The thicker solid line
observations and the fitted data is N
t=1 |yt − y
connects the fitted data simulated using method 2, and the average error between the
N
observations and the fitted data is t=1 |yt − yˆt |/n = 2.277 . Clearly the average error
between observations and the fitted data from method 1 is smaller than that obtained by
method 2, an instability that may partly result from the variability associated with the
latent process Wt .

294

Y.-J. Jou and Y.-C. Huang
40
30
20
10
0
1

21

41

61

81

101

121

141

161

181

201

201

221

241

261

281

301
time t

321

341

361

381

401

30
20
10
0

Fig. 1. Time sequence of the traffic flow (the first 400 data of complete data set). The dots represent observations. The thinner solid line connects the fitted data simulated using method 1.
Meanwhile, the thicker solid line connects the fitted data simulated using method 2.

4 Conclusions
In this work, a modified MCEM algorithm is proposed to the analysis of a parameterdriven model for a time series of count data. The applicability of the proposed algorithm is demonstrated by analyzing the relationship between traffic flow and occupancy,
which is modelled by assuming the existence of an AR(1) Gaussian latent process. The
proposed algorithm also possesses the advantages of being economical in terms of both
computational time and memory space. This model can be used for signal control and
queue management procedures of ITSs.

Acknowledgement
This research was partially supported by the Ministry of Education of the Republic of
China, Taiwan, MOE ATU Program and partially support by National Science Council, Taiwan, under grant number NSC-95-2221-E-009-347 and NSC-95-2622 -E-009007-CC3.

References
1. Cox, D.R.: Statistical analysis of time series: some recent developments (with discussion),
Scandinavian Journal of Statistics, Vol. 8, 1981, pp. 93-115.
2. Cho, H.J., Tseng, M.T.: A novel computational algorithm for traffic signal control SoC,
WSEAS Transactions on Mathematics, Issue 1, Vol. 5, 2006. pp. 123-128.
3. Chan, K.S., Ledolter, J.: Monte Carlo EM estimation for time Series models involving counts,
Journal of the American Statistical Association, Vol. 90, No. 429, 1995, pp. 242-252.
4. Freeland, R.K., McCabe, B.P.M.: Analysis of low count time series data by Poisson autoregression, Journal of Time Series Analysis, Vol. 25, No.5, 2004, pp. 701-722.

