Clustering Organisms Using Metabolic Networks
Tomasz Arod´z
Institute of Computer Science, AGH University of Science and Technology,
al. Mickiewicza 30, 30-059 Krak´
ow, Poland
arodz@agh.edu.pl

Abstract. Topological properties of metabolic networks may reﬂect systematic diﬀerences between evolutionary distinct groups of organisms.
Indeed, the mean shortest path length between metabolites is, on average, longer in eukaryotes than in bacteria. We show that not only the
averages of groups diﬀer, but the organisms can be successfully clustered,
based on network properties, into categories corresponding to taxonomic
groups. We use the fact that in metabolic networks of diﬀerent organisms,
correspondence between vertices is available. We compare our approach
with several graph indices employed previously to analyse metabolic networks, and show that they fail at achieving level of clustering similar
to ours. Finally, we show that the phylogenetic tree constructed using
network-based approach agrees in most cases with gene-based phylogeny.
Keywords: Metabolic networks, Phylogenetic tree, Graph descriptors.

1

Introduction

Nature provides us with a stunning diversity of life forms. First taxonomic efforts aimed at classifying and bringing order to this heterogeneity relied on
apparent phenotypic diﬀerences between organisms. With the advances in molecular biology, study of evolution of species found ground on the conservation
and divergence of their corresponding gene or protein sequences. Phylogenetic
analyses of evolutionary conserved genome units, such as 16S rRNA, allowed
for constructing trees that capture the evolutionary closeness of organisms, with
more distant species occupying nodes in distant branches. Still, reliance in the
construction of a phylogenetic tree on a speciﬁc sequence can be unstable, due to
events such as horizontal gene transfer. As genome sequencing eﬀorts progress,
whole-genome phylogenetic approach emerged to circumvent this issue [1].
Analysing sequences of some or even all genes or proteins does not make
explicit the system-level interactions between these entities. Recently, networkbased approach gained popularity in modelling and analysing the linked and
entangled structure that turns these individual units into a living cell [2]. In particular, metabolic networks, linking metabolites through enzymes that catalyse
reactions between them, were shown to belong to a class of complex networks
with scale-free connectivity [3]. Such networks are resilient to small random
changes, which may accumulate through generations and give hints to the evolutionary distance between organisms.
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2008, Part II, LNCS 5102, pp. 527–534, 2008.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

528

T. Arod´z

The goal of the paper is to cluster organisms according to similarity of the
topological properties of their metabolic networks. Using such networks to aid the
construction of phylogenetic trees has been introduced recently. One approach for
evaluating distance between organisms’ networks relies on information other than
topological. Measures of overlap between sets of metabolites [4,5] or enzymes
[6,4] present in diﬀerent organisms were used. Other methods use information on
enzyme similarity instead or in addition to topological properties, which makes
them more akin to classical phylogenetic algorithms that operate on genetic
closeness. For example, enzyme functional class similarity was employed together
with similarities of enzyme neighbourhoods [7]. Extent of sequence agreement of
enzymes, and of those substrates that are proteins, was also used [8].
Another group of methods relies only on topological properties of the graph,
once the network structure of enzymatic connections linking metabolites has
been inferred from the genome. Average shortest path lengths of metabolic networks was shown to be shorter for bacteria than for eukaryotes and archaea [9].
Average clustering coeﬃcient and average betweenness centrality was proposed
as means to discriminate archaea from bacteria, but it was validated using only
11 organisms [10]. In the same study, network diameter and average shortest
paths were deemed not suitable for clustering. Phylogenetic trees were also constructed based on graph kernels [11]. Rank order of metabolites or enzymes was
also used [4], revealing clustering of parasitic and non-parasitic bacteria, eukaryotes and archaea, but the networks involved spurious connections through
abundant current metabolites, for example cofactors such as ATP.
We show here that analysing metabolic networks using only simple graph descriptors to infer similarity allows for obtaining meaningful phylogenetic results.
We use the fact that network edges are spanned on a common set of vertices
with known identities as metabolites. We calculate and compare vertex-speciﬁc
descriptors, that is, topological properties for nodes common in networks of all
organisms. Our approach does not involve quantitative measures of genetic or
functional similarity of enzymes in the network. Nor does it use the diﬀerences in
presence or absence of certain elements of the network, as we use descriptors for
vertices that are present in all networks. Despite the simplicity of the topological
descriptors used in calculating graph similarity, the resulting phylogenetic tree
is in good accord with current phylogenetic knowledge.

2

Methods

Evaluation of similarity of two graphs is in most applications hindered by the lack
of correspondence between elements of the network. Techniques to circumvent
this involve dissimilarity measures based on the cost of edit operations required
to transform one graph into another or rely on estimated vertex matching in
graphs [12]. Other methods compare graph indices, either global properties, such
as graph diameter, or aggregated statistics of node- or edge-speciﬁc properties,
such as average clustering coeﬃcient [13]. Also, more sophisticated functions of

Clustering Organisms Using Metabolic Networks

529

vertex-speciﬁc properties are in use, such as symmetric polynomials, which are
invariant to the permutation of nodes [14].
In metabolic networks made publicly available by Ma and Zeng [9], which we
analyse here, vertices represent well-deﬁned chemical entities, such as glucose,
while edges correspond to enzymatic reactions that transform the metabolites.
Thus, the correspondence between vertices in the network is readily available.
Permutation invariant measures or indices based on aggregate statistics are no
longer necessary to obtain similarity between two graphs. Instead, we evaluate
here an approach in which the values of vertex-speciﬁc topological properties
are used directly to form a feature vector. Each feature corresponds then to a
speciﬁc metabolite. Dissimilarities between metabolic networks are quantiﬁed by
distances between corresponding feature vectors.
Metabolic networks were shown to be composed of a single giant connected
component, and a set of isolated small components [15]. In further analysis, we
have discarded these small components, and retained only the giant connected
component of the network. One should note that in diﬀerent organisms the whole
networks, as well as the giant connected components, are of diﬀerent size, and
overlap only partially.
We have analysed two vertex-speciﬁc topological descriptors as basis for our
feature vectors. A descriptor provides a single numerical value for each vertex in
the network’s giant connected component. One analysed property is the vertex
degree, deﬁned as the number of edges incident with the vertex. Alternatively,
we analysed the betweenness centrality of a vertex v, deﬁned as the fraction
of the number of shortest paths between two vertices s and t passing through
v in the overall number of shortest paths between s and t, averaged over all
source-target pairs in the giant connected component.
Values of these descriptors are available only for nodes present in the network
of a given organism, and also present in its giant connected component. To obtain
feature vectors with no missing entries for all organisms, we identiﬁed vertices
that are present in giant connected components of all the analysed metabolic
networks. This resulted in a subset containing 100 nodes. We utilised the values
of node degrees or node betweenness centrality only from these vertices. Thus, we
arrive with 100–dimensional feature vectors that are well-deﬁned across all the
networks. Also, while the values are taken from only a subset of the connected
component, they contain information from outside of the subset, as calculation
of the vertex properties involves the whole giant connected component.

3
3.1

Results and Discussion
Clustering Organisms Using Vertex-Speciﬁc Descriptors

We have analysed metabolic networks of 44 organisms – 3 eukaryotes and 41
bacteria. The latter consist of 25 members of Proteobacteria, 12 Firmicutes and
4 Actinobacteria (see Fig. 4 for detailed information about the species analysed).
For each organism, we obtained a feature vector of 100 values describing the
vertex degrees of the nodes in its metabolic network.

T. Arod´z

Principal component II

530

Proteobacteria
Firmicutes
Actinobacteria
Eukaryotes

Principal component I

Fig. 1. First two principal components of the 100-dimensional feature space, formed by
values of the vertex degrees of 100 vertices common to all giant connected components
of the 44 analysed metabolic networks

In Fig. 1, we show the projection of vertex-speciﬁc descriptors into principal
component space (PCA) [16], spanned by highest variance, mutually uncorrelated directions in the dataset. The ﬁgure indicates that metabolic networks of
the three animals, as captured by the descriptors, are distinct from the networks of bacteria. Within the cluster of the latter, Proteobacteria form a region
separated from Firmicutes. Actinobacteria are grouped between Frimicutes and
Proteobacteria. The distances between the three animals are relatively large
compared to distances between neighbouring bacterial organisms. This is consistent with the fact that the animals analysed, H. sapiens, D. melanogaster
and C. elegans, represent diﬀerent phyla, while within the phyla of Proteobacteria, Actinobacteria and Firmicutes several examples of each bacterial class are
present.
3.2

Comparison with Network Indices

To compare the eﬀectiveness of the vertex-speciﬁc approach with the one based
on graph indices, we grouped the descriptors employed in previous studies of
metabolic networks to form a feature vector and analysed its clustering and
discriminatory ability. The feature vector comprises of average shortest path
length, maximum path length, average clustering coeﬃcient, number of vertices,
average vertex degree and average vertex betweenness centrality, each normalised
to zero mean and unit variance. Next, we have conducted principal component
analysis (PCA). Contrary to results of our vertex-speciﬁc descriptors in Fig. 1,
the results depicted in the left panel of Fig. 2 do not show meaningful clusters.

Proteobacteria
Firmicutes
Actinobacteria
Eukaryotes

Principal component I

Discriminant component II

Principal component II

Clustering Organisms Using Metabolic Networks

531

Proteobacteria
Firmicutes
Actinobacteria
Eukaryotes
Discriminant component I

Fig. 2. Principal component space (left) and optimal discriminant space obtained with
LDA (right) for a feature set composed of global descriptors and averages of local
descriptors of metabolic networks. See text for details.

Lack of clusters, corresponding to groups of organisms, in the principal component space indicates that the main variance captured by graph indices is not
associated with inter-group diversity. It does not mean that diﬀerences between
groups are not captured at all. We evaluated the extent to which analysed graph
indices contain information allowing to discriminate between groups of organisms. To this end, we employed a supervised projection method, the Fisher’s
Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) [16], to ﬁnd an optimal discriminant space.
LDA ﬁnds a projection optimal in terms of separation between groups, knowing on input the assignment of organisms to groups. The result, depicted in the
right panel of Fig. 2, indicates that some discriminatory information is present
in the descriptors, at least allowing to separate eukaryotes from bacteria. Unlike for the vertex-speciﬁc descriptors, as comparison with PCA results show,
this information does not dominate the variance but is overwhelmed by variance
within organism groups. It has to be extracted with supervised learning methods
that know group assignment from the start, such as LDA. However, such supervised methods are unsuitable for phylogenetic analysis, which is inherently an
unsupervised task. Similarly unsatisfactory clustering was obtained when graph
indices were computed using only the 100 vertices common to all giant connected
components (data not shown), which rules out the possibility that the advantage
of our method stems from using only a speciﬁc subset of vertices.
For comparison, if the same supervised LDA method is applied to our vertexspeciﬁc descriptors based on vertex degrees, as shown in the left panel of Fig. 3,
discrimination between groups of organisms is much more evident than for graph
indices in Fig. 2. Moreover, clustering in PCA space is not much diﬀerent from supervised results in LDA space, which further supports the claim that for vertexspeciﬁc descriptors, the main source of diﬀerences between organisms is related
to their evolutionary closeness. As shown in the right panel of Fig. 3, the effectiveness of the vertex-speciﬁc approach is not conﬁned to vertex degree only,
vertex-speciﬁc descriptors based on betweenness centralities of the nodes can
also be used.

T. Arod´z

Proteobacteria
Firmicutes
Actinobacteria
Eukaryotes
Discriminant component I

Discriminant component II

Discriminant component II

532

Proteobacteria
Firmicutes
Actinobacteria
Eukaryotes

Discriminant component I

Fig. 3. Optimal discriminant space obtained with LDA for the vertex-speciﬁc descriptors of metabolic networks, based on vertex degree (left) or vertex centrality (right)

3.3

Phylogenetic Tree from Vertex-Speciﬁc Descriptors of
Metabolic Networks

We have used feature vectors deﬁned by vertex-speciﬁc descriptors based on
vertex degrees to construct the phylogenetic tree of the 44 analysed organisms.
To this end, we calculated Euclidean distances between normalised feature
vectors representing the metabolic networks of the organisms. The distances
were then supplied to the NJ phylogenetic tree construction algorithm [17] implemented in the PHYLIP tool. The resulting tree is depicted in Fig. 4.
In the tree, bacteria form a separate subtree from eukaryotes. Within bacteria, a certain amount of taxonomic order is preserved, with the most notable
exception being the placement of N. meningitidis, a β-proteobacteria, along with
M. leprae, a member of Actinobacteria, and C. crescentus, an α-proteobacteria,
in a separate subtree. One reason for this may be that C. crescentus is a species
of Caulobacterales, while all the other α-proteobacteria, separated from it in
the tree, are Rhizobiales. Furthermore, a recent study using a genome-wide
phylogeny indicated that N. meningitidis is quite distinct [18]. Depending on
the tree-construction method, it was situated near α- or γ-proteobacteria, not
along the other β-proteobacteria with sequenced genome, R. solanacearum. In
whole-genome phylogeny, R. solanacearum aligned itself consistently with a γproteobacteria P. aeruginosa, a ﬁnding that is also supported by results of our
study.
The rest of the organisation of the bacteria tree follows taxonomy, in some
groups down to below the level of species class. A subtree of α-proteobacteria
forms a separate group within Proteobacteria, as do γ-proteobacteria. Within
a common tree of the class of γ-proteobacteria, a branch corresponding to the
order Enterobacteriales is present. Actinobacteria, a phylum of high-GC Grampositive bacteria, and Firmicutes, low-GC Gram-positive bacteria, form a tree
isolated from Gram-negative Proteobacteria, with further grouping of Firmicutes
into a single branch separated from Actinobacteria.

Clustering Organisms Using Metabolic Networks

Actinobacteria

Proteobacteria

Firmicutes

Actinobacteria
Eukaryotes

533

Mycobacterium leprae
b-Proteobacteria
Neisseria meningitidis Z2491
a-Proteobacteria
Caulobacter crescentus
Escherichia coli K-12 MG1655
Escherichia coli K-12 W3110
Escherichia coli O157 Sakai
Escherichia coli O157 EDL933
Salmonella typhimurium
Enterobacteriales
Salmonella typhi
Escherichia coli CFT073
Shigella flexneri
Yersinia pestis CO92
Yersinia pestis KIM
Vibrio cholerae
g-Proteobacteria
Pasteurella multocida
Xanthomonas campestris
Xanthomonas axonopodis
Shewanella oneidensis
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
b-Proteobacteria
Ralstonia solanacearum
Mesorhizobium loti
Sinorhizobium meliloti
Brucella melitensis
Agrobacterium tumefaciens C58 U a-Proteobacteria
Agrobacterium tumefaciens C58 C
Brucella suis
Staphylococcus aureus N315
Staphylococcus aureus Mu50
Staphylococcus aureus MW2
Lactococcus lactis
Clostridium acetobutylicum
Clostridium perfringens
Streptococcus pneumoniae R6
Listeria innocua
Listeria monocytogenes
Bacillus subtilis
Bacillus halodurans
Oceanobacillus iheyensis
Streptomyces coelicolor
Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv
Mycobacterium tuberculosis CDC1551
Caenorhabditis elegans
Drosophila melanogaster
Homo sapiens

Fig. 4. Phylogenetic tree obtained with NJ tree construction method [17] using the
vertex-speciﬁc descriptors of metabolic networks based on vertex degrees

4

Conclusion

We have shown that the evolutionary distances between organisms can be successfully inferred from simple properties of their metabolic networks. We used
the fact that correspondence between vertices in metabolic networks is readily
available, as they represent well-deﬁned chemical entities, to construct vertexspeciﬁc topological graph descriptors. This network-centred approach allows for
capturing evolutionary closeness of organisms at the functional, system level.
The resulting clustering of organisms is in most aspects consistent with the well
established view that relies on genome content.

534

T. Arod´z

Acknowledgements. The author acknowledges Polish Ministry of Science and
Higher Education research projects 3T11F01030 and N519315535 and KI AGH
internal grant 11.11.120.777. Graph properties were calculated with Matlab BGL
library. The author thanks Prof. Dr. Witold Dzwinel for mentoring, and Mr.
Marcin Kurdziel and Mr. Wojciech Czech for discussions.

References
1. Wolf, Y., Rogozin, I., Grishin, N., Koonin, E.: Genome trees and the tree of life.
Trends in Genetics 18, 472–479 (2002)
2. Barabasi, A., Oltvai, Z.: Network biology: understanding the cell’s functional organization. Nature Reviews Genetics 5, 101–113 (2004)
3. Jeong, H., Tombor, B., Albert, R., Oltvai, Z., Barab´asi, A.: The large-scale organization of metabolic networks. Nature 407, 651–654 (2000)
4. Podani, J., Oltvai, Z., Jeong, H., Tombor, B., Barab´
asi, A., Szathm´
ary, E.: Comparable system-level organization of Archaea and Eukaryotes. Nature Genetics 29,
54–56 (2001)
5. Forst, C., Flamm, C., Hofacker, I., Stadler, P.: Algebraic comparison of metabolic
networks, phylogenetic inference, and metabolic innovation. BMC Bioinformatics 7,
67 (2006)
6. Ma, H., Zeng, A.: Phylogenetic comparison of metabolic capacities of organisms at
genome level. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 31, 204–213 (2004)
7. Heymans, M., Singh, A.: Deriving phylogenetic trees from the similarity analysis
of metabolic pathways. Bioinformatics 19, i138–i146 (2003)
8. Forst, C., Schulten, K.: Phylogenetic analysis of metabolic pathways. Journal of
Molecular Evolution 52, 471–489 (2001)
9. Ma, H., Zeng, A.: Reconstruction of metabolic networks from genome data and
analysis of their global structure for various organisms. Bioinformatics 19, 270–277
(2003)
10. Zhu, D., Qin, Z.: Structural comparison of metabolic networks in selected single
cell organisms. BMC Bioinformatics 6, 8 (2005)
11. Oh, S., Joung, J., Chang, J., Zhang, B.: Construction of phylogenetic trees by
kernel-based comparative analysis of metabolic networks. BMC Bioinformatics 7,
284 (2006)
12. Luo, B., Hancock, E.: Structural graph matching using the EM algorithm and
singular value decomposition. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence 23, 1120–1136 (2001)
13. Costa, L., Rodrigues, F., Travieso, G., Boas, P.: Characterization of complex networks: A survey of measurements. Advances in Physics 56, 167–242 (2007)
14. Wilson, R., Luo, E.: Pattern vectors from algebraic graph theory. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 27, 1112–1124 (2005)
15. Ma, H., Zeng, A.: The connectivity structure, giant strong component and centrality of metabolic networks. Bioinformatics 19, 1423–1430 (2003)
16. Bishop, C.M.: Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. Springer, Heidelberg
(2006)
17. Saitou, N., Nei, M.: The neighbor-joining method: a new method for reconstructing
phylogenetic trees. Molecular Biology and Evolution 4, 406–425 (1987)
18. Henz, S., Huson, D., Auch, A., Nieselt-Struwe, K., Schuster, S.: Whole-genome
prokaryotic phylogeny. Bioinformatics 21, 2329–2335 (2005)

