Bioinformatics’ Challenges to Computer Science
Mario Cannataro1, Mathilde Romberg2 , Joakim Sundnes3 ,
and Rodrigo Weber dos Santos4
1

University Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy
cannataro@unicz.it
2
Research Centre Julich, Germany
m.romberg@fz-juelich.de
3
Simula Research Laboratory, Norway
sundnes@simula.no
4
Federal University of Juiz de Fora, Brazil
rodrigo.weber@ufjf.edu.br

Abstract. The workshop Bioinformatics’ Challenges to Computer Science covers the topics of data management and integration, modelling
and simulation of biological systems and data visualization and image
processing. This short paper describes the requirements Bioinformatics
has towards computer science, summarizes the papers accepted for the
workshop and gives a brief outlook on future developments.
Keywords: Bioinformatics, Data Management and Integration, Modelling and Simulation of Biological Systems, Data Visualization.

1

Bioinformatics - An Overview

Bioinformatics[1], a link between biology and computer science, involves the design and development of advanced algorithms and computational platforms to
solve problems in biology and medicine. It also deals with methods for acquiring, storing, retrieving, analyzing, and integrating biological data obtained by
experiments, or by querying databases.
Bioinformatics is providing the foundation for fast and reliable analysis of biological and medical data. Genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, epidemiological, clinical and text mining applications have made essential progress through
using bioinformatics tools. Although standard tools are widely oﬀered through
the Web, they are no longer suﬃcient to cope with the increasing demands of
the complex analysis and simulation tasks of today’s emerging ﬁelds of biotechnology research. Moreover, emerging life sciences applications need to use in a
coordinated way bioinformatics tools, biological data banks, and patient’s clinical data, which require seamless integration, privacy preservation and controlled
sharing[2,3,4]. Therefore, new challenges to computer science arise from the sheer
problem scale, the huge amounts of data to be integrated and the computing
power necessary to analyze large data sets or to simulate complex biological
systems.
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2008, Part III, LNCS 5103, pp. 67–69, 2008.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

68

2

M. Cannataro et al.

Goals

The aim of the workshop was to bring together scientists from computer and
life sciences to discuss future directions of bioinformatics algorithms, applications, and data management. The discussion evolves from the basic building
blocks for Bioinformatics applications which are: data sources (e.g. experimental
datasets, local and public biological databases); software tools providing specialized services (e.g. searching of protein sequences in protein databases, sequence
alignment, biophysical simulations, data classiﬁcation, etc.); and high level description of the goals and requirements of applications and results produced in
past executions. From a computational point of view, bioinformatics applications bring a wide range of challenges and a huge demand for computing power.
The challenging issues involve the large number of involved datasets, the size of
the datasets, the complexity inherent in the data analysis and simulations, the
heterogeneous nature of the data, and the need for a secure infrastructure for
processing private data. From another perspective, emerging high performance
computer architectures may oﬀer huge computational resources in the trade of
speciﬁc development of new algorithms for bioinformatics. These are the cases
of Grid and Web services, as well as of multicore architectures that demand
bioinformatics algorithms to be speciﬁcally tailored to these new computational
frameworks.

3

Workshop Summary

The papers in the present workshop address a number of the requirements and
challenges mentioned above, with special emphasis on data management and
integration, modelling and simulation, and data visualization and image processing. A ﬁrst group of papers discusses data management and integration issues in genomics and proteomics as well as in biomedical applications, including
management of provenance data. In particular, Swain et al. present a data warehouse and repository for results from protein folding and unfolding simulations
together with optimization strategies for the data warehouse that exploit grid
tools. The ViroLab virtual laboratory is a common framework discussed by the
papers of Balis et al. and Assel et al.. The ﬁrst one uses ViroLab to investigate
a data provenance model, whereas the second one discusses data integration
and security issues for medical data. Mackiewicz et al. deal with the analysis of
genetic code data and the minimization of prediction errors.
A second group of papers discusses modelling and simulation in systems biology and biosciences. In particular, Cui et al. demonstrate a computational model
for calcium signalling networks. Cardiac modelling for understanding Chagas’
Disease is the focus of Mendo¸ca Costa et al. whereas Vega et al. present an
adaptive algorithm for identifying transcription factor binding regions. The use
of DNA microarray expression data for gene selection is exploited by Maciejewski to optimize feature selection for class prediction. Cannataro et al. discuss
a meta tool for the prediction of possible protein combinations in protein to
protein interaction networks.

Bioinformatics’ Challenges to Computer Science

69

The third group of papers discusses visualization of genomics data and
biomedical images, as well as metadata extraction for e-learning purposes. In
particular, Jakubowska et al. present a new technique for improving the visual
representation of data in genomic browsers. Miranda Teixeira et al. discuss methods for automatic segmentation of cardiac Magnetic Resonance Images and Bulat
et al. deal with algorithms for computer navigation systems assisting bronchoscope positioning. Kononowicz and Wi´sniowski exploit the MPEG-7 meta data
standard for medical multimedia objects to support e-learning.
The results and current research trends presented in the papers reassure the
importance of especially data and meta data management and of computational
modelling. In addition, the workshop includes discussion slots on topics not
covered by the accepted papers, like bioinformatics middleware for future applications, full semantic integration of biological data banks, and utilization of new
visualization techniques.

4

Conclusions and Outlook

Data integration and data management are under research for years but the
complexity associated to biological processes and structures demand further investigations and the development of new methods and tools for bioinformatics.
The simulation of complex biological phenomena becomes more feasible as the
amount of information provided by new experimental techniques and the computing power rapidly increases. On the other hand, the development and use of
complex computational models demand new implementations that better exploit
the new computer architectures. Research on distributed and Grid computing
for bioinformatics applications as well as related workﬂow modeling will enable
emerging life sciences applications to use in a coordinated way bioinformatics
tools, biological data banks, and patient’s clinical data, that requires seamless
integration, privacy preservation and controlled sharing.
Acknowledgements. We would like to thank the members of the program
committee for the invaluable assistance on reviewing the papers and the organizers of ICCS for promoting this workshop.

References
1. Cohen, J.: Bioinformatics - an introduction for computer scientists. ACM Computing Surveys 36, 122–158 (2004)
2. Talbi, E.G., Zomaya, A.Y. (eds.): Grid Computing for Bioinformatics and Computational Biology. Wiley, Chichester (2008)
3. Cannataro, M. (ed.): Computational Grid Technologies for Life Sciences,
Biomedicine and Healthcare. Information Science Reference. Hershey (in preparation, 2008)
4. Aloisio, G., Breton, V., Mirto, M., Murli, A., Solomonides, T.: Special section: Life
science grids for biomedicine and bioinformatics. Future Generation Computer Systems 23, 367–370 (2007)

