Second Workshop on Teaching Computational Science
WTCS 2008
A. Tirado-Ramos1 and Q. Luo2
1
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Wuhan University of Science and Technology, Zhongnan, China
alfredo@science.uva.nl, ccnu_luo2008@yahoo.com.cn
2

Abstract. The Second Workshop on Teaching Computational Science, within
the International Conference on Computational Science, provides a platform for
discussing innovations in teaching computational sciences at all levels and contexts of higher education. This editorial provides an introduction to the work
presented during the sessions.
Keywords: computational science, teaching, parallel computing, e-Learning,
collaborative environments, higher education.

1 Introduction
Experience shows that students who have been trained in technology-based environments, such as computational science, tend to thrive in today’s technology-driven
societies. The interdisciplinary nature of computational science allows the integration
of methods from computer science, mathematical modeling, and data visualization,
among others, in order to create virtual laboratories for in-silico experimentation that
just a few years ago would have proved costly and impractical for most academic
institutions of higher learning. It is evident that the interaction of computational
methods allows more intriguing questions to be posed by teachers and students at
lower cost experimental settings [1].
The field of higher education is therefore currently witnessing the rapid adoption of
computational tools and methods by science teachers. A large majority of those teachers have steadily joined forces and shared experiences in the last few years on the use
of high performance computing facilities in order to promote the benefits and importance of computational science instruction in science classrooms.
The International workshop on Teaching Computational Science (WTCS2008),
held in Krakow, Poland, in conjunction with the International Conference on Computational Science 2008 (ICCS 2008) offers a technical program consisting of presentations dealing with the state of the art in the field. The workshop includes presentations
that describe innovations in the context of formal courses involving, for example,
introductory programming, service courses and specialist undergraduate or postgraduate topics.
During the workshop sessions, Gimenez et al present their experiences with the use
of metaheuristics in a parallel computing course, mapping problems in which processes are assigned to processors in a heterogeneous environment, with heterogeneity
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2008, Part II, LNCS 5102, pp. 657 – 658, 2008.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

658

A. Tirado-Ramos and Q. Luo

in computation and in the network. Freitag et al discuss how to introduce students to
collaborative work, in project-based learning courses on computer network applications. Hamada et al provide their experiences with e-Learning using supporting active
tools to improve learning and evaluation. Hnatkowska et al present an assessment
approach to software development process used within student team projects, based
on the Process Assessment Model. Aracely et al present their experiences teaching
cryptography to engineering students, using Maple software in a graduate-level
course. Iglesias et al discuss teaching in the context of the European space of higher
education, focusing on the problem of teaching computer graphics. Ramos-Quintana
et al elaborate on collaborative environments to encourage self-directed learning,
focusing on their experiences with object-oriented programming and case-based reasoning. Shiflet et al discuss theirs undergraduate computational science curriculum,
which served as a basis the first textbook designed specifically for an introductory
course in the computational science and engineering curriculum. Finally, GonzalezCinca et al discuss innovative ways of teaching computational science in aeronautics,
with a particular emphasis in Computational Fluid Dynamics, and the experiences
derived from implementation.
We feel that the width and breadth of topics shown at the workshop provide a
glimpse on the current state of the art in the field, and a promising window to challenges and possibilities ahead.
Acknowledgments. The workshop chairs would like to thank all the work by the
scientific reviewing committee, as well as the efforts by ICCS chairs Dick van Albada, Marian Bubak, and Peter Sloot.

Reference
1. Selwyn, N.: The use of computer technology in university teaching and learning: a critical
perspective. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 23(2), 83–94 (2007)

