Estimating Real Estate Value-at-Risk Using
Wavelet Denoising and Time Series Model
Kaijian He1,2 , Chi Xie1 , and Kin Keung Lai2,1
1

College of Business Administration, Hunan University, Changsha, Hunan, 410082,
P.R. China
paulhekj@gmail.com, xiechi@hnu.cn
2
Department of Management Sciences, City University of Hong Kong, Tat Chee
Avenue, Kowloon, Hong Kong
mskklai@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract. As the real estate market develops rapidly and is increasingly securitized, it has become an important investment asset in the
portfolio design. Thus the measurement of its market risk exposure has
attracted attentions from academics and industries due to its peculiar
behavior and unique characteristics such as heteroscedasticity and multi
scale heterogeneity in its risk and noise evolution etc. This paper proposes the wavelet denoising ARMA-GARCH approach for measuring the
market risk level in the real estate sector. The multi scale heterogeneous
noise level is determined in the level dependent manner in wavelet analysis. The autocorrelation and heteroscedasticity characteristics for both
data and noises are modeled in the ARMA-GARCH framework. Experiment results in Chinese real estate market suggest that the proposed
methodology achieves the superior performance by improving the reliability of VaR estimated upon those from traditional ARMA-GARCH
approach.
Keywords: Value at Risk, Real Estate Market, Wavelet Analysis,
ARMA-GARCH Model.

1

Introduction

Traditionally the direct investment in the real estate market has been seen as
the low risk/low return means of investment and are only allocated the small
proportion of the portfolio value [1]. In recent years, the increasing securitization
of the real estate industry has oﬀered an important alternative to the direct
investment in property. These indirect investment means oﬀer clear advantages
over the direct investment counterpart such as signiﬁcantly higher liquidity level,
lower unit costs, lower management and transaction costs, good levels of within
property portfolio diversiﬁcation, and transparent and real time price. Empirical
researches also conﬁrm that prices of these securitized real estate vehicles are
highly correlated with the value of the underlying properties, thus serves as the
alternative to the traditional direct property investment [2].
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2008, Part II, LNCS 5102, pp. 494–503, 2008.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

Estimating Real Estate Value-at-Risk Using Wavelet Denoising

495

However, the securitization process of the property investment also introduces
additional risks in the investment process. Empirical researches suggest that
their prices are not only exposed to the performance of the underlying property
values, but also exposed to the volatility in the stock market. Thus they are
more volatile than the underlying property market. There is higher level of risks
accompanied by higher level of returns with the advent of these new features in
the property investment [2].
Therefore, when new features of securitized real estate investment attract
large allocation of funds into the real estate investment in the portfolio design,
it also demands the appropriate risk measurement and management during the
investment process. The more volatile market environment requires more precise
measurement and management of the market risk level. However, traditional risk
measurement techniques no longer suﬃce as the property shares increasingly
exhibit unique characteristics. On one hand, its movement reﬂects the underlying
property market behavior and is typically auto correlated and mean reverting.
On the other hand, it is also inﬂuenced by speculative forces in the stock market
and incorporates multi scale nonlinear dynamics structure in its risk evolution
[3]. Therefore, new risk measurement techniques that are capable of analyzing
risk in the multi scale domain is desired to deal with the particular characteristics
in the market.
Despite its signiﬁcance, the literature on risk measurement for real estate
investment is surprisingly scarce. This paper attempts to measure the market risk
in the real estate market using Value at Risk methodology. Although numerous
risk measures emerge over years, none has received the same level of recognition
as VaR at both industrial and academic level. As a single summarizing statistics
measuring the maximum possible losses over certain investment horizon at the
given conﬁdence level, VaR is simple and concise to understand and implement.
To estimate real estate VaR at higher accuracy and reliability demanded by
investors, this paper proposes the wavelet denoising ARMA-GARCH approach
to analyze the multi scale structure of risk evolutions in the real estate market
and further estimates VaR at the ﬁner time scale domain.
The contribution of the present paper is two folds: ﬁrstly wavelet denoising
ARMA-GARCH algorithm is proposed for VaR estimates (WDNVaR). This approach is unique as the wavelet denoising algorithm is treated here as a blind
source separation tool that extracts two time series with distinct features from
the original time series, i.e. data and noise, for further modeling. Besides, noises
are taken into account when measuring the market risk level since it contributes
signiﬁcantly to the overall variation. Secondly the proposed approach is applied
to Chinese real estate market to measure signiﬁcant market risk there, which is
largely overlooked issue in the current literature, to the best of our knowledge.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: the second section reviews
the relevant theories. The third section proposes the wavelet denoising ARMAGARCH VaR estimation methodology. The fourth section conducts empirical
studies and analyze results. The ﬁfth section concludes.

496

2
2.1

K. He, C. Xie, K.K. Lai

Relevant Theories
Value at Risk and Backtesting Theories

VaR measures the maximum level of downside risk of the portfolio at certain conﬁdence level with the given investment time horizon. It computes the maximum
loss level as in (1)
p{rt ≤ −rV aR } = 1 − cl

(1)

Where rt denotes the return of the portfolio over the time period t. cl denotes
the associated investment conﬁdence level.
There are mainly three approaches to calculate VaR based on historical returns. These include parametric, nonparametric and semi parametric approach.
The parametric approach derives the analytical form of risk measures based
on the assumed density function. The non parametric approach infers patterns
and the risk exposure level from the historical data using empirical data driven
approaches. As parametric and non parametric approaches both have their advantages and disadvantages, the semi parametric approaches attract signiﬁcant
attentions recently by complimenting one using the other [4].
Meanwhile, the VaR model adequacy is checked using formal statistical procedures such as Backtesting. There are diﬀerent types of backtesting procedures
developed over years, which mainly concentrate on the following three aspects:
the frequency of exceedances, the temporal behavior of exceedances and the size
of losses [4]. Among them, Kupiec backtesting procedure is the most widely accepted one and is adopted in this paper to evaluate the model performance. The
backtesting process is treated as a series of Bernoulli trials. The frequency of exceedances in these trials should converge to the binomial distribution at inﬁnity.
Thus the likelihood ratio test statistics takes the mathematical form as in (2).
LRuc = −2log[(1 − ρ)T −N ρN ] + 2log([1 − (

T T −N T N
)]
( ) ])
N
N

(2)

Where LRUC denotes the test statistics that has an asymptotic χ2 (1) distribution. N is the number of VaR exceedances. ρ is the probability of an VaR
exceedances occurrence. T is the number of trials carried out.
2.2

Wavelet Denoising Theory

Wavelet analysis is a new tool designed for multi scale analysis of signals in the
time scale domain. Compared to the frequency only signal projection in the traditional Fourier analysis, wavelet analysis projects signals in the frequency-time
domain, thus bringing the capability for more subtle and detailed data analysis.
Mathematically wavelet analysis is an orthogonal transform that utilizes a special family of functions called wavelets to approximate and extract the features
of interests from the original data [5]. Wavelets are basis functions that satisfy
the admissibility and unit energy condition as in (3).

Estimating Real Estate Value-at-Risk Using Wavelet Denoising
∞

Cϕ =
0

|ϕ(f )|
df < ∞,
f

∞
−∞

|ψ(t)|2 dt = 1

497

(3)

Where ϕ(f ) is the Fourier transform of wavelet ψ(t) in the frequency domain.
The original data series can be orthogonally transformed using wavelet basis
functions. It is a decomposition process that projects the original data into the
sub data series in the wavelet domain as in (4).
∞

W (u, s) =

t−u
1
x(t) √ ψ(
)dt
s
s
−∞

(4)

Where u is the wavelet parameter translating the original wavelet function, and
s is the scale parameter dilating the original wavelet function.
The wavelet synthesis process reconstructs the data series using wavelet coefﬁcients in the time scale domain as in (5).
x(t) =

1
Cψ

∞

i

nf ty
0

−∞

W (u, s)ψu,s (t)du

ds
s2

(5)

As data are often contaminated by irrelevant noises, researches on recovering
data of interests from noisy data have attracted signiﬁcant attentions. Traditional approach assumes linear nature of the data during the denoising process
and only achieves limited success. Recently nonlinear denoising algorithm that
recognizes the nonlinear nature of data and noise has been explored further to
improve the quality of data recovered from noisy data. Among numerous denoising algorithm proposed, wavelet analysis is one promising approach [6]. It
starts by ﬁrstly decomposing the original data series in the time scale domain.
The threshold level is selected for each scale following certain threshold selection
rules. Then wavelet coeﬃcients smaller than the calculated threshold level are
removed while the remaining coeﬃcients are dealt with following certain thresholding strategy. And ﬁnally the denoised data series are reconstructed from the
denoised sub data series at diﬀerent scales. In the end, the original data are
decomposed into data part and irrelevant noises part.
During the denoising process, both thresholding rules and threshold selection
rules are crucial to the appropriate separation of data from noises. There are
mainly two thresholding rules in the literature. The hard thresholding rule suppresses only those insigniﬁcant data that are less than the chosen thresholds. It
retains the rest of the data. Thus it would retain the spike and abrupt changes.
The soft thresholding rule subtracts the thresholding value from all data points
while suppressing those insigniﬁcant data smaller than the chosen thresholds.
The soft thresholding rule would leave more smooth and continuous data series
for model ﬁtting. Signiﬁcant eﬀorts have been devoted to develop algorithms
for determining the optimal thresholds. These may include numerous threshold
selection rules such as universal thresholding, minimax thresholding and Stein’s
Unbiased Risk Estimate (SURE), etc [6]. The universal thresholding rule sets
the upper ceiling boundary for independently and identically distributed noises.

498

K. He, C. Xie, K.K. Lai

The minimax thresholding rule adopts more conservative approach by choosing
the optimal threshold that minimizes the overall mean square error. Thus the
abrupt changes from the original data are retained [7]. The SURE chooses the
optimal threshold by minimizing the Stein’s unbiased estimator of risk and is
data adaptive. However, it could be narrow banded around the minimum value
range.

3

Wavelet Denoising ARMA-GARCH Approach for
Value at Risk Estimates

The traditional ARMA-GARCH approach ﬁts conditional models directly to the
original data to obtain parameter estimates for both mean and volatility. It only
achieves the moderate level of accuracy since they ignore the underlying risk structure. Besides, diﬀerent parts of risks may follow diﬀerent evolution processes, which
require the same model with diﬀerent parameters or diﬀerent model speciﬁcations.
The traditional ARMA-GARCH approach is only approximation and oﬀers limited insights into the underlying risk structure and evolution.
To tackle these issues, the wavelet denoising ARMA-GARCH approach is
proposed to model the risk evolution at ﬁner scales. Risks are separated into data
and noise parts. They are modeled separately with diﬀerent model speciﬁcations
and parameters. The rationale behind the proposed wavelet denoising ARMAGARCH approach is as follows: Since the fundamental and speculation part
of real estate risks are driven by completely diﬀerent factors, they evolve in
independent manners and require separate treatments. Thus by separating these
two parts and ﬁtting models to them independently using the wavelet denoising
algorithm, the ﬁtting accuracy can be improved and more insights can be gained.
The WDNVaR algorithm involves the following steps:
(1) Wavelet analysis is used to separate the data from irrelevant noises.
rt = rdata,t + rnoise,t

(6)

(2) The mean for both data and noises are modeled by ARMA processes with
diﬀerent parameters.
m

μt = a0 +

n

ai rt−i +
i=1

bj εt−j

(7)

j=1

Where μt is the estimate of the conditional mean at time t, rt−i (i = 1...m) is
the lag m returns with parameter ai , and εt=j (j = 1...n) is the lag n residuals
in the previous period with parameter bj .
(3) The conditional mean for the original data series are aggregated from
estimates for both data and noises part.
μaggregated = μdata + μnoises

(8)

(4) The volatility for both data and noises are modeled by GARCH processes
with diﬀerent parameters.

Estimating Real Estate Value-at-Risk Using Wavelet Denoising

p

σt2 = ω +

q
2
ai σt−i
+

i=1

499

βj ε2t−j

(9)

j=1

2
(i = 1...p)
Where σt2 is the estimate of the conditional variance at time t, σt−i
2
is the lag p variance with parameter ai , and εt−j (j = 1...q) is the lag q squared
errors with parameter βj in the previous periods.
(5) And the conditional volatility for the original data series are aggregated
from estimates for both data and noises part.
2
2
2
σaggregated
= σdata
+ σnosies

(10)

The model order during model ﬁtting process is determined under AIC and
BIC minimization principle.
(6) Although the empirical sample distribution could take any arbitrary form,
it would converge to the normal distribution with signiﬁcantly large size of samples and length of time horizon. Thus, when sample size is signiﬁcantly large
and covers signiﬁcant length of time, VaR can be estimated parametrically as in
(11).
W DN V aR = −F (a)σt+1|t − μ

(11)

Where F (a) refers to the corresponding quantile (i.e. 95%, 97.5% or 99%) of
the normal distribution. σt+1|t refers to the estimate of conditional standard
deviation at time t + 1. μ refers to the estimate of the sample mean.

4

Empirical Studies

The data analyzed in this paper include the closing prices for the Shanghai real
estate index. Data are obtained from Global Financial Data, which is one of the
major data vendors. The data set includes 3568 observations for Shanghai SE
real estate index covering the time period from 30th April, 1993 to 14th December, 2007. Data range covers the period of signiﬁcant changes and events, such
as the residential reform in 1998, the volatile market environment during the
transitional period and the late 2007, etc. Thus the proposed model is put to
strict test under diﬀerent market scenarios. 60% of the data set is used as the
training set while the remaining 40% is reserved as the test set for model backtesting. The Augmented Dickey Fuller (ADF) test of stationarity shows that the
original price series is not stationary. Further autocorrelation and partial autocorrelation function analysis suggest the existence of signiﬁcant trend factors.
Thus the price series are log diﬀerenced at the ﬁrst order to eliminate the trend
pt
.
factors as in ln pt−1
Some stylized facts can be observed in table 1. There are considerable ﬂuctuations in the Chinese real estate market as suggested by the signiﬁcant level
of standard deviation. The market is also prone to high probability of extreme
events occurrences as indicated by signiﬁcant excess kurtosis. This is further

500

K. He, C. Xie, K.K. Lai
Table 1. Descriptive Statistics and Statistical Tests
Mean Standard Deviation Skewness Kurtosis JB Test BDS test
0.0001

0.0277

1.3826

17.3717

0.001

0

conﬁrmed by the rejection of Jarque-Bera test of normality, which suggests that
the phenomenon of fat tail is statistically signiﬁcant. Meanwhile, the rejection
of BDS test of independence suggests that there are nonlinear autocorrelation
for the market returns. Thus the risks in the Chinese real estate market are statistically signiﬁcant. Accurate and reliable risk measures are desired to protect
investors’ interests in the risky market environment.
Firstly VaR is estimated using traditional ARMA-GARCH approach. The lag
order up to 5 for both ARMA and GARCH processes are tried using the training
data. The model order is determined as ARMA(1,1)-GARCH(4,2) under AIC
and BIC minimization principle. The rolling window method is used to include
new observations made available for each trail. The window length is set to 2139
to cover the relevant information set.
Table 2. ARMA-GARCH VaR for Shanghai SE Real Estate Index
Conﬁdence Levels Exceedances Kupiec Test P Value
99.0%

17

0.4933

0.4825

97.5%

38

0.1489

0.6996

95.0%

64

0.8352

0.3608

As indicated by lower p value, the VaR estimated at 97.5% conﬁdence level is
too aggressive. Meanwhile, the estimation at 95% conﬁdence level is too conservative, which leads to too few exceedances. Besides, when it comes to the further
performance improvement, this approach leaves little room. Thus the wavelet
denoising ARMA-GARCH model is proposed to investigate the underlying risk
structure and further improve the accuracy and reliability of VaR estimated.
Four parameters need to be set when estimating VaR based on the wavelet
denoising approach, including the decomposition level, the wavelet family, the
thresholding rule and the threshold selection rule. The decomposition level is set
to 1. The wavelet families tried includes Haar, Daubechies 2 and Coiﬂets 2. The
thresholding rule tried include hard and soft thresholding rule. The threshold
selection algorithms attempted include SURE, minimax and universal threshold
selection algorithm. Firstly the wavelet denoising algorithm is used to denoise
the original data series and analyze the underlying risk structure. The standard
deviations for both denoised and noise data are calculated to investigate the
impacts of both data and noises on the total risk level. The ARMA-GARCH
model is ﬁtted to the denoised data and noise separately to determine the model
order. In table 3, the standard deviation is shown as the number outside the

Estimating Real Estate Value-at-Risk Using Wavelet Denoising

501

Table 3. ARMA-GARCH Model Order with diﬀerent Thresholding and Threshold
Selection Rules
Wavelets

Hard

Soft

Hard

Soft

Hard

Soft

Heursure Heursure Minimaxi Minimaxi Universal Universal
Data

(2,3,1,1)

(5,4,1,4)

(5,4,1,5)

(3,4,4,4)

(5,5,4,4)

(4,5,4,4)

(Haar)

0.0273

0.0240

0.0255

0.0216

0.0238

0.0205

Noise

(1,2,5,4)

(1,1,4,4)

(1,2,5,4)

(1,1,4,4)

(1,1,4,4)

(1,1,4,4)

(Haar)

0.0046

0.0082

0.0108

0.0140

0.0141

0.0164

Data

(1,3,5,2)

(1,1,1,1)

(5,5,2,2)

(2,4,1,4)

(2,5,4,3)

(5,4,4,4)

(Db2)

0.0271

0.0237

0.0255

0.0216

0.0239

0.0206

Noise

(1,4,4,5)

(4,5,3,2)

(2,2,4,5)

(4,5,2,2)

(4,5,4,4)

(2,4,3,4)

(Db2)

0.0055

0.0092

0.0107

0.0140

0.0140

0.0163

Data

(3,4,5,2)

(4,5,1,2)

(2,5,1,4)

(4,4,1,2)

(3,5,3,1)

(4,1,4,2)

(Coif2)

0.0273

0.0237

0.0253

0.0211

0.0235

0.0201

Noise

(5,3,1,1)

(1,5,4,2)

(4,5,1,1)

(1,5,4,2)

(3,5,1,5)

(1,5,2,1)

(Coif2)

0.0049

0.0087

0.0113

0.0146

0.0146

0.0172

parenthesis. The number pair (r,m,p,q) shown within the parenthesis correspond
to the optimized model order in ARMA(r,m)-GARCH(p,q) speciﬁcation.
Experiment results in table 3 conﬁrm that the standard deviation for noise
data series are signiﬁcant and non negligible during the modeling process. It
could be as large as half of the standard deviation of data series in some circumstances. That means that noise data contributes up to 20% of the total
variation in the data. Thus previous approaches ignoring the signiﬁcant impact
of noise data lead to signiﬁcantly downward biased risk estimates. In contrast,
risk estimates for noise data constitute important part of total risk estimates.
Since the typical physical real estate market is usually more stable than the
securitized market, the fundamental part of the risk is supposed to be smaller
than the speculation part of the risk [?]. Thus it can be observed from experiment
results that the noise data correspond to the fundamental part of market risks
since it contributes less to the total variation in the long term. Meanwhile the
denoised part corresponds to the speculation part of the market risk since they
contribute most to the total variation. The securitized real estate market is
much more volatile than the traditional one. This ﬁndings oﬀer potentially useful
information and freedom to investors when estimating the market price and risk
level. Based on the analysis, the securitized real estate market is at least 50%
more volatile than the traditional one.
Experiment results in table 3 also show that the model order varies when
WDNVaR is tried using diﬀerent parameters. Thus to determine the best set of
parameters for improving model’s forecasting accuracy, the AIC and BIC information criteria are introduced into the modeling process. Experiment results in

502

K. He, C. Xie, K.K. Lai

table 3 also shows clearly that data and noise follow their own path of evolutions
and they are both non negligible during modeling process. This ﬁnding supports
the modeling methodology proposed in this paper that treats data and noise
separately with emphasis on their own characteristics. It also implies that the
current denoising algorithms are not solely reliable as they ignore the potential
signiﬁcant impact of the noise part of the data, determine the separation of data
and noise in a largely arbitrary manner and lacks the theoretical guidance as to
the suitability of the parameters chosen.
Based on the previous ﬁndings, the WDNVaR is used to estimate VaR in
Chinese real estate market. Through trial and error method, the decomposition
level is set to 1 as it shows the best performance among decomposition levels
tested up to 6. The wavelet family chosen is Haar. The universal threshold selection rule is used during the denoising process while the noises are processed
following hard thresholding method. The model order for ﬁtting denoised data
is determined as ARMA(5,5)-GARCH(4,4). The model order for noise data is
determined as ARMA(1,1)-GARCH(4,4).
Table 4. WDNVaR(Haar,1) for Shanghai SE Real Estate Index Conﬁdence Level
Conﬁdence Levels Exceedances Kupiec Test P Value
99.0%

17

0.4933

0.4825

97.5%

36

0.0026

0.9595

95.0%

67

0.2912

0.5895

As shown in the experiment results in table 4, the reliability of VaR estimated based on the wavelet denoising approach improves considerably. The P
value improves at both 95% and 97.5% conﬁdence level and stays the same at
99% conﬁdence level, during the model backtesting process. The performance improvement is attributed to the separation of data from noises during the model
ﬁtting process. Thus, the models ﬁtted to both data and noise series can better capture the essential factors governing the risk evolution and lead to higher
goodness of ﬁt.

5

Conclusions

This paper proposes the wavelet denoising ARMA-GARCH approach for estimating VaR. Compared to traditional approaches that recover signals from noisy
data, the wavelet denoising ARMA-GARCH model recognizes the contributions
of both data and noise to the overall market risk level. The denoised data are
linked to the speculation part of the real estate risk while the noise part is linked
to the fundamental part of the market risk. Both data and noises are separated
by the utilization of wavelet analysis for further model ﬁtting. Recognizing their
distinct features, they are further modeled using ARMA-GARCH speciﬁcation

Estimating Real Estate Value-at-Risk Using Wavelet Denoising

503

with diﬀerent model speciﬁcations and parameters. Since empirical studies suggest that Chinese real estate market represents a considerable risky environment,
the proposed wavelet denoising ARMA-GARCH approach is applied to Chinese
real estate market for market risk measurement. Experiment results conﬁrm the
superior performance of the proposed model against traditional ARMA-GARCH
approach, i.e. the reliability of VaR estimated improves considerably upon those
from the traditional ARMA-GARCH approach.

Acknowledgements
The work described in this paper was supported by a grant from the National
Social Science Foundation of China (SSFC No.07AJL005) and a Research Grant
of City University of Hong Kong (No. 9610058).

References
1. Glascock, J.: Market conditions, risk, and real estate portfolio returns: Some empirical evidence. The Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics 4(4), 367–373
(1991)
2. Ball, M., Lizieri, C., MacGregor, B.D.: The economics of commercial property markets, pp. 367–384, Routledge, London, GB98Z0620 bnb 2516 Michael Ball, Colin
Lizieri and Bryan D. MacGregor. 24cm. Bibliography: Includes index (1998)
3. Scott, L.O.: Do prices reﬂect market fundamentals in real estate markets? The
Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics 3(1), 5–23 (1990)
4. Dowd, K.: Measuring market risk. Wiley ﬁnance series. pp. 341–354, Wiley, Chichester (2002) (GBA364768 bnb 2758 Kevin Dowd. ill. 25 cm. + 1 CD-Rom (4 3/4
in.) Includes bibliographical references and indexes)
5. Percival, D.B., Walden, A.T.: Wavelet methods for time series analysis. Cambridge series in statistical and probabilistic mathematics. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge (2000) (GBA102097 bnb 2629 Donald B. Percival and Andrew
T. Walden. ill. 26cm. Includes bibliographical references and index)
6. Donoho, D.L., Johnstone, I.M.: Adapting to unknown smoothness via wavelet
shrinkage. Journal Of The American Statistical Association 90(432), 1200–1224
(1995)
7. Donoho, D.L., Johnstone, I.M.: Minimax estimation via wavelet shrinkage. Annals
Of Statistics 26(3), 879–921 (1998)

