Web Applications Supporting the Development
of Models of Chagas’ Disease for Left
Ventricular Myocytes of Adult Rats
Caroline Mendon¸ca Costa, Ricardo Silva Campos, Fernando Otaviano Campos,
and Rodrigo Weber dos Santos
FISIOCOMP, the Laboratory of Computational Physiology,
Dept. of Computer Science and Master Program in Computational Modeling
Federal University of Juiz de Fora
Campus Martelos,
Juiz de Fora, MG 36036-330, Brazil
mendonca.carol@yahoo.com.br, ricardosilvacampos@terra.com.br,
fcampos1981@gmail.com, rodrigo.weber@ufjf.edu.br
http://www.fisiocomp.ufjf.br

Abstract. Chagas’ Disease is an endemic infection in many areas of
South and Central America that may cause a fatal type of myocarditis.
In the acute phase of the disease, ventricular extrasystoles and tachycardia have been reported. Experiments with cardiac myocytes in the
acute stage of Chagas’ Disease have suggested a depression of Ito , the
Ca2+ -independent K+ Transient Outward current. In this work we use
computational models of left ventricular myocytes of adult rats to qualify
the eﬀects of Ito reduction that appear during the acute phase of Chagas’
Disease. The simulations are carried out by Web applications based on
the CellML language, a recently emerged international standard for the
description of biological models. The computational framework supports
the development of mathematical models, simulations and visualization
of the results. Our preliminary simulation results suggest that the reduction of Ito density elicits modiﬁcations of electrophysiological mechanisms
that are strongly related to the phenomena of arrhythmia.
Keywords: Cardiac Modeling, Web-based Simulations, Problem Solving
Environment, Myocarditis, Arrhythmia, Chagas’ Disease.

1

Introduction

Chagas’ Disease is an endemic infection in many areas of South and Central
America causing a distinctive, often fatal myocarditis. Approximately 10 to 20
million individuals are infected, and 50,000 deaths annually are associated with
this disease [1].
In the acute period ventricular extrasystoles and tachycardia have been reported in the cases of acute myocarditis [2,3]. Experiments with cardiac myocytes
in the acute stage of Chagas’ Disease [4] have suggested a depression of Ito ,
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2008, Part III, LNCS 5103, pp. 120–129, 2008.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

Web Applications Supporting the Development of Models of Chagas’ Disease

121

the Ca2+ -independent K+ Transient Outward current in canine hearts. Animal
models of myocarditis have also reported the depression of Ito in rat heart. The
availability of many diﬀerent genetically altered mouse models of known defects
in the human cardiovascular system, the recent completion of the rat genome [5]
and improvements in methods for genetically modifying rat progeny [6] create a
strong demand for a more quantitative understanding of murine cardiovascular
physiology.
In this work we use computational models of the left ventricular myocytes
of adult rats to qualify the eﬀects of the Ito reduction that appear during the
acute phase of Chagas’ Disease. Due to the multi-scale and multi-physics nature
of these biological models, their development becomes particularly challenging,
not only from a biological or biophysical viewpoint, but also from a mathematical and computational perspective. A Web-based computational framework that
provides support for cardiac electrophysiology modeling is under development
[7,8]. Such framework integrates diﬀerent tools and allows one to bypass many
complex steps during the development and use of cardiac models that are based
on systems of ordinary diﬀerential equations. The implementation of cardiac cell
models is supported by a code generator named AGOS [7] that generates C++
code by translating models described in the CellML language [9], a recently
emerged international open standard for the description of biological models.
The generated code allows one to manipulate and solve the mathematical models numerically. The set up and use of the computational models is supported
by a user-friendly graphical interface that oﬀers the tasks of simulation conﬁguration, execution in a computer cluster, storage of results and visualization. All
these tools are integrated in a Web portal [10]. The Web portal allows one to
develop and simulate cardiac models eﬃciently via this user-friendly integrated
environment. As a result, the complex techniques behind cardiac modeling are
taken care of by the Web distributed applications.
A series of in-silico experiments were performed in order to better understand
how the depression of Ito relates to the reported extrasystoles and tachycardia in
the acute phase of the disease. The simulations focused on obtaining insights to
better describe three important landmarks of arrhythmia: APD (Action Potential Duration) restitution curves; dispersion of repolarization; and the dynamics
of intracellular Ca2+ concentration. The APD restitution curve seeks an indication of pro-arrhythmic behavior. During pacing and reentrant cardiac arrhythmias, APD restitution slope has been shown to be an important determinant
of wave stability. In addition of promoting APD alternans, a steep (modulus
greater than 1) APD restitution slope can promote breakup of electrical waves
into a ﬁbrillation-like state [11]. It is well known that ampliﬁcation of dispersion of repolarization underlies the development of life-threatening ventricular
arrhythmias [12]. The dispersion of repolarization is inﬂuenced by the dispersion
of APDs of the ventricular myocytes and the propagation velocity of the depolarization wave. In this work we have taken the diﬀerence between endocardial and
epicardial APDs as an indication of transmural APD dispersion. Finally, alterations in intracellular calcium handling play a prominent role in the generation

122

C. Mendon¸ca Costa et al.

of arrhythmias in the failing heart. Abnormal intracellular calcium dynamics
are usually correlated to the occurrence of Early (EAD) and Delayed (DAD)
Afterdepolarization, i.e. the strong candidates for triggers of arrhythmia [13].
In this work, we use a modiﬁed version of the Pandit et al [14] model to
simulate action potentials (APs) in adult rat left ventricular myocytes. The
mathematical description of the Pandit model was obtainned from the CellML
repository [15]. Our Web Portal supported the modiﬁcation of the model, the
simulation of many experiments and the visualization of results. Our simulation results suggest that the reduction of Ito density observed during the acute
phase of Chagas’ Disease elicits the modiﬁcation of many important electrophysiological mechanisms and features at the cellular level. The reduction of Ito
was followed by [Ca2+ ]i overload and promoted the occurrence of EADs, acting
thus in a pro-arrhythmic fashion. However, reduction of Ito also decreased the
transmural dispersion of APDs, indicating an anti-arrhythmic response. Therefore, the observed modiﬁcations do not converge to the same direction in what
concerns the prevention or induction of arrhythmia.

2

Methods

We have used a modiﬁed version of the Pandit et al. [14] model to simulate action
potentials (APs) in adult rat left ventricular myocytes. The Pandit model was used
to simulate both epicardial and endocardial myocytes as described in [14]. The
original model exhibits Early Afterdepolarizations (EAD) at pacing rates greater
than 2Hz due to insuﬃcient inactivation and excessive reactivation of the L-type
Ca2+ current ICa,L [16]. To solve these limitations the modiﬁcations proposed in
[16] were implemented to avoid the occurrence of EAD at physiological rates: the
time constant of fast inactivation related to the Ca2+ -independent K+ Transient
Outward Current Ito was reduced by 5%; and the inactivation time constant f11
of ICa,L was modiﬁed according to [16] in order to accelerate its kinetics.
These modiﬁcations were performed on the Web via a CellML editor which is
one of the applications of a Web-based computational framework that provides
support for cardiac electrophysiology modeling [7,8]. In addition, all simulations
and the visualization of results were performed on the web with the support
of our computational framework. After applying the above modiﬁcations to the
original CellML model, the AGOS tool [7] translated the new description to an
Application Program Interface (API) which is an object oriented C++ code.
Functions are created for initialization of parameters like the number of iterations, discretization interval and initial values of variables. There are functions
for the numerical solution of the system of ordinary diﬀerential equations and for
results storage. In addition, the API oﬀers functions which allow the automatic
creation of model-speciﬁc interfaces. This feature is used by another web application that enables one to set any model initial condition or parameter of the
model, displaying their actual names, as documented in the CellML input ﬁle,
as shown in Figure 1. The Web server is currently connected to a small cluster
via the SGE engine [17] which enables the simulations to be executed.

Web Applications Supporting the Development of Models of Chagas’ Disease

123

Fig. 1. Web form automatically generated by the AGOS tool for the Pandit model

The in-silico myocyte based on the Pandit model was stimulated by injecting
a transmembrane current of 0.6nA during 5 ms. A train of stimuli was simulated
in order to reproduce the dynamic restitution protocol described in [18]. Cells
were initially paced at a constant BCL (Basic Cycle Length) of 150 ms. After
50 stimuli pacing was stopped and action potential duration (APD90) and the
maximal upstroke velocity (max dv/dt ) were measured. APD90, APD at 90% of
repolarization, was calculated using the diﬀerence between the activation time
and repolarization time. Activation times were obtained as the time of maximum
rate of rise of the simulated transmembrane potentials. Repolarization times were
calculated as the time of crossing a level corresponding to 90% of repolarization
to the transmembrane resting potential. Pacing was then restarted at a longer
BCL. At every 50 stimuli BCL was increased by 25 ms for the simulation with
BCLs ranging from 150 ms to 300 ms; by 50 ms for BCLs ranging from 300 ms
to 500 ms; by 250 ms from 500 ms to 1000 ms; and by 500 ms from 1000 ms to
3000 ms.

124

C. Mendon¸ca Costa et al.

Fig. 2. Epicardial AP paced at a constant BCL of 250 ms for 50% reduction and control
Ito densities

Fig. 3. Epicardial APD for diﬀerent DIs and Ito densities

Web Applications Supporting the Development of Models of Chagas’ Disease

125

Fig. 4. Diﬀerence between endocardial and epicardial APDs for diﬀerent Ito densities

We have also analyzed the dynamics of intracellular Ca2+ concentration by
using the same steady-state restitution protocol described above. Calcium intracellular concentration was also recorded during 100 pulses at a constant BCL of
750 ms. The density of the Ito current was reduced to 50%, 25% and 12.5% in
order to investigate the occurrence of EAD and its relation to APD. Transmembranic currents and ion concentrations were computed, stored, visualized and
used in subsequent analysis.

3
3.1

Results
Restitution Curves and EADs

Experiments with cardiac myocytes in the acute stage of Chagas’ Disease [4]
indicate that phase 1 repolarization is attenuated and suggest a depression of
Ito . In this work we investigated the inﬂuence of Ito in the APD restitution. For
this task we changed the maximum conductance of the Ito current varying its
density from 12.5% to 100% (control condition).
Figure 2 shows APs using the Modiﬁed Pandit Model paced at a BCL of
250 ms for both control (100% of Ito ) and Ito reduced to 50% conditions. At
this BCL, Figure 2 shows that a pattern similar to EAD appears after 9 s of
simulation when Ito is reduced. At BCLs longer than 275 ms we have not observed
EADs, i.e. with Ito reduced to 50%. However, after further reducing Ito density
to 25% (12.5%) EAD-like patterns show up again for BCLs shorter than 450 ms

126

C. Mendon¸ca Costa et al.

(750 ms). Therefore, these simulations suggest that the reduction of Ito density
increases the probability of EAD occurrence at physiological rates.
APD restitution curves were calculated and are presented in Figure 3, where
APD is plotted versus the diastolic interval (DI). DI was taken as the diﬀerence
of the BCL and the measured APD90. One may note from Figure 3 that APD decreases for longer BCLs reaching a steady-state condition after 1000 ms. In addition, reducing the maximum conductivity of Ito monotononically increases APD.
The APD restitution curve may be used as an indication of pro-arrhythmic behavior. During pacing and reentrant cardiac arrhythmias, APD restitution slope
has been shown to be an important determinant of wave stability. In addition
to promoting APD alternans, a steep (modulus greater than 1) APD restitution slope can promote breakup of electrical waves into a ﬁbrillation-like state
[11]. The slopes of the restitution curves presented by Figure 3 were signiﬁcantly
smaller than 1. This agrees with the fact that alternans were not observed in
any of the simulation results.
3.2

Dispersion of Repolarization

It is well known that ampliﬁcation of dispersion of repolarization underlies the
development of life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias [12]. The dispersion of
repolarization is inﬂuenced by the dispersion of APDs of the ventricular myocytes
and the propagation velocity of the depolarization wave. In this work we have
taken the diﬀerence between endocardial and epicardial APDs as an indication
of transmural APD dispersion. In addition, since the propagation velocity is
proportional to the maximum rise of the action potential, we measured max dv/dt
and considered this as an indication of changes on the propagation velocity.
Figure 4 presents the diﬀerence of APDs between simulated endocardial and
epicardial cells for diﬀerent densities of Ito with a pacing rate of 1Hz. Note the
biphasic behavior. APD dispersion is greatly decreased by reducing Ito density
(a near 4-fold decrease from control to 12.5% of Ito density). However, increasing
Ito beyond the control level also reduces APD dispersion.
Since max dv/dt is related with the velocity of the wave propagation in the
cardiac tissue, we simulated the inﬂuence of the Ito in the upstroke of the AP.
Figure 5 shows that the longer the cycle length the greater the upstroke. Figure
5 also shows that Ito marginally aﬀects max dv/dt. The reduction of Ito was
followed by a 10% decrease of max dv/dt.
3.3

Changes in the Intracellular Ca2+ Concentration

Alterations in intracellular calcium handling play a prominent role in the generation of arrhythmias in the failing heart [13]. Figure 6 presents the [Ca2+ ]i versus
time for a BCL of 750 ms. By reducing Ito density we observe that [Ca2+ ]i
reaches a larger steady-state value. The results thus suggest that reduction of
Ito density is followed by [Ca2+ ]i overload.

Web Applications Supporting the Development of Models of Chagas’ Disease

Fig. 5. The upstroke velocity max dv/dt for diﬀerent DIs

Fig. 6. [Ca2+ ]i for diﬀerent densities of Ito versus time

127

128

4

C. Mendon¸ca Costa et al.

Discussion

In this work we have used a Web-based cardiac computational framework based
on the CellML language to simulate mathematical models of the left ventricular myocytes of adult rats. The simulations seek a better understanding of the
eﬀects of Ito reduction during the acute phase of Chagas’ Disease. APD restitution curves were generated, the transmural dispersion of repolarization was
investigated and the dynamics of [Ca2+ ]i analyzed. We have not observed the
phenomenon of alternans during the steady-state pacing protocol adopted. The
APD restitution curves were calculated as presented in Figure 3. It is known
that a steep APD restitution slope may suggest the breakup of electrical waves
into a ﬁbrillation-like state. The absolute values of the slopes of the restitution
curves presented by Figure 3 were signiﬁcantly smaller than 1. This agrees with
the fact that alternans were not observed in any of the simulation results.
However, during fast pacing a pattern similar to Early Afterdepolarization
(EAD) was present (see Figure 2). In addition, EADs occurred in considerably
slower pacing rates after Ito density was reduced in the models. Therefore, the
results suggest that the reduction of Ito density increases the probability of EAD
occurrence at physiological rates. The premature occurrence of EADs seems to
be in accordance with the accumulation of [Ca2+ ]i as a consequence of reduction of Ito density (see Figure 6). Calcium entry into myocytes drives myocyte
contraction. To prepare for the next contraction, myocytes must extrude calcium from intracellular space via the Na+ /Ca2+ exchanger (NCX1) or sequester
it into the sarcoplasmic reticulum. Defective calcium extrusion correlates with
increased intracellular calcium levels and may be relevant to heart failure and
to the generation of arrhythmias [19]. The results presented in Figure 6 suggest
that reduction of Ito density may be followed by [Ca2+ ]i overload.
We have addressed the eﬀects of Ito density reduction on the transmural dispersion of repolarization by calculating the changes on endocardial to epicardial APD diﬀerence and on the max dv/dt, which is related to the velocity of
the wave propagation in the cardiac tissue. In our simulations, max dv/dt was
marginally aﬀected (see Figure 4). However, the transmural dispersion of APD,
as presented in Figure 5, is decreased after Ito is reduced. The results indicate
an anti-arrhythmic eﬀect associated to the reduction of Ito density.
In summary, the computational framework simpliﬁed the required modiﬁcations and usage of the mathematical model studied in this work. The combination
of the XML-based automatic code generator, the CellML editor and the Web
portal provided an user-friendly environment for our simulations. Our results
suggest that the reduction of Ito density observed during the acute phase of
Chagas’ Disease elicits the modiﬁcation of many important electrophysiological
mechanisms and features. The reduction of Ito was followed by [Ca2+ ]i overload
and promoted the occurrence of EADs, acting thus in a pro-arrhythmic fashion.
However, reduction of Ito also decreased the dispersion of APDs, indicating an
anti-arrhythmic eﬀect. Therefore, the observed modiﬁcations do not converge to
the same direction in what concerns the prevention or induction of arrhythmia.
Further studies are necessary in order to better characterize and understand the
electrophysiological changes that underly the acute phase of Chagas’ Disease.

Web Applications Supporting the Development of Models of Chagas’ Disease

129

Acknowledgments. The authors would like to thank the support provided by
UFJF, CNPQ and FAPEMIG, project TEC-1358/05. Caroline Costa, Ricardo
Campos and Fernando Campos are FAPEMIG scholarship holders.

References
1. Control of Chagas’ Disease. Report of WHO Expert Committee. World Health
Organization, Geneva, p. 1 (1991)
2. Laranja, F.S., Dias, E., Nobrega, G., Miranda, A.: Chagas’ Disease. A clinical,
epidemiologic and pathologic study. Circulation 14, 1035–1060 (1956)
3. Rosenbaum, M.B.: Chagasic myocardiopathy. Prog. Cardiovasc. Dis. 7, 199–225
(1964)
4. Pacioretty, L.M., Barr, S.C., Han, W.P., Gilmour Jr., R.F.: Reduction of the transient outward potassium current in a canine model of Chagas’ Disease. Am. J.
Physiol. 268(3 Pt 2), H1258–H1264 (1995)
5. Rat Genome Sequencing Project Consortium: Genome sequence of the Brown Norway rat yields insights in to mammalian evolution. Nature 428, 493–521 (2004)
6. Abbot, A.: The renaissance rat. Nature 428, 464–466 (2004)
7. Barbosa, C.B., Santos, R.W., Amorim, R.M., Ciuﬀo, L.N., Manfroi, F.M., Oliveira,
R.S., Campos, F.O.: A Transformation Tool for ODE based models. In: Alexandrov,
V.N., van Albada, G.D., Sloot, P.M.A., Dongarra, J. (eds.) ICCS 2006. LNCS,
vol. 3991, pp. 69–75. Springer, Heidelberg (2006)
8. Martins, D., Campos, F.O., Ciuﬀo, L.N., Oliveira, R.S., Amorim, R.M., Vieira,
V.F., Ebecken, N.F.F., Barbosa, C.B., Santos, R.W.: A Computational Framework
for Cardiac Modeling Based on Distributed Computing and Web Applications. In:
´
Dayd´e, M., Palma, J.M.L.M., Coutinho, A.L.G.A.,
Pacitti, E., Lopes, J.C. (eds.)
VECPAR 2006. LNCS, vol. 4395, pp. 544–555. Springer, Heidelberg (2007)
9. CellMl 1.1 (2006), http://www.cellml.org/specifications/cellml 1.1/
10. Laboratory of Computational Physiology, http://www.fisiocomp.ufjf.br
11. Zemlin, C.W., Panﬁlov, A.V.: Spiral waves in excitable media with negative restitution. Phys. Rev. E Stat. Nonlin. Soft Matter. Phys. 63(4 Pt 1), 041912 (2001)
12. Antzelevitch, C.: Role of spatial dispersion of repolarization in inherited and
acquired sudden cardiac death syndromes. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 293(4), H2024–H2038 (2007)
13. Burashnikov, A., Antzelevitch, C.: Late-phase 3 EAD. A unique mechanism contributing to initiation of atrial ﬁbrillation. Pacing Clin. Electrophysiol. 29(3), 290–
295 (2006)
14. Pandit, S.V., Clark, R.B., Giles, W.R., Demir, S.S.: A mathematical model of
action potential heterogeneity in adult rat left ventricular myocytes. Biophys.
J. 81(6), 3029–3051 (2001)
15. CellMl Repository, http://www.cellml.org/models/
16. Kondratyev, A.A., Ponard, J.G., Munteanu, A., Rohr, S., Kucera, J.P.: Dynamic
changes of cardiac conduction during rapid pacing. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ.
Physiol. 292(4), H1796–H1811 (2007)
17. SGE, The Sun Grid Engine, http://gridengine.sunsource.net/
18. Koller, M.L., Riccio, M.L., Gilmour Jr., R.F.: Dynamic restitution of action potential duration during electrical alternans and ventricular ﬁbrillation. Am. J. Physiol. 275(5 Pt 2), H1635–H1642 (1998)
19. Bers, D.M., Despa, S., Bossuyt, J.: Regulation of Ca2+ and Na+ in normal and
failing cardiac myocytes. Ann. N Y Acad. Sci. 1080, 165–177 (2006)

