Special Session: Tools for Program Development
and Analysis in Computational Science
Jie Tao1 , Arndt Bode2 , Andreas Knuepfer3 , Dieter Kranzlm¨
uller4 ,
5
4
Roland Wism¨
uller , and Jens Volkert
1

3

Steinbuch Center for Computing
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Germany
2
Lehrstuhl f¨
ur Rechnertechnik und Rechnerorganisation
Technische Universit¨
at M¨
unchen, Germany
Center for Information Services and High Performance Computing
Technische Universit¨
at Dresden, Germany
4
Institute of Graphics and Parallel Processing
Johannes Kepler University Linz, Austria
5
Operating Systems and Distributed Systems
University of Siegen, Germany

The use of supercomputing technology, parallel and distributed processing, and
sophisticated algorithms is of major importance for computational scientists.
Yet, the scientists’ goals are to solve their challenging scientiﬁc problems, not
the software engineering tasks associated with it. For this reason, computational
science and engineering must be able to rely on dedicated support from program
development and analysis tools.
The primary intention of this workshop is to bring together developers of
tools for scientiﬁc computing and their potential users. Since its beginning at
the ﬁrst ICCS in 2001, the workshop has encouraged tool developers and users
from the scientiﬁc and engineering community to exchange their experiences.
Tool developers present to users how their tools support scientists and engineers
during program development and analysis. Tool users report their experiences
employing such tools, especially highlighting the beneﬁts and the improvements
possible by doing so.
The workshop covers various research topics, including
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

Problem solving environments for speciﬁc application domains
Application building and software construction tools
Domain-speciﬁc analysis tools
Program visualization and visual programming tools
On-line monitoring and computational steering tools
Requirements for (new) tools emerging from the application domain
Tools for parallel, distributed and network-based computing
Testing and debugging tools
Performance analysis and tuning tools
(Dynamic) Instrumentation and monitoring tools
Data (re-)partitioning and load-balancing tools

M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2008, Part III, LNCS 5103, pp. 201–202, 2008.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

202

J. Tao et al.

– Checkpointing and restart tools
– Tools for resource management, job queuing and accounting
This year a rich number of papers has been submitted to the workshop. From
the 25 submissions, nine papers have been selected for a presentation in the
conference. These papers give a basic overview and some technical details of the
authors’ recent research work in the area of software tools, with a focus on optimal libraries, on-line monitoring and steering, performance and pattern analysis
systems, automatic code optimization, and systems for supporting application
development on the Grid.
The workshop organization team thanks Dr. Martin Schulz, Dr. Josef Weidendorfer, Dr. Karl Fuelinger, and David Kramer for their support in the review
process.

