Collaborative and Cooperative Environments
Christoph Anthes1 , Vassil Alexandrov2 , Dieter Kranzlm¨
uller1 ,
1
3
Jens Volkert , and Gerhard Widmer
1

GUP, Institute of Graphics and Parallel Processing
Johannes Kepler University, Altenbergerstraße 69, A-4040 Linz, Austria
2
Centre for Advanced Computing and Emerging Technologies,
The University of Reading, Reading, RG6 6AY, United Kingdom
3
CP, Institute of Computational Perception
Johannes Kepler University, Altenbergerstraße 69, A-4040 Linz, Austria

1

Motivation

Technological advances in high-speed networking and computational grids do
not only transform the methods applied to everyday science, but also the collaboration and cooperation between scientists at almost arbitrary locations around
the world. The additional provision of multi-sensory, immersive Virtual Reality
interfaces as tools to improve the collaboration between groups of human users
is another hot topic in this research domain, which will most likely increase the
potential beneﬁts of these distributed research communities. The vision to facilitate large scale, complex simulations, which may be steered through natural
and intuitive interfaces, is both intriguing and of high scientiﬁc interest.
This workshop at the ICCS 2008 in Cracow comprises the best submitted
papers concerning the application and usage of collaborative and cooperative
environments, as well as the technologies supporting them in the scientiﬁc and
industrial context. The workshop on collaborative and cooperative environments
has oﬀered the possibility to discuss the diﬀerent approaches in this domain, to
show the latest results, products, or research prototypes to potential users, and
to establish connections between developers and users of associated technologies.
The attendants were asked to present and discuss the following technologies:
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

Collaborative and cooperative tools and environments
Development of associated parallel and distributed computing solutions
Integration of networking and grid computing technology
Provision of multi-sensory, natural and intuitive interfaces
Immersive Virtual and Augmented Reality approaches
Requirement studies for future collaboration tools
Evaluation of existing collaboration environments and practical experiences

Each of the submitted papers has been reviewed by at least three international
referees in this domain. The highest ranking contributions are presented here.
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2008, Part III, LNCS 5103, pp. 379–380, 2008.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

380

2

C. Anthes et al.

Overview of Contributions

The paper by Choi´
nski et al., Multi-Agent System for Collaboration in Hybrid
Control, investigates an ontology-based multi-agent system augmented with web
engineering for the for validation of hybrid control of biotechnological plant.
In order to acquire knowledge and conﬁgure the multi-agent system, the data
gathered from the web is reduced, ﬁltered and validated.
The problem of geographically distributed software engineering is addressed
by Penichet et al. in their contribution Design and Evaluation of a Service
Oriented Architecture-based Application to Support the Collaborative Edition of
UML Class Diagrams. The authors present a collaborative CASE tool called
CE4WEB to support the edition of UML diagrams using the Service Oriented
Architecture paradigm.
Another contribution from the domain of software engineering, g-Eclipse a contextualised framework for Grid users, Grid resource providers and Grid
application developers, by Kornmayer et al. introduces an eco-system to access
Grid infrastructures with support for contextualised user roles. The abstraction
layer of the g-Eclipse system, its integration in the Eclipse framework and the
main use cases are presented.
Zuzek et al. propose a model to support the process of setting up a Virtual
Organization (VO) in their paper Formal Model for Contract Negotiation in
Knowledge-based Virtual Organizations. They discuss in detail the formal model
underlying the process of contract negotiation and how the ontological description of domains related to given VO supports this process.
In An Approach for Enriching Information for Supporting Collaborative eWork, Anya et al. combine latent semantic analysis, domain task modelling
and conceptual learning to enrich information in order to support collaborative e-Work. They illustrate their approach using the prototypical e-Workbench
system.
The contribution by Dunk et al., Dynamic Virtual Environments Using Really
Simple Syndication, investigates the use of really simple syndication (RSS) to
dynamically change virtual environments (VE). Instead of simulating weather
conditions in training scenarios, actual weather conditions can be incorporated,
improving the scenario and immersion. This weather data is gathered by incorporating an up-to-date RSS feed in the VE.
Jamieson et al. present another contribution from the Virtual Reality domain.
In Immersive Co-operative Psychological Virtual Environments (ICPVE) they
discuss their approach to develop a variety of diﬀerent applications from the ﬁeld
of psychology, using a single framework.
In the paper Environment for collaborative development and execution of virtual laboratory applications by Funika et al., a user interface system is introduced which enables collaboration between developers and users, to improve
experiments and introduce more reﬁnements to the research conducted within
the ViroLab Virtual Laboratory.

