An Individual-Based Model of Influenza in Nosocomial
Environments
Boon Som Ong1, Mark Chen2, Vernon Lee2, and Joc Cing Tay1,*
1
ROSS Scientific Pte Ltd
Innovation Centre, Units 211-212, 16 Nanyang Drive
Singapore 637722
*
joccing@ross-scientific.com
2
Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Tan Tock Seng Hospital
Moulmein Road, Singapore 30843

Abstract. Traditional approaches in epidemiological modeling assume a fully
mixed population with uniform contact rates. These assumptions are inaccurate
in a real epidemic. We propose an agent-based and spatially explicit epidemiological model to simulate the spread of influenza for nosocomial environments
with high heterogeneity in interactions and susceptibilities. A field survey was
conducted to obtain the activity patterns of individuals in a ward of Tan Tock
Seng Hospital in Singapore. The data collected supports modeling of social behaviors constrained by roles and physical locations so as to achieve a highly
precise simulation of the ward’s activity. Our results validate the long-standing
belief that within the ward, influenza is typically transmitted through staff and
less directly between patients, thereby emphasizing the importance of stafforiented prophylaxis. The model predicts that outbreak size (and attack rate)
will increase exponentially with increasing disease infectiousness beyond a certain threshold but eventually tapers due to a target-limited finite population. The
latter constraint also gives rise to a peak in epidemic duration (at the threshold
level of infectiousness) that decreases to a steady value for increasing infectiousness. Finally, the results show that the rate of increase in distinct cumulated contacts will be highest within the first 24 hours and gives the highest
yield for contact tracing among patients that had prolonged periods of nonisolation. We conclude that agent-based models are a necessary and viable tool
for validating epidemiological beliefs and for prediction of disease dynamics
when local environmental and host factors are sufficiently heterogeneous.
Keywords: Agent-based modeling, Spatially-explicit model, Epidemiology, Influenza, Contact patterns.

1 Introduction
During the SARS crisis, hospitals were found to be especially vulnerable to outbreaks
[1-3]. Hospitals are also susceptible to nosocomial influenza, and rapid crossinfection between healthcare workers and patients can occur [4-6]. In spite of
this, there has been little work in simulating the potential spread of infections in the
hospital setting, with a granularity that allows policy makers and infection control
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2008, Part I, LNCS 5101, pp. 590–599, 2008.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

An Individual-Based Model of Influenza in Nosocomial Environments

591

practitioners to explore the utility and potential impact of various hospital outbreaks
and infection control measures. We have therefore chosen, 1) to base the geographic
and spatial context of our epidemiological model in which the disease outbreak is
based on a hospital environment and, 2) to use agents whose behaviors are based on
surveyed activity data of patients and healthcare workers.
We have designed and developed a spatially explicit agent-based epidemiological
simulation model called ASINE (which stands for Agent-based Simulator for Infections in the Nosocomial Environment). This model can simulate the dynamics of
disease spread through person-to-person contact among the staff and patient population for a particular ward at Tan Tock Seng Hospital (TTSH) in Singapore. While
hospital infections have traditionally been modeled using compartmental models, our
use of a spatially explicit agent-based simulation is driven by the fact that, in a hospital environment: 1) Individuals interact with each other locally, 2) Individuals are
mobile but may be restricted to certain areas, and 3) The individual environment is
heterogeneous [7, 8]. Although individual-based models have been used to model the
spread of community influenza [7-10], but such an approach, to our knowledge, has
not been applied to nosocomial influenza.

2 The Spread of Influenza within a Hospital Ward
As alluded to in our introduction, the primary motivation for our work arose out of the
experience of nosocomial SARS outbreaks in 2003, and the threat which pandemic
influenza may pose to the hospital environment. From this section onwards, we will
refer primarily to influenza, as an example of an infectious disease which can potentially be spread in the hospital through staff and patient interactions.
In a typical hospital environment, the main venues for human traffic are within the
clinical wards; these were also the key locations where outbreaks were observed during the SARS epidemic in Singapore [1]. Influenza is predominantly spread from
person to person, by droplet spray or by direct or indirect (e.g. via fomites) contact
with nasopharyngeal secretions [6]. In our model, the geographic context is the spatial
environment of CDC1 ward 71.
2.1 Modeling the Environment
We implemented a Geographic Information System (GIS) as a data model for a twodimensional schematic map that represents the environment of interest, in which individuals performs their social activities [11, 12]. The spatial environment only consists
of location objects in specific positions with no explicit path information. Therefore, a
graph is used to provide the navigational structure for agents to move within the ward
[13, 14]. Each location can be thought of a node in the graph and thus an edge can
then be added between two nodes to denote that a path exists between them.
For each location object, we specify a Cartesian coordinate for its position and a
rectangle of certain width and height for its shape (say for a bed) in the two dimensional environment. The topology for the CDC ward was thereby approximated in this
manner in accordance to our onsite inspection of the ward.
1

Communicable Disease Centre, TTSH.

592

B.S. Ong et al.

2.2 Modeling the Human Population at CDC Ward 71
The healthcare staff can be categorized as: doctors, nurses and health attendants.
There is only one clerk and one cleaner. There are many types of patients, but we
have categorized them into two types: ambulant and non-ambulant. Ambulant patients
are allowed to move around the ward area but for a non-ambulant patient, he/she
would be bedridden for the whole duration of stay at the ward. The last type of agent
is a visitor, who may visit the patients. In summary, the population at CDC ward 71
(which we modeled) comprises:
•
•
•
•
•
•

18 nurses, 6 for each shift.
3 health attendants, 1 for each shift.
4 doctors, who do their rounds at the ward daily.
1 ward clerk. There is only 1 shift for the ward clerk.
1 ward cleaner. There is only 1 shift for the ward cleaner.
Number of patients (ambulant and non-ambulant) and visitors can be parameterized during initialization.

2.3 Modeling Agent Behaviors
There are two types of routines - standard and miscellaneous. Healthcare workers
have standard routines to follow during a work shift. Nurses need to carry out tasks
like taking parameters for patients and bed turnings for non-ambulant patients. Health
attendants need to serve meals during meal timings and doctors usually make their
rounds in the morning. These standard routines occur during certain times of the day
and they must be carried out. Apart from these standard routines, different types of
individuals each have a set of activities that may be performed. These activities are
categorized as miscellaneous routines an agent performs. For instance, a ward clerk
may only visit administrative areas like the doctor’s office or the nursing station. A
visitor may only visit the patient’s room and nursing station, but is out of bounds to
the staff room. By definition, the visitor may also choose not to visit a patient. Hence
each patient can have 0 or more visitors during the visitation hour. Each individual
agent performs such activities or actions probabilistically. The algorithm for the selection of an action is based on roulette wheel selection where each action is associated
with a probability value that corresponds to its fitness. The fitter the action, the
greater the chance the agent will perform this action.
The social interactions of each individual are simulated on a daily basis with activity patterns obtained from a field survey. This field survey helps to derive the sets of
routines mentioned previously that an agent has to carry out. The survey method was
sample-based and purely observational. Movements of representative healthcare staff,
patients and visitors was observed during an average work day, so as to establish the
frequency, duration and intensity of contacts between healthcare staff, patients and
their visitors. The ethics review committee of the National Healthcare Group, Singapore, was consulted, with approval obtained, to ensure that the conduct of the field
survey respected privacy and ethical consults.
For each location x visited by an individual y (upon observation of y during the
survey), the probability of visiting x is calculated based on the observed frequencies
of visit to x given by Nx divided by the total frequencies of visit to all locations by y,

An Individual-Based Model of Influenza in Nosocomial Environments

593

given by N. For example, a total of 50 activities for a particular nurse were observed
(during the survey). Out of these 50 activities, 10 of them are activities performed at
the nursing station. So the probability of a nurse going to a nursing station is 1/5. The
actual type of activities performed by each individual is not relevant. The duration an
agent ai spends at location x is drawn from a normal distribution based on the frequencies of visit and the amount of time associated with each visit.
2.4 Modeling Disease Transmission
Epidemics are usually described using a set of states; namely, susceptible (S), infected
(E), infectious (I) and recovered/removed (R) [15]. Depending on the disease’s natural history, an epidemiological model can be described using the SEIR, SEIS, SIR, or
SIS pattern as shown in Fig. 1. Fig. 1 illustrates a finite state machine (FSM) which
describes the possible state transitions of an infectious disease. The possible set of
state transitions that can be obtained from the FSM is SEIR, SEIS, SIR and SIS. The
FSM allows us to model diseases of different natural history through alternative state
transition routes.

Fig. 1. Possible state transitions of an infectious disease

To simulate the pathogenesis of a disease within a host and transmission between
hosts, each individual is associated with a disease model that describes the health state
of that individual (using discrete states, susceptible, infected, infectious and recovered).
A disease is modeled as an agent and is responsible for transiting between epidemic
states and performs computations for infecting other susceptible human agents. The
joint preconditions for successful influenza transmission between two agents are 1)
both agents must first collocate at a location in order for influenza to spread, and 2)
distance between infector agent x and infectee agent y must be within a certain radius.
In a spacious room therefore, the disease may not be transmitted so easily. In our
model, the infection radius is defined as twice the size of the human agent.
Transmission probability, β, is defined as the transmissibility of the infectious
agent multiplied by the susceptibility of the susceptible agent, which is based on unittime per contact with the following formula:
Unit-time per contact transmission probability, β1 = 1 – (1 – β)

T /T 1

(1)

where T = Newtonian time and T1 = simulation time.
Both transmissibility and susceptibility depend on the instantaneous health state of
the individual. The latter is a random variable drawn from a normal distribution with a
mean of 0.5 and standard deviation of 0.5. The range is between 0 (indicates severely

594

B.S. Ong et al.

immune-suppressed) and 1 [8]. Therefore, a healthy person may be less susceptible to
infection and less likely to transmit the disease.
All human agents are initialized to be at a susceptible state. The infected and infectious states are both associated with a non-zero time period. When an infectious agent
infects a susceptible agent, the susceptible agent will move to the infected state. After
the infected period has expired, the agent will move to the infectious state. This is the
state where the disease becomes contagious and transmission to other agents can
occur at this state. After the infectious period has expired, the agent recovers. Mortality is currently not modeled.

3 Model Validation and Results
We designed several experiments with two aims in mind. The first experiment (A)
aimed to validate our agent-based epidemiological model in terms of its ability to
simulate the ward environment. The second and third experiments (B and C) are samples of the type of results we can obtain from this model, which may be useful in
guiding control measures.
A) Contact patterns between individuals within the ward environment
Table 1. Contact patterns between individuals within the ward environment

Index individual

Distinct contacts of index for 1 day, by individual type

Cleaner
Clerk
Doctor
Health
Attendant
Nurse
Ambulant
Patient
Non-ambulant
Patient
Visitor

Cleaner Clerk Doctor Health
Attendant

Nurse Ambulant
Patient

0
0.89
0

10.12 0.4
14.28 1.21
5.62 7.85

0.94
0
0.37

0.04
1.72
2.83

1.76
1.85
0.2

1.27

Nonambulant
Patient
0.15
0
14.65

Visitor Total
Contacts
0.72
3.96
4.35

14.13
23.91
35.87

0.64

0.67

0.21

0

8.21

0.3

2.06

13.36

0.6

0.85

1.19

1.36

12.89 4.06

5.65

3.54

30.14

0.05

0.16

3.45

0.4

8.18

0

1.91

16.51

2.36

0.01

0

3.58

0.03

7.03

0

0

1.29

11.94

0.04

0.09

0.4

0.19

1.86

0.57

0.57

2.46

6.18

Table 1 shows the average number of distinct contacts (from 100 realizations) encountered by a putative index individual within the course of a 24-hour period. We
see that the contact patterns in the ward which are generated by the model resemble
what we expect of a ward environment. For example, the clerk has a high number of
contacts mainly with the nursing staff, due to her central location at the nursing station; she has however, minimal contact with patients. The doctors, on the other hand,
have a high number of contacts with nurses, patients and visitors; they also have the
highest number of contacts amongst all staff types. When we look at patients, we see
that patients have less contacts overall, and that patients have few contacts with other
patients; in particular, we see that non-ambulant patients are unlikely to have contact
with other patients. The model thus affirms the current opinions that, in many nosocomial diseases, transmission is not occurring from direct patient-to-patient contact
but through healthcare workers as vectors.

An Individual-Based Model of Influenza in Nosocomial Environments

595

B) Outbreak size and path-length for an infectious disease with different transmission probabilities
We can also use our model to simulate other diseases which may, in the future,
cause outbreaks spread by direct person-to-person contact. The set of parameters
which have been used to describe the biology and natural history of influenza is
shown in Table 2. In this set of experiments, we simulated the propagation of the
entire outbreak (i.e. all generations of cases) and then calculated the simulated outbreak size, the total attack rate (including staff, patients and visitors), the epidemic
duration, and the number of generations of cases.
Table 2. Disease parameters for influenza (adopted from [10])
Duration (in days)
Minimum
Maximum
Mean

Infected state
1
3
1.9

Infectious state
3
6
4.1

Again, the parameter describing the infectiousness of the disease is unknown, so
we simulated a range of values for infectiousness (β), as shown in Fig. 2a. We see
that, below a certain threshold value of infectiousness, the average outbreak size is
very small; this is because, at these values, the index case on the average produces
less than one other infectious case (R0 < 1), therefore no propagated transmission is
possible. With higher levels of infectiousness, the outbreak size has a near linear association (on a logarithmic scale) with infectiousness. Further increase in infectiousness, however, only has a marginal effect on outbreak size since the ward environment is a finite population and almost all individuals who can be infected would have
been infected; this is illustrated by Fig. 2b, which shows the attack rates approaching
100% at values of infectiousness exceeding 0.1.
When looking at epidemic duration and the maximum number of generations
within an outbreak, an interesting pattern emerges. At lower levels of infectiousness,
epidemic duration increases with increasing infectiousness (Fig. 2c). This is because
of the likelihood that the epidemic will generate successive generations of cases (Fig.
2d). However, with higher levels of infectiousness, epidemic durations decrease; this
is because, when the average number of cases infected by an infectious patient increases, the finite number of individuals within the ward environment can be infected
in fewer generations than at lower levels of infectiousness.
C) Outcome and yield of contact tracing for simulated outbreaks with different infection parameters
Fig. 3a and Fig. 3b simulate the dynamics of a commonly used intervention, that of
contact tracing; the situation simulated is one where the ward environment is exposed
to an infectious index case for a number of days before the case is identified and isolated. For Fig. 3a, we explore the number of distinct contacts that would be generated
over the infectious period if the index were a patient, or any of the staff types shown
in the picture. We see that staff have far more contacts than patients, and nonambulant patients have the least number of contacts. The number of distinct contacts

596

B.S. Ong et al.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 2. Outbreak size and path length of influenza

An Individual-Based Model of Influenza in Nosocomial Environments

597

(a)

(b)

Fig. 3. Outcome and yield of contact tracing

accumulated over time is interesting to note; the sharpest increase is between time
zero and day 1; this is because, within the first 24 hours, an index case (in particular
in the case of patients), would have met most of the individuals which he/she will
ever meet within the ward environment. The result of this cumulative contact pattern
translates into the patterns observed in Fig. 3b when we look at the yield of contact
tracing, when the index case is a patient. If uniform infectiousness is assumed over
time, then the cumulative contacts infected by an index case increases with the days
that the patient is left without isolation at a faster rate than the increase in the number
of contacts, with the result being that the yield of contact tracing is higher for cases
who have not been isolated for a longer period, regardless of the level of infectiousness assumed.

4 Conclusions
We have designed and developed an individual-based epidemiological simulation
model that can accurately simulate the spread of influenza within a ward at the Communicable Disease Centre of Tan Tock Seng Hospital in Singapore. As influenza is
typically spread by droplet or direct person-to-person contact, the basic interactivity
and social structure of the domain would be of paramount importance. As such, we
undertook field surveys of the movement patterns of staff, patients and their visitors.
These movements result from visitation patterns, bed and nurse-patient allocation

598

B.S. Ong et al.

methods, and from miscellaneous activities such as visitations to various staff rooms,
pantries, washrooms, or taking work breaks and mandatory activities like bed turning,
taking of parameters, administration of medication and shift change. We also employed a two dimensional topology for the physical structure of the ward to constrain
the navigational movement of individuals. Disease transmission was based on an
individualized SEIR model without morbidity and mortality. Heterogeneity in individual health statuses and interaction patterns determine local transmissibility and
form the measurable dynamics of disease spread for parameters such as epidemic
duration and attack rate. The resulting individual-based, stochastic model of influenza
spread within a constrained environment with finite population was validated with
epidemiologists through a number of experiments. We established the long-standing
belief that within the wards, influenza is typically transmitted through staff and less
directly between patients, thereby emphasizing the importance of staff-oriented prophylaxis. Also, results show that outbreak size (and attack rate) increases exponentially with increasing disease infectiousness beyond a certain threshold but tapers
eventually due to a target-limited finite population constraint. The latter constraint
also gave rise to a peak in epidemic duration (at the threshold level of infectiousness)
that decreases to a steady value for increasing infectiousness. Finally, we showed that
the rate of increase in distinct cumulated contacts was highest within the first 24 hours
and gave the highest yield for contact tracing among patients that had longer periods
of non-isolation. Through this project, we showed that agent-based models are a necessary tool for validating epidemiological beliefs and for prediction of disease dynamics when local environmental and host factors are sufficiently heterogeneous.
Acknowledgments. We would like to thank CDC, Tan Tock Seng Hospital of Singapore for providing needed data clearance and access to the ward and its staff. In particular, A/Prof. Leo Yee Sin, Dr. Angela Chow, Staff Nurse Quek Lee Kheng and
student helpers Ms. Guo Zaiyi and Ms. Christine Ong.

References
1. Heng, B.H., Lim, S.W.: Epidemiology and control of SARS in Singapore. Epidemiological
News Bulletin, Ministry of Health Singapore 29, 42–47 (2003)
2. Skowronski, D.M., Astell, C., Brunham, R.C., Low, D.E., Petric, M., Roper, R.L., Talbot,
P.J., Tam, T., Babiuk, L.: Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS): a year in review.
Annual Review of Medicine 56, 357–381 (2005)
3. Yu, I.T.S., Sung, J.J.Y.: The epidemiology of the outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) in Hong Kong–what we do know and what we don’t. Epidemiology and Infection 132, 781–786 (2004)
4. Salgado, C.D., Farr, B.M., Hall, K.K., Hayden, F.G.: Influenza in the acute hospital setting. Lancet Infectious Diseases 2, 145–155 (2002)
5. Sartor, C., Zandotti, C., Romain, F., Jacomo, V., Simon, S., Atlan-Gepner, C., Sambuc, R.,
Vialettes, B., Drancourt, M.: Disruption of services in an internal medicine unit due to a
nosocomial influenza outbreak. Infection control and hospital epidemiology 23, 615–619
(2002)
6. Stott, D.J., Kerr, G., Carman, W.F.: Nosocomial transmission of influenza. Occupational
Medicine 52, 249–253 (2002)

An Individual-Based Model of Influenza in Nosocomial Environments

599

7. Bian, L.: A conceptual framework for an individual-based spatially explicit epidemiological model. Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design 31, 381–395 (2004)
8. Dunham, J.B.: An Agent-Based Spatially Explicit Epidemiological Model in MASON.
Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation 9 (2005)
9. Ferguson, N.M., Cummings, D.A., Fraser, C., Cajka, J.C., Cooley, P.C., Burke, D.S.:
Strategies for mitigating an influenza pandemic. Nature 442, 448–452 (2006)
10. Longini Jr., I.M., Halloran, M.E., Nizam, A., Yang, Y.: Containing Pandemic Influenza
with Antiviral Agents. American Journal of Epidemiology 159, 623–633 (2004)
11. Crooks, A.T.: Exploring Cities using Agent-based Models and GIS. In: Proceedings of the
Agent 2006 Conference on Social Agents: Results and Prospects, University of Chicago
and Argonne National Laboratory, Chicago, IL (2006),
http://www.agent2006.anl.gov/2006procpdf/Crooks_Agent_2006.
pdf
12. Gonçavels, A.S., Rodrigues, A., Correia, L.: Multi-Agent Simulation Within Geographic
Information Systems. In: Coelho, H., Espinasse, B. (eds.) Proceedings of 5th Workshop on
Agent-Based Simulation (2004)
13. Buckland, M.: Programming game AI by example. Wordware Pub. (2005)
14. Smed, J., Hakonen, H.: Algorithms and Networking for Computer Games. Wiley, Chichester (2006)
15. Hethcote, H.W.: The Mathematics of Infectious Diseases. SIAM Review 42, 599–653
(2000)

