Computations of Ground State and Excitation
Energies of Poly(3-methoxy-thiophene) and
Poly(thienylene vinylene) from First Principles
A.V. Gavrilenko, S.M. Black, A.C. Sykes, C.E. Bonner, and V.I. Gavrilenko
Center for Materials Research, Norfolk State University
700 Park Ave, Norfolk, VA 23504
a.v.gavrilenko@nsu.edu

Abstract. Ground state and excitation energies of poly(3-methoxy-thiophene) (PMT) and poly(thienylene vinylene) (PTV) conjugated polymers are studied by ﬁrst principles density functional theory (DFT). Two
basic approaches of computational chemistry and physics are compared:
time dependent DFT (TDDFT) of clusters and ab initio pseudopotentials
within a standard DFT (PP-DFT) of inﬁnite polymer chains. We demonstrate that series of excitation energies of PMT calculated by TDDFT
with increased unit numbers converge well to the real experimentally
measured energy gaps. Combination of TDDFT cluster method with PPDFT approach for inﬁnite chain provides single-gap quasiparticle correction value needed for optical calculations. Inﬁnite chain model is used to
calculate optical absorption of PTV.
Keywords: Density functional theory, equilibrium geometry, excitation
energies, conjugated polymers.

1

Introduction

The search for inexpensive renewable energy sources has sparked considerable
interest in the development of photovoltaics based on conjugated polymers and
organic molecules [1,2]. In organic materials, the dominant light absorption interesting for applications is caused by π−electron transitions between highest
occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and excited lowest unoccupied molecular
orbital (LUMO) [3,4]. The spectral location of the optical absorption band (or
HOMO-LUMO gap value) determines eﬃciency of photovoltaic and optoelectronic devices [3,5,6]. It has been understood earlier that the gap value in poly(3methoxy-thiophene) (PMT) and poly(thienylene vinylene) (PTV) is determined
by the rings and less aﬀected by the sidegroups [7].
The technologically challenging goal of bandgap engineering could be substantially supported by modeling and simulation in addition to highlighting the
methods of materials modiﬁcation to achieve many of the desired properties.
However, realistic modeling of the ground state and excitation energy of conjugated polymers, which are required for optics, still remains a challenging task for
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2008, Part II, LNCS 5102, pp. 396–404, 2008.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

Ground State and Excitation Energies of Conjugated Polymers

397

ﬁrst principle theories [8,9,10]. In the present work we compare diﬀerent computational approaches for realistic predictions of the ground and excited states of
conjugated polymers. The ﬁrst approach involves modeling of atomic structure
of conjugated polymers as clusters [7,11]. The excitation energies are calculated
by Time Dependent Density Functional Theory (TDDFT). The second approach
involves modeling of conjugated polymers as inﬁnitely long chains thus allowing application of ab initio pseudopotentials within DFT (PP-DFT). We also
present calculated optical absorption spectra and discuss both computational
approaches in comparison to each other and to the data available in literature.

2

Methods

Density functional theory (DFT) has been shown for decades to be very successful for the ground state analysis of diﬀerent materials [12]. In order to be able
to predict physical properties of conjugated polymer systems it is important to
realistically describe both short (covalent) and long range (Coulomb and van der
Waals, vdW) components of intermolecular interactions [8]. Local density (LDA)
[13] and generalized gradient approximations (GGA) [14] are frequently used to
account for the exchange and correlation (XC) interaction. Coulomb part dominates intermolecular potential energy over higher order vdW part. The Coulomb
interaction is realistically reproduced by LDA, but the vdW interactions is not
included in standard DFT. It has been shown that equilibrium distance between
organic molecule and solid (graphene) surface predicted by LDA is in good agreement to the value followed from explicit inclusion of the vdW into the interaction
Hamiltonian [8] thus justifying neglect of the vdW interaction for interatomic
equilibrium distances predictions.
In this work the TDDFT method as implemented in the Gaussian03 package
[15,14] was used for cluster calculations of PMT. For atomic structure optimization the B3LYP/6-31G* basis was used. Excitation energies were obtained
through extrapolation of the values calculated for n = 2 to 7 repeat units. The
calculated data for the n = 1 case does not obey the 1/n-extrapolation due to
less pronounced delocalization of π-electrons in a single unit, and relevant data
isn’t considered here. Similar approach to obtain ground and excited electronic
states of PMT inﬁnite chain by extrapolation of TDDFT cluster data was used
in [11]. According to our ﬁnding the diﬀerences in excitation energies if using
B3LYP/6-31G* and B3LYP/6-31+G* basis sets become negligible for n > 5 as
shown in Table 1. Eﬀect of the basis could be an interesting point for future
studies in the ﬁeld, however, it is out of scope of this work. Solvent eﬀects were
not taken into account for the cluster calculations.
In addition, the PMT and PTV conjugated polymers were also modeled as inﬁnite atomic chains [9,10] in two parts. We used the DMol3 [16,17] and CASTEP
[18] (based on ab initio pseudopotentials, PP) computational packages as implemented in Materials Studio. First, the geometry relaxation was performed using
the DFT-LDA method as implemented in DMol3 . Equilibrium atomic structures
were obtained by LDA method. Only Coulombic interaction providing most

398

A.V. Gavrilenko et al.

Table 1. Basis set eﬀect on the HOMO-LUMO gap and excitation energies of 3methoxy-thiophene in eV

Oligomer Units
2
3
4
5
6
7

HOMO-LUMO Gap
6-31G*
6-31+G*
3.97
3.92
3.19
3.16
2.65
2.62
2.36
2.33
2.16
n/a
2.02
n/a

Excitation Energies
6-31G*
6-31+G*
3.76
3.66
3.01
2.94
2.49
2.43
2.19
2.14
1.98
n/a
1.83
n/a

important contribution to the interchain interaction [8] is included. The unit
cell is replicated in all 3 dimensions, the height, d3, was set to be 15 ˚
A in order
to quench the interaction between the thiophene ring and the methyl group. We
obtained very weak eﬀect of the d3 on optics therefore this value was constrained.
The fully relaxed structure was then used to calculate the electronic and
optical properties of the conjugated polymer within PP-DFT as implemented
in CASTEP. Three dimensional periodicity in this case allows application of ab
initio pseudopotential method which makes optical calculations straight forward
[19]. Optical absorption spectra of the PTV conjugated polymers are calculated
within the independent particles picture (random phase approximation, RPA)
employing ultrasoft pseudopotentials [9]. Details of the optical calculations are
described in the detail in Ref. [20].

3

Results and Discussion

We studied equilibrium atomic conﬁgurations and excitation energies of PMT
and PTV using diﬀerent computational approaches described above. First we
consider results of cluster calculations of PMT. As stated above the excitation
energies are obtained by extrapolation of the values predicted for 2 to 7 units to
the inﬁnitely long chain.
Our previous work with substituted poly(phenylene vinylenes) (PPV) has resulted in the observation of supramolecular scale quasicrystalline arrangements
of these polymers with distinctive unit cell dimensions [19,21,22]. In those reports, both experimental and computational methods were used to conﬁrm the
formation of crystalline domains of the PPV conjugated polymer with interchain
dimensions on the order of the van der Waals radii which would be expected to
lead to a strong interchain interaction.
In the present work, we extend these methods to the study of two more
technologically relevant conjugated polymers, poly(3-methoxy-thiophene) and
poly(thienylene vinylene). These conjugated polymers are similar to PPV but
contain ﬁve membered rings with sulfur substitution in the ring and as a result a lower bandgap than their PPV counterparts. Each polymer has an alkoxy
substituent on the thiophene ring which donates electrons to the chain leaving

Ground State and Excitation Energies of Conjugated Polymers

(a) PMT Cluster

(b) PMT unit cell

399

(c) PTV unit cell

Fig. 1. (a) Converged atomic structure of pentamer (5 units) of 3-methoxy-thiophene.
3D-view of the poly(3-methoxy-thiophene) (b) and poly(thienylene vinylene) (c) unit
cells. Optimized unit cell dimensions for (b) are d1 = 7.74 ˚
A, d2 = 10 ˚
A, and d3 = 15
˚
A, and for (c) are d1 = 6.55 ˚
A, d2 = 3.75 ˚
A, and d3 = 15 ˚
A.

the chain slightly electron rich forming an n−type material. Experimentally, an
eight carbon (or longer) alkoxy chain is used in part to assist the solvation properties of the polymer in organic solvents. In this work, the alkoxy side chain was
shortened to a single carbon methoxy chain as the chain length does not aﬀect
the electron donating ability of the alkoxy subtstituent and the arrangement
of the chains did not include solvent eﬀects. Additionally, the shorter methoxy
side chain allows the computational resources to be reserved for the conjugated
backbone.
3.1

Equilibrium Geometry

Fully relaxed conﬁguration of 3-methoxy-thiophene pentamer is shown in Fig.1(a)
as an example. Geometries of PMT and PTV polymers modeled as an inﬁnite
chain are given in Figs. 1(b) and 1(c). Interchain interaction is an important
aspect since the close proximity of neighboring chains will split the electronic
states of the polymer, thereby reducing the bandgap and creating additional
states. As mentioned above the d3 provides very weak eﬀect on optics therefore
this value was constrained to 15˚
A . The equilibrium intermolecular distances
(d1 ) for PMT and PTV are 7.74˚
A and 6.55˚
A, respectively, and were determined
by cluster calculations of a single polymer chain.
3.2

Excitation Energies

The excitation energies (EXC) were calculated using both the TDDFT theory
and ab initio pseudopotential method as described in section 2. In order to obtain
correct values for EXC in PTV within the TDDFT we studied convergence of
the EXC with increase of the unit number in the polymer chain. Predicted EXC
values are given in Table 1. In Fig. 2 we demonstrate that calculated EXC data

400

A.V. Gavrilenko et al.

Fig. 2. Energy extrapolation to inﬁnite chain length for both the HOMO-LUMO gap
and the excitation energy. The excitation energy yields a value of 1.1 eV which is lower
than that of the HOMO-LUMO gap by about 0.1 eV.

could be ﬁtted by 1/n function, where n is the number of units in the chain. The
observed 1/n dependence allows simple extrapolation to inﬁnitely long polymer
chain as shown in Fig. 2, however, analysis of this dependence requires further
study.
The obtained TDDFT excitation energy value of 1.1 eV is compared with that
calculated by PP-DFT method. The excitation energies of PMT polymers are
obtained from the Projected Density Of States (PDOS). The PDOS spectrum
of PMT inﬁnite chain polymer is given in Fig. 3.
The calculated PP-DFT HOMO-LUMO gap of 0.9 eV (excitation energy)
is lower then TDDFT value by 0.2 eV. It is well known that DFT excitation
energies underestimate the actual energy gaps. In order to obtain realistic values
the quasiparticle (QP) correction to the DFT data, substantial complications of
computations are required [23]. On the other hand the QP values for the HOMOLUMO gap could be obtained from the comparison with available experimental
data or with TDDFT gap-values [23]. By comparison with optical absorption
data we demonstrate that both methods provide very close results.
3.3

Optical Absorption

Calculated optical absorption spectrum of PTV conjugated polymers is shown
in comparison with experimental data [24,19] in Fig. 4. In order to match spectral location of theoretical spectrum to the experimental one (to the dominant
peak located at 577 nm) a QP correction (blue shift) of 0.18 eV was applied to
the calculated data in Fig. 4. The QP corrected theoretical spectrum correctly
reproduces shoulders on a long-frequency wing of the spectrum. These shoulders
are attributed to molecular vibrations (at 619 nm) and to the aggregation (at

Ground State and Excitation Energies of Conjugated Polymers

401

Fig. 3. Electronic structure of 3-methoxy-thiophene in the form of Projected Density
of States (PDOS)

685 nm) caused by interchain interaction [19]. The shape of the calculated spectrum, however, shows remarkable diﬀerences from experimental data (see Fig.
4). It has been demonstrated before that for optical line shape analysis inclusion
of excitonic eﬀects in polymers is necessary [10]. However this technically challenging theory of optical response in polymers is out of scope of present study.
Inclusion of exciton eﬀects is expected to improve comparison between the line
shapes of predicted and measured optical absorption spectra which should be
addressed in future works.
From the comparison between calculated and measured optical absorption
spectra of PTV we obtained the QP correction value of 0.18 eV (the blue-shift)
which is applied to the calculated spectrum in order to match the experimental
data. The QP value of 0.18 eV obtained for PTV polymers is very close to the
DFT gap underestimation (by 0.2 eV) which we obtained for PMT polymers from
comparison to our TDDFT value. The TDDFT data realistically predict experimental HOMO-LUMO gap values in conjugated polymers [11]. The DFT+QP
calculated gap values agree well with those predicted by TDDFT method for
both organic and inorganic materials [23]. This comparison suggests that excitation energies of the PMT polymer obtained by extrapolation of TDDFT values
to an inﬁnitely long chain correctly reproduces a real HOMO-LUMO gap in
agreement with general conclusions followed from comparative DFT+QP and
TDDFT analysis [11,23].
Therefore, results of this work demonstrate that relatively simple TDDFT
cluster calculations combined with extrapolation method provide correct QP
values for HOMO-LUMO gap which could be used with PP-DFT method for realistic predictions of optical absorption in conjugated polymers. This is substantial simpliﬁcation of the theory which still incorporates important many-body

402

A.V. Gavrilenko et al.

Fig. 4. Calculated optical absorption spectra resulted PTV (solid) in comparison with
experimental data (circles) measured in [24]

eﬀects in polymer optics. Thus for conjugated polymers, the realistic ﬁrst principle predictions of optical spectra could be performed within a simpliﬁed scheme
avoiding large-scale computations.

4

Conclusions

In this work we present results of the ground state and excitation energies study
of poly(3-methoxy-thiophene) (PMT) and poly(thienylene vinylene) (PTV) conjugated polymers by ﬁrst principles density functional theory (DFT). We used
two approaches for computations of excitation states: time dependent DFT
(TDDFT) of clusters and ab initio pseudopotentials based DFT (PP-DFT) of
inﬁnite polymer chains. The excitation energies of PMT calculated by TDDFT
with increased unit numbers converge well to the real experimentally measured
energy gaps. Combination of TDDFT cluster method with PP-DFT approach
for inﬁnite chain provide single-gap quasiparticle corrections value needed for
optical calculations. Inﬁnite chain model is used to calculate optical absorption
of PTV. Predicted optical absorption spectrum is in good agreement with experiment. Combination of both cluster TDDFT and inﬁnite chain PP-DFT methods
is rather simple and promising ﬁrst principle approach for realistic modeling and
simulations of conjugated polymers optics.
Acknowledgments. This work is supported by NSF STC DMR-0120967, NSF
PREM DRM-0611430, NSF NCN EEC-0228390, and NASA CREAM NCC31035.

Ground State and Excitation Energies of Conjugated Polymers

403

References
1. Dhanabalan, A., van Duren, J.K.J., van Hal, P.A., van Dongen, J.L.J., Janssen,
R.A.J.: Synthesis and characterization of a low bandgap conjugated polymer for
bulk heterojunction photovoltaic cells. Adv. Funct. Mater. 11, 255–262 (2001)
2. Sun, S.S., Sariciftci, N.S.: Organic Photovoltaics: Mechanisms, Materials, and Devices. CRC Press, Boca Raton (2005)
3. Patil, A.O., Heeger, A.J., Wudl, F.: Optical properties of conducting polymers.
Chem. Rev. 88, 183–200 (1988)
4. Skotheim, T.A. (ed.): Handbook of Conducting Polymers, 2nd edn. CRC Press,
Boca Raton (1997)
5. Eckhardt, H., Shacklette, L.W., Jen, K.Y., Elsenbaumer, R.L.: The electronic
and electrochemical properties of poly(phenylene vinylenes) and poly(thienylene
vinylenes): An experimental and theoretical study. J. Chem. Phys. 91, 1303–1315
(1989)
6. Blohm, M.L., Pickett, J.E., Van Dort, P.C.: Synthesis, characterization, and stability of poly(3,4-dibutoxythiophenevinylene) copolymers. Macromol. 26, 2704–2710
(1993)
7. Toussaint, J.M., Bredas, J.L.: Theoretical analysis of the geometric and electronic
structure of small-band-gap polythiophenes: poly(5,5’-bithiophene methine) and
its derivatives. Macromol. 26, 5240–5248 (1993)
8. Ortmann, F., Schmidt, W.G., Bechstedt, F.: Attracted by long-range electron correlation: Adenine on graphite. Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 186101–186105 (2005)
9. Gavrilenko, V.I.: Ab initio modeling of optical properties of organic molecules
and molecular complexes. In: Alexandrov, V.N., van Albada, G.D., Sloot, P.M.A.,
Dongarra, J. (eds.) ICCS 2006. LNCS, vol. 3993, pp. 89–96. Springer, Heidelberg
(2006)
10. Rohlﬁng, M., Tiago, M.L., Louie, S.G.: First-principles calculation of optical absorption spectra in conjugated polymers: role of electron-hole interaction. Synth.
Met. 116, 101 (2001)
11. Ma, J., Li, S., Jiang, Y.: A time-dependent DFT study on band gaps and eﬀective conjugation lengths of polyacetylene, polyphenylene, polypentafulvene, polycyclopentadiene, polypyrrole, polyfuran, polysilole, polyphosphole, and polythiophene. Macromol. 35, 1109–1115 (2002)
12. Kohn, W., Becke, A.D., Parr, R.G.: Density functional theory of electronic structure. J. Phys. Chem. 100, 12974–12980 (1996)
13. Perdew, J.P., Wang, Y.: Accurate and simple analytic representation of the
electron-gas correlation energy. Phys. Rev. B 45, 13244–13249 (1992)
14. Perdew, J.P., Burke, K., Ernzerhof, M.: Generalized gradient approximation made
simple. Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3865–3868 (1996)
15. Miller, W.H., Hernandez, R., Handy, N.C., Jayatilaka, D., Willets, A.: Ab initio calculation of anharmonic constants for a transition state, with application to
semiclassical transition state tunneling probabilities. Chem. Phys. Lett. 172, 62
(1990)
16. Delley, B.: An all-electron numerical method for solving the local density functional
for polyatomic molecules. J. Chem. Phys. 92, 508–517 (1990)
17. Delley, B.: From molecules to solids with the DMol3 approach. J. Chem. Phys. 113,
7756–7764 (2000)
18. Segall, M.D., Lindan, P.J.D., Probert, M.J., Pickard, C.J., Hasnip, P.J., Clark,
S.J., Payne, M.C.: First-principles simulation: ideas, illustrations and the CASTEP
code. J. Phys.Cond. Matt. 14, 2717–2744 (2002)

404

A.V. Gavrilenko et al.

19. Gavrilenko, A.V., Matos, T., Bonner, C.E., Sun, S.S., Zhang, C., Gavrilenko, V.I.:
Optical absorption of poly(thiophene vinylene) conjugated polymers. Experiment
and ﬁrst principle theory. J. Phys. Chem. B (in press) (2008)
20. Gavrilenko, V.I., Bechstedt, F.: Optical functions of semiconductors beyond
density-functional theory and random-phase approximation. Phys. Rev. B 55,
4343–4352 (1997)
21. Bonner, C.E., Charter, S., Lorts, A., Adebolu, O.I., Zhang, C., Sun, S.S.,
Gavrilenko, V.I.: Luminescence and optical absorption of conjugated polyphenylene-vinylene polymers. In: Proc. of SPIE, vol. 6320, 63200J (2006)
22. Seo, K., Choi, S., Zhang, C., Sun, S.S., Bonner, C.: Processing and molecular
packing of a derivatized PPV -donor-bridge-acceptor-bridge- type block copolymer
for potential photovoltaic applications. Adv. Mater (in press) (2008)
23. Onida, G., Reining, L., Rubio, A.: Electronic excitations: density-functional versus
many-body Green’s-function approaches. Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 601–633 (2002)
24. Matos, T.D.: Design, synthesis, and characterization of 3-dodedyl-2,5-poly(thienylene vinylene) polymer for optoelectronics and solar energy conversions. Master’s
thesis, Norfolk State University (2007)

