Grid-Enabled Non-Invasive Blood Glucose
Measurement
Ibrahim Elsayed1, Jianguo Han2 , Ting Liu3 , Alexander W¨
ohrer1 ,
1
1
Fakhri Alam Khan , and Peter Brezany
1

3

Institute of Scientiﬁc Computing
University of Vienna, Nordbergstrasse 15/C/3, A-1090 Vienna, Austria
{elsayed,woehrer,khan,brezany}@par.univie.ac.at
2
School of Information Science and Technology
Beijing University of Chemical Technology
15 BeiSanhuan East Road, ChaoYang District, Beijing 100029, China
han@mail.buct.edu.cn
School of Earth and Space Science, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
liuting5331@163.com

Abstract. Earth and life sciences are at the forefront to successfully
include computational simulations and modeling. Medical applications
are often mentioned as the killer applications for the Grid. The complex
methodology and models of Traditional Chinese Medicine oﬀer diﬀerent
approaches to diagnose and treat a persons health condition than typical
Western medicine. A possibility to make this often hidden knowledge explicit and available to a broader audience will result in mutual synergies
for Western and Chinese medicine as well as improved patient care. This
paper proposes the design and implementation of a method to accurately
estimate blood glucose values using a novel non-invasive method based on
electro-transformation measures in human body meridians. The framework used for this scientiﬁc computing collaboration, namely the ChinaAustria Data Grid (CADGrid) framework, provides an Intelligence Base
oﬀering commonly used models and algorithms as Web/Grid-Services.
The controlled execution of the Non-Invasive Blood Glucose Measurement Service and the management of scientiﬁc data that arise from model
execution can be seen as the ﬁrst application on top of the CADGrid.
Keywords: Traditional Chinese Medicine, Non-Invasive Blood Glucose
Measurement, Grid Computing, e-Infrastructure.

1

Introduction

Grid computing [1] promises to change the way scientists will tackle future research challenges in a number of domains, including earth sciences [2], medicine
[3,4] and life sciences [5]. Service-oriented architectures (SOA) [6] are utilized in
Grid computing to facilitate the virtualization of heterogeneous resources, e.g.
data sources, computational resources, network and workload. Due to wireless
connectivity improvements and hardware getting mobile and constantly smaller
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2008, Part I, LNCS 5101, pp. 76–85, 2008.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

Grid-Enabled Non-Invasive Blood Glucose Measurement

77

and cheaper, the visions of ubiquitous [7] and mobile computing [8] are becoming
reality. Information is collected, exchanged and processed by specialized computing units embedded in the environment to achieve a certain task [9] and accessed
as needed on-the-way [10]. Enormous amount of data will be produced at a rate
never seen before in any ﬁeld of human activity, requiring next generation grids
[11] to cope with and making use of it.
Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) [12] has diﬀerent models and approaches
to diagnose and treat a persons health condition than typical Western medicine.
According to meridian-theory, which is an important part of TCM, meridians are a
secret to our biological and medical knowledge. Recently, several projects in China
started to investigate how modern measurement and information and communication technologies can support not only exact estimation of the meridian status,
but also to improve TCM in general [13]. Although Chinese and Western medicine
have a diﬀerent understanding and approach to life, health, and illness - concerted,
complementary work between Western allopathy and Chinese medicine could result in an improved health system [14]. The problem of diabetis mellitus [15] is
urgent around the world (estimated 100 million [16]), in Austria approximately
300.000 people suﬀer from it [17]. To minimize short term problems (e.g. unconsciousness, hypoglycemia) and severe mid and long term complications (e.g. blindness and neuropathie), which are also very costly to treat, repetitive invasive blood
sugar measurements are needed with following medication modulation (typically
insulin for Type 1 and pills for Type 2 diabetics). Besides several negative medical
side eﬀects (e.g. skin injuring), this way is also rather expensive.
This paper proposes the grid based implementation of a novel non-invasive
method for measuring human blood glucose values accurately and conveniently
by the use of a special medical meridian measurement instrument and the CADGrid infrastructure [18]. The data obtained by this instrument are referred to
as meridian measurement data and can be analyzed by the meridian electro information transmission model [19] to derive human blood glucose values. This
model is implemented as a complex grid-based computing process that executes a number of compute intensive algorithms. The controlled execution of
this process is done by the Non-Invasive Glucose Measurement Service, in short
NIGM-Service. A special subset of CADGrid-services will focus on receiving and
analyzing patients meridian measurement data coming from mobile devices and
thin clients. Splitting the process of vital parameter estimation into an evolveable, personalized data mining process and a rather simple source signal emitting
and recording phase has two main beneﬁts: ﬁrst, the infrastructure can easily be
applied to other target values and second, improvements to the involved data
mining services and process will directly result in a more precise and robust
estimation of the values. Diabetic patients as well as researchers in the ﬁeld of
treatment of diabetes mellitus will highly proﬁt from the realization of the above
mentioned scientiﬁc computing infrastructure.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 the application domain is
described in order to provide the reader with domain speciﬁc background
knowledge. Section 3 describes the China-Austria Data Grid infrastructure and

78

I. Elsayed et al.

on top of it its ﬁrst application the Non-Invasive Glucose Measurement Service
in Section 4. Section 5 gives a brief overview of available non-invasive methods
for measuring human blood glucose values. Finally, we conclude the paper and
mention our ongoing work as well as planned next steps in Section 6.

2

Application Scenario

The non-invasive method for measuring human glucose values used in the NIGMService is based on the meridian-theory, according to which the human body has
14 acupuncture meridians. Each of these longitudinally distributed lines on our
human body has its main points, called source points, totally 24 [20]. Clinical
practices of TCM (especially acupuncture) have been guided by meridian theory
for thousands of years.
Exact estimation of the meridian status has been one of the pilot tasks of
TCM. In order to prove the meridian theory with modern methods a number
of special meridian measurement instruments were developed. Analyzing these
meridian measurement data with advanced data mining techniques and models
can lead to important information about human illness state and other health
relevant knowledge.
The electro signal measurement instrument sends an electric signal (white
noise) into one meridian source point and measures the corresponding signal
output at another source point either on the same meridian or on another meridian. In particular a random electro signal with the maximal voltage less than
2.0 V is produced by the instrument. This process is illustrated in Figure 1.
According to international standard terminologies deﬁned by the World Health
Organization on traditional medicine in the western paciﬁc region [21], point 1 is
called “Ba Xie” and point 2 is called “He Gu”. These points are connecting two
diﬀerent meridians through a special information channel. Zero potential points
are points on the human body that have the lowest electrical potential and are
usually located on ﬁnger tips and toes. In the context of electro signal measure,
zero point measures are used as reference values, in order to weight the electric
potential on a acupuncture point. The measurements obtained in this process
can, if analyzed by the meridian electro information transmission model, derive
diabetic patient’s blood glucose values.
Another instrument measures the subcutaneous impedance at acupuncture
points and its adjacent control points [20]. Also high sensitive CO2 analyzers
are used to measure transcutaneous CO2 emission [22] from the skin on correlating meridian source points. Using clustering and frequent itemset mining
techniques, correlations among measured values of these points can be identiﬁed, e.g. start-end point correlation, symmetric point correlation etc., which is
useful knowledge for research in the meridian theory and thus aims to observe
the features of acupuncture and meridians. Deploying an e-infrastructure that
provides collaborative research with advanced data mining services, eﬃcient data
and workﬂow management services, as well as visualization services contribute
to the progress in this domain.

Grid-Enabled Non-Invasive Blood Glucose Measurement

Acupuncture
Point 1

Acupuncture
Point 2

79

Zero Potential
Point

Fig. 1. The Electro Signal Measure on the left hand

3

CADGrid Infrastructure

Science has evolved in the past several decades from an empirical and theoretical
approach to one that includes computational simulations and modeling [23],
commonly known as enhanced science or e-science in short. The term e-Science
is often used to refer to highly collaborative computational science that uses
distributed software infrastructures, like grids in order to support shared eﬀorts.
Technological progress in such e-Science infrastructures have enabled researchers
to run complex, computational investigations that include data access, analysis,
and largely automated model execution.
The China-Austria Data Grid (CADGrid) connects several research institutions in both countries and provides an Intelligence Base oﬀering commonly used
models and algorithms as services as well as compute and storage resources. Further it is equipped with our workﬂow engine WEEP [24] allowing the users to
execute a number of pre-selected services in a controlled and eﬃcient way.
The Intelligence Base is the heart of the CADGrid infrastructure, providing
participants a number of services aiming to support and accomplish user deﬁned
research tasks. In general the services can be classiﬁed into four main groups, (a)
data analysis group includes services representing data mining and other special
data analysis algorithms (i.e. Kalman Filtering), (b) data managing and preprocessing services covering issues that occur when working with diﬀerent data
sources or when accessing data resources from diﬀerent locations, (c) workﬂow
services that are necessary to provide the controlled execution of a number of
pre-selected services, and (d) the data visualization group including services for
data representation and visualization.
Three typical usage scenarios will exemplify how diabetic patients, medical
professionals, and researchers in the ﬁeld of treatment of diabetes mellitus can
beneﬁt from NIGM and its underlying grid infrastructure.

80

I. Elsayed et al.

Diabetic patients can measure the electricity information transformation
of their blood sugar values using the measurement instrument which will be
embedded into mobile devices such as PDA, cell phones and other handhelds.
Using the NIGM-Service oﬀered via the Intelligence Base the measurement data
can be analyzed on the ﬂy and the patient will be informed via messaging services
about his blood glucose values. Patients will beneﬁt twice: ﬁrst the incurred
expenses will be lower in comparison to conventional methods based on chemical
reactions and second patients will have a much more convenient method than
injuring their skin to receive the needed drop of blood for the chemical reaction.
Health professionals and services have a better surveillance of the patient’s illness and can adjust their therapy more eﬃciently based on the continuously collected data.
Scientists from diﬀerent institutions in diﬀerent countries can work together
on common goals. This will require access to anonymized measurement data and
analysis services from diﬀerent locations. Further they might want to share their
results among each other. The CADGrid Intelligence Base provides advanced
data management services enabling such requirements in an eﬃcient and secure
way. By means of the online portals, scientists can access advanced data analysis
tools, computational power, and data resources and share elaborated results.

4

Non-Invasive Glucose Measurement Service

The NIGM-Service covers the process of computing patients glucose values from
meridian measurements. The service consists of the execution of several algorithms, each one available as a standalone CADGrid service within the Intelligence Base. Using the workﬂow engine WEEP [24], a predeﬁned workﬂow representing the NIGM-Service is deployed and available as one service within the
CADGrid Intelligence Base. Figure 2 illustrates the workﬂow with the visualized
outputs of each component.
In the following the non-invasive process of calculating patients blood glucose
values from meridian measurements is brieﬂy described. More details can be
found in [19]:
Collect Measurement Data by running a measurement process with the
electro signal measurement instrument. This non-invasive painless process is
done by a health professional or any trained person on the hand of a patient. The
current prototype of the instrument is equipped with a USB interface and connected to a PC, where the occurred measurement data is organized in two ﬁles.
One representing the input values and the other contains values of the measured
output signal. This data, referred to as meridian measurement data is sent to the
joint grid testbed where the NIGM-Service will be started. The NIGM-Service is
composed of a set of services implementing the following algorithms, which will
be executed one after the other, whereas each algorithm’s output represents the
input to the next algorithm.
System Identiﬁcation is the ﬁrst algorithm to be executed. A model is
set up for each measured input/output value pair describing the relationship

Grid-Enabled Non-Invasive Blood Glucose Measurement

Input
Signals

81

Output
Signals

Diabetic

Data

Health
Professional

Identification

Transformation

Transformation
(FFT)

User

Data

Diabetic

Fig. 2. The Non-Invasive Glucose Measurement Service

between the corresponding signals. The resulting diﬀerence equation is used to
generate a standard output signal for a common input signal.
Kalman Filtering is further used to weaken the white noises and ﬁlter the
useful signals, as well as useful noises. In fact, the useful signals are the true data
retrieved from the meridians. However, the measurement data is blended with
diﬀerent kind of noises: physical, chemical, and biological noises. These noises can
represent the patient’s condition and feelings at the moment the measurements
were taken i.e. fear, hotness, etc. and also the surroundings of the patient i.e.
noisy or electromagnetic environment. The ﬁrst kind of noises represent useful
information (color noise), whereas the latter one (white noise) are of less interest.
Although they need to be extracted in order to get data that is close to the true
data. This process is deﬁned as optimal estimation of measured true data, which
is blended by white and color noises and is covered within the Kalman Filtering
service.
Wavelet Transformation takes the graph containing the optimally estimated data produced in the previous step and splits it into several frequency
levels. Each generated new graph, referred to as wavelet represents the origin
time domain graph from diﬀerent frequency levels. This mechanism of experimental data processing provides the most visual and informative picture of
the measured data and allows ﬁnding peculiarities of the signal in the area of
the wavelet. Hence the wavelet with the most important graph is selected and
forwarded to the next algorithm. It is to say that choosing a best wavelet for
calculating the blood glucose values is in the current state of research progress
an optional step and needs to be elaborated in detail.

82

I. Elsayed et al.

Fast Fourier Transformation is then executed in order to produce the
frequency domain representation of the time domain graph used in the previous algorithms. A frequency domain graph shows how much of the signal lies
within each given frequency band over a range of frequencies. Further the so
called electro-transformation-character-values are computed. These values, such
as maximum, integral, center point, etc. represent the characteristics of the produced graph. These are the main inputs for the next step which is to setup a
back propagation neural network.
Back Propagation Neural Network. In general such a model is used to establish a mathematical model describing the relationship among two data series.
The two data series in our model are the electro-transformation-character-values
on one side and conventionally measured glucose values, serving as training data
in order to set up the model. The model has to be trained ﬁrst, pictured in the
left corner of the ﬁgure above. During this phase, in addition to each meridian
measurement a conventional method has to be used to get reference values. Once
a model is set up for a patient it can be used to compute the patient’s glucose
values for a given set of electro-transformation-character-values without conventionally measured values. In order to maintain the model, reference values have
to be measured again in a certain time interval (e.g. once a week) and the model
must be re-evaluated to accommodate recent changes and developments in the
patient health condition and to further improve precision and robustness.

5

Related Work

The development of non-invasive methods for measuring human blood glucose
values has been targeted by a number of research institutions all over the world.
The most common non-invasive methods were categorized into two broad categories [16]: (a) blood glucose measurement with external factor and (b) without
external factor (based on the theory that blood glucose values can be derived
from glucose concentration in human body liquids like tears, urine and saliva).
The latter cannot be used for continuous measurement of glucose concentration
in blood. Methods with external factor are described in the following:
Electromagnetic Radiation. Here electromagnetic radiation (EMR) is used
as an external factor for the non-invasive measurement of glucose value in blood.
The optical characteristics of the tissue are observed and analyzed when a human
body is exposed to EMR. Experiments have shown that optical methods are not
suﬃcient to calculate blood glucose values accurately, therefore other external
factor techniques like mechanical stimulation of tissues and analysis of light
scattering are more frequently used.
Eye Sensitivity to small color changes. In this technique the value of
glucose in blood is measured from the eye sensitivity to small color changes
where wide range of wavelengths, ﬁlters and detectors are used.
Endogenous Method. This method correlates changes in the glucose value
to changes in the electro-physiological activity of certain peripheral nerves.

Grid-Enabled Non-Invasive Blood Glucose Measurement

83

Changes in their endogenous physiological and biochemical functions are observed from which the glucose value is calculated.
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance. In this method the nuclear magnetic resonance spectrum and water resonance are considered. Blood glucose values are
calculated on the basis of theory that the ratio of the resonance frequencies
correlates with the blood glucose level.
Our approach has the advantage to split the process of blood glucose value
estimation into a developable, personalized data mining process and a rather simple source signal emitting and recording phase. Improvements to the involved
data mining services and overall process can be deployed remotely and will directly result in a more precise and robust estimation for the patient without
the need to change the client environment. Another important beneﬁt of our
approach is that the introduced concept of local measurement and remote personalized estimation is general applicable to various scenarios, e.g. for estimating
another vital parameter like blood pressure.
E-Health [25], the use of information and communication technologies to improve or enable health care, will have various impacts on health care services [26]
and the quality, cost and eﬃciency of patient care [27]. Health Grids [27] are going
to be used for the individualized health care and the epidemiology analysis. The
former is improved by the secure and eﬃcient combination of the widespread personal clinical information and the availability of advanced services for diagnostic
and therapy. The latter combine the information from a wide population to extract the knowledge that can lead to the discovery of new correlations between
symptoms, diseases, genetic features or any other clinical data. An example of a
project serving both directions is @neurIST [3], which aims to create an IT infrastructure for the management of all processes linked to research, diagnosis and
treatment development for complex and multi-factorial diseases - currently focusing on cerebral aneurysm and subarachnoid haemorrhage.
The recently started EU project OLDES [28] includes a pilot application focusing on older persons suﬀering from Type 2 diabetes mellitus. The main aim
is to provide a low-cost and easy-to-use health care platform, including a continuous glucose monitoring system. All measured data, including other vital
parameters, will be transferred wirelessly to the patient’s health provider. This
will enable a better surveillance of the patient’s health status and more eﬃcient
adjustment of therapy. While we are having the same overall aims as OLDES namely the reduction of acute and chronic complications of diabetes and a more
eﬀective prevention of emergencies, resulting in the reduction of the frequency
of hospitalizations and increased quality of life - we are targeting also the commonly younger, more mobile and active Type 1 diabetics with our non-invasive
measurement method, but not providing such a comprehensive health platform.

6

Conclusions

This paper has outlined the China-Austria Data Grid framework in the context
of its ﬁrst application, namely the Non-Invasive Glucose Measurement Service,

84

I. Elsayed et al.

in short NIGM-Service. The key contribution in this paper is the grid based
implementation of a novel non-invasive method for accurate estimation of blood
glucose values based on electro-transformation measures in human body meridians. The presented approach has two main beneﬁts, by splitting the process of
vital parameter estimation into an evolve-able, personalized data mining process and a rather simple source signal emitting and recording phase: ﬁrst, the
infrastructure can easily be applied to other target values and second, improvements to the involved data mining services and process will directly result in a
more precise and robust estimation of the values. It follows from the discussion
in this paper that the treatment of diabetic patients will be the ﬁrst domain
highly proﬁting (improvement of quality of life, economical aspects, etc.) from
the NIGM-Service. However, the scientiﬁc computing infrastructure presented
in this paper also establishes the basis for a number of future applications and
extensions to other domains.
Acknowledgments. The work described in this paper is being carried out as
part of the research projects “Medical Measurement Grid for On-Line Diagnosis”
and “Austrian Grid” supported by the Austrian Federal Ministry of Science and
Research.

References
1. De Roure, D., Baker, M.A., Jennings, N.R., Shadbolt, N.R.: The evolution of the
grid. In: Berman, F., Hey, A.J.G., Fox, G. (eds.) Grid Computing: Making The
Global Infrastructure a Reality, pp. 65–100. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester (2003)
2. Ramakrishnan, L., Simmhan, Y., Plale, B.: Realization of Dynamically Adaptive Weather Analysis and Forecasting in LEAD: Four Years Down the Road. In:
Shi, Y., van Albada, G.D., Dongarra, J., Sloot, P.M.A. (eds.) ICCS 2007. LNCS,
vol. 4487, pp. 1122–1129. Springer, Heidelberg (2007)
3. The @neurIST Project: Integrated Biomedical Informatics for the Management of
Cerebral Aneurysms (2008), http://www.aneurist.org/
4. Benkner, S., Berti, G., Engelbrecht, G., Fingberg, J., Kohring, G., Middleton, S.E.,
Schmidt, R.: GEMSS: Grid-infrastructure for Medical Service Provision (2004)
5. Krishnan, A.: A survey of life sciences applications on the grid. New Generation
Computing 22(2), 111–126 (2004)
6. Srinivasan, L., Treadwell, J.: An overview of service-oriented architecture, web
services and grid computing. Hewlett-Packard White Paper (2005)
7. Abowd, G.D., Mynatt, E.D.: Charting past, present, and future research
in ubiquitous computing. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction
(TOCHI) 7(1) (2000)
8. Satyanarayanan, M.: Fundamental challenges in mobile computing. In: PODC
1996: Proceedings of the ﬁfteenth annual ACM symposium on Principles of distributed computing, pp. 1–7 (1996)
9. Mattern, F.: Ubiquitous computing: Scenarios from an informatised world. In:
Zerdick, A., et al. (eds.) E-Merging Media - Communication and the Media Economy of the Future, pp. 145–163. Springer, Heidelberg (2005)
10. The AKOGRIMO Project: Access to Knowledge trough the Grid in a Mobile World
(2008), http://www.mobilegrids.org/

Grid-Enabled Non-Invasive Blood Glucose Measurement

85

11. Cannataro, M., Talia, D.: Towards the next-generation grid: a pervasive environment for knowledge-based computing. Information Technology: Coding and Computing, 437–441 (2003)
12. Maciocia, G.: The Foundations of Chinese Medicine: A Comprehensive Text for
Acupuncturists and Medical Herbalist. Elsevier Churchill Livingstone (2005)
13. Wen, D.: The drum of chinese medicine’s modernization beats loudly: A summary
of the second international science and technology conference on traditional chinese
medicine. Acupuncture Today (2005)
14. Schloegl, R.: Report on the outcome of the conference ’traditional chinese medicine
- a successful concept for east and west’. In: Seminar on the modernization of
traditional medicine, pp. 10–11 (2006)
15. WHO-IDF: Deﬁnition and diagnosis of diabetes mellitus and intermediate hyperglycemia. Report of a WHO/IDF Consultation (2006)
16. Bazaev, N.A., Selishchev, S.V.: Noninvasive methods for blood glucose measurement. Biomedical Engineering 41(1), 42–50 (2007)
17. Diabetes-Austria (2008), http://www.diabetes-austria.com/
18. CADGrid: China-austria data grid (2007),
http://www.par.univie.ac.at/project/cadgrid/
19. Han, J., Han, Y., Xia, Q., Hou, X., Li, Y.: Experiment and analysis on
transmission-characteristics of human-body-meridians-electro-information with application. Modern Chinese- and west-Medicine Magazine 3(19), 17–29 (2005)
20. Zhang, W.B., Jeong, D.: Subcutaneous impedance measured by four-electrode
method and low impedance acupoints located by single power alternative current.
American Journal of Chinese Medicine 32(5), 779–788 (2004)
21. WHO: International standard terminologies on traditional medicine in the western
paciﬁc region. WHO Library Cataloging in Publication Data (2007)
22. Zhang, W.B.: Proceedings in the study of transcutaneous CO2 emission in acupuncture and meridians. World Journal of Gastroenterol 6(3) (2000)
23. Bell, G., Gray, J., Szalay, A.: Petascale computational systems. Computer 39(1),
110–112 (2006)
24. WEEP: The workﬂow enactment engine project (2005),
http://weep.gridminer.org
25. Oh, H., Rizo, C., Enkin, M., Jadad, A.: What is ehealth (3): A systematic review
of published deﬁnitions. Journal of Medical Internet Research (2005)
26. Martin, S., Yen, D.C., Tan, J.K.: E-health: impacts of internet technologies on various healthcare and services sectors. International Journal of Healthcare Technology
and Management 4(1/2), 71–86 (2002)
27. Breton, V., Dean, K., Solomonides, T.: The healthgrid white paper (2005),
http://www.whitepaper.healthgrid.org
28. The OLDES project: Old people’s e-services at home (2007),
http://www.oldes.eu/

