3rd Workshop on Computational Chemistry and Its
Applications (3rd CCA)
Ponnadurai Ramasami
Department of Chemistry, University of Mauritius, Réduit, Republic of Mauritius,
p.ramasami@uom.ac.mu

The 3rd workshop on computational chemistry and its applications (3rd CCA) will be
held, as part of ICCS-2008, from 23rd to 25th June 2008 in Kraków, Poland. This
workshop is the third one after being two successful events in Reading, UK and
Beijing, China for ICCS-2006 and ICCS-2007 respectively. The main aim of this
workshop is to consider only high standards, original work not published, after peer
reviewing.
Computational chemistry is one of the fields of computational science and hence
this workshop is suitable for the ICCS conference. Computational chemistry is rapidly
expanding with the explosive growth of computational power. It is widely used in
research and more interestingly in interdisciplinary research involving computational
science.
The major goals of this workshop are to highlight the latest scientific advances
within the broad field of computational chemistry in education, research, industry and
society. This workshop will provide the opportunity for researchers coming from
corners of the world to be on a single platform for discussion, exchanging ideas and
possibly developing collaborations. It will also be a suitable platform for researchers
from different fields of computational science to meet so that ideas for
interdisciplinary research can emerge.
This year, for the 3rd CCA, some excellent papers have been received and these
papers cover a wide range of research from fundamental to applied chemistry. It is
interesting to note that there are increasingly more of interdisciplinary research papers
being submitted for consideration.
As the workshop organizer, I would like to thank all those who have submitted
papers for this workshop and the ICCS conference. I would also like to thank all
reviewers for their efforts and comments to improve some of the papers. I look
forward that we have a fruitful gathering and successful conference in Kraków.

M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2008, Part II, LNCS 5102, p. 343, 2008.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

