Cost-Minimizing Algorithm for Replica Allocation
and Topology Assignment Problem in WAN
Marcin Markowski and Andrzej Kasprzak
Wroclaw University of Technology, Chair of Systems and Computer Networks
Wybrzeze Wyspianskiego 27, 50-370 Wroclaw, Poland
{marcin.markowski,andrzej.kasprzak}@pwr.wroc.pl

Abstract. The paper deals with the problem of simultaneously assignment of
network topology and server’s replica placement in the wide area network in
order to minimize the criterion composed of the leasing capacity cost and the
building cost of the network. An exact algorithm, based on the branch and
bound method, is proposed to solve the problem. Algorithm takes into account
the problem of ensuring the reliability of the network. Some interesting features, observed during the computational experiments are reported.
Keywords: resource replication, topology assignment, WAN.

1 Introduction
Designing or modernizing of the Wide Area Network (WAN) consists in the assignment of resource allocation (i.e. servers, replicas of servers), topology and flow
routes. The optimal arrangement of resources and optimal allocation of network
channels let us obtain the most efficient and economical solution. Designing of the
wide area computer networks is always a compromise between the quality of service
in the network and reliability of the network from the one hand and the costs needed
to build and to support the network from the other. Quality of services and the network costs are criteria often used during the designing process. In [1] we have considered problem based on designing the WAN assuming that the maximal support cost of
the network is bounded. In [2] we have proposed algorithm for CFA problem with
cost criterion. In those papers the reliability requirements were not considered. In
many cases it is useful to formulate the optimizing problem in such a way: to minimize the cost of the network, when the acceptable quality level is known and the
reliability level is given. Then in the paper the problem of server’s replication and
topology assignment with the cost criterion delay constraint and reliability constraint
is considered. In our opinion it is well-founded to consider two kind of cost: the building cost of the network, borne once and the supporting cost (i.e. connected with the
capacity leasing), borne regularly. Then the criterion function is composed of two
ingredients: the regular channel capacity leasing cost and the disposable server cost.
We assume that the maximal acceptable total average delay in the network is given as
the constraint.
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2008, Part I, LNCS 5101, pp. 549–558, 2008.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

550

M. Markowski and A. Kasprzak

Designing of the wide area network topology consists in assignment of channels
location and choosing of channels' capacities. Properly designed network topology
should ensure communication between all pairs of nodes in WAN. There must be at
least one path between each pair of nodes in the network. In case of the channel failure or node failure, all paths leading through this channel or node become unserviceable. In case when only one path exists between pair of nodes, failure of any of the
path elements makes communication between nodes impossible. To ensure the reliability and survivability of the network, there should exist few different paths between
each pair of nodes. Paths are different when they do not have any common channel or
node, except the source node and destination node. Usually minimal condition imposing to the network is to ensure two paths between each node pair. Some problems and
solutions related to the network reliability are presented in [3, 4].
We assumed that the minimal number of paths between each pair of nodes is given
as the constraint. It allows to design network topology with denoted reliability level.
The problem considered here may be formulated as follows:
given:

user allocation at nodes, the set of the nodes to which replicas may be
connected for each server, maximal value of the total average delay in the
network, traffic requirements user-user and user-server, the set of potential channels, capacities and their costs (i.e. cost-capacity function) for
each potential channel,
minimize: linear combination of the capacity leasing cost and server cost,
over:
servers allocation, channel’s capacity and multicommodity flow,
subject to: multicommodity flow constraints, channel capacities constraints, server
allocation constraints, total average delay constraint, network reliability
constraint (minimal number of different paths between nodes).
We consider the discrete cost-capacity function because it is the most important
from practical point of view for the reason that the channels capacities can be chosen
from the sequence defined by international ITU-T recommendations. Such formulated
problem is NP-complete as more general than the capacity and flow assignment problem (CFA) with discrete cost-capacity function which is NP-complete [5].
The literature focusing on the simultaneous server’s replication and topology assignment problem is very limited. Some algorithms for this problem with different
delay criterion may be found in [1, 6]. The formulated here problem is more general.
It uses cost criterion and take into account the maximal acceptable average delay in
the WAN as the constraint. Moreover it takes into account some aspects of reliability
of the designed network. In the literature such formulated problem has not been considered yet.

2 Problem Formulation
Let n be the number of nodes of the wide area network and b be the number of potential channels which may be used to build the network. For each potential channel i
there is the set C i = {c1i ,..., c si (i )−1} of alternative values of capacities from which

exactly one must be chosen if the i -th channel was chosen to build the WAN. Let d ij

Cost-Minimizing Algorithm

551

be the cost of leasing capacity c ij [€€ /month]. Let c si (i ) = 0 for i = 1,..., b. Then
C i = C i ∪ {csi (i ) } be the set of alternative capacities from among which exactly one

must be used to channel i. If the capacity c si (i ) is chosen then the i -th channel is not
used to build the wide area network. Let x ij be the decision variable, which is equal
to one if the capacity c ij is assigned to channel i and x ij is equal to zero otherwise.
Since exactly one capacity from the set C i must be chosen for channel i, then the
following condition must be satisfied:
s (i )

∑ x ij

= 1 for i = 1,..., b.

j =1

(1)

Let W i = {x1i ,..., x si (i ) } be the set of variables x ij , which correspond to the i-th channel. Let X r' be the permutation of values of all variables x ij for which the condition
(1) is satisfied, and let X r be the set of variables, which are equal to one in X r' .
Designing the wide area network topology (channels allocation) the reliability of
the network should be ensured. Particularly, in case of a failure of a link (channel) or
a node, some routes must be redirected to another path. Let PN be the least number
of different paths between each pair of nodes in the network. Paths between two
nodes are different only when they do not have any common nodes or channels. Let
MPN be the minimal number of paths, which have to exist between all pairs of nodes
of the WAN. Ensuring MPN number of paths is very important for reliability of the
network.
Let K denotes the total number of servers, which must be allocated in WAN and
let LK k denotes the number of replicas of k -th server. Let M k be the set of nodes
to which k -th server (or replica of k -th server) may be connected, and let e(k ) be
the number of all possible allocation for k -th server. Since only one replica of server
may be allocated in one node then the following condition must be satisfied

LK k ≤ e(k ) for k = 1,..., K .

(2)

Let y kh be the decision binary variable for k -th server allocation; y kh is equal to
one if the replica of k -th server is connected to node h , and equal to zero otherwise.
Since LK k replicas of k -th server must be allocated in the network then the following condition must be satisfied

∑ y kh = LK k

h∈M k

for k = 1,..., K .

(3)

Let Yr be the set of all variables y kh , which are equal to one. The pair of sets
( X r , Yr ) is called a selection. Let ℜ be the family of all selections. X r determines

552

M. Markowski and A. Kasprzak

the network topology and capacities of channels and Yr determines the replicas allocation at nodes of WAN.
Let T ( X r , Yr ) be the minimal average delay per packet in WAN in which values
of channel capacities are given by X r and traffic requirements are given by Yr (depending on server replica allocation). T ( X r , Yr ) can be obtained by solving a multicommodity flow problem in the network [7]. Let U (Yr ) be the server cost and let

d ( X r ) be the capacity cost.
Let Q( X r , Yr ) be linear combination of the capacity cost and the server cost:
Q( X r , Yr ) = αD( X r ) + βU (Yr )

(4)

where α and β are the positive coefficients; α , β ∈ [0,1], α + β = 1.
Let T max be the maximal acceptable average delay per packet in WAN. Then, the
considered servers allocation, capacity and flow assignment problem in WAN with
total average delay constraint is formulated as follows:
min Q( X r , Yr )

(5)

PN X r ≥ MPN

(6)

( X r , Yr ) ∈ ℜ

(7)

T ( X r , Yr ) ≤ T max

(8)

( X r ,Yr )

subject to

Where PN X r is the least number of different paths between each pair of nodes in
the network in which values of channel capacities are given by X r .

3 Calculation Scheme of the Branch and Bound Algorithm
Assuming that LK k = 1 for k=1,...,K and C i = C i for i=1,...,b and omitting the
constraint (6), the problem (5-7) is resolved itself into the “host allocation, capacity
and flow assignment problem”. Since the host allocation, capacity and flow assignment problem is NP-complete [6, 7] then the problem (5-8) is also NP-complete as
more general. Then, the branch and bound method can be used to construct the exact
algorithm. Starting with the selection ( X 1 , Y1 ) ∈ ℜ we generate a sequence of selections ( X s , Ys ) . Each selection ( X s , Ys ) is obtained from a certain selections ( X r , Yr )
of the sequence by complementing one variable x ij (or y kh ) by another variable from
W i (or {ykm : m ∈ M k and m ≠ h} ).
For each selection ( X r , Yr ) we constantly fix a subset Fr ∈ ( X r , Yr ) and momentarily fix a set Frt . The variables in Fr are constantly fixed and represent the path

Cost-Minimizing Algorithm

553

from the initial selection ( X 1 , Y1 ) to the selection ( X r , Yr ) . Each momentarily fixed
variable in Frt is the variable abandoned during the backtracking process. Variables,
which do not belong to Fr or Frt are called free in ( X r , Yr ) . There are two important
elements in branch and bound method: testing operation (lower bound of the criterion
function) and branching rules. Then, in the next section of the paper, the testing operation and choice operation are proposed.
The lower bound LBr and branching rules are calculated for each selection
( X r , Yr ) . The lower bound is calculated to check if the “better” solution (selection
( X s , Ys ) ) may be found. If the testing is negative, we abandon the considered selection ( X r , Yr ) and backtrack to the selection ( X p , Y p ) from which selection ( X r , Yr )

was generated. The basic task of the branching rules is to find the variables for complementing to generate a new selection with the least possible value of the criterion
function. The detailed description of the calculation scheme of branch and bound
method may be found in the paper [8].

4 The Lower Bound
Since the traffic requirements in the network depend on the server allocation, then
obtaining the lower bound for the problem (5-8) is difficult. We propose, the lower
bound may be obtained by relaxing some constraints and by approximating the
discrete cost-capacity curves with the lower linear envelope [5, 7].
To find the lower bound LBr of the criterion function (4) we reformulate the problem (5-8) in the following way:
- we assume that the variables x ij ∈ X r − Fr , such that X i ∩ Fr = ∅ are continuous
variables. Then we can approximate the discrete cost-capacity curves (given by the
set C i ) with the lower linear envelope. Let Z ' be the set of such channels i, for
which variables x ij are continuos. The criterion function (4) turns itself into:

⎛
⎞
⎜
⎟
Q( X r , Yr ) = α ⎜ ∑ c i d i + ∑ d i ⎟ + β ∑ ykhukh ,
i
⎜ i∈Z '
y kh ∈Yr
i: x j ∈Fr ⎟⎠
⎝
where d i = min (d ij / c ij ) and c i is capacity of channel i (continuous variable).
xij ∈X i

- we assume that the variables

y kh ∈ Y k − Fr , for

k = 1,.., K ,

such that

Y ∩ Fr = ∅ are continuous variables. We create the model of the WAN in the
following way. We add to the considered network 2 K new artificial nodes, numbered from n + 1 to n + 2 K . The artificial nodes n + k and n + K + k correspond to
the k -th server. Moreover we add to the network directed artificial channels
〈n+k,m〉, 〈m,n+K+k〉, 〈n+K+k,n+k〉, for all m ∈ M k and k = 1,.., K , such that
k

554

M. Markowski and A. Kasprzak

Y k ∩ Fr = ∅ . The capacities of the new artificial channels are following:
c(n + k , m ) = ∞ , c(m, n + K + k ) = ∞ , c(n + K + k , n + k ) =

∑ u kh . The leasing

h=1..n

costs of all artificial channels are equal to zero.
Then, the lower bound LBr of minimal value of the criterion function Q( X s , Ys )

for every possible successor ( X s , Ys ) generated from ( X r , Yr ) may be obtained by
solving the following optimization problem:
2
⎞
⎛ ⎛
⎞
⎛
⎟
⎜ ⎜
⎟
d i ⎞⎟
⎜
⎟
⎜ ⎜
f
⎟
∑
i
⎜⎜
⎟
⎜ ⎜
c i ⎟⎟
⎟
i∈Z '
⎝
⎠
LBr = min ⎜ α ⎜ ∑ d i f i +
+ ∑ d i ⎟ + β ∑ ykhukh ⎟
f
f ⎜ ⎜ i∈Z '
⎟
y kh ∈Yr
i: x ij ∈Fr ⎟
γT max − ∑ i i i
⎟
⎜ ⎜
⎟
i
x
c
f
−
i
x j ∈Fr j j
⎟⎟
⎜⎜ ⎜
⎟
⎠
⎠
⎝ ⎝
subject to

f i ≤ c i for i ∈ Z'
fi ≤
fi ≤

x ij c ij

ir
c max

for

x ij

∈ Fr

for each i ∈ Z '

(9)

(10)
(11)
(12)

ir
where c max
is maximal capacity connected with variables x ij ∈ X i − Frt , and Frt
is the subset of momentarily fixed variables.
The solution of problem (9−12) gives the lower bound LBr. To solve the problem
(9-12) we can use an efficient Flow Deviation method [5, 7].

5 Branching Rules
The purposes of the branching rules is to find the normal variable from ( X r , Yr ) for
complementing and generating a successor of the selection ( X r , Yr ) with the least
possible value of criterion function (4). The choice criterions should be constructed in
such a way that complementing reduces the value of (4) and the increase of the total
average delay in the network is as minimal as possible.
Complementing variables x ij causes the capacity change in channel i. Then, the
values of average delay in the network and the capacity cost changes, and the value of
server cost does not change. Moreover, complementing variable x ij , j < s (i ) by

xsi (i ) = 0 causes that network topology changes - constraint (6) can not be violated.
We propose the following choice criterion for complementing variable x ij ∈ X r by
the variable xli ∈ X s :

Cost-Minimizing Algorithm

⎧
⎪ i
⎪ cl
Δi jl = ⎨
⎪
⎪∞
⎩

f
− i i
− fi c j − fi

555

fi

(

α d ij − d li

)

if f i < cli and PN X s ≥ MPN
otherwise

where f i is the flow in the i -th channel obtained by solving the multicommodity
flow problem for network topology and channel capacities given by the selection X r .
The choice criterion for complementing variable ykh ∈ Yr by the variable
ykm ∈ Ys may be formulated as follows:

k
δ hm

⎧1
⎪
⎪γ
⎪
=⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪⎩∞

∑

x ij ∈ X r

~
fi

~ − T ( X r , Yr )
x ij c ij − f i

β (u kh − ukm )

~
if f i < x ij c ij for x ij ∈ X r
otherwise

~
~
~
where the flow f = [ f1 ,.., f b ] was constructed as follows: flow from all users to k -th
server was moved from the routes leading from users to node h to the routes leading from
~
users to node p . The calculation scheme for obtaining flow f may be found in [1].
Let E r = ( X r ∪ Yr ) − Fr , and let Gr be the set of all reverse variables of normal
variables, which belong to the set E r . We want to choose a normal variable the complementing of which generates a successor with the possible least value of criterion
(4). We should choose such pairs {( x ij , xli ) : x ij ∈ Er , xli ∈ Gr } or {( y kh , y kp ) :
k is minimal.
ykh ∈ Er , ykm ∈ Gr } , for which the values of the criterion Δi jl or δ hm

6 Computational Results
The presented algorithm was implemented in C++ code. Extensive numerical
experiments have been performed with this algorithm for many different networks. The experiments were conducted with two main purpose in mind: first, to
examine the impact of various problem parameters on the solution (i.e. on the
value of the criterion Q) and second, to test the computational efficiency of the
algorithm.
The typical dependence of the optimal value of Q on maximal acceptable total
average delay per packet T max for different values of parameters α and β is
presented in the Fig. 1. It follows from computational experiments that the dependence of Q on T max is decreasing function. The following conclusions follows from the computer experiments (Fig.1).

556

M. Markowski and A. Kasprzak

Conclusion 1. There exist such acceptable total average delay per packet T*max ,
that the problem (5-8) has the same solution for each T max greater or equal
to T*max .

The typical dependence of the optimal value of D on the value of parameter α
( β = 1 − α ) is presented in the Fig. 2. It follows from computational experiments
and from Fig. 2 that the dependence of D on α is increasing function.
We have examined the impact of reliability parameter MPN on the solution. Typical dependences of the optimal value of the criterion Q and total average delay in
the network on the minimal number of different paths are presented in the Fig. 3
and Fig. 4. Experiments were conducted for MPN=1, 2 and 3. Obtaining of more
than three different path between each pair of nodes is difficult or even impossible for small and medium wide area networks. To ensure MPN=4 there must
exists at least four channels adjacent to each node of the network. It makes the network very expensive, because the leasing costs of channels increase fast and the cost
of nodes (WAN switches) increases as well.
As it follows from Fig. 3 the value of combined cost criterion Q is quite similar for
MPN=1 and MPN=2 and rapidly increases for MPN > 2. Similar dependences were
discovered for all examined networks.
Typical dependence of the optimal value of the total average delay in the network, obtained by solving problem (5-8), on the minimal number of different
paths is decreasing function (Fig. 4). In most cases dependency of T on MPN can
be approximated with the linear function.
Basing on the results, partially presented in the Fig. 3 and Fig. 4, we can formulate the following conclusion.
Conclusion 2. For small and medium wide area networks the optimal value of
minimal number of paths between each pair of nodes is equal
to two.
Computational properties of the presented algorithm were tested during experiments. Let NT = ((T max − Tmin ) /(T*max − Tmin )) ⋅ 100% be the normalized maximal
acceptable total average delay per packet in the network - problem (5-8) has no

α = 0,6, β = 0,4

Q

α = 0,2, β = 0,8

250000
150000
50000
0,0010

0,0015

0,0020

0,0025

0,0030

T

max

Fig. 1. Typical dependence of the optimal value of criterion Q on maximal acceptable
total average delay per packet

Cost-Minimizing Algorithm

557

T. max = 0,002

D

T. max = 0,003

120 000
95 000
70 000
0,00

0,20

0,40

0,60

α

0,80

.
Fig. 2. Typical dependence of the optimal value of D on the coefficient α

solution for T max < Tmin . This normalized value let us compare the results obtained for different wide area network topologies and for different numbers and
locations of servers. Let P(u , v) , in percentage, be the arithmetic mean of the
relative number of iterations for NT∈[u,v] calculated for all considered network
topologies and for different servers locations. Fig. 5 shows the dependency of P
on divisions [0%,10%), [10%,20%),..., [90%,100%] of NT. It follows from Fig.3
that the exact algorithm is especially effective from computational point of view
for NT ∈ [60%, 100%].

Q

T

2,6E+05

0,0030

2,3E+05

0,0015
0,0000

2,0E+05
0

1

2

MPN

3

0

1

2

3

MPN

Fig. 3. Typical dependence of the optimal Fig. 4. Typical dependence of the optimal
value of criterion Q on the minimal number of value of the total average delay in the
different paths
network
on
the
minimal
number
of different paths

7 Conclusion
In the paper the exact algorithm for solving the servers replication and topology assignment problem with cost criterion, delay constraint and reliability constraint is
proposed. Such formulated problem has not been considered in the literature yet. It
follows from computational experiments that the presented algorithm is effective
from computational point of view for greater values of acceptable average delay in

558

M. Markowski and A. Kasprzak

Fig. 5. The dependence of P on normalized maximal average delay per packet NT

the WAN (Fig.5). We are of the opinion that the WAN property formulated as Conclusion 2 is very important from practical point of view. It shows the optimal value of
minimal path’s number between each node pairs in the small or medium networks.
Moreover, properties presented in the section 4 and 5 may be very useful to construct
effective approximate algorithm for solving the problem (5-8).
This work was supported by a research project of The Polish State Committee for
Scientific Research in 2005-2007.

References
1. Markowski, M., Kasprzak, A.: The Three-Criteria Servers Replication and Topology Assignment Problem in Wide Area Networks. In: Gavrilova, M.L., Gervasi, O., Kumar, V.,
Tan, C.J.K., Taniar, D., Laganá, A., Mun, Y., Choo, H. (eds.) ICCSA 2006. LNCS,
vol. 3982, pp. 1119–1128. Springer, Heidelberg (2006)
2. Markowski, M., Kasprzak, A.: An Exact Algorithm for the Servers Allocation, Capacity and
Flow Assignment Problem with Cost Criterion and Delay Constraint in Wide Area Networks. In: Shi, Y., van Albada, G.D., Dongarra, J., Sloot, P.M.A. (eds.) ICCS 2007. LNCS,
vol. 4487, pp. 442–445. Springer, Heidelberg (2007)
3. Koidea, T., Shinmorib, S., Ishiic, H.: Topological Optimization with a Network Reliability
Constraint. Discrete Applied Mathematics 115, 135–149 (2001)
4. Yi-Kuei, L.: Reliability of a Flow Network Subject to Budget Constraints. IEEE Transactions on Reliability 56(1), 10–16 (2007)
5. Pioro, M., Medhi, D.: Routing, Flow, and Capacity Design in Communication and Computer Networks. Elsevier, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, San Francisco (2004)
6. Chari, K.: Resource Allocation and Capacity Assignment in Distributed Systems. Computers Ops Res. 23(11), 1025–1041 (1996)
7. Fratta, L., Gerla, M., Kleinrock, L.: The Flow Deviation Method: an Approach to Store-andForward Communication Network Design. Networks 3, 97–133 (1973)
8. Wolsey, L.A.: Integer Programming. Wiley-Interscience, New York (1998)

