Wavelet Based Spatial Scaling of Coupled Reaction
Diffusion Fields
Sudib K. Mishra1, Krishna Muralidharan2, Pierre Deymier2,
George Frantziskonis1,2, Srdjan Simunovic3, and Sreekanth Pannala3
1

Civil Engineering & Engineering Mechanics,
University of Arizona
2
Materials Science & Engineering, University of Arizona,
Tucson, AZ 85721 USA
3
Computer Science & Mathematics Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory,
Oak Ridge, TN 37831, USA
{sudib,krishna,deymier,frantzis}@email.arizona.edu,
{pannalas,simunovics}@ornl.gov

Abstract. Multiscale schemes for transferring information from fine to coarse
scales are typically based on some sort of averaging. Such schemes smooth the
fine scale features of the underlying fields, thus altering the fine scale
correlations. As a superior alternative to averaging, a wavelet based scheme for
the exchange of information between a reactive and diffusive field in the
context of multiscale reaction-diffusion problems is proposed and analyzed.
The scheme is shown to be efficient in passing information along scales, from
fine to coarse, i.e. up-scaling as well as from coarse to fine, i.e. down-scaling.
In addition, it retains fine scale statistics, mainly due to the capability of
wavelets to represent fields hierarchically. Critical to the success of the scheme
is the identification of dominant scales containing the majority of useful
information. The scheme is applied in detail to the analysis of a diffusive
system with chemically reacting boundary. Reactions are simulated using
kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) and diffusion is solved by finite differences.
Spatial scale differences are present at the interface of the KMC sites and the
diffusion grid. The computational efficiency of the scheme is compared to
results obtained by local averaging, and to results from a benchmark model.
The spatial scaling scheme ties to wavelet based schemes for temporal scaling,
presented elsewhere by the authors.
Keywords: Multiscale, wavelets, up-scaling, down-scaling, reaction, diffusion.

1 Introduction
Diffusion from a reactive boundary is inherently a spatially and temporally multiscale
problem, since the reaction process typically involves spatiotemporal scales quite
different than those in the diffusion process. Reaction phenomena involve
microscopic spatial and temporal scales, while diffusion involves mesoscopic ones.
Thus, coupling of the two processes efficiently is challenging. Recently, the authors
and co-workers developed a wavelet based scheme that addresses temporal scaling in
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2008, Part II, LNCS 5102, pp. 301–310, 2008.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

302

S.K. Mishra et al.

such problems [1]. The present work complements those schemes efficiently by
offering efficient spatial scaling that can be used in conjunction with the temporal
one. In fact, it is shown in this paper that a combined spatial and temporal scaling is
needed in order to minimize error from the tradeoff between computational efficiency
and loss of information due to up and down-scaling in multiscale schemes.
Modern simulation techniques deal with the coupling of the spatial and temporal
scales involved in a problem. Multiscale models fall under two general categories,
namely sequential, and concurrent. In the former ones, typically, a set of
calculations performed at lower scales is used to estimate parameters needed in a
model at higher scales. An example is molecular dynamic simulations used to come
up with the parameters needed to describe the constitutive behavior of materials and
processes at higher scales modeled by finite difference or finite element methods. In
the latter ones (concurrent) different models are used in different spatial regions
concurrently, while compatibility of the methods at interfaces is enforced or
assumed. An example is the simulation of crack propagation, where atomistic
simulations are used in the vicinity of the crack tip while continuum finite elements
are employed to simulate the far field response.
A general review on multiscale methods is that of [2]. Discipline specific review
papers are also available in the literature, e.g. in general chemical engineering [3], surface
science [4], reactor technology [5], heat transfer and thermal modeling [6], and works
implementing general approaches such as gap-tooth and time stepping [7]. A general
multiscale methodology based on wavelets has been examined for both spatial scales [8]
as well as temporal scales [9, 10]. These works take full advantage of the inherent
capabilities of wavelet analysis to represent objects in a multiscale fashion. The waveletbased approach, termed the compound wavelet matrix method, establishes a
communication bridge between phenomena at different scales.

2 Reaction Diffusion System
The reaction diffusion system is simulated by utilizing principles of operator splitting,
which allows treating the reaction operator separately from the diffusion one. Once
the two phenomena are simulated at two different scales the multiscale bridging and
passing information from lower to higher scales and getting feedback from higher to
lower scales is accomplished through multiscale interfacing. This section presents the
details of the reaction and diffusion processes for the problems herein.
The chemical processes are treated under the framework of reaction kinetics. First
order reactions are considered in this work, i.e. the reaction rate is proportional to the
concentration of the reactant to the first power. For reversible reactions such as
k AB
A ⎯⎯→
B
(1)
k BA
B ⎯⎯→ A
the first order rate constants k AB , k BA , each of inverse time units, define the reaction
kinetics governed by
d [ A]
d [ B]
= −k AB [ A] + k BA [ B ] ,
= −k BA [ B ] + k AB [ A]
(2)
dt
dt
The stochastic formulation of (2) yielding a KMC process is based on the probability
distribution function for reaction events expressed as an exponential

Wavelet Based Spatial Scaling of Coupled Reaction Diffusion Fields

303

P ( R = ri ) = 1 − e − k [ S ]Δt
(3)
where P is the probability of the event ri . Here k denotes the reaction rate constant,
[S] denotes concentration, and Δt is the reaction time demand (time until the next
reaction event will occur). Using the time demand, as is standard in formulation of
KMC algorithms, the following equations for forward (AÆB) and backward reaction
(BÆA) are obtained
1
ln(1 − R1 )
t AB = −
k AB [ A]
(4)
1
ln(1 − R2 )
t BA = −
k BA [ B ]
where R1 and R2 are random numbers uniformly distributed between zero and unity. At
any time in the simulation the reaction which requires the least time is the one that will
occur. Thus, at every KMC iteration step, two random numbers are generated, i.e.
R1 , R2 , and t AB , t BA are evaluated based on (4). The minimum of t AB , t BA is the time
increment associated with the selected reaction event. Since the chemical processes at
the boundary are coupled to the diffusion of species by operator splitting, the uncoupled
reaction process was described above. For the same reason, the uncoupled diffusion
process is described next, with proper boundary condition at the reactive site.
The governing equations for the diffusion of species on a two dimensional, x-y
spatial domain is
⎛ ∂ 2 u ( x, y, t ) ∂ 2 u ( x, y, t ) ⎞
∂u ( x, y, t )
= D⎜
+
(5)
⎟⎟
⎜
∂t
∂x 2
∂y 2
⎝
⎠
where D denote the diffusion coefficients, considered constant over the domain, and u
denotes concentration of species. A finite difference explicit Euler scheme, first order
in time and second order in space, with fixed time steps and fixed spatial
discretization is used to solve (5). The stability criteria for the numerical integration
process is guaranteed when the Courant condition is satisfied, i.e.
⎡ ( Δs ) 2 ⎤
Δt ≤ ⎢
(6)
⎥
−1
⎢⎣ 2 D ⎥⎦
where Δt , Δs denote the time increment and minimum spatial grid size, respectively.
In this work, the diffusion of species in the 2-D domain is considered deterministic.
The stochastic version of the diffusion process yields a Brownian motion process, not
examined herein.
The spatially 2-D model consists of the semi-infinite positive half space
(diffusion domain) with chemical reactions taking place at the boundary of the half
space (reaction domain). The boundary condition at the reactive site is that both A,
B are specified by the values evaluated from the reaction kinetics during the
operation splitting process. The reflecting boundary condition for the half space is
implemented in the finite difference scheme by setting the outgoing flux to zero. At
the other end of the discretized diffusion problem (far from the reactive site), the
species are absorbed. Simulating an absorbing boundary in a finite difference
algorithm is not trivial. However, true absorbing boundary can be simulated using
an infinite element in a finite element method. For the present problem this issue is

304

S.K. Mishra et al.

tackled, simply, by taking a sufficiently large diffusion domain along diffusion
direction (x) so that species do not reach the end within the time frame considered.
In a general context, however, appropriate measures such as using infinite finite
elements must be implemented. Finally, periodic boundary conditions are assumed
for the (y) diffusion direction.
Let { R}r denote the spatial “signal” or vector of concentrations along r discrete

equidistantly spaced reactive points, x1 , x2 ,..., xr . Similarly, let { D}d denote the spatial
“signal” of concentrations along d discrete equidistantly spaced diffusion nodes,
x1 , x2 ,..., xd , along the reactive boundary. For a benchmark solution of the reaction
diffusion problem r = d ; in this benchmark solution, no spatial scaling is required, yet
the process is computationally cumbersome. For an efficient solution, however, d  r ,
thus, the number of diffusion grid nodes along the reactive boundary are less than the
number of reaction sites. This is examined within the context of averaging and wavelet
based mapping in the following two sections. The averaging, wavelet based, and
benchmark schemes are illustrated using the discretization parameters listed in Table 1.
The benchmark scheme is the most accurate one, since it uses a diffusion domain
discretization at the scale of the reaction sites. For this reason, it is computationally
expensive. The wavelet based scheme maps 256 reaction sites to 32 nodes in the
diffusion grid, thus there are 8 reactive sites contributing to each node in the diffusion
domain. The averaging scheme maps 256 reaction sites to 32 nodes in the diffusion grid.
Table 1. Discretization used in the three schemes
Diffusion domain

Benchmark
Wavelet
scheme
Averaging
scheme

Nodes
in x
64
64
64

Nodes
in y
256
32
32

Discretization
in x
0.125
0.125
0.125

Reaction sites
Discretization
in y
0.1250
1.0282

Reaction
sites
256
256

1.0282

256

Discretization
in x
0.125
0.125
0.125

Isotropic diffusion is considered with a diffusion coefficient D=0.05 spaceunits/sec2. The reaction rate for both forward (AÆB) and backward (BÆA) reactions
is considered the same, 2.5 per sec. Thus the reaction kinetics is solely governed by
the reactive species concentration and is biased to the direction of lower species
concentration. The initial concentration of species A is 100 and of B is 10 at the
reactive boundary, while away from the boundary (diffusion domain) the initial
concentrations are zero.

3 Multiscale Interfacing by Averaging
Averaging can be used for passing information from fine to coarse scales. Here, the
concentrations at the nodes along the reactive boundary belonging to the diffusion

Wavelet Based Spatial Scaling of Coupled Reaction Diffusion Fields

305

grid are taken as the mean concentration of the reactive sites contributing to that node,
i.e. those in its vicinity. Conversely, these mean concentration fields are taken as the
initial concentrations along the reactive boundary for the next KMC step. A simple
way to map the reaction “signal” over the diffusion grid is to take the mean field of
the contributing reaction sites, yielding two vectors based on operations on { R}r , i.e.

⎧ ..... ⎫
⎪R ⎪
⎪ i−2 ⎪
⎪ Ri −1 ⎪ ⎧.... ⎫
⎪
⎪ ⎪ ⎪
⎨ Ri ⎬ → ⎨ Di ⎬ ,
⎪ R ⎪ ⎪.... ⎪
⎪ i +1 ⎪ ⎩ ⎭
⎪ Ri + 2 ⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩ ..... ⎭

⎧ ..... ⎫
⎪δ ⎪
⎪ i−2 ⎪
⎪ δ i −1 ⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨ δi ⎬
⎪δ ⎪
⎪ i +1 ⎪
⎪δ i + 2 ⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩ ..... ⎭

(7)

where {δ }r denotes the deviators (residuals) from the mean field at the reaction sites,

and { D}r denotes the mean concentrations at the diffusion nodes. Based on
averaging,

{D}d = [ H ]d ,r {R}r
t

t

(8)

holds, with superscript t denoting evaluation at time t, and matrix H of dimensions
d,r, is circulant, expressed as
⎡ ci
⎢c
⎢ i −1
H
=
[ ] ⎢0
⎢
⎢ci + 2
⎢⎣ ci +1

ci +1
ci
0
0
ci + 2

ci + 2
ci +1
0
0
0

0

ci + 2
...
0
0

0
0
...
0
0

0 0
0 0
... 0
0 ci − 2
0 0

0
0
0
ci −1
ci − 2

ci − 2
0
0
ci
ci −1

ci −1 ⎤
ci − 2 ⎥⎥
0 ⎥
⎥
ci +1 ⎥
ci ⎥⎦ d , r

(9)

The coefficients in H can be set to appropriate weights for evaluating the mean field.
In a way, H acts as a multiscale operating matrix, and this will become more evident
in the sequence where the wavelet based scaling is described. The deviators from the
mean field are expressed as

{δ }r = { R}r − [ M ]r , d {D}d = {R}r − [ M ]r , d [ H ]d , r {R}r

(10)

where matrix M maps the d diffusion grid nodes along the reactive boundary to the r
reactive sites, and has a sort of unit matrix structure. Thus a stochastic species
concentration spatial signal can be decomposed into a mean field which is sent across
to coarser scales, i.e. to the diffusion grid, which diffuses the species, and the residual
part which contains information on the correlation structure among the individual
sites. However, for a deterministically reactive boundary, all sites are reacting
equivalently so the residual vector is null in that case. Statistically, all of them are
fully correlated. Since mean field in this case is the entire reaction field and the
residual part is zero, such a deterministic system should behave as if there is no
spatial scaling. This fact will be used in the sequence for validating the
implementations.

306

S.K. Mishra et al.

Up-scaling maps the reaction sites to the diffusion grid, where species are allowed
to diffuse over a time period that covers several reaction time steps. The reason for
this is that the characteristic time scale for reaction is orders of magnitude lower than
that of the diffusion time scale. An analytical estimate of the number of intermediate
KMC steps to be covered between two successive diffusion steps is provided. At the
end of the diffusion time step, the species concentrations as they appear on the
diffusion grid need to be mapped back onto the reactive sites. This step, crucial to the
success of the simulation is called down-scaling (not to be confused to “up-sampling”
which is a terminology used mostly in signal processing), or backward feedback from
diffusion grid to the reaction sites. Within the averaging framework, this is done by
first assigning the updated mean field of concentrations from the diffusion grid to its
contributing reactive sites and then adding to them the residuals δ . This operation is
expressed as (constituting an explicit scheme)

{R}r

t +1

= [ M ]r , d { D}d + {δ }r
t

t

t

(11)

where superscript t+1 indicates the time at one diffusion time step after time t.

4 Multiscale Interfacing Using Wavelets
Here, analogously to the averaging scheme, the concentration at the reactive sites
represented through vector { R}r are to be up-scaled to the diffusion grid nodes, thus

yielding vector { D}d . Let WR ( s, x ) denote the wavelet transform of { R}r , expressed

in terms of scale s and spatial coordinate x. WR ( s, x ) is decomposed as

WR ( s, x ) = f R ( s0 , Δx ) ⊕ f R ( s1 , Δx ) ⊕ f R ( s2 , 21 Δx ) ⊕ ... ⊕ f R ( sn , 2n −1 Δx )

(12)

where f R ( si , 2i −1 Δx ) , i = 1,.., n denote the wavelet transform at scale si and sampling
interval 2i −1 Δx , and f R ( s0 , Δx ) denotes the transform at the coarsest scale using the

scaling function (thus it appears as if there are two wavelet decompositions at the first
level, however one is that of the scaling function and the other of the wavelet in (12).
Biorthogonal splines of so-called order [10,4] were used in this work. It is noted that
for vector { R}r there are n = log 2 r − 22 number of scales. In (12), ⊕ implies scalewise association in the wavelet analysis formality. This hierarchical decomposition
can be used to up-scale { R}r to the diffusion grid by using only the relevant few
dominant scales in wavelet domain and truncating the remaining scales. Since the
spatial resolution of the diffusion grid is smaller than that of the reaction sites, it may
not be possible to up-scale { R}r and also have the same level of resolution as in

{D}d . In the wavelet domain this translates to having coarser resolutions than those

dictated by the sampling interval at the corresponding scale. Thus, if there are d
number of points in the diffusion grid desired to have Δxd resolution then out of
n = log 2 r − 22 available scales at the reaction sites only m = log 2 d − 22 scales,

Wavelet Based Spatial Scaling of Coupled Reaction Diffusion Fields

307

which preferably should all belong to the dominant ones, should be retained. Then,
the wavelet transform of {D}d, WR ( s, x ) can be written as
WD ( s, x ) = f R ( s0 , Δx ) ⊕ f R ( s1 , Δx ) ⊕ f R ( s2 , 21 Δx ) ⊕ ... ⊕ f R ( sm , 2m −1 Δx )

(13)

where the notation is the same as in (12). By truncating the coefficient at higher
scales, it is natural to query whether the energy norm of { R}r is preserved. This
partially guaranteed by the dominant scale representation of the field. However,
truncation of finer scales introduces loss/gain of energy contained in those higher
wavelet sub bands. But for all practical purposes the total energy (or mean) remains
same; in addition the basic correlation structure is transferred through these scales of
dominance. Relevant results are presented in subsequent section.
With the species concentration up-scaled from the reaction sites to the diffusion
grid, it is convenient and efficient to solve the diffusion equations in the wavelet
domain, until the next, i.e. down-scaling step, described below. Since the wavelet
transform is linear, it is permitted to carry over the diffusion equation on the wavelet
domain and then back transform it to the physical domain. With the bridging of scales
along the y coordinate, the diffusion equation (5) is transformed, with respect to the
spatial axis y only in this case, into the wavelet domain, yielding
∂Wy [u ( x, y, t )]
∂t

⎡ ∂ 2Wy [u ( x, y, t )] ∂ 2Wy [u ( x, y, t )] ⎤
= D⎢
+
⎥
∂x 2
∂y 2
⎣⎢
⎦⎥

(14)

where Wy denotes the wavelet transform in the y direction only. Equation (14) can be
written as

⎡ ∂ 2 u ( x, W y , t ) ∂ 2 u ( x, W y , t ) ⎤
⎥
(15)
= D⎢
+
∂t
∂x 2
∂y 2
⎢⎣
⎥⎦
thus expressing u as a function of x, t, and the wavelet transform of spatial coordinate
y. The inverse wavelet transform yields u in the x, y, t domain, i.e.
∂u ( x, Wy , t )

u ( x, y, t ) = Wy−1 ⎡⎣u ( x, Wy , t ) ⎤⎦

(16)

Finally, it is mentioned that the scales considered in (14)-(16) are the dominant ones.
Similarly to the steps in the averaging scheme, after the diffusion step, { D}d is
down-scaled to { R}r thus providing feedback to the reaction sites from the diffusion
grid. The wavelet transform of

{D}d

expressed in (14) contains m = log 2 d − 22

scales, while n = log 2 r − 22 scales are required to define the wavelet transform of

{R}r .

Since n>m, the information in the “lacking” scales, i.e. the finer ones, is

obtained from the previous time step. This saliently assumes that the fine scale
fluctuations of the concentrations remain invariant or change only a little between two
successive up- and down-scaling operations and small diffusion time steps. Given the
dominant scales described above, this is a reasonable assumption that does
not introduce measurable error. Then, after down-scaling, the wavelet transform of
{R}r , WR ( s, x ) is expressed appropriately.

308

S.K. Mishra et al.

5 Results
Before proceeding to present any results the first thing is to check for the
conservation. Conservation is one necessary condition that must be satisfied for any
multiscale schemes. We check the mass conservation through counting the total
number of species present in the system in kinetic evolution time steps. The relevant
evolution shows that, with varying level of spontaneous fluctuations, mass is
conserved in both the multiscale schemes.
The parameters listed in TABLE 1 are used for three different schemes. From
these, it can be concluded that all three schemes show obvious fluctuations in the
kinetic evolution of species, which is due to the KMC reaction process. However, the
fluctuations in both the wavelet and averaging schemes are reduced, as compared to
the benchmark model. One reason for this is the intermediate time steps. Another
reason for the wavelet scheme is that by only considering the dominant scales in the
wavelet transform, small scale fluctuations are smeared out. Such smearing is more
pronounced in the averaging scheme, since, even though it is incapable of recognizing
dominant information, each averaging yields a spatially flat reaction field.
The efficiency of the multi scale schemes depends on their capability to accurately
retain temporal as well as spatial information on the concentrations. Thus, along with
the temporal evolution the spatial distribution of concentrations should be studied; for
compactness, such spatial maps are not shown here.
It can be concluded that, as expected, both the averaging and wavelet spatial
scaling schemes compromise the fine scale fluctuations for the gain in computational
efficiency. However, it will be shown in the sequence that the wavelet scheme
provides superior information as compared to the averaging scheme. The ensemble
statistics of the diffusion profile along the diffusion field show that while the
ensemble mean values are captured accurately by the multiscale schemes, the
standard deviations are not captured as accurately by the averaging scheme as are by
the wavelet one. In particular, the averaging scheme overestimates the standard
deviations whereas the wavelet scheme underestimates them. The benchmark model
is thus sandwiched between the two. The enhanced standard deviation values result
from the sharp peaks present in the averaging model. The exclusion of ultra fine
scales in wavelet filtering is responsible for a lower standard deviation of the
fluctuations along reactive sites. However by increasing the number of wavelet scales
in up- and down-scaling brings increasingly more fluctuations.
Another important measure is the capturing of correlation structures by the
multiscale schemes. Even though the KMC reactions are uncorrelated, diffusion of
species in the y-direction introduces correlations. In order to examine whether the
multiscale schemes are capable of capturing such correlations, an enhanced
correlation on the concentrations along the reactive sites is imposed. Even though
these do not contribute to the physics of the problem, they do help understand the
effect of multiscaling in detail.
Figure 1 shows the spatial autocorrelation of concentrations along the reactive sites
(y-direction, at x=0) as it results from the three schemes. The benchmark scheme has
the correlation structure as it results from the diffusion processes. The wavelet scheme
is capable of capturing the spatial correlations by even including only first two

Wavelet Based Spatial Scaling of Coupled Reaction Diffusion Fields

1.0

309

(a)

autocorrelation

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

autocorrelation

1.0

(b)

0.8

3

6

9
12
spatial lag

1/9 th scaling
1/8 th scaling

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
-0.2 0

3

6

9
spatial lag

12

15

18

15

18

1.0
autocorrelation

0

(c)

0.8
0.6
0.4
one wavelet scales
three wavelet scales

0.2
0.0
0

3

6

9
12
spatial lag

15

18

Fig. 1. The autocorrelation function resulting from (a) benchmark, (b) homogenization, (c)
wavelet scheme. The scaling in the homogenized and wavelet schemes is defined as

S = (log 2 r / log 2 d ) where

r is the number of reaction sites, and d is the number of

diffusion sites.

coarsest scales (i.e. the scales containing the scaling coefficients and the next finer
scale containing the coarsest wavelet coefficients). With three (or more) scales the
autocorrelation structure from the wavelet scheme is practically identical to the one
from the benchmark. To the contrary the averaging scheme is incapable of capturing
the correlations.

6 Conclusions
The spatial scaling wavelet scheme presented herein is offered as a complement to the
wavelet based temporal multiscaling presented elsewhere. Even though the spatial
multiscaling offers reduced CPU time demand while providing reasonable accuracy, a
combined temporal and spatial scaling is required to simulate problems as the present
reaction diffusion system efficiently, i.e. representing the behavior accurately at all
spatiotemporal scales. An averaging scheme may offer a simple alternative to the
wavelet one, yet its efficacy is inferior, especially with respect to correlations.

Acknowledgements
This research is sponsored by the Mathematical, Information, and Computational
Sciences Division; Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research; U.S.
Department of Energy with Dr. Anil Deane as the program manager. The work was
partly performed at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory, which is managed by

310

S.K. Mishra et al.

UT-Battelle, LLC under Contract No. De-AC05-00OR22725. Discussions with M.
Syamlal, T. J. O'Brien, and D. Alfonso of the National Energy Technology Laboratory
(NETL), C.S Daw and P. Nukala of Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Rodney Fox and
Z. Gao of Iowa State University have been very useful.

References
1. Frantziskonis, G., Mishra, S.K., Pannala, S., Simunovic, S., Daw, C.S., Nukala, P., Fox,
R.O., Deymier, P.A.: Wavelet-based spatiotemporal multi-scaling in diffusion problems
with chemically reactive boundary. Int. J. Multiscale Comp. Eng. 4, 755–770 (2006)
2. Vvedensky, D.D.: Multiscale modelling of nanostructures. J. Phys. Cond. Matter 16,
R1537–R1576 (2004)
3. Marin, G.B. (ed.):Multiscale Analysis. Advances in Chemical Engineering, book series,
vol. 30, pp. 1–309 (2005)
4. Dollet, A.: Multiscale Modeling of CVD Film Growth—a Review of Recent Works.
Surface and Coatings Technology, 177–178, 245–251 (2004)
5. Hsiaotao, T., Jinghai, L.I.: Multiscale Analysis and Modeling of Multiphase Chemical
Reactors. Advanced Powder Technol. 15, 607–627 (2004)
6. Murthy, J.Y., Narumanchi, S.V.J., Pascual-Gutierrez, J.A., et al.: “Review of Multiscale
Simulation in Submicron Heat Transfer. Int. J. Multiscale Computational Engineering 3,
5–31 (2005)
7. Vasenkov, A.V., Fedoseyev, A.I., Kolobov, V.I., et al.: Computational Framework for
Modeling of Multi-scale Processes. Computational and Theoretical Nanoscience 3, 453–
458 (2006)
8. Frantziskonis, G., Deymier, P.A.: Wavelet Methods for Analyzing and Bridging
Simulations at Complementary Scales – the Compound Wavelet Matrix and Application to
Microstructure Evolution. Modelling Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng. 8, 649–664 (2000)
9. Frantziskonis, G., Deymier, P.: Wavelet-based Spatial and Temporal Multiscaling:
Bridging the Atomistic and Continuum Space and Time Scales. Phys. Rev. B 68, 024105
(2003)
10. Muralidharan, K., Mishra, S., Frantziskonis, G., Deymier, P.A., Nukala, P., Simunovic, S.,
Pannala, S.: The dynamic compound wavelet matrix for multiphysics/multiscale problems.
Phys. Rev. E 77, 026714 (2008)

