A Simple Method of the TEX Surface Drawing
Suitable for Teaching Materials
with the Aid of CAS
Masataka Kaneko, Hajime Izumi,
Kiyoshi Kitahara1, Takayuki Abe, Kenji Fukazawa2 ,
Masayoshi Sekiguchi, Yuuki Tadokoro,
Satoshi Yamashita, and Setsuo Takato3
1

Kisarazu National College of Technology, Japan
Kogakuin University, Japan
2
Kure National College of Technology, Japan
3
Toho University, Japan
nkaneko@inc.kisarazu.ac.jp

Abstract. The authors have been developing KETpic as a bundle of
macro packages for Computer Algebra Systems (CASs) to draw ﬁne
TEX-pictures. Recently we have developed a new method of the surface drawing using KETpic. The equation of envelopes is used to draw
ridgelines of surfaces. Also the technique of hidden line elimination is
used. By these methods, we can draw 3D-graphics which are so simple
that the global (i.e. sketchy) shapes of them are easily understood.

1

Introduction

We have been developing KETpic as a bundle of macro packages for CASs.
It has been developed for inserting ﬁne (accurate and expressive) ﬁgures into
LATEX documents. We can readily produce a graphic output within such CASs
and export the resulting ﬁgures to LATEX documents as source code rather than
a graphical ﬁle itself. It is downloadable for free from [5].
Since KETpic has been equipped with various commands or accessories, its
2D-graphics have been actually used in our mathematics classroom. We can
also draw space curves easily with KETpic. The 3D-graphics of KETpic are
monochrome and are composed of lines.
5
0
5
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
5
0
5

Fig. 1. The graphic of CAS

Fig. 2. The graphic of KETpic

M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2008, Part II, LNCS 5102, pp. 35–45, 2008.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

36

M. Kaneko et al

It takes little cost for us to make copies of the ﬁgures drawn with KETpic. Moreover, the quality of the ﬁgures is maintained when they are copied. Using these
printed materials repeatedly, students can establish the mathematical concepts.
Thus, they are suitable for teaching materials in the form of mass printed matter. On the other hand, the 3D-graphics of CASs are colourful and illuminated,
so they are suitable for demonstration on displays. However, it takes much cost
to maintain the quality of the graphic images of them when they are copied.
Therefore, it is diﬃcult for students to use them repeatedly.
Currently KETpic is equipped with the ability to eliminate the part of curves
hidden by the other ones [1]. We call such a technique “skeleton method”. By
using only one command “skeletondata” of KETpic, we can easily give clear
perspective to 3D-graphics as shown in Fig. 3. These ﬁgures were actually used
to explain the deﬁnition of double integral and the concept of repeated integral
in our mathematics classroom.
z

z

y

y

x

x

Fig. 3. Figures drawn with skeleton method

Though the ability of KETpic for drawing space curves is exploited as above,
there were some deﬁcits for surface drawing. In this paper, the authors introduce
a new capability of KETpic for surface drawing. It meets the potential demands
of the mathematics teachers who usually use CAS and TEX , and who
1. want to show students the ﬁgures of surfaces with the accurate ridgelines
just as we see them.
2. want to draw such ﬁgures using the minimal number of lines so as to make
them easy to see.
In fact, a method to draw accurate ridgelines has been known. In that method,
a point on the ridgelines is characterized by the following condition:
The normal vector of the surface at that point is orthogonal to the line
connecting that point with the view point.
Since the equation describing this condition is simple, we can solve it by hand.
However, this method is ad hoc in a sense, and it would be complicated in case of

A Simple Method of the TEX Surface Drawing

37

the surface given by parameters other than x, y. The method introduced in this
paper is applicable to such general cases. Though the equation of our method
is a little complicated and can not be solved by hand, it can be solved within
almost the same time as in the above method by using CAS.
The authors also introduce the method to eliminate the parts of ridgelines
hidden by the parts of the surface on this side of the viewer.
In the next Section 2, we introduce mathematical background of our method.
In Section 3, we explain the procedure to draw surfaces using our method with
an example.

2
2.1

Mathematical Background
Setting of the Problem

Suppose z = f (x, y) is a smooth function with two variables deﬁned on a domain
D in R2 . When we draw a graph of f on a plane, we actually draw its image under
the projection p onto the plane (the ﬁeld of our view). The projection depends
on the viewpoint and the focus point, and generally has a form of nonlinear
transformation. The 3D-graphics of CAS are drawn also by using the automatic
calculation of this projection p. Therefore, it should be impossible for us to draw
a precise ﬁgure of the graph of f without using CAS or other graphic softs.
In the above setting, the composition p◦f : R2 −→ R2 becomes a smooth map.
For exactness, we give coordinate (x, y) to the former R2 (containing domain D)
and coordinate (X, Y ) to the latter R2 (containing image (p ◦ f )(D)).
For example, we consider the graph of the function:
z = 2 − x2 − y 2

(−1 ≤ x ≤ 1, −1 ≤ y ≤ 1) .

It is drawn with CAS, and is inserted into LATEX document by using KETpic.
Remark that Fig. 4 is drawn on the XY -plane.
z
ridgeline

y
edge line

x

Fig. 4. Edge lines and ridgelines

38

M. Kaneko et al

As shown in Fig. 4, the boundary of (p ◦ f )(D) in the XY -plane is composed
of two kinds of parts. One part is the set of “edge lines”, the part of (p ◦ f )(∂D).
The other part is the set of “ridgelines”.
Though this surface is obtained by the rotation of a parabola, the ridgeline
is not a parabola. As is easily seen, it is nothing but the envelope of the image
of some family of curves on the surface. We can draw edge lines easily by using
CAS. On the other hand, it is not so easy to draw ridgelines.
2.2

Main Result

In this subsection, we show a method to draw ridgelines by using CAS.

Y
p
X
f

y

x
Fig. 5. Setting of the main result

We represent p ◦ f by components as follows:
(p ◦ f )(x, y) = (F1 (x, y), F2 (x, y)) .
Then our main result is the next
Proposition
If the point (F1 (x, y), F2 (x, y)) is located on the ridgelines of the graph of f ,
then the following equality holds at (x, y):
∂F1 ∂F2
∂F1 ∂F2
−
=0.
∂x ∂y
∂y ∂x

A Simple Method of the TEX Surface Drawing

39

Proof
Firstly, remark that, to deduce the equation of the envelope, it is suﬃcient to
consider any family of curves on the image of p ◦ f the union of which covers
the image of p ◦ f . So that, we can deduce the equation by using both of the
following families of curves on the image:
X = F1 (x, β)
Y = F2 (x, β)

X = F1 (α, y)
Y = F2 (α, y)

Here α and β indicate the parameters of the families.

Fig. 6. Idea of proof

In Fig. 6 the dotted line is a member of α-family, and the dash line is a
member of β-family. Remark that these two lines are tangent to each other at
one point of the envelope.
By the formula for the diﬀerentials of the functions with parametric representations, the slopes of the tangent lines to each of the above two families are
equal to
∂F1
∂F2
∂F1
∂F2
,
∂x
∂x
∂y
∂y
respectively. Clearly, at each point of the envelope, a curve belonging to α-family
is tangent to a curve belonging to β-family. Hence, at that point, the equality
∂F2
∂x

∂F1
∂F2
=
∂x
∂y

∂F1
∂y

holds. This implies the claim of our proposition.
2.3

(Q.E.D.)

The Meaning of the Main Result

As is easily seen, the quantity
∂F1 ∂F2
∂F1 ∂F2
−
∂x ∂y
∂y ∂x
is nothing but the Jacobian of the map p ◦ f : R2 −→ R2 . Therefore, our
proposition means that the envelope is given as the singular value set of the
map p ◦ f .
In singular point theory, it is well known that the singular point set is given
as the set of points where the Jacobian of the map vanishes. In our situation,

40

M. Kaneko et al

the envelope corresponds to the singular value set of p (deﬁned on the image of
f ). Since f is a diﬀeomorphism onto its image, the critical value set of p ◦ f is
the same as that of p (by the chain rule of Jacobian).
From the viewpoint of singular point theory, it seems to be meaningless to
consider p ◦ f instead of p. Actually there is almost no opportunity of using
p ◦ f because it is very diﬃcult to give the explicit representation of it by hand.
However, p ◦ f becomes very important when we draw ﬁgures by using CAS.
This is because CAS can calculate p ◦ f and its diﬀerential. Furthermore, CAS
can automatically solve the equation in the proposition.
Based on our main result, we can draw simple ﬁgures of surfaces with the minimal number of lines. The simpleness of the ﬁgures has not only aesthetic value
but also mathematical meaning. In fact, it is an important idea of Morse theory
[2] that the topological information of a manifold is contained in the structure
of some critical submanifolds for a Morse function deﬁned on the manifold.

3

The Procedure to Draw Surfaces by Using KETpic

In this section, we explain how to draw surfaces by using the method given in the
previous section. Here we draw the graph of the following function as an example:
f (x, y) = 3 1 − (2x2 + y 2 )e−(x
3.1

2

+y 2 )

.

Calculate the Critical Point Set

Firstly, we calculate the critical point set of p◦f which is a set of connected curves
in the xy-plane. By ﬁxing the focus point and the view point, the command such
as “implicitplot” of CAS enables us to ﬁnd the points which satisfy the equation
in the previous section. Connecting the neighbouring points by segments, we can
obtain the picture like Fig. 7. Remark that the number of connected components
depends on the choice of the focus point and the view point.
y

O

Fig. 7. Critical point set

x

A Simple Method of the TEX Surface Drawing

3.2

41

Calculate the Critical Value Set

Secondly, we draw the graph of f restricted to the above critical point set. It is
drawn in the XY -plane as in Fig. 8. The ridgelines which we want to draw are
composed of some parts of this critical value set.

Y

O

X

Fig. 8. Critical value set

There are some cusps in the critical value set. In Fig. 9, these points are
speciﬁed clearly by using bold points. Topologically, the graph of f is composed
of three disks centered at extremal points of f . The cusps correspond to the
points where the line segments bounding three disks are attached together.
We judge, by rather unreﬁned method, whether a point in the critical value
set is a cusp or not. The judgement is accomplished by calculating the angle
between the two vectors from that point to the neighbouring points.

Fig. 9. Cusps

Though there are some parts in the critical value set which are invisible from
the view point as shown in Fig. 11, they become visible when other parts on this
side are eliminated.

42

3.3

M. Kaneko et al

Add Edges of the Graph and Eliminate Hidden Parts

Thirdly, we add the edge lines of the graph to the critical value set. Then we
obtain Fig. 10.

Fig. 10. Add edge lines

In these curves, there are some parts which are drawn in this picture but
actually can not be seen from the viewpoint. So we must eliminate such hidden
parts to draw the picture we want (as in Fig. 11).
As seen in Fig. 10, ridgelines and edge lines are separated to some parts by
their own intersections or cusps. Remark that whether a point in these curves is
visible or not is determined by the separated part to which the point belongs.
We judge whether a part is visible or not by following the next procedure:
1. Pick up an arbitrary point (x0 , y0 , f (x0 , y0 )) from that part.
2. Take some points on the line connecting (x0 , y0 , f (x0 , y0 )) with the view
point by the method of bisection, and ﬁnd the signature of {z − f (x, y)} for
each of these points.
3. If the signatures in the second step are constant, then the part containing
(x0 , y0 , f (x0 , y0 )) is visible. Otherwise, the part is invisible.
Thus, through this process of “hidden line elimination”, we obtain the next Fig.
11 which we aimed at.

Fig. 11. Eliminate hidden lines

Even though this ﬁgure is precise with the aid of CAS, there remains only
minimal information about the shape of the graph of f . This is because the

A Simple Method of the TEX Surface Drawing

43

minimal number of lines are used. Therefore, this ﬁgure enables us to grasp the
global shape easily.
3.4

Draw Wire Frames

When we attach importance to the preciseness of the ﬁgure, we can also use
wire frames widely used in 3D-graphics of CAS. Our graphics are more beautiful
than those of CAS because the number of wires is small and because wires
are smooth curves. In the next Fig. 12, ﬁve wires are drawn in both x and y
directions. Remark that the technique of hidden line elimination can be also
applied to wires.

Fig. 12. Add wire frames

Compared with Fig. 11, Fig. 12 contains additional information about the
local shape of the graph. In fact, the shape of the wire frames indicates the slope
and curvature of the graph. In case of 3D-graphics of CAS, colours and half tone
shadings indicate the local shape. Since it takes much cost for us to use colours
and half tone shadings in teaching materials in the form of mass printings, the
surface drawing of KETpic is more suitable for such practical use.

Fig. 13. Finished ﬁgure

44

M. Kaneko et al

Oppositely, the existence of the wire frames makes it a little harder for us to
grasp the global shape. This is because we must pick up the curves which are
also contained in Fig. 11 from those in Fig. 12 to grasp the sketchy shape.
To make up this deﬁcit, in Fig. 13, we draw clear distinction between the
curves contained in Fig. 11 and wire frames by utilizing the ability of KETpic
to draw thick and thin lines. This distinction makes this ﬁgure more easy to be
understood. Thus, KETpic can oﬀer 3D-graphics which are not only accurate
(i.e. diﬀerential geometric) but also easy to understand (i.e. topological).

4

Conclusion and Future Works

The ability of surface drawing with minimal number of essential curves has great
meaning. This is because we can easily understand the topological structure. As
illustrated in the ﬁgures of this paper, we can draw accurate and simple 3Dgraphics in TEX documents with KETpic. Moreover, KETpic enables us to hand
the printed materials with those ﬁgures to students.

Fig. 14. The case of polar coordinate

The method which we have introduced in this paper can be applied to the
case where the surface is given by parameters other than x, y as follows:
x = x(u, v),

y = y(u, v),

z = z(u, v) .

Here we assume that the diﬀerential of the map (u, v) → (x, y, z) is injective.
The authors think that our method will be applicable also to the case of several
surfaces. In the near future, we should develop a new KETpic functionality as
above.

References
1. Kaneko, M., Abe, T., Sekiguchi, M., Tadokoro, Y., Fukazawa, K., Yamashita, S.,
Takato, S.: CAS-aided Visualization in LATEX documents for Mathematical Education. Teaching Mathematics and Computer Science (to appear)
2. Milnor, J.: Morse theory. Princeton Univ. Press, New Jersey (1963)

A Simple Method of the TEX Surface Drawing

45

3. Sekiguchi, M., Yamashita, S., Takato, S.: Development of a Maple Macro Package
Suitable for Drawing Fine TEX-Pictures. In: Iglesias, A., Takayama, N. (eds.) ICMS
2006. LNCS, vol. 4151, pp. 24–34. Springer, Heidelberg (2006)
4. Sekiguchi, M., Kaneko, M., Tadokoro, Y., Yamashita, S., Takato, S.: A New Application of CAS to LATEX-Plottings. In: Shi, Y., van Albada, G.D., Dongarra, J.,
Sloot, P.M.A. (eds.) ICCS 2007. LNCS, vol. 4488, pp. 178–185. Springer, Heidelberg
(2007)
5. Sekiguchi, M., http://www.kisarazu.ac.jp/∼ masa/math/

