Computational Materials Science
at the Cutting Edge
Stefan Bl¨
ugel
Institut f¨
ur Festk¨
orperforschung, Forschungszentrum J¨
ulich,
52425 J¨
ulich, Germany
s.bluegel@fz-juelich.de
Phone: +49 2461 61 4249; Fax: +49 2461 61 2850
www.fz-juelich.de/iff/staff/Bluegel S/

Abstract. Material science is a ﬁeld which cuts through physics, chemistry, biology, and engineering working with an enormous spectrum of
diﬀerent material systems and structures on quite diﬀerent length and
time scale and symmetry, on diﬀerent degrees of hardness or softness as
well as on liquids. The degree to which new functionalities of magnetic
clusters, quantum dots, bio-molecules or carbon nanowires can be exploited for speciﬁc applications depends heavily on our ability to design
devices with optimal behavior in response to external stimulation, such
as applied voltage. While the basic physical eﬀects are often well understood, quantitative simulations with predictive power that do not rely on
empirical models and parameters pose a major challenge. This is due to
the large numerical eﬀort of the calculations, to accurately describe quantum eﬀects at atomic and larger distances. Therefore, modern quantum
simulations in material science depend heavily on eﬃcient algorithms
and powerful computer hardware.

During the past ten years, ﬁrst-principles calculations based on the densityfunctional theory (DFT) emerged as the most powerful framework to respond
to the demands mentioned above on a microscopic level. By ﬁrst-principles is
meant, that the parameters of the theory are ﬁxed by the basic assumptions
and equations of quantum mechanics. The overwhelming success of the densityfunctional theory for the description of the ground-state properties of large
material classes including organic molecules and bio-molecules, insulators, semiconductors, semimetals, half-metals, simple metals, transition-metals and rareearths in bulk, at surfaces and as nanostructures such as fullerenes and nanotubes
makes it the unchallenged foundation of any modern electronic structure based
materials.
In this talk I will explore the opportunities of petaﬂop computing for materials
science. Petaﬂop computing opens the path for the treatment of the van der
Waals interaction of molecules, the chemical reactions of bio-molecules and the
treatment of strongly-correlated electrons, where concept of individual electrons
breaks down. These problems beneﬁt from the advent of massively parallelized
computers. Conclusions for the method development for massively parallelized
computers are drawn.
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2008, Part I, LNCS 5101, p. 6, 2008.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

