Automatic Segmentation of Cardiac MRI Using Snakes
and Genetic Algorithms
Gustavo Miranda Teixeira, Igor Ramalho Pommeranzembaum,
Bernardo Lino de Oliveira, Marcelo Lobosco, and Rodrigo Weber dos Santos
Departamento de Ciência da Computação, Universidade Federal de Juiz de Fora (UFJF),
Juiz de Fora, Minas Gerais, Brasil
magusbr@gmail.com, tosobaum@yahoo.com.br, belino@acessa.com,
{marcelo.lobosco,rodrigo.weber}@ufjf.edu.br

Abstract. In this work we study and implement techniques for the automatic
segmentation of cardiac Magnetic Resonance Images. The methods are based on
the active contours algorithm called Snakes, which are adapted and tailored to the
specific task of automatic segmentation of the left ventricle of the heart in
Magnetic Resonance Images. We propose a new external force to improve the
convergence of the Snakes method. In addition, a genetic algorithm is used to find
the best set of configuration parameters for the Snakes method. The algorithms
are implemented in Java and threads are used to explore data parallelism on
shared-memory machines. Tests are performed on 150 short-axis images acquired
from two healthy volunteers. Preliminary results suggest the proposed methods
are promising and with further development and validation may be used, for
instance, for the automatic calculation of cardiac ejection fraction.
Keywords: image processing, snakes, genetic algorithms, cardiac MRI.

1 Introduction
The segmentation of the heart is a common task to be performed in cardiac exams of
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI). In one typical exam many images are obtained
from different positions of the heart and at different phases of contraction (from
systole to diastole). The segmentation is then performed off-line on these images to
extract important clinical parameters and information that characterize the function
and the anatomy of the heart. For instance, in order to calculate the cardiac ejection
fraction or cardiac ejection curves, important parameters that characterize cardiac
contraction [1], the medical specialist may need to segment near one hundred of twodimensional images for a single patient. The cardiac ejection fraction is the relation of
the blood cavity volume of the left ventricle during diastole per the volume during
systole. For estimating each volume one segments the endocardium in different shortaxis images, or slices, of the ventricle (around 10 slices from apex to base) and
calculates the areas of the blood cavity in each of these images. The majority of
today's commercial software provides segmentation in a semi-automatic way.
Therefore, during the segmentation of the cardiac endocardial surface the specialist is
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2008, Part III, LNCS 5103, pp. 168–177, 2008.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

Automatic Segmentation of Cardiac MRI Using Snakes and Genetic Algorithms

169

forced to pick around six points in the border between cardiac tissue and the blood
cavity of each short-axis image.
The segmentation of the cardiac MRI images is of extreme importance but it is,
today, a tedious and an error-prone task. In this work, we investigate the automatic
segmentation of the endocardium in cardiac MRI images using the active contour
technique named Snakes[2] method. This method is based on a parameterized closed
curve. Internal and external forces change the shape of the curve adapting it towards
the structure we seek. This curve should be deformed until it minimizes an energy
functional determined by the information extracted from the image and by restrictions
imposed to the curve, like elasticity and rigidity. In order to achieve better results we
have adapted and tailored the Snakes method to the specific task of automatic
segmentation of the endocardial surface of the left ventricle of the heart in MRI
images. We propose and implement a new external force that further restricts the
deformation and overcomes artifacts, such as the papillary muscles. The new method
provided better results than those of the traditional Snakes method.
Nevertheless, the results of both implemented methods have shown to be very
dependent on their configuration parameters. In this work, we use a Genetic
Algorithm (GA) to find the best set of configuration parameters for the automatic
segmentation method. The GA is used to solve a minimization problem, where the
objective function captures the distance between 25 manually segmented short-axis
images and the respective automatic segmented ones. We evaluated the results of the
automatic algorithm using 150 manually segmented curves generated by a medical
specialist using the best set of configuration parameters found by the GA.
As mentioned before, a single patient exam may consist of over a hundred of cardiac
segmentations. Therefore, the computer implementations here described explore the
embarrassingly data parallelism of the algorithms using Java threads on a sharedmemory machine.

2 Snakes
In this model we consider a Snake as a parameterized curve such as:

             

(1)

where x and y are functions which determine the coordinates of the function v, v is the
position of the snake and s varies from 0 to 1.
The main idea of the method lies in the minimization of an energy function that
involves the Snake curve and features of the image [2, 3]. The energy E associated to
the curve is defined in such a way its value is minimum when the curve is near the
region of interest, i.e. near the borders of the image:




 	    
    
        .



(2)

The coefficients α and β represent the elasticity and rigidity of the Snake,
respectively, and they define its internal energy. Eext is the energy term related to
image characteristics and will be more discussed later. The operators |v’(s)|2 and
|v’’(s)|2 are the L2 norm of the first and second derivatives of v(s), respectively.

170

G. Miranda Teixeira et al.

The elasticity coefficient makes the Snake more resistant to traction. The rigidity
coefficient makes it more resistant to bending. These two parameters prevent the
Snake to become non-continuous or to break during the iteration process of the
optimization problem.
The optimization problem above is solved using variational calculus, or being more
specific, using the Euler-Lagrange equations[4]. A formal derivation of Eq. (2) gives us:

	




 


     	  .





(3)

where ∇I is the classical external energy and represents the image gradient.
The original external energy from the Snake model, Eext is based on the image
gradient, ∇I, which points towards the image borders. The main problem of this
approach is that it forces the initialization of the Snake to be very close to the region
of interest. To overcome this problem we implemented the Gradient Vector Flow
(GVF) method [3] with the purpose of increasing the region of influence of the
external forces. This is obtained by solving a few steps of the diffusion equation (with
a diffusion coefficient equals to γ) to the components of the gradient vector. This
procedure spreads the information of ∇I all over the image [3, 5].
2.1 Balloon and Adaptive-Balloon Techniques
There is a particular problem during the segmentation of the endocardial surface: the
existence of artifacts that have the same contrast of the object of interest. The
presence of these artifacts should be ignored. This is the case of the papillary muscles
highlighted in Figure 1.
To overcome this problem we have implemented the Snake method with the so
called Balloon Force:

 .
    

(4)

In this expression k1 is the constant strength of the force and n is the unitary normal
vector to the curve. Depending on the signal of k1, the force will provide the curve to
grow or to shrink. In our implementation it always grows.

Fig. 1. A correct segmentation (left) avoiding artifacts (right)

Automatic Segmentation of Cardiac MRI Using Snakes and Genetic Algorithms

171

However, the balloon force has shown not always to work properly. It was very
difficult to adjust the strength parameter. It should be strong enough to overcome the
noise and the artifacts but not so strong as to overcome the borders of interest and
grow disorderly.
To solve this problem we developed a new force named the Adaptive-Balloon. Its
direction is also normal to the curve, but the intensity varies along the Snake and
during the iterations of the method. The strength of this force depends on the
information of the curve neighborhood.
Since the format of the object to be segmented is convex, we create a force that
acts only over those Snake points that have angles between the vector of the GVF and
the axial vector at v(s) greater than a predefined value. The axial vector of v(s)
connects v(s) to the center of gravity of the image. The equation for the AdaptiveBalloon force is:

 , if  >  .
Fadapt (v(s)) =   
Fadapt (v(s)) = 0, if  <  .

(5)

where θ is the angle between the axial vector and the GVF at the Snake point v(s), k2
is the force strength, n is the unitary normal vector and γ is the limit angle
previously chosen. Figure 2 shows some examples of the directions of GVF, the axial
vector and the angle θ.

Fig. 2. The calculation of the Adaptive-Balloon force based on the angle θ between the GVF
and the axial vectors

3 Genetic Algorithm
With the Adaptative-Balloon force, the automatic segmentation generated better
results than those obtained by the Snake with the classical Balloon force.
Nevertheless, the results of both implemented methods have shown to be very
dependent on their configuration parameters. One set of parameters may work well in
one image, but fail for another. It was not possible to manually find a single set of

172

G. Miranda Teixeira et al.

parameters that produced satisfactory results for all images. Therefore we chose to use
a Genetic Algorithm (GA)[6] to find the best set of configuration parameters for the
automatic segmentation method. The set of parameters are: The elasticity α; rigidity
β; the viscosity γ; the maximum amplitude associated to ∇I, κ; k1 and k2, the strength
of the Balloon forces as in Eqs. (4) and (5), respectively.
The GA was used to solve a minimization problem, where the objective function
captures the distance between 25 manually segmented short-axis images and the
respective automatic segmented ones. For each curve we calculate the distance
between the curve points and the center of gravity. The center of gravity is taken as
the mean of the coordinates of the semi-automatic segmented curve. Therefore, the
GA minimizes the error defined by the distance between these two curves:
y

   	  

Error =



 

.

(6)



where Rpi and Rqi are distances from the center of gravity to the ith point of the semiautomatic segmented curve and the automatic segmented curve, respectively.
The Genetic Algorithm simulates the evolution of a population of individuals, in
our case, the Snake configuration parameters. The individuals, i.e. the Snake
configuration parameters, were coded using real numbers. As the population evolves
the best adapted individuals survive whereas the others die. The measure of the
adaptation level of each individual is called fitness. In our case, the fitness measures
the mean distance between the curves obtained automatically and the corresponding
manual ones for 25 short-axis images, as described in Eq. (6).
To generate the offspring, the best adapted individuals are selected form the
population. The Roulette-Wheel, also known as Fitness Proportionate Selection method
[6], was used as the selection algorithm. After the parents are selected, they reproduce,
generating the offspring. This process is called crossover. We implemented the Blend
Crossover method [7] with a crossover rate of 90%. The offspring may mutate in the
process. When this occurs, the new generated individuals are set with new randomly
chosen genes within the range of each parameter. The mutation rate was set in a way it
affects 10% of the population.
Half of the new individuals are selected to survive regardless of their fitness. The
other half is made of individuals with higher fitness than their parents. This way, the
individuals with higher fitness survive and we keep a diverse population. The method
called elitism [6] was also implemented. It guarantees that the best individual of the
population always survives after the selection process. The process described above
was repeated two hundred times with a population of one hundred individuals.

4 Implementation
The algorithms developed were implemented in Java [8]. The Java language was
chosen due to its rapid prototyping feature, its embedded support for concurrent
programming and the wide availability of libraries for numerical methods and image

Automatic Segmentation of Cardiac MRI Using Snakes and Genetic Algorithms

173

processing. In particular, the software was developed using the ImageJ framework
[9]. ImageJ is a public domain software which offers many functionalities to image
processing. One of its most interesting features is the possibility to extend its basic
functionalities by the development of new plug-ins. That way, new plug-ins were
created on ImageJ: two Snake methods, one with the classical Balloon force and
another with the new Adaptive-Balloon force; and the Genetic Algorithm.
The implementation of the Snakes methods was based on the finite difference
method. Each deformation of the Snake involves a linear system to be solved. The
Cholesky method was implemented to solve the linear systems.
A MRI exam generates many images that need to be segmented. Therefore, the
implemented algorithms work with sets of images. Each set of images is stored in an
internal data structure of ImageJ called ImageStack. The ImageStack is processed in
parallel. The parallel implementations explore the embarrassingly data parallelism
and were developed for shared-memory machines using Java threads[10]. The
implementation of the parallelism is conceptually simple. ImajeJ loads the images
from the ImageStack. The plug-in is executed and behaves as a master thread. The
master creates new threads, the slaves. Each slave applies the Snakes method to a set
of images of the stack and draws the segmentation results directly in the images.
Figure 3 ilustrates this process.

Fig. 3. The parallel implementation

5 Experimental Evaluation
In this section, we present experimental results obtained with a dual Xeon 1.6 GHz, 4
MB of cache, 4 GB of main memory. Each Xeon is a dual core processor. Therefore, all

174

G. Miranda Teixeira et al.

computations were executed using 4 threads. The methods for automatic segmentation
were tested using 6 stacks of images obtained from two healthy volunteers. There are 3
stacks per person, each from different short-axis position (apex, mid and base). Each
stack has 25 images obtained from different phases of contractions, from diastole to
systole and back to diastole. The parallel implementation achieved near linear speedups
when using 4 threads. The automatic segmentation of 150 images took less than 5
seconds with 4 threads. To validate the methods the automatic segmentations were
compared to manual ones performed by a medical specialist. Figure 4 presents the
automatic and manual segmentations for one of the images.

Fig. 4. Manual (left) and automatic segmentation using Snake-Adaptive Balloon method (right)
Table 1. Mean errors using the automatic methods

Stack 1
Stack 2
Stack 3
Stack 4
Stack 5
Stack 6
Average

Balloon
12.2%
9.6%
9.4%
13.4%
9.9%
9.7%
10.7%

Adaptive-Ballon
10.4%
8.3%
6.9%
11.9%
9.1%
7.9%
9.0%

5.1 Adaptive-Balloon vs. Balloon Force
As we mentioned before the tuning of parameters for the Snakes methods is a nontrivial task. A set of parameters may achieve good results for one image but not for
others. To compare the new developed Adaptive-Balloon force to the classical one,

Automatic Segmentation of Cardiac MRI Using Snakes and Genetic Algorithms

175

we have first manually tuned the parameters using the Snakes method with the
Balloon force for each image. After that, using the same sets of parameters, we
executed the Snakes method with the extra Adaptive-Balloon force. Table 1 presents
the errors of segmentations obtained with the automatic method compared to the
manual segmentations. The error presented in this table is the distance between the
two curves, as defined by Eq. (6). The table shows that the new Adaptive-Balloon
force technique achieved better results than the classical one.
5.2 Validation of the Method
The Genetic Algorithm optimized the parameters using one of the stacks of 25
images. Figure 5 shows the evolution of the fitness, i.e. the error as defined in Eq. (6),
of the best individual (parameter set) per generation. After a few generations we
observed that the fitness drops an order of magnitude.

Fig. 5. Fitness value per generations
Table 2. Errors between automatic and manual segmentations

Stack 1
Stack 2
Stack 3
Stack 4
Stack 5
Stack 6
Average

Mean Error
9.8%
7.0%
6.3%
10.6%
7.6%
7.3%
8.1%

Standard Deviation
3.8%
1.8%
1.8%
3.5%
2.7%
2.5%
2.6%

176

G. Miranda Teixeira et al.

The best set of configuration parameters found by the Genetic Algorithm was used
to evaluate the effectiveness of our Adaptive-Balloon force technique. Table 2
presents the segmentation errors obtained when applying these configuration
parameters to the stacks. Again, the error corresponds to that of Eq. (6). As we can
observe, the proposed method obtained satisfactory results, with errors around 8%.

6 Conclusion
The segmentation of the cardiac MRI images is of extreme importance but a tedious
and an error-prone task, whereas the automatic segmentation is a challenging task. In
this work we proposed, implemented and evaluated a new external force technique,
called Adaptive-Balloon, to improve the convergence of the Snakes method,
traditionally used to segment images. In addition, a genetic algorithm is used to find
the best set of configuration parameters for the Snakes method. The proposed method
obtained satisfactory results, with errors around 8%. We developed a parallel
implementation to explore the embarrassingly data parallelism. The parallel
implementation was very effective, segmenting automatically 150 images in less than
5 seconds. The preliminary results suggest that the methods are promising and with
further development and validation they may be used, for instance, for the automatic
calculation of cardiac ejection fractions.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to acknowledge the reviewers for their comments and
suggestions that significantly improved the quality of this work. This work was
supported by CNPq, FAPEMIG and UFJF. G. M. Teixeira is a scholarship holder of
PIBIC/CNPq.

References
1. Kühl, H.P., Schreckenberg, M., Rulands, D., Katoh, M., Schäfer, W., Schummers, G.,
Bücker, A., Hanrath, P., Franke, A.: High-resolution Transthoracic Real-Time ThreeDimensional Echocardiography: Quantitation of Cardiac Volumes and Function Using
Semi-Automatic Border Detection and Comparison with Cardiac Magnetic Resonance
Imaging. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 43, 2083–2090 (2004)
2. Kass, M., Witkin, A., Terzopoulos, D.: Snakes: Active Contour Models. International
Journal of Computer Vision V1(4), 321–331 (1987)
3. Xu, C., Prince, J.L.: Gradient Vector Flow: A New External Force for Snakes. In: IEEE
Proc. of the Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 66–71. IEEE
Computer Society, Washigton (1997)
4. Forsyth, A.R.: Calculus of Variations. Dover, New York (1960)

Automatic Segmentation of Cardiac MRI Using Snakes and Genetic Algorithms

177

5. Xu, C., Prince, J.L.: Generalized Gradient Vector Flow External Forces for Active
Contours. Signal Processing 71(2), 131–139 (1998)
6. Eiben, A.E., Smith, J.E.: Introduction to Evolutionary Computing. Springer, Heidelberg
(2003)
7. Eshelman, L.J., Schaffer, J.D.: Real-coded Genetic Algorithms and Interval-Schemata. In:
Foundations of Genetic Algorithms-2, pp. 187–202. Morgan Kaufman Publishers, San
Mateo (1993)
8. Arnold, K., Gosling, J., Holmes, D.: The Java Programming Language, 4th edn. Prentice
Hall PTR, Englewood Cliffs (2005)
9. ImageJ, http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/
10. Doug, L.: Concurrent Programming in Java: Design Principles and Pattern, 2nd edn.
Prentice Hall PTR, Englewood Cliffs (1999)

