Modeling Incompressible Fluids by Means of the
SPH Method: Surface Tension and Viscosity
Pawel Wr´
oblewski1 , Krzysztof Boryczko1, and Mariusz Kope´c2
1

Department of Computer Science
AGH University of Science and Technology, Krak´
ow
{pawel.wroblewski,boryczko}@agh.edu.pl
2
Faculty of Physics and Applied Computer Science
AGH University of Science and Technology, Krak´
ow
makopec@agh.edu.pl

Abstract. The adaptations of the SPH method for simulating incompressible ﬂuids which focuse on two features: the surface tension and
artiﬁcial viscosity, are presented in this article. The background and
principles of the SPH method are explained and its application to incompressible ﬂuids simulations is discussed. The methodology and implementation of artiﬁcial viscosity in the SPH method are presented.
The modiﬁcation for surface tension simulation, which relies on incorporating additional forces into the model, as well as the methodology are
suggested. Also, the new equations for artiﬁcial viscosity are presented,
which are able to simulate a ﬂow of non-newtonian ﬂuids. The results
obtained with the method are presented and discussed.

1

Introduction

A number of existing computer methods can be used for simulating phenomena
from the real world. Many of these phenomena, very important in the contemporary science and engineering, are related to ﬂuid mechanics. These phenomena
refer to diﬀerent spatio-temporal scales, starting from micro scale, through meso
scale to macro scale. Very interesting processes, e.g. turbulences, wall-ﬂuid interactions, free surface behavior, take place in the domain between these scales.
However, neither correct nor eﬃcient methods have been available for this area
yet. The SPH method is a very popular particle method for simulating processes
in the macro scale [12]; it also seems to be possible to simulate phenomena from
the domain between macro and meso scales. However, despite many advantages,
the proposed method has also several drawbacks. From the authors’ point of
view, one of the most awkward one is the lack of possibility to simulate surface
tension. There are a few papers presenting modiﬁcations of the SPH method
which remove this disadvantage [16][13]. However, the analysis of these modiﬁcations reveals that they are either deprived of a strong physical background
or are too complicated for computer implementation. Another drawback of the
SPH method is the problem with modeling a ﬂow of non-newtonian ﬂuids. This
topic is almost not present in papers concerning SPH simulations [15] and there
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2008, Part I, LNCS 5101, pp. 600–609, 2008.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

Modeling Incompressible Fluids by Means of the SPH Method

601

is no straight scheme for obtaining the eligible model of non-newtonian viscosity,
what opens this research area for new investigations.
The background and principles of SPH method are shown along with its variants, depending on the target application. There are also presented adaptations
of this method to incompressible ﬂuids simulations. The proposed modiﬁcation
of the SPH method enables modeling surface tension in several physical phenomena. The changes rely on additional forces acting between SPH particles as
well as between SPH particles and walls of a vessel. The methodology of adding
new forces is discussed. The implemented modiﬁed algorithm has been employed
for simulating two phenomena: a ﬂuid drop behavior in vacuum without gravity
and a capillary rise between two vertical, parallel plates inserted into a ﬂuid.
The second application of the SPH method presented in this paper is the
simulation of a ﬂow of non-newtonian ﬂuid. In order to achieve it we propose
new equations for artiﬁcial viscosity, which actually are a modiﬁcation of Monaghan’s artiﬁcial viscosity model. This modiﬁcation consists of the change of
the character of viscosity’s dependence on interparticle velocity. In the proposed
model this dependence is non-linear. The new model of viscosity was validated
in the simulation of the ﬂow of the viscous ﬂuid in a long, cylindrical vessel. The
non-newtonian character of the ﬂuid manifested itself in the modiﬁed velocity
proﬁle for the modeled ﬂow [4].

2

Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics

The SPH method was created in order to simulate astrophysical phenomena
[10][5]. The main idea of the method is a ﬁeld approximation in the set of points
from space. The hydrodynamical forces, corresponding to the Navier-Stoke’s
equations are calculated in these points (the SPH particles) and with such a
background the equations of motion are solved. The approximation procedure
uses the kernel function, which vanishes at inﬁnity and its integral is equal to
unity. From the theoretical point of view one could choose the gaussian bellshaped function, however in practice it is common to use the spline function with
compact support. The authors present results obtained by means of the kernel
function proposed in [11]. The approximation procedure applies not only to the
hydrodynamical forces, but also other quantities referred to by the modeled
phenomenon. The approximation equation for a density is presented below [11]:
ρi =

mj Wij ,

(1)

j

where mj – the mass of particle j, Wij = W (rij , hij ) – the kernel function
evaluated for particles i and j, rij – the distance between particles i and j
and hij – a smoothing length. The sum in the above equation runs over all
particles from the system. In practice, however, if the support of kernel function
is compact, it is enough to count only those SPH particles, for which the kernel
function is non-zero. Then, the character of interparticle interactions is shortrange; there exists cut-oﬀ radius rcut such, that for every pair of particles whose

602

P. Wr´
oblewski, K. Boryczko, and M. Kope´c

distance is larger than rcut , the force acting between them is equal to zero. For
simulation with short-range interactions it is possible to use the structure of
cubic cells, which rapidly accelerate calculations [2].
Every SPH particle undergoes the acceleration given by the formula:
dvi
=−
dt

Pi
Pj
+ 2 + Πij
ρ2i
ρj

mj
j

∇i Wij ,

(2)

where Pi – the pressure at point i, ρi – the density at point i and Πij – the
viscosity part of the force. One can ﬁnd the full derivation of equation (2) in [8].
Besides the force acting between ﬂuid particles, it is also necessary to incorporate
into the model forces acting between ﬂuid particles and the walls. In this paper
we use a wall consisting of particles, and the corresponding force is very similar
to the one given in [12]. It is given by formula:
dvi
=
dt

j

c0
10

2

Γ (rij /rcut ) mj
,
rij
mi + mj

(3)

where
⎧2
⎪
3,
⎪
⎪
⎨2(2q − 3q 2 ),
Γ (q) =
⎪
2(1 − q)2 ,
⎪
⎪
⎩
0,

3

if q < 13 ,
if 13 < q < 12 ,
if 12 < q < 1,
otherwise.

(4)

Incompressible SPH

The standard SPH formula for density (1) is useless when modeling the ﬂuids
with free surface. If this equation is applied, the density in the vicinity of the
surface changes continuously from the value assumed for all particles to the value
of zero on the distance of 2h, which is obviously a discord with the experiments.
In the case of such ﬂuids another formula derived from the SPH approximation
is used:
dρi
=
dt

mj (vi − vj ) · ∇i Wij ,

(5)

j

which evaluates only the rates of change of the density. Application of this equation requires the initialization of the density values at the beginning of the
simulation.
The incompressible character of the ﬂuid is modeled by an appropriate equation of state, which is used for evaluating the pressure values in equation (2).
The authors use the equation of state given by [12]:
P =

ρ0 c20
7

ρ
ρ0

7

−1 .

(6)

Modeling Incompressible Fluids by Means of the SPH Method

603

When modeling incompressible ﬂuids it is very problematic to choose the
proper timestep. If real values of speed of sound c are applied, the timestep
is too small for any practical application. Therefore it is convenient to use a
value of c several orders of magnitude smaller than the real one. This approach
accelerates the calculation signiﬁcantly, and does not inﬂuence results [3].

4

Modeling Viscosity with SPH

In many simulations of ﬂuid ﬂow it is necessary to comply the transition of
kinetic energy of the ﬂuid into its thermal energy. In the case of the SPH method
presented here, where the thermal energy of the ﬂuid is not concerned, it is
necessary to incorporate the dissipation of the ﬂuid energy by means of viscosity.
Also, the every day experience of viscosity in almost all real ﬂuids demands
incorporating the viscosity term Πij into the equation (2).
The most often used [8] model of artiﬁcial viscosity in SPH simulations is the
one proposed by Monaghan [11]:
Πij =

−αcij μij +βμ2ij
ρij

, if v ij · rij < 0

0

, if v ij · rij ≥ 0

where
μij =

,

hv ij · rij
2 + η2 .
rij

(7)

(8)

Monaghan proposes to set η 2 = 0.01h2 . In this model viscosity vanishes, when
v ij · rij ≥ 0, which has an equivalent on the SPH interpolation level: ∇ · v ≥ 0
[11]. According to this, viscosity is present only when two particles approach to
each other. In the opposite case, the viscosity force is equal to 0.
There are also other models of artiﬁcial viscosity used in SPH simulations.
One can mention ones proposed by Hernquist and Katz [6] or by Balsara [1].
A more detailed discussion of the appropriate choice of the artiﬁcial viscosity
model is presented in [9]. In simulations presented in this article the authors use
the model proposed by Monaghan. Its advantages are: simplicity and relatively
low computational costs.

5

5.1

The Proposed Modiﬁcations of SPH Method for
Simulating: Surface Tension and Non-newtonian
Character of a Fluid
Additional Forces for Surface Tension Model

Modeling the phenomena in which the surface tension eﬀects arise one needs to
incorporate two additional parts into the model. The ﬁrst one represents interactions acting between ﬂuid particles responsible for modeling the surface tension
of the ﬂuid. The second part is the modiﬁcation of the ﬂuid-wall interactions,
which is responsible for proper modeling the wetting character of the ﬂuid.

604

P. Wr´
oblewski, K. Boryczko, and M. Kope´c

Fig. 1. The function of new additional force

Fluid-ﬂuid interactions. The surface tension is an eﬀect of mutual attraction
of ﬂuid molecules. It is impossible to simulate the exact inter-molecule interaction in the SPH method, because the scale of the method is much larger than
the scale where intermolecule forces are present. However, the main idea of the
model is still the same and it is realized by incorporating additional attractive
forces. When trying to ﬁnd the form of this force the authors found that it was
very diﬃcult to do so, when the range of the new, additional attractive force
was the same as the range of the SPH interactions. In this case the additional
force modiﬁed the nature of the SPH force, and together they led to numerical
artifacts. For example, the SPH particles tended to bind in pairs. This is why,
following the advice given in [14], the authors move the range of acting of the
additional force beyond the SPH range. Actually, it is twice as far as SPH range.
In this case the artifacts are not observed anymore, and the results are in good
agreement with expectations.
The form of the new, proposed force is given by the equation:
Fij = −A · W

3
1
rcut − rij , rcut ,
2
4

(9)

where A is a positive constant and W is the kernel function. The plot of this
new function is depicted in the Fig. 1. The form of the proposed additional force
is one of many possible. During tests with many diﬀerent forms of this force
the authors concluded, that, in general, the form of the force does not inﬂuence
the results, if only values of the force are negative in the range [rcut , 2rcut ].
Therefore, the authors proposed the force given by (9), which is convenient to
be implemented.
Fluid-wall interactions. Similarily, in order to model phenomena which concern hydrophilic or hydrophobic ﬂuids it is also necessary to incorporate additional attractive forces acting between ﬂuid particles and wall particles. In the
original SPH model the force acting between walls and ﬂuid was purely repulsive. The authors incorporated additional, attractive forces into the simulation.
Their form is given by the formula (9), i.e. it is exactly the same, as in the case
of ﬂuid-ﬂuid interactions, but with a diﬀerent value of constant A. The reasons,
why this particular form of the force was used are the same, as in the case
mentioned above.

Modeling Incompressible Fluids by Means of the SPH Method

5.2

605

The Modiﬁcation of Artiﬁcial Viscosity Model

Additionally, in order to propose the model capable of simulating ﬂows of nonnewtonian ﬂuids, we propose a modiﬁcation of Monaghans’ artiﬁcial viscosity.
The modiﬁcation relies on a change of the equation (8) to:
μij =

hv ij · r ij exp vij − 1
.
2 + η2 ·
rij
vij

(10)

According to this change, an artiﬁcial viscosity acting between two particles
depends nonlinearly on their mutual velocity, and this way it is possible to obtain
the non-netwonian character of a ﬂuid ﬂow. This manifests itself in the change of
the velocity proﬁle of the ﬂow, which now corresponds to the viscosity coeﬃcient
nonlinearly dependent on the shear rate [4].
By using modiﬁcation given by (10) the authors introduced non-linear dependence of μij on vij . The equation (10) is only an example of such modiﬁcations
and is supposed to show the possibilities of further research in this area. The
authors tested also several other equations and received similar results.

6

Results

The modiﬁcations presented above have been tested in simulations of three different ﬂuid phenomena.
6.1

Fluid Drop Oscillations without Gravity

The ﬁrst phenomenon used for validating the form of additional attractive forces
was the behavior of ﬂuid drop in vacuum. We took well equilibrated circular drop
and transformed it into an ellipsoid with the transformation [14]:
x
y

=

sin(φ/2) sin u
2
r
,
sin φ cos(φ/2) cos u sgny

(11)

where r = x2 + y 2 , φ = 0.63π and u = arctan xy . The ’z’ coordinate for every
particle remained unchanged.
Then, we examined the relaxation time of the drop, which should depend on
the surface tension value of the ﬂuid. If there is no artiﬁcial viscosity, then the
drop deformed with the above formula oscillates about the equilibrium state,
which is ideal sphere. However, when the artiﬁcial viscosity is present, it is
more convenient to examine the relaxation time. The sample relaxation scheme
is depicted in the Fig. 2. The authors ran four diﬀerent simulations, for four
diﬀerent values of the parameter corresponding to the surface tension value for
the ﬂuid. The results obtained are presented in the Fig. 3.
The relaxation time should depend on the surface tension coeﬃcient γ as
1
∼ γ − 2 [14]. The plot presented in the Fig. 3 shows, that the results from the
simulation are in good agreement with this dependence at least qualitatively.

606

P. Wr´
oblewski, K. Boryczko, and M. Kope´c

Fig. 2. A relaxation-oscillation of ﬂuid drop in vacuum

Fig. 3. A relaxation time versus surface tension

6.2

Capillary Rise of the Liquid

The second phenomenon used for validating the model of surface tension with
the SPH method is capillary rise of the modeled liquid. The eﬀect in this phenomenon depends on the diﬀerence between attractive forces of ﬂuid-ﬂuid interactions, and ﬂuid-walls interactions. If ﬂuid-ﬂuid attractive forces are stronger
than ﬂuid-walls interactions, then one should expect to see convex meniscus (negative capillary rise). In the opposite case, a concave meniscus should be visible
(positive capillary rise).
This is what the authors received from the simulations as a result. For ﬂuidﬂuid attractive forces stronger than ﬂuid-walls interactions, the results are as
presented in the Fig. 4.a. On the other hand, when the ﬂuid-wall interactions
are stronger than the ﬂuid-ﬂuid ones, the obtained results are as in the Fig. 4.b.
Both simulated phenomena prove that the proposed modiﬁcation of SPH
method properly model the surface tension eﬀects.
6.3

The Fluid Flow in an Elongated Vessel

The next phenomenon modeled by means of SPH method is the ﬂuid ﬂow in
an elongated vessel. In the beginning all ﬂuid particles ﬁlling the vessels rested.
Then we applied the initial velocity to all of them and continued the simulation
till the ﬂow stopped. The ﬂow was delayed by the forces acting between the

Modeling Incompressible Fluids by Means of the SPH Method
a)

607

b)

Fig. 4. Two menisci obtained from the simulations: a) convex meniscus, b) concave
meniscus
a)

b)

Fig. 5. a) Velocity distribution. b) Velocity proﬁles for two diﬀerent viscosity models.

wall and ﬂuid particles. The interactions of wall-ﬂuid particles were modeled by
means of the DPD method [7], where brownian part of the force was omitted.
It was the dissipative part of the DPD model, which delayed ﬂow of a ﬂuid.
The sample velocity distribution, where velocities were marked with color, is
presented in the Fig. 5.a. The authors ran several such simulations, each for
diﬀerent artiﬁcial viscosity model. When compared the Monaghan’s model with
the modiﬁed artiﬁcial viscosity, it seems that our modiﬁcation can be treated as a
starting point for further research on the area of non-newtonian ﬂuid ﬂows. This
can be derived from the analysis of velocity proﬁles from executed simulations.
The velocity proﬁles of two models: Monaghan’s model and the one given by
equation (10), are presented in the Fig. 5.b. The obtained proﬁle is more ﬂattened
than the Monaghan’s one, which meets the expectations [4].
6.4

The Parallel Implementation of the Model

The SPH method, along with presented modiﬁcations, was implemented in parallel by means of the OpenMP environment. The simulation of a ﬂuid ﬂow was

608

P. Wr´
oblewski, K. Boryczko, and M. Kope´c

Fig. 6. The relative eﬃciency of OpenMP implementation

ran for several values of the number of processors. The time of execution of a
single simulation step was measured, and the relative eﬃciency was evaluated.
The results are depicted in the Fig. 6. The similar values of relative eﬃciency
were obtained for simulation of SPH method with modiﬁcations for surface tension. In this case, however, the execution time of a single simulation step was
greater, since the interparticle interaction range was doubled.

7

Conclusions and Future Work

The results presented in the paper show that the proposed form of the additional
forces in the SPH method properly model the surface tension of the simulated
ﬂuid. These forces were validated in two simulated phenomena, and satisfactory
results were obtained.
Also, the simulation of the ﬂuid ﬂow with the modiﬁed artiﬁcial viscosity
indicates that proposed improvements allow for reasonable modeling of nonnewtonian ﬂuids. Such simulations will ﬁnd diﬀerent applications in science and
engineering, for example in modeling properties of the blood ﬂows [4]. However, this method still needs additional work and more detailed derivation of its
equations.
The presented results qualitatively prove the correctness of the modiﬁed
method. However, it is still a big challenge to validate the new forces quantitatively. Yet, no analytical relation between physical quantities such as viscosity,
surface tension and simulation parameters is known.
Acknowledgments. This research is ﬁnanced by the Polish Ministry of Science
and Higher Education, Project No. 3 T11F 010 30.

Modeling Incompressible Fluids by Means of the SPH Method

609

References
1. Balsara, D.: Von Neumann stability analysis of smoothed particle hydrodynamicsSuggestions for optimal algorithms. J. Comput. Phys. 121, 357 (1995)
2. Boryczko, K., Dzwinel, W., Yuen, D.: Parallel implementation of the ﬂuid particle
model for simulating complex ﬂuids in the mesoscale. Concurrency and computation: practice and experience 14, 137–161 (2002)
3. Colagrossi, A., Landrini, M.: Numerical simulation of interfacial ﬂows by smoothed
particle hydrodynamics. J. Comp. Phys. 191, 448–475 (2003)
4. Gijsen, F., Vosse, F., Janssen, J.: The inﬂuence of the non-newtonian properties
of blood on the ﬂow in large arteries: steady ﬂow in a carotid bifurcation model.
Journal of Biomechanics 32, 601–608 (1999)
5. Gingold, R.A., Monaghan, J.J.: Smoothed particle hydrodynamics - Theory and
application to non-spherical stars. Mon. Not. R. Astr. Soc. 181 (1977)
6. Hernquist, L., Katz, N.: TREESPH: A uniﬁcation of SPH with the hierarchical
tree method. The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series 70, 419–446 (1989)
7. Hoogerbrugge, P.J., Koelman, J.: Simulating microscopic hydrodynamic phenomena with dissipative particle dynamics. Europhys. Lett. 19, 155–160 (1992)
8. Liu, G.R., Liu, M.B.: Smoothed particle hydrodynamics: a meshfree particle
method. World Scientiﬁc, Singapore (2003)
9. Lombardi, J., Alison, S., Rasio, F., Shapiro, S.: Tests of Spurious Transport in
Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics. Journal of Computational Physics 152, 687–
735 (1999)
10. Lucy, L.B.: A numerical approach to the testing of the ﬁssion hypothesis. Astron.
J. 82, 1013–1024 (1977)
11. Monaghan, J.J.: Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics. Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 30, 543–574 (1992)
12. Monaghan, J.J.: Smoothed Particle hydrodynamics. Rep. Prog. Phys. 68, 1703–
1759 (2005)
13. Morris, J.P.: Simulating surface tension with smoothed particle hydrodynamics.
Int. J. Numer. Meth. Fluids 33, 333–353 (2000)
14. Nugent, S., Posch, H.A.: Liquid drops and surface tension with smoothed particle
applied mechanics. Phys. Rev. E 62, 4968–4975 (2000)
15. Shao, S., Lo, E.Y.M.: Incompressible SPH method for simulating Newtonian and
non-Newtonian ﬂows with a free surface. Advances in Water Resources 26, 787–800
(2003)
16. Tartakovsky, A., Meakin, P.: Modeling of surface tension and contact angles with
smoothed particle hydrodynamics. Phys. Rev. E 72, 02630 (2005)
17. Wr´
oblewski, P., Boryczko, K., Kopeæ, M.: SPH - a comparison of neighbor search
methods based on constant number of neighbors and constant cut-oﬀ radius. TASK
Quart. 11, 275–285 (2007)

