Intrinsic Limitations in Context Modelling
Maria E. Orlowska
Ministry of Science and Higher Education,
1/3 Wsp´
olna Street,
00-529 Warsaw, Poland
Phone: (+4822) 629 5703; Fax: (+4822) 529 2615

Abstract. Where are the limits in context modelling? Can we ever
model context? Do we understand the limits in context modelling, in
the context of business process execution?
Keywords: context awareness, context-dependent applications, process
model, web services, coordination.

The last few years of Information Technology evolution has been strongly inﬂuenced by virtually unlimited mobile connectivity between functionally sophisticated hardware devices. Incredible promises of innovative applications, often
beyond our imagination, have emerged within pervasive, ubiquitous, and ambient computing, within the semantic web, smart knowledge management, and
the management of agile processes, and so on. All have one common characteristic; they rely on a system’s ability to observe and capture the application
context. Therefore, context awareness, context capturing, context management,
de-abstracting context, and linking contexts are the key terms and phrases for
these directions in contemporary computer science. The precise meaning of the
term “context” depends on the context in which the term is used. This obvious meta-level logical loop often creates confusion and discourages eﬀorts, in
diﬀerent situations, to present a precise semantic speciﬁcation of this term.
The goal of this presentation is to constructively evaluate the feasibility of
expanding the potential for future context-dependent applications in general.
We will begin with a short overview of the generic and inherited limitations of
current computational models that form the basis of all computing machines
we use and most likely will use for many years to come. We will then continue
the debate from the perspective of business process modelling issues where the
meaning of “context”, and dependency of applications on “context”, is equally
important.
Typically, business process communication is characterized by complex interactions between heterogeneous and autonomous systems within an enterprise,
and increasingly between trading partners. Each of the involved parties operates
in its own individual context, with diﬀerent perspectives on the overall process.
Most attempts at business process enforcement can be thought of in terms
of two basic approaches. The ﬁrst “coordinative” paradigm is concerned with
the enforcement of a structured, “pre-arranged” process. A complete process
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2008, Part I, LNCS 5101, pp. 3–4, 2008.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

4

M.E. Orlowska

model, reﬂecting all potential local and global context variations, is designed
prior to enacting the process. This approach mainly provides an eﬀective means
of coordinating business activities with well-deﬁned dependency relations that
can be modelled with simple workﬂow control constructs such as sequence, choice
and fork.
Another approach to process enforcement is concerned with a less structured
and a more ad hoc process which is now more commonly quoted since the advent of web services. This is precisely where the use of context speciﬁcation,
discovery or capturing is vital for a realistic chance to deliver any promise. The
potential of web service technology in the area of integration and interoperation
has generated substantial interest, with initiatives from leading software vendors such as HP, IBM, Microsoft, SAP, Oracle and Sun Microsystems. There
is a belief that web services will provide a means for integrating applications,
promoting interoperability and facilitating loosely-coupled process management
over decentralised environments. A natural question that comes to mind: where
is the source of the web services power? Why do integration problems, often
semantically and contextually sensitive, become easier to handle under these
architectural considerations?
Many extensions to the basic web service functionality have been recently
proposed with the aim of capturing more meaningful semantics and contexts
than simply service invocations, enabling the modelling and implementation of
business processes in the web service context. This coordination layer is said to
provide web service ‘orchestration’, ‘choreography’ or ‘harmonization’.
Even a superﬁcial analysis of the potential obstacles with deployment, either through coordinative or collaborative approaches for cross-organizational
business process support, reveals that the main issues are related to context
modelling of the loosely coupled application environments such that global goals
are tractably achieved.
This talk will highlight the issues outlined above with an attempt to provide well-deﬁned feasibility limits for such context sensitive loosely coupled
applications.

