A Multiscale Approach for Solving Maxwell’s
Equations in Waveguides with Conical Inclusions
Franck Assous1,2 and Patrick Ciarlet, Jr.3
1

Bar-Ilan University, 52900 Ramat-Gan, Israel
Ariel University Center, 40700 Ariel, Israel
franckassous@netscape.net
ENSTA, 32 bvd Victor, 75739, Paris Cedex 15
ciarlet@ensta.fr

2

3

Abstract. This paper is devoted to the numerical solution of the instationary Maxwell equations in waveguides with metallic conical inclusions
on its internal boundary. These conical protuberances are geometrical
singularities that generate in their neighborhood, strong electromagnetic
ﬁelds. Using some recent theoretical and practical results on curl-free
singular ﬁelds, we have built a method which allows to compute the instationary electromagnetic ﬁeld. It is based on a splitting of the spaces
of solutions into a regular part and a singular one. The singular part is
computed with the help of a multiscale representation, written in the
vicinity of the geometrical singularities. As an illustration, numerical results in a rectangular waveguide are shown.
Keywords: Maxwell equations; waveguides; conical inclusions; multiscale approach.

1

Introduction

Many practical problems require the computation of electromagnetic ﬁelds. In
this paper, we are interested in computing the electromagnetic ﬁelds which propagate in three-dimensional waveguides with metallic conical inclusions. This can
be useful in microwave and millimeter-wave technology, for instance for design
purpose. The knowledge of the electromagnetic ﬁelds in the vicinity of irregular
points of a surface is an old, widely studied problem (cf. [1], [2]). However, it
remains a present problem, particularly the inﬂuence and the numerical treatment of such irregular points in the wave propagation (see for instance [3] and
the references therein).
Within this framework, we developed a numerical method for solving the
instationary Maxwell equations [4], with continuous approximations of the electromagnetic ﬁeld. However in practical examples, the boundary of the computational domain may include reentrant corners and/or edges. They are called
geometrical singularities, generate strong ﬁelds, and require a careful computation of the electromagnetic ﬁeld in their neighborhood.
Using some new theoretical and practical results, we have built a method, the
singular complement (hereafter SCM), which consists in splitting the space of
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2008, Part II, LNCS 5102, pp. 331–340, 2008.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

332

F. Assous and P. Ciarlet Jr.

solutions into a two-term direct sum (cf. [5]). The ﬁrst subspace (the regular one)
coincides with the whole space of solutions, provided that the domain is either
convex, or with a smooth boundary. So, one can compute the regular part of the
solution with the help of a classical method such as the ﬁnite element or ﬁnite
diﬀerence method. The singular part is computed with the help of a multiscale
representation, written in the vicinity of the geometrical singularities.
In this paper, we consider a 3D waveguide with sharp conical metallic protuberances on its internal boundary. Then the singularities consist of conical
vertices. We propose an application of the SCM for the non-symmetric 3D case.
Based on a multiscale representation of the singular part of the solution at the
tip of each cone, coupled with a three-dimensional Maxwell formulation, we construct a numerical method of solution. Numerical results are shown. This extends
the numerical results obtained in two-dimensional cartesian [5] or axisymetric
domains [6]. See also [7] for an extension to prismatic domains based on a Fourier
expansion. Following [8], extensions to rounded corners seem to be also possible.

2

Instationary Maxwell Equations

Let Ω be a open, polyhedral subset of R3 , unbounded in one direction (typically a hollow metallic cylinder or a rectangular waveguide) and Γ its boundary.
We denote by n the unit outward normal to Γ . If we let c, ε0 and μ0 be respectively the light velocity, the dielectric permittivity and the magnetic permeability
(ε0 μ0 c2 = 1), Maxwell’s equations in vacuum read
∂E
1
− c2 curl B = − J ,
∂t
ε0
∂B
+ curl E = 0,
∂t

div E =

ρ
,
ε0

div B = 0,

(1)
(2)

where E and B are the electric and magnetic ﬁelds, ρ and J the charge and
current densities which depend on the space variable x and on the time variable
t. It is well known that ρ and J have to verify the charge conservation equation
∂ρ/∂t + div J = 0 .

(3)

Waveguide problems are generally set without charges (ρ = 0), and this condition
expresses that the current density J is divergence-free.
These equations are supplemented with appropriate boundary conditions. Since
the domain of interest is unbounded in one direction, we denote by ΓC the ”real
part” of the boundary Γ (i.e. the metallic part), on which one imposes the perfect
conducting boundary condition. As it is well known, this is modelled by
E × n = 0 and B · n = 0 on ΓC .

(4)

This condition expresses that the tangential components of E, and the normal
component of B uniformly vanish on ΓC . Nevetheless, these boundary conditions are not suﬃcient to model eﬃciently our problem. Since the domain is not

A Multiscale Approach for Solving Maxwell’s Equations

333

bounded, it has to be ”numerically closed” to perform computations. As a consequence, the boundary Γ of Ω is also made up of an artiﬁal part ΓA = Γ \ ΓC ,
on which a Silver-M¨
uller boundary condition is imposed, namely
(E − cB × n) × n = e × n on ΓA ,

(5)

where the surface ﬁeld e is given. In waveguide problems, the artiﬁcial boundary
ΓA is often splitted into ΓAi and ΓAa . On ΓAi , we model incoming plane waves by
a non-vanishing function e , whereas we impose on ΓAa an absorbing boundary
condition by choosing e = 0. Without loss of generality, one can choose the
location of the artiﬁcial boundary ΓA , in such a way that it does not intersect
with the conical inclusions. Moreover, one can also choose a regular shape for
ΓA . Hence, the boundary ΓA is not an issue for the conical inclusions. For this
reason, we will only consider in what follows perfectly conducting boundary (i.e.
ΓA = ∅). The case of Silver-M¨
uller boundary condition will be then introduced.
Writing the Maxwell equations as two second-order in time equations, the
electric and the magnetic ﬁelds can be handled separately. In this paper, we
will focus on the electric ﬁeld formulation. Let us recall the deﬁnitions of the
following spaces
H(curl , Ω) = {u ∈ L2 (Ω), curl u ∈ L2 (Ω)} ,
H(div , Ω) = {u ∈ L (Ω), div u ∈ L (Ω)} ,
H1 (Ω) = {u ∈ L2 (Ω), grad u ∈ L2 (Ω)} .
2

2

(6)
(7)
(8)

We deﬁne the space of electric ﬁelds E with
X = {x ∈ H(curl , Ω) ∩ H(div , Ω) : x × n|Γ = 0} ,

(9)

endowed with the norm · X = [ · 20 + curl · 20 + div · 20 ]1/2 .
When the domain is convex (or with a smooth boundary), the space of electric
ﬁelds X is included in H1 (Ω). That is not the case anymore in a singular domain
(see for instance [9]), in particular in a waveguide with conical inclusions. One
thus introduces the regular subspace for electric ﬁelds (indexed with R )
XR = X ∩ H1 (Ω),

(10)

which is actually closed in X [10]. Hence, one can consider its orthogonal subspace (called singular subspace and indexed with S ), and then deﬁne a two-part,
direct, and orthogonal sum of the space as
⊥X

X = XR ⊕ XS .

(11)

As a consequence, one can split an element x into an orthogonal sum of a regular
part and a singular one, namely x = xR +xS . This is the principle of the Singular
Complement Method.
As far as numerical computations are concerned, one can also introduce direct, but non-orthogonal two-part sum for the space X. The choice is made

334

F. Assous and P. Ciarlet Jr.

with respect to the ease of implementation and depends on the characterization
of the singular space. The characterization (and so is the computation) of the
elements of XS is complicated (see [10]). So, one is able to introduce another
(non-orthogonal) singular subspace LS and deﬁne a two-part, direct sum for the
space X as
X = XR ⊕ LS ,
(12)
so that an element x of X will be splitted into x = xR + lS . Following [10],
elements of LS are the curl-free elements of X that satisfy:
div lS = sD in Ω ,
lS ×n|Γ = 0 ,

(13)
(14)

where sD is the (non-vanishing) singular solution (i.e. that belongs to L2 (Ω)) of
the Dirichlet homogeneous boundary problem
ΔsD = 0
sD = 0

in Ω ,
on Γ .

(15)
(16)

Hence, it appears more convenient to solve a scalar Laplace problem to determine
LS , than a vector one that would appear for the XS characterization.
Let us now brieﬂy re-introduce the boundary ΓA . A ﬁrst way could be to
consider the space of solutions
XΓA = {x ∈ H(curl , Ω) ∩ H(div , Ω) : x × n|ΓC = 0} .

(17)

Then introduce the regular subspace XΓRA = XΓA ∩ H1 (Ω), and construct the ad
hoc orthogonal (or non-orthogonal) splitting, in which appears a singular space,
say XΓSA (or LΓSA for the non-orthogonal curl-free part). Nevertheless, it is more interesting from a numerical point of view, to consider the (non-orthogonal) splitting
XΓA = XΓRA ⊕ LS ,

(18)

ﬁrst since the subspace of singular magnetic ﬁelds is LS , as before (with only
a perfect conducting boundary condition). Second, modelling incoming plane
waves, or imposing an absorbing boundary condition has no impact, as far as
the singular subspace is concerned. It will be suﬃcient, as soon as ΓA is not
empty, to add in the variational formulation, integral terms on ΓA as for a
regular domain Ω.

3

Multiscale Representation for the Singular Part

In general 3D domains, the main diﬃculty of such an approach is to take into
account accurately singular subspaces. They originate from geometrical singularities, such as reentrant edges, that can meet at reentrant vertices. In addition
to generating inﬁnite dimensional singular subspaces, the challenge is to understand and resolve the links between singular edges and singular vertex functions.

A Multiscale Approach for Solving Maxwell’s Equations

335

In that case, other approaches are possible and very useful, see [11]. Nevertheless, in many cases, one can proceed with this approach. This is the case for
3D prismatic domains, or for 3D domains invariant by rotation (cf. [7,12]). This
is also the case for conical vertices that generate a ﬁnite dimensional singular
subspace (LS in our case), even in a full 3D geometry. However, computations
retain their 3D character.
To simplify the presentation, we assume in this section that there is only one
conical vertex, so that LS is of dimension 1. The numerical method consists in
ﬁrst computing numerically the basis of the singular subspace LS , based on a
multiscale representation. Following the characterization (13-14), we shall need
sD to compute lS ∈ LS . Then using ad hoc singular mappings (see [10]), one can
associate to sD a unique scalar potential ψS such that
− ΔψS = sD
ψS = 0

in Ω ,

(19)

on Γ .

(20)

Then, the singular basis function lS will be easily inferred from ψS by taking its
gradient, lS = grad ψS .
As the keypoint is to compute sD , let us now examine the behavior of this
solution in the vicinity of a sharp cone. This can be done by deriving the asymptotic expansions. As the conical inclusion is locally invariant by rotation, we
consider the system of spherical coordinates (r, θ, ϕ), centered at the tip of the
cone. Let Γcone be the part of the boundary which intersects the cone of equation
θ = w0 /2, with w0 the aperture angle of the cone (a priori π ≤ w0 ≤ 2π). Hence,
one can ﬁnd sD in the form of spherical harmonic functions
rμ Pμ (cos θ) sin(mϕ),

(21)

where P· denotes a Legendre function of order 0 and index μ, which is an eigenfunction of the Laplace-Beltrami operator, related to the eigenvalue −μ(μ + 1).
Proposition 1. There exists a sequence (cl )l∈IN such that one can write, for
any N ∈ IN, the expansion
N

sD (r, θ, ϕ) = r−λ−1 Pλ (cos θ) +

cl rλl Pλl (cos θ) + O(rλN +1 ),

r −→ 0 . (22)

l=1

In addition, the coeﬃcient λ can be uniquely determined by solving
Pλ (cos(

w0
)) = 0 .
2

(23)

Remark ﬁrst that, since the boundary Γcone is locally invariant by rotation, the
above expansion does not depend on the variable ϕ, namely is axisymmetric (see
for instance [13]). Moreover, computing the behavior of λ, as a function of the
angle w0 , we ﬁnd that only sharp conical inclusions (i. e. cones for which the
aperture is larger than a given value β 130o 43 ), generate a singular function.

336

F. Assous and P. Ciarlet Jr.

In other words, r−λ−1 is singular (i.e. belongs to L2 (Ω), but not to H 1 (Ω)) only
for cones for which the aperture is larger than β. This result is in accordance
with the ones obtained in invariant by rotation domains [14]. For the other
conical inclusions (with an aperture lower than β), no speciﬁc treatment will be
necessary .
We are ready now to compute sD . If we denote by s˜D = sD − r−λ−1 Pλ (cos θ),
the regular part of sD (i.e. that belongs to H 1 (Ω)), and recall that r−λ−1Pλ (cos θ)
is known as soon as λ was determined, one can compute sD by solving
Δ˜
sD = 0
s˜D = −r

−λ−1

Pλ (cos θ)

in Ω,

(24)

on Γ.

(25)

Note that the above equation is homogeneous as Δ [r−λ−1 Pλ (cos θ)] = 0. Moreover, the boundary condition also vanishes on Γcone , due to the term Pλ (cos θ).
Then, one solves the discrete variational formulation, using continuous, P1 Lagrange ﬁnite elements.
The computation of ψS is carried out analogously. In that case, we have to
solve a non-homogeneous Dirichlet problem. From a numerical point of view, the
sD v dx appears in the right-hand side of the variational formulation,

term
Ω

r−λ−1 Pλ (cos θ) v dx.

s˜D v dx +

where v is a test function. It is splitted as
Ω

Ω

Then, in order to compute the second term accurately, one uses the analytical
knowledge of r−λ−1 Pλ (cos θ) – up the quasi-exact value of λ – in conjunction
with Gauss quadrature formulas, exact up to the 6th order. These formulas require 15 integration points per element of the mesh (in our case, tetrahedron).
It is emphasized that these formulas are well-suited, in the sense that no integration point coincides with the tip of the cone, where the (absolute) value of
r−λ−1 Pλ (cos θ) is inﬁnite.
Finally, the computation of lS (= ∇ψS ) is carried out with the help of the
P
analytical expression in spherical coordinates of lP
S (= ∇ψS ), namely
⎞
⎛ cos ϕ
[Pλ (cos θ) − cos θPλ−1 (cos θ)]
⎟
⎜ sin θ
λ−1 ⎜ sin ϕ
⎟
lP
(26)
S = λr
[Pλ (cos θ) − cos θPλ−1 (cos θ)] ⎠ .
⎝
sin θ
Pλ−1 (cos θ)

4

Numerical Algorithms

Now, to solve the problem, we have to modify a classical method by handling the
above decomposition. We ﬁrst write Amp`ere and Faraday’s laws as two secondorder in time equations, and focus on the electric ﬁeld problem. To enforce the
divergence constraint div E = 0, we introduce a Lagrange multiplier (say p), to
dualize Coulomb’s law. In this way, one builds a mixed variational formulation
(VF) of Maxwell equations. It is well-posed, as soon as the well-known infsup (or Babuska-Brezzi [15,16]) condition holds. In addition to begin Mixed,

A Multiscale Approach for Solving Maxwell’s Equations

337

we use here an Augmented VF (see [4]), which results in a Mixed, Augmented
VF. To this end, one adds to the bilinear form Ω curl E · curl F dx, the term
Ω div E div F dx. This formulation reads
Find (E, p) ∈ X × L2 (Ω) such that
d2
dt2

E · F dx + c2
Ω

=−

curl E · curl F dx + c2
Ω

1 d
ε0 dt

J · F dx,

div E div F dx +
Ω

p div E dx
Ω

∀F ∈ X,

(27)

Ω

div E q dx = 0

∀q ∈ L2 (Ω) .

(28)

Ω

To include the SCM in this formulation, the electric ﬁeld E is split like E(t) =
ER (t) + ES (t). One has ES (t) = κ(t)lS , where κ is a continous time-dependent
function (to be determined). The same splitting is used for the test functions
of the variational formulation, which is discretized in time, with the help of the
leap-frog scheme. From a practical point of view, we choose the Taylor-Hood, P2 iso-P1 ﬁnite element. In addition to being well-suited for discretizing saddle-point
problems, it allows to build diagonal mass matrices, when suitable quadrature
formulas are used. Thus, the solution to the linear system, which involves the
mass matrix, is straightforward [4]. This results in a fully discretized VF:
MΩ En+1
R

+ MRS κn+1 + LΩ pn+1 = Fn ,

(29)

MTRS En+1
R
LTΩ En+1
R

+ MS κ

n

(30)

n

(31)

n+1

+

LTS κn+1

+ LS p

n+1

=G ,
=H .

Above MΩ denotes the usual mass matrix, and LΩ corresponds to the divergence
term involving lhR and the discrete Lagrange multiplier ph (t). Then, MRS is a
rectangular matrix, which is obtained by taking L2 scalar products between regular and singular basis functions, MS is the ”singular” mass matrix, and ﬁnally,
LS corresponds to the divergence term involving lS and ph (t). To solve this sysn+1
tem, one ﬁrst removes the unknown κn+1 , so that the unknowns (En+1
)
R ,p
can be obtained with the help of a Uzawa-type algorithm. Finally, one concludes
the time-stepping scheme by computing κn+1 with the help of (30).
What is added, when compared to the same formulation posed in a waveguide
without conical inclusions is, ﬁrst, equation (30); second, additional terms that
appear in (29) and (31), which express the coupling between singular and regular
parts. However, these terms are independent of the time variable, so they are
computed once and for all, at the initialization stage.

5

Numerical Experiments

We consider a metallic rectangular waveguide with two conical inclusions on its
boundary (see Fig. 1). The metallic walls of the guide are assumed to be entirely
perfectly conducting and the extremities are absorbing boundary conditions.

338

F. Assous and P. Ciarlet Jr.

Support of the current

Fig. 1. Rectangular waveguide with conical inclusions

10-1
2.23

10-1
9.79

Ey = Ey regular + Ey singular

with SCM
without SCM

-0.71

500 Δt

Fig. 2. Comparison of the total ﬁeld,
its singular and regular parts

-5.33

500 Δt

Fig. 3. Comparison of the total ﬁeld
with and without the SCM

The initial conditions are set to zero. The electromagnetic wave is generated by
a current, with density J (t) = Jz ez , the support which is depicted on Fig.1.
The value of the z-component is
Jz (x, y, z) = C sin(ωt) .

(32)

Above, C is a constant, set to C = 10−5 , and ω is associated to the frequency
ν = 5.109 Hz.
We focus on the evolution of the electric ﬁeld over time, at diﬀerent nodes of
the ﬁnite element mesh. First, one can check that the numerical method enforces
causality, by studying the evolution at node A. By causality, we mean that the
value of the electric ﬁeld at A should be zero as long as the wave generated
by the current has not reached A. To that aim, we show, on the same Figure,
the – strong – total electric ﬁeld, Ey (A), its regular part EyR (A), and its singular

A Multiscale Approach for Solving Maxwell’s Equations

339

part EyS (A) (see Fig. 2.) The singular coeﬃcient κ(t) is non-zero as soon as the
wave hits the tip of the cone, and it adopts a more or less sinusoidal pattern, with
a frequency which depends on ν. Still, the total electric ﬁeld at A, here Ey (A)
does not vary, until the wave actually reaches A: the regular part ’compensates’
for the variations of the singular part before that.
Then, we compare the results at some point B, with or without the SCM. In
particular, results diﬀer signiﬁcantly in amplitudes (see the component Ey (B),
Fig. 3): the amplitudes vary with a factor of more than two.

6

Conclusion

In this paper, we were interested in the treatment of conical protuberances in
waveguide problems. This is a real 3D problem, even if around each sharp conical
vertex, the singular subspace is ﬁnite-dimensional. Using a multiscale representation of the electromagnetic ﬁeld in the vicinity of singular points, we propose an
extension of the SCM in this non symmetric 3D case. Such approach may be useful
in models in which it is possible and reasonable to determine or approximate the
behavior of the singular electromagnetic ﬁeld near irregular points. Extensions to
”pseudo-singualrities”, namely rounded corners seems also possible (see [8]).

References
1. Jackson, J.D.: Classical electrodynamics. John Wiley & Sons, New-York (1975)
2. Van Bladel, J.: Electromagnetic ﬁelds. McGraw-Hill, New York (1985)
3. Juntunen, J.S., Tsiboukis, T.D.: On the FEM Treatment of Wedge Singularities
in Waveguide problems. IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. 48(6), 1030–1037
(2000)
4. Assous, F., Degond, P., Heintz´e, E., Raviart, P.-A., Segr´e, J.: On a ﬁnite element method for solving the three-dimensional Maxwell equations. J. Comput.
Phys. 109, 222–237 (1993)
5. Assous, F., Ciarlet Jr., P., Segr´e, J.: Numerical solution to the time-dependent
Maxwell equations in two-dimensional singular domain: The Singular Complement Method. J. Comput. Phys. 161, 218–249 (2000)
6. Assous, F., Ciarlet Jr., P., Labrunie, S., Segr´e, J.: Numerical solution to the
time-dependent Maxwell equations in axisymmetric singular domains: the singular
complement method. J. Comput. Phys. 191, 147–176 (2003)
7. Ciarlet Jr., P., Garcia, E., Zou, J.: Solving Maxwell equations in 3D prismatic
domains. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris, Ser. I 339, 721–726 (2004)
8. Ciarlet Jr., P., Kaddouri, S.: A justiﬁcation of Peek’s empirical law in electrostatics. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris, Ser. I 343, 671–674 (2006)
9. Grisvard, P.: Singularities in boundary value problems, vol. 22. RMA Masson,
Paris (1992)
10. Assous, F., Ciarlet Jr., P., Garcia, E.: A characterization of singular electromagnetic ﬁelds by an inductive approach. Int. J. Num. Anal. Mod. 5(3), 491–515
(2007)
11. Ciarlet Jr., P., Jamelot, E.: Continuous Galerkin methods for solving the timedependent Maxwell equations in 3D geometries. J. Comput. Phys. 226, 1122–1135
(2007)

340

F. Assous and P. Ciarlet Jr.

12. Labrunie, S.: La m´ethode du compl´ement singulier avec Fourier pour les ´equations
de Maxwell en domaine axisym´etrique, Technical Report Institut Elie Cartan,
2004-42, Nancy, Paris, France (in French) (2004)
13. Assous, F., Ciarlet Jr., P., Garcia, E., Segr´e, J.: Time-dependent Maxwell’s equations with charges in singular geometries. Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 196 (1-3), 665–681 (2006)
14. Bernardi, C., Dauge, M., Maday, Y.: Spectral methods for axisymmetric domains.
Series in Applied Mathematics. Gauthiers-Villlars, Paris and North Holland, Amsterdam (1999)
15. Babuska, I.: The ﬁnite element method with Lagrange multipliers. Numer.
Math. 20, 179–192 (1973)
16. Brezzi, F.: On the existence, uniqueness and approximation of saddle point problems arising from Lagrange multipliers. RAIRO Anal. Num´er., 129–151 (1974)

