Simulation of Electrical and Optical Interconnections
for Future VLSI ICs
Grzegorz Tosik1,2, Zbigniew Lisik1, Małgorzata Langer1, Frederic Gaffiot2, and
Ian O’Conor2
1

Institute of Electronics, Technical University of Łódź, 91-924 Łódź, ul. Wólczańska 230
2
LEOM Ecole Centrale de Lyon
Abstract. At present, metallic interconnections become the “bottleneck” of the
further progress in VLSI technology. The optical solution is considered as an
alternative that could allow overcoming the limitations but its advantage should
be confirmed at the level of modeling approach. The clock distribution network
(CDN) that is the most representative component of the modern VLSI circuits
has been used as the test circuit and its numerical models for H-tree architecture
have been worked out and used. The model of the electrical CDN as well as
some results of simulations presenting its expected features, also with the
comparison to the results obtained for its optical counterpart are presented.

1 Introduction
The advances of semiconductor fabrication process made possible design and
fabricate chips with several millions of transistors operating at a very high speed.
These advances together with innovative hardware organisations of modern integrated
circuits (IC’s) give high performance ICs at low cost. However it becomes evident
that most of the known technological capabilities will approach or reach their
fundamental limits and one will require substantial changes in device technologies
and structures that will become more and more 3D ones.
The progress of the VLSI systems has been driven by downsizing of their
components and increasing the operating speed. In contrast to transistor scaling the
interconnect scaling improves the integration density but at the cost of the degraded
propagation delay and the power consumption. In the new technology, the
interconnect delay dominates over logic delay even in spite when new metallization
technologies such as copper or new low-k dielectrics are applied [1]. The downsizing
process leads to smaller transistors characterized by smaller power consumption but
the number of transistors and its density increases in such a degree that the resulting
density of power dissipation becomes larger still. In spite of the multi-level (3D)
design, the simultaneous growth in circuit complexity leads to larger and larger chip
dimensions and the total length of interconnection lines. They are manufactured as
multilevel structures, like the one shown in Fig.1, characterized by the total length
reaching a few kilometers at the width below 0.3µm on the lowest level, giving a
considerable contribution to the total power dissipation. As the result, in modern
VLSI systems, the power dissipation increases rapidly especially in its
interconnection part and in a VLSI circuit with the power dissipation of 100W [2]
only the clock tree uses at least 30-50% of this power [3]. Due to natural limits in
thermal management, this is a real barrier to further progress of modern VLSI systems
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3039, pp. 1037–1044, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

1038

G. Tosik et al.

and just now, it has happened that manufactures must reduce their ratings due to the
thermal reason only.
Copper layer 6

Copper layer 5
Oxide interlevel dielectric (ILD)
Copper layer 4
Copper layer 3
Copper layer 2
2µm

Copper layer 1

Local tungsten interconnection

Fig. 1. Scanning electron micrographs of interconnect architecture with six levels
of copper wires/vias and tungsten contacts/local interconnects

As a possible alternative that can overcome the limitation of metallic wires an
optical interconnection are proposed. Applying optical interconnections to ICs has
been the subject of many researches [4, 5] but no real remedy has been presented till
now. It is obvious that this alternative can be acceptable only if it demonstrates
significantly improved performance over the electrical solution. Unfortunately, due to
the obvious reasons, the electrical metallic interconnections foreseeing by ITRS do
not exist at present as well. In such a case, an approach basing on their models is the
only way to evaluate and to compare the prospective features of the both solutions.
This approach has been also applied in the project [6] aiming at the new
optoelectronic VLSI solution with a layout covering silicon waveguides formed on
the silicon chip. The clock distribution network (CDN) that is the most representative
component of the modern VLSI circuits has been used as the test circuit and its model
for the H-tree architecture has been worked out and used. The model of the electrical
CDN and some results of simulations presenting its expected features, also with the
comparison to the results obtained for its optical counterpart, are presented in the
paper.

2 Clock Distribution Network (CDN)
2.1 General Description
The semiconductor technologies operate at increasingly higher speeds, and the system
performance has become limited not by the delays of the individual logic elements but
by the necessity to synchronize the flow of the data signals. A clock network
distributes the clock signal from the clock generator, to the clock inputs of the
synchronizing components. This must be done while maintaining the integrity of the

Simulation of Electrical and Optical Interconnections for Future VLSI Ics

1039

signal and minimizing such clock parameters like: the clock skew, the clock slew rate
or the clock phase delay. Additionally, these objectives must be attained while
minimizing the use of system resources such as the power and the area. The CDN of a
modern microprocessor uses a significant fraction of the total chip power and has a
substantial impact on the overall performance of the system.
“Branches”

“Root”

“Trunk”
“Leaves”

Fig. 2. The tree-like structure of the clock network

The proper generation and the distribution of the clock signal are critical for the
high performance systems operating. The most common strategy for this distribution
is using a tree-like structure shown in Fig.2. The clock input is connected to the
”trunk” and the signal is subsequently split and distributed to the”branches”
connected hierarchically that finally feed logic elements (”leaves”). In order to keep
the quality of clock signals, the tree is completed by repeaters (buffers) built-in into
the branches.
2.2 H-Tree Architecture
Fully symmetrical structures of CDN are desirable to eliminate the clock skew. The
most popular solution that one considers here is the H-tree one, shown in Fig.3. That
makes all the paths from the clock signal source to the clocked register being identical
and therefore the clock skew is minimized. The distribution scheme repeats the Hshaped structure recursively and the lowest level of these structures covers points
used to drive the local registers. Some design rules must be fulfilled to ensure the
proper work of the H-tree CDN. The impedance of the branch leaving each branch
point must be twice the impedance of the one providing the signal to the branch point
to avoid the reflection effect at the branch point [7], and appropriate buffers must be
built-in into the H-tree branches. The both demands have been met in the worked out
model.

3 Model of Electrical H-Tree CDN
3.1 General Description
The most recent microprocessors have as many as seven metal layers [2], while the
ITRS predicts the use of up to 10 levels of wiring for the 45nm technology node in

1040

G. Tosik et al.

2010 at up to 2x109 transistors per chip, and clock frequencies up to 10 GHz. Coping
with the analyze of electrical interconnections under the above conditions is a task
that requires an adequate tool allowing to investigate the signal propagation in the
considered system, and dedicated numerical models seem to meet this demand. Such
a model for H-tree CDN has been worked out in a form of ICAL software package. It
allows designing any H-tree structure for any technology level predicted by ITRS,
extracting the electric parameters from technology data both for transmission lines
and necessary buffers, and creating an equivalent circuit model presented in a form of
SPICE netlist useful in further circuit simulations.

Fig. 3. The H-tree topology

3.2 Transmission Line Model
The interconnection system in a VLSI chip covers two power lines and one signal line
as shown in Fig.4. The technology used to its realization allows considering the power
lines as a meshed network that plays the role of distributed current sources supplying
all electronic elements equally. The signal line must, however, be considered as a
transmission line coupling buffers sketched as CMOS inverters, and characterized by
its resistivity R, inductivity L and capacity C that can be used to model it as an RC or
RLC transmission line shown in Fig.4a. When such models are created for CDN
transmission lines, the specificity in realizing them consists in shielding the signal
wires at the sides by power, and ground lines as shown in Fig.4b.
(a)

(b)
Vin

L∆l

R∆l Vn+1 L∆l

R∆l Vn+2

L∆l

R∆l

Vout
GND

C∆l

C∆l

l

C∆l

Vdd

CLOCK

Vdd
GND

Fig. 4. Distributed RLC interconnection model (a) and clock wire shielding (b)

Interconnection resistance. The interconnection resistance per unit length, Ro, is
generally determined by (1) where ρ - resistivity of the metal layer, W - width of the
wire and T - its thickness. At large signal frequencies, the resistance can by changed
by the skin effect and such a possibility is introduced into ICAL. It takes place when
the skin effect depth δ is smaller than the wire dimension, what can, however, happen

Simulation of Electrical and Optical Interconnections for Future VLSI Ics

1041

very seldom in considered CDN systems since δ=0.7µm for the maximal ITRS
frequency, f=10GHz.
ρ
Ro =
(1)
W*T
Interconnection capacitance. Parasitic capacitances associated with the
interconnection lines are shown schematically in Fig.5. They have become the
primary factors in the evolution of the very high speed integrated circuit technology,
their evaluation is not a trivial task and has been the subject of many investigations
[8-10]. To get an accurate interconnection capacitance, 2D or 3D electric field
simulation in the whole interconnection system should be applied. It is, however, such
a huge task that in real applications approximate approaches have been used only.
They treat the total interconnection capacitance as a sum of a few different
capacitances resulting from the particular design and differ the way of the
components capacitances identification.

Fig. 5. Interconnect capacitance components: CP - parallel plate capacitance component,
CF - fringing field component, CL - lateral coupling capacitance component

The most popular approaches were proposed by Saravat [11], Sakurai [12], Chern
[13] and Wong [14] and their application in ICAL has been considered. Since each of
them gives another evaluation of the total capacitance Ctot for designs predicted by
ITRS and their experimental verification is impossible, the numerical simulation has
been used to recognize which one of them could be used. In this goal the software
package OPERA [15] using finite element techniques to solve the Maxwell equations
has been used to analyze electric field in 2D domain shown in Fig.4b. The electric
field distributions, like the one in Fig.6, were used to calculate the real values of Ctot
that were compared to the evaluations obtained by means of tested approaches The
comparison showed that only for the Chern approach the discrepancy was lower than
7% over a wide range of ITRS parameters whereas it was much larger for the others.
The Chern approach has been chosen for ICAL package.

Fig. 6. Interconnect structure used in numerical capacitance calculation

1042

G. Tosik et al.

Interconnection inductance. In today’s VLSI circuits, the inductance starts to
become significant due to longer metal interconnections, the reduction in wire
resistances and the higher operation frequency. The analytical expressions (2) and (3)
have been obtained [16] for partial self and mutual inductances, respectively, under
the assumption of uniform current distribution and rectangular shape of wires shown
in Fig.7.
S

Mutual inductance

W

l
T Vss

VDD
I1

I2

Self inductance

Fig. 7. On-chip interconnection inductance

L=

µol
2l
0.2235(W+T)
[ln(
) + 0.5 +
]
2π
W+T
l

M=

2l
S
µol
[ln( ) -1 + ]
S
l
2π

(2)

(3))

3.3 Buffer Model
The accurate characterization of the MOSFET transistor is crucial for any high speed
digital integrated circuit analysis and design. In order to calculate the clock path
delay, buffers incorporated into ICAL program are modeled by an equivalent circuit
shown in Fig.8a (where DInv is the buffer internal delay, RInv is the buffer output
resistance, Cin is the buffer input capacitance and V is the logic swing on the clock
lines) and by the transistor level model shown in Fig.8b. Taking into account the
demands resulting from the technologies predicted by ITRS, the Berkeley BSIM3v3
and BSIM4 MOS models were used in the transistor level model.
a)

b)

DInv

in
Cin

V

RInv out

Vdd
PMOS

Vdd

PMOS

in

out
NMOS

NMOS

Fig. 8. Models of buffer devices. a) Equivalent circuits. b) Transistor level model

4 Results of Simulation
The majority of investigations have been performed for 128 and 256 symmetrical
global H-trees manufactured on 300-450 mm2 chips depending on the ITRS demands
for the assumed technology. Some of these results are collected in Fig 9-12.

Simulation of Electrical and Optical Interconnections for Future VLSI Ics

1043

700

1200

Power dissipated in buffers
600

128 output nodes

1000

Power dissipated in wires
Static power dissipated in buffers

P ower dis s ipation [m W ]

P ow er dis s ipat ion [ m W ]

256 output nodes
800

600

400

200

500
400
300
200
100
0

0
130

100

70

Technology node [nm]

45

130

100

70

45

Technology node [nm]

Fig. 9. Power dissipated in electrical H-trees Fig. 10. Power budget in the electrical H-tree
vs. technology
networks at 256 output nodes

Fig.9 shows the electrical power consumption in the global H-trees versus technology
node, and the operating frequencies for considered systems are (in GHz/technology):
1.6/130nm, 3/100nm, (5.6 and 11.5)/(70nm and 45nm). It is obvious that the total
power consumption in electrical clock distribution network tends to grow despite
technology improvements. Fig.10 shows the power dissipated by buffers and wires in
for various technology nodes. It shows that along with technology scaling the
contribution of the power consumed by buffers to the total power consumption tends
to grow, and for the 45nm technology it will be even bigger than the power consumed
by wires due to increasingly large number of repeaters used in clock distribution
systems. Fig.11 shows the dependence of the power consumption for both electrical
and optical CDN’s on the frequency for 70nm technology node. Whereas the power
consumption in the electrical system increases rapidly with the increase of the clock
frequency, in the optical system it remains almost on the same level. In Fig.12 the
power consumption is plotted as a function of the chip width for f=5.6GHz and 70nm
technology node rules. In opposite to the optical CDN, in the electrical one, the power
consumption increases drastically when the die size increases.

Fig. 11. Power consumption in optical and Fig. 12. Power consumption in optical and
electrical CDN’s versus operating frequency electrical
CDN’s
versus
chip
width.
at 256 output nodes
at 256 output nodes

1044

G. Tosik et al.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.

SIA The National Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors San Jose CA, USA 1994
N.,Barkatullah et al IEEE J. Solid-St. Circuit. 36 (2001) 1647-1652
S.,Rusu et al IEEE J.Solid-St. Circuit., 35, (2000),1545-1552
J.W.Goodman et al Proc. IEEE,72 (1984) 850–866.
D.A.Miller et al Proc. IEEE 88 (2000) 728-749.
Integration of optical and optoelectronics technologies for the realization of
interconnections in microelectronics systems, Polonium Project No 4337.I/2002
D.C.Keezer et al IEEE Int. Conf. Wafer-Scale Integration (1992) 168-175.
A.Ruehli et al J. Solid-St. Circuits 10 (1975) 530-536.
E.Barke IEEE Trans.CAD 7 (1988) 295-298
M.Lee J.Solid-St. Circuits.33 (1998) 657-661
K.C.Saraswat J. Solid-St. Circuits 17 (1982) 275-280.
T.Sakurai IEEE J.Solid-St. Circuits 18 (1983) 418-425.
J.H.Chern et al IEEE EDL 13 (1992) 32-34.
S.C.Wong et al IEEE Trans. Semicon. Manuf. 13 (2000) 219-223.
Vector Fields (http://www.vectorfields.com/op2d).
F.Grover Instrum. Soc. of America (1945).

