Individual Diﬀerences in Virtual Environments
Corina Sas
University College Dublin, Belﬁeld, Dublin 4, Ireland

Abstract. This paper summarises the results of several studies of individual diﬀerences among users navigating in virtual environments. These
diﬀerences relate to performance of navigational tasks, and the degree
of sense of presence experienced by the users. The individual diﬀerences
addressed in this paper refer primarily to personality and demographic
factors. The possibility of improving the design of virtual environments
for a better accommodation of these diﬀerences is discussed.

1

Introduction

Individual diﬀerences is an umbrella term describing an entire ﬁeld of research
primarily involving psychology that focuses on aspects of behaviour that diﬀerentiate individuals from one another. Any attempt to accommodate individual
diﬀerences should follow after they have been identiﬁed and after we have established the aspects with respect to which the individual diﬀerences emerged.
The work presented in this paper focuses on two major aspects which usually
describe any interaction with a Virtual Environment (VE), such as navigation,
and sense of presence.
Because of its prevalence, there is a tendency to take the navigational process
for granted. However, navigation is a complex activity which requires seamless
integration of several cognitive processes. The diﬃculties associated with navigation become especially obvious when it is performed in unfamiliar environments
(i.e. one becomes lost). Due to their speciﬁc characteristics, VEs put additional
demands on untrained users. In addition, within VEs the user set of actions
is restricted, consisting mainly of navigation and locomotion, object selection,
manipulation, modiﬁcation and query [10].
Sense of presence is a psychological adjacent phenomenon experienced by
users while (and not only) they interact with virtual reality systems.
This paper summarises the ﬁndings of some of our previous studies, based on
which a set of factors that led to individual diﬀerences with respect to previously
mentioned aspects, e.g. performance on spatial tasks and sense of presence, have
been identiﬁed.

2

Individual Diﬀerences

Clinical studies involve an in–depth investigation of one or a limited number
of subjects in order to highlight their individual unique proﬁle. A more general
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3038, pp. 1017–1024, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

1018

C. Sas

approach to studying individual diﬀerences, and the one taken by this paper,
strives to capture dimensions of individual diﬀerences rather than individual
patterns. Accordingly, one can group subjects together, based on the commonly
shared variance with respect to a particular aspect of their individuality. Such
an approach leads to the identiﬁcation of diﬀerences between groups of subjects
(intra-group diﬀerences) as opposed to the diﬀerences among individuals within
the same group (inter-group diﬀerences).
Identifying and consequently describing groups of individuals sharing common features is a preliminary stage in this kind of research. It leads to a descriptive taxonomy regarding the factors which trigger the individual diﬀerences.
Attempts to highlight a causal relationship between these factors and other relevant aspects deﬁne another area of potential research in this ﬁeld. The third area
of research in this area is a theoretical one, aiming at explaining the structure
and dynamics of individual diﬀerences [18].

3

Individual Diﬀerences in Virtual Environments

A signiﬁcant amount of work has been carried out on individual diﬀerences in
the area of Human Computer Interaction (HCI). The theoretical and empirical
ﬁndings in ﬁelds like diﬀerential psychology and cognitive psychology present
a great potential for the researchers in HCI [7]. Carroll’s [2] work involved a
hierarchical exploratory analysis of part of the studies in diﬀerential psychology.
His ﬁndings regarding individual diﬀerences refer to general intelligence as a top
level, which includes eight general abilities. Personality traits and cognitive style
have been also considered of potential interest for HCI ﬁeld.
Most of studies related to spatial navigation addressed the issue of individual
diﬀerences with respect to navigation in abstract information space, such as
hypermedia space or semantic space [4,3]. However, less research has been carried
out in the area of spatial navigation within VE.
The basic goal of Virtual Environments (VEs) is to create a place for people
to act [28]. An additional purpose, related primarily with the VEs developed for
training spatial skills, addresses the users’ ability to both learn and represent
the spatial characteristics of such virtual spaces [29]. While considerable amount
of work concerned the technological factors regarding the design of VEs, factors
which might be related to the training eﬀectiveness, little research has been done
in the ﬁeld of user characteristics. As Waller highlighted [29], this is unfortunate
since individual diﬀerences are a major source of variation in performance in
both real and virtual spatial tasks.
A major aspect related to VEs, which can greatly beneﬁt from the insights
into the psychology of individual diﬀerences, regards the possible transfer of skills
from the VE to the real world. Since the inter-subjects variability in performance
within a VE is higher than that for the analogous real tasks, it seems that
knowledge acquired within a VE requires not only abilities for similar real tasks,
but additional skills as well [29].

Individual Diﬀerences in Virtual Environments

1019

A major distinction among diﬀerent types of VEs refers to immersive and
non-immersive VEs. As opposed to non-immersive VEs, immersive VEs involve
the restriction of users’ senses in terms of their reference to the real world [8]. A
desktop VE has been used in the studies summarised within this paper.

4

Study Design

The VE which has been used as an experimental testbed across our studies
represents a training environment supporting technicians in the maintenance
of engineering artefacts [17]. The ECHOES system consists of a virtual multistorey building, each of the seven levels containing three rooms, e.g. lobby room,
conference room, training room, library etc. Figures 1 and 2 presents a bird’s
eye view of the ground ﬂoor and ﬁrst ﬂoor respectively.

Fig. 1. Bird’s Eye View of Ground
Floor

Fig. 2. Bird’s Eye View of First Floor

The study involved three phases: familiarisation, exploration and performance measurement. Initially, users were allowed to become accustomed with
the VE and to learn movement control. After this, they were asked to perform an
exploration task within the virtual building which lasted for approximately 25
minutes. After the completion of this task, during which participants implicitly
acquired spatial knowledge related to the VE, they were tested. Given the ﬁndings provided by studies on human spatial cognition, the strength of relationship
between spatial abilities measured by psychometric tests and spatial knowledge
acquisition from VE is arguable [29]. Therefore, in order to assess the level of
spatial knowledge acquisition, we employed a search task. Users were placed on
the third level and asked to ﬁnd a particular room identiﬁed only through its
name, and located on the ground ﬂoor.
The time needed to accomplish this task acted as an indicator of the level of
spatial knowledge acquired within the VE. According to the time required for
the search task, users have been identiﬁed as low spatial users, when they needed
signiﬁcantly longer time to ﬁnd the library (Mean = 49 seconds), or high spatial
users who found the library straight away (Mean = 7 seconds).

1020

5

C. Sas

Individual Diﬀerences on Spatial Task Performance

The demographic factors which we considered of interest in understanding performances on the search task, were gender and prior computer games experience,
since all participants were already familiar with computers. Findings indicate signiﬁcant gender diﬀerences: male subjects outperformed female subjects by ﬁnding the room signiﬁcantly quicker. These diﬀerences follow the line of ﬁndings
in the area of spatial abilities that indicate better performances for males [11].
Understanding users’ preferred manner of processing information opens a
door towards their perception of the world, either physical or virtual. Several
studies consider cognitive style and/or learning style important variable(s) potentially triggering individual diﬀerences in the way users perform [9]. However,
little attention has been paid to the impact of personality cognitive style, deﬁned in terms of Jung’s personality types [13]. We conjectured that is might be
a signiﬁcant factor which could lead to diﬀerences on spatial task performance.
Without being statistically signiﬁcant, ﬁndings suggest that individuals who
are more extrovert, intuitive or thinking perform better in terms of task eﬃciency. Along the Extroversion–Introversion continuum, the extravert people are
predominantly orientated towards the external world, thing which probably leads
to an increased level of spatial awareness. On the Sensing–Intuition continuum,
intuitive people look at the entire picture which emerges from the single parts,
but also go beyond it. The search task is a complex one and its solution requires
information perceived through our senses. However, this does not suﬃce and
user has to perceive something which is beyond the immediate information. In
order to be successful, one needs an internal representation of the spatial layout,
or a so-called cognitive map. Most likely intuitive individuals are able to take the
bird’s eye view, as they would see the space from above. However, further work is
required for validating this hypothesis. Along the Thinking–Feeling continuum,
thinking type grounds his/her decision on logic and analysis. The need of thinking type to organise both things and ideas within its environment could prove
beneﬁcial in understanding it. Probably when both extrovert and thinking types
are met within the same individual, he/she could achieve higher performance in
building up the internal representation of the spatial layout through methodical
coverage of the space.

6

Individual Diﬀerences on Navigational Pattern

Ford [9] investigated the individual diﬀerences in behavioural patterns of navigating in abstract VEs, triggered by cognitive style deﬁned in terms of holist
or serialist orientation. He showed that while holists like to have access to an
overview of the underlying structure, serialists prefer keyword indices. As the
best of our knowledge there have been no research on identifying patterns of
human navigational behaviour within VEs.
Work carried out in one of our studies involved the use of self-organising
maps for classifying users’ trajectories [22]. This allowed identifying a set of

Individual Diﬀerences in Virtual Environments

1021

ﬁve clusters, based on the shape of motion trajectory. These clusters helped
diﬀerentiating study participants on the basis of eﬃciency of their navigational
strategies. Clustering allowed the identiﬁcation of good and poor motion trajectories and their associated characteristics, where good and poor have been
determined in the light of users’ performance.
Each cluster but one could prove beneﬁcial for the performance of the search
task, excepting one, which consisted of erratic trajectories, presenting lots of
turns and straight line segments joined at sharp angles. Since more than 50%
of trajectories composing this cluster belong to the subjects with the worst
performance on the search task, we considered trajectories within this cluster as
poor trajectories.
These ﬁndings indicate that there are individual diﬀerences in navigational
patterns, which correlate with performance on spatial task, or in other words
with users’ spatial abilities. While high spatial users perform a good coverage of
the space, by following a smooth path which resembles “going around the edge”
feature, low spatial users navigate more erratically, performing more greater
turns or crossovers. They seem to explore the environment in an unsystematic
manner, which is reﬂected on navigation behaviour both on each level and across
the levels. An analysis of these ﬁndings in the light of Ford’s previously summarised results [9] determined us to conjecture that, through their pattern of
navigation, high spatial users developed holistic strategies of exploration, while
low spatial users seemed to be more serialistic in their approach.

7

Individual Diﬀerences on Experiencing Presence

One of the psychological phenomena experienced by users while they interact
with virtual reality systems is sense of presence. It allows them to be there [23],
to feel themselves immersed and moreover to perceive the virtual world as another world where they really exist. We deﬁned presence as a psychological phenomenon, through which one’s cognitive processes are oriented towards another
world, either technologically mediated or imaginary, to such an extent that he or
she experiences mentally the state of being (there), similar to one in the physical
reality, together with an imperceptible shifting of focus of consciousness to the
proximal stimulus located in that other world [19]. For measuring presence, we
devised a questionnaire presented in Sas and O’Hare [21].
Within immersive VEs, most of the users become immersed, despite the intragroup variability based on cognitive factors. We conjecture that in this case, the
presence is experienced because of the advanced technological aspects featured by
these fully immersive systems. These technical issues are so impressive that they
simply prevail over the cognitive determinants of presence. On the other hand,
within non-immersive VEs whose technological infrastructure is less advanced,
the user’s experience of presence is mainly due not to the system characteristics,
but rather to the associated human factors.
The potential set of personality factors which could impact upon sense of
presence has been identiﬁed after a thorough review of presence literature [15,

1022

C. Sas

12] accompanied by an approach in the psychology of hypnosis. Therefore, we
choose to investigate the following factors: empathy, absorption, creative imagination, personality cognitive style and willingness to be transported in the VE.
A presentation of each of these factors is brieﬂy outlined below.
– Empathy was identiﬁed with a set of constructs associated with the responses
of one individual to the experience of another [6]. It involves the ability to
engage in the cognitive process of adopting another’s psychological point
of view, together with the capacity to experience aﬀective reactions to the
observed experience of others. In order to develop such capacities and exhibit
empathic behaviour, one should be able to assume perceptual, cognitive and
aﬀective roles. Empathy was measured with Davis’ Interspersonal Reactivity
Index [6].
– Absorption construct elaborated by Tellegen [26] is deﬁned as a state of
“openness to experiencing, in the sense of readiness to undergo whatever
experiential events, sensory or imaginal, that may occur, with a tendency to
dwell on, rather than go beyond, the experiences themselves and the objects
they represent”. Absorption was measured with Tellegen Absorption Scale
[27].
– Creative Imagination represents the ability to generate mental representations of objects, persons or events not immediately presented to the senses
[24], was also considered to carry an impact upon presence [12]. This trait
was measured with Barber and Wilson’s Creative Imagination Scale [1].
– Cognitive style. Curry’s Onion Model [5] proposes a hierarchical structure
of cognitive styles, with the outermost layer referring to the individual’s
choice of learning environment, with the middle layer referring to information processing style and with the innermost layer consisting of cognitive
personality style. Deﬁned as the individual’s tendency to assimilate information, cognitive personality style is an enduring and context-independent
feature. Personality Cognitive Style was measured with Myers-Briggs Type
Indicator (MBTI) [16].
– Willingness to be transported into the virtual world. The role of this factor
can be better understood if one looks at it as a prerequisite for willingness
to suspend disbelief, aspect often mentioned in relation to sense of presence.
It seems to be a necessary condition for experiencing a high level of sense of
presence [14,25] and ultimately enjoying a mediated experience of any kind
(e.g. theatre, literature, television, ﬁlm, VR).
With respect to the individual diﬀerences in experiencing sense of presence,
ﬁndings indicate that individuals more absorbed (t(30) = 2.10, p < 0.05), more
imaginative (t(30) = 2.41, p < 0.05), more empathic (t(30) = 2.00, p < 0.05)
or more willing to be transported into the virtual world (t(30) = 2.75, p <
0.01), experienced a signiﬁcantly greater level of sense of presence [21]. The way
in which personality cognitive style shapes the experience of “being there” is
indicated by the following results: individuals who are highly introvert (t(28) =
1.68, p = 0.05), sensitive (t(28) = 1.47, p = 0.07) or feeling type (t(28) =
1.46, p = 0.07) are more prone to experience a higher level of presence [20].

Individual Diﬀerences in Virtual Environments

8

1023

Conclusions

The results presented in this paper indicate the signiﬁcant impact of some personality factors on spatial performance, navigational patterns and sense of presence experienced by users during their interaction with the system. These ﬁndings indicate that “one size ﬁts all” is an obsolete concept when it comes to
the design of VEs. Since the ultimate goal of studying individual diﬀerences is
to enhance system usability, once they have been identiﬁed and their impact is
signiﬁcant, eﬀorts should be made to accommodate the individual diﬀerences.
In this context, an important aspect to be considered is the purpose of the
application. Whether the VE is designed to enable humans to exceed the barrier
of our limited senses for allowing access to inaccessible spaces, to improve skills,
to cure, or to entertain, greater attention should be paid to diﬀerent aspects,
and accordingly to the set of factors which could trigger remarkable individual
diﬀerences on these aspects. However, the distinct goal of any VE could be placed
on a continuum between two poles: best performance–most pleasure.
When, for instance, the VE is designed for medical applications, its main
purpose is to enable surgeons to perform at least as well as they would perform
in reality (with or without presence). In this case, particular attention should
be given to introvert, sensitive and feeling types who experience a higher level
of sense of presence but whose performance might be reduced. For example, a
VE for games should be particularly designed to allow extrovert, intuitive and
thinking type individuals not only to perform better in spatial tasks but to
experience presence as well.

References
1. Barber, T.X., Wilson, S.C.: The Barber suggestibility scale and the creative imagination scale: Experimental and clinical applications. The American Journal of
Clinical Hypnosis 21(2-3) (1979) 84–108
2. Carroll, J.B.: Human Cognitive Abilities: A Survey of Factor-Analytic Studies.
Cambridge University Press, New York (1993)
3. Chen, C.: Individual diﬀerences in a spatial-semantic virtual environment. Journal
of the American Society for Information Science 51(6) (2000) 529–542
4. Chen, S., Ford, N.: Towards adaptive information systems: Individual diﬀerences
and hypermedia. Information Research 3(2) (1997)
5. Curry, L.: An organization of learning styles theory and constructs. ERIC Document (1983) 235-185
6. Davis, M.: Empathy: A social psychological approach. Westview Press, Oxford
(1994)
7. Dillon, A., Watson, C.: User analysis in HCI: The hystorical lesson from individual diﬀerences research. International Journal of Human–Computer Studies 45(6)
(1996) 619–637
8. Fernie, K. and Richards, J.D.: Creating and Using Virtual Reality: A Guide for the
Arts and Humanities. URL: http://vads.ahds.ac.uk/guides/vr guide/glossary.html
(10.03.2003)

1024

C. Sas

9. Ford, N.: Cognitive styles and virtual environments. Journal of American Society
for Information Science 51(6) (2000) 543–557
10. Gabbard, J., Hix, D. Taxonomy of Usability Characteristics in Virtual Environments. Virginia Polytechnic Institute, Blackenburg (1997)
11. Goldstein, D., Haldane, D., Mitchell, C.: Sex diﬀerences in visual–spatial ability:
The role of performance factors. Memory and Cognition 18(5) (1990) 546–550
12. Heeter, C.: Being there: The subjective experience of presence. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments 1(2) (1992) 262–271
13. Jung, C.G.: Psychological types. In Ress, L., McGuire, W. (eds) The Collected
Works of C.G. Jung, Vol. 6 Princeton University Press Princeton (1971)
14. Laurel, B.: Computers as Theatre Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc,
Boston (1993)
15. Lombard, M., Ditton, T.: At the heart of it all: The concept of presence. Journal
of Computer–Mediated Communication 3(2) (1997)
16. Myers, I.B., McCaulley, M.H.: Manual: A Guide to the Development and Use of
the MBTI. Consulting Psychologist Press, Palo Alto, (1998)
17. O’Hare, G.M.P., Sewell, K., Murphy, A., Delahunty, T.: An immersive training
experience. In Brusilovsky, P., Stock, O., Strapparava, C. (eds) Lecture Notes in
Computer Science Vol. 1892 179–188 Springer-Verlag, Berlin (2000)
18. Revelle, W.: Individual diﬀerences. In Kazdin, A. (ed) Encyclopedia of Psychology
Oxford University Press (2000)
19. Sas, C. and G.M.P. O’Hare, G.M.P.: The presence equation: An investigation into
cognitive factors underlying presence within non-immersive virtual environments.
In 4th Annual International Workshop on Presence (2001)
20. Sas, C., O’Hare, G.M.P.: Impact of cognitive style upon sense of presence. In
Jacko, J., Stephanidis, C. (eds) Proceedings of the 10th International Conference
on Human–Computer Interaction 696–700 (2003)
21. Sas, C., O’Hare, G.M.P.: Presence equation: An investigation into cognitive factor underlying presence Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments 12(5)
(2003) in press.
22. Sas, C., O’Hare, G.M.P., Reilly, R.G.: On-line trajectory classiﬁcation. In Lecture
Notes in Computer Science Vol. 2659 1035–1044 Springer-Verlag, Berlin (2003)
23. Schloerb, D.W., Sheridan, T.B.: Experimental investigation of the relationship between subjective telepresence and performance in hand-eye tasks. Telemanipulator
and Telepresence Technologies 62–73 (1995)
24. Singer, J.: Imagination. In Kazdin, A. (ed) Encyclopedia of Psychology Vol. 4
227–230 Oxford University Press, Oxford (2000)
25. Slater, M., Usoh, M.: Representations systems, perceptual position, and presence
in immersive virtual environments. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments 2(3) (1993) 221–233
26. Tellegen, A.: Practicing the two disciplines of relaxation and enlightenment: Comment on “Role of the feedback signal in electromyography biofeedback: The relevance of attention” by Qualls and Sheehan. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General 110 (1981) 217–226
27. Tellegen, A.: Brief manual for the diﬀerential personality questionnaire. Unpublished manuscript. Department of Psychology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis (1982)
28. Tromp, J.G.: Methodology of distributed CVE evaluations. Proceedings of UK
VR SIG (1997)
29. Waller, D.: Individual diﬀerences in spatial learning from computer–simulated
environments. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 8 (2000) 307–321

