Mobility Management Scheme for Reducing Location
Traffic Cost in Mobile Networks
Byoung-Muk Min1, Jeong-Gyu Jee2, and Hea Seok Oh1
1

School of Computing Soongsil Univ., Seoul, Korea
bmmin@yahoo.com
2
Korea Research Foundations, Seoul, Korea

Abstract. Even when users are moving, a major problem in such a mobile networks is how to locate Mobile Hosts (MHs). In this paper we propose mobility
strategy that minimizes the costs of both operations, the location registration
and the call tracking, simultaneously. In numerical results, the proposed method
proves that it has more improved performance than the previous methods.

1 Introduction
To effectively monitor the movement of each MH, a large geographical region is partitioned into small Registration Areas (RAs). Figure 1 shows the architecture of a
mobile system. Each RA has a Mobile Switch Center (MSC, also called a Base Station
(BS)) which serves as the local processing center of the RA. The profiles of MH inside a RA are kept, in the MSC’s Visitor Location Register (VLR). On top of several
MSC/VLRs is a Local Signaling Transfer Point (LSTP) and on top of several LSTPs
again is a Remote Signaling Transfer Point (RSTP). In this way, the whole system
forms a hierarchy of station. The LSTP and the RSTP are routers for handling message transfer between stations. For one RSTP there is a Home Location Register
(HLR). Each MH must register in a HLR. When a MSC needs to communicate with
another MSC. MSC first sends a message to the LSTP on top of it. If another MSC is
under the same LSTP as MSC, then the message is forwarded to another MSC without
going through the RSTP. Otherwise, the message has to be through the RSTP and then
down to a proper LSTP ad then to another MSC. In spite of many advantages available in wireless communication. It is not without difficulties to realize such systems.
The first problem is how to locate a Mobile Host (MH) in a wireless environment. The
IS-95 strategy is most often referred in resolving this problem. IS-95 used in the
United States and GMS [6] used in Europe are examples of this strategy.
Many papers in the literature have demonstrated that the IS-95 strategy does not
perform well. This is mainly because whenever a MH moves. The VLR of a Registration Area (RA) which detected the arrival of the host always reports to the HLR about
the host’s new location.

M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3036, pp. 342–348, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

Mobility Management Scheme for Reducing Location Traffic Cost

343

S C P/H L R
R em ote A -link

RSTP
D -link

L ST P

LSTP

LSTP
Lo ca l A -link

SSP
Radio port

M SC

V LR
C ell or radio port
coverage area

R egistration
A rea (R A )

PC S term inal/
hand set

Fig. 1. Architecture of mobile networks

Among them, the Forwarding strategy [4, 5], the Local Anchor (LA) strategy, and the
Caching strategy [3,7] are representatives of the old VLR to the new VLR. Update of
the client’s location to the HLR’s database is not always needed to minimize communications to the HLR. To locate a callee however, some extra time is required to follow the forwarding link to locate the host. When the number of the forwarding links is
high, the locating cost becomes significant.
In IS-95 scheme, the BS reserves only the resources corresponding to the minimum transmission rate to the mobile. According to the IS-95 strategy, the HLR always
knows exactly the ID of the serving VLR of a mobile terminal. We outline the major
steps of the IS-95 location registration scheme as follows [6]:
1. The mobile terminal sends a registration request (REGREQ) message to the new
VLR.
2. The new VLR checks whether the terminal is already registered. If not, it sends a
registration notification (REGNOT) message to the HLR
3. The HLR sends a registration cancellation (REGCANC) message to the old VLR.
The old VLR deletes the information of the terminal and the IS-95 call tracking
scheme is outlined as follows:
1. The VLR of caller is queried for the information of callee. If the callee is registered to the VLR, the Search process is over and the call is established. If not, the
VLR sends a location Request (LOCREQ) message to the HLR.
2. The HLR finds out to which VLR the callee is registered, and sends a routing
request (ROUTREQ) message to the VLR serving the callee. The VLR finds out
the location information of the callee.
3. The serving MSC assigns a temporary local directory numbers (TLDN) and returns the digits to the VLR which sends it to the HLR.
4. The HLR sends the TLDN to the MSC of the caller.

344

B.-M. Min, J.-G. Jee, and H.S. Oh

5. The MSC of the caller establishes a call by using the TLDN to the MSC of the
callee. Among the above 5 steps, the Search process is composed of step1 and
step2.
This paper proposes on further improvement the performance by minimizing location
traffic. In the proposed method, we define the VLRs that have been linked to by the
same LA as the overseen VLRs of this LA, and allow multiple such LAs to be linked
together by using forwarding links.

2 Proposed Strategy
The proposed strategy is designed based on this simple concept. That is, when a call is
made, instead of asking the callee’s HLR the system will find the callee’s VLR and
from there the LA and then the callee. To accomplish this, the concept of the past LA
strategy is adopted in this work. Depending on whether the caller’s VLR statically or
determine where to search for the callee. In both of these methods, the callee’s profile
needs to be kept in his visited VLRs. To serve for this purpose, a data structure named
the MH table is defined to save some information of visited mobile users for each
VLR. This table maintains for each visited MH the host’s ID, a Type and a Pointer.
The host’s ID has the identifier of the host. Each host is assumed to have a different
host’s ID. Every VLR maintains a MH table records the information for each MH
who has visited this VLR. Whether a VLR is the LA of a mobile client can be examined by using the value of Type in the MH table. The schema of the MH table is quite
simple and easy to implement. The size of each record in this table can be as small as
eight byte. The size of Type value is two bits and that of a Pointer value is also four
bytes. It is easily manageable by any current DBMS. However the size of a MH table
grows when more and more clients visited this. This problem can be easily resolved
by removing obsolete records from the table when necessary. If from the table the
system cannot locate the host, then the system simply asks the HLR of the callee
about the current location of the callee.
2.1 Location Registration
We formally present the algorithms in the following subsections. Basically, take of
location registration are to save a new record in visiting VLR, and to update location
of the MH recorded in the old VLR. We provide for each algorithm to illustrate how
the algorithm works.
1.

2.
3.

The new VLR learns that the MH is inside its territory and informs the old
VLR that MH is in its RA. The MH table of the new VLR is inserted a new record describing the coming MH. If the mobile client visited this new VLR in
the past, then the system only updates the Type and the Pointer values.
The old VLR replies an acknowledgement to the new VLR.
The old VLR informs the LA that the MH has moved to the new VLR. Also the
old VLR update its own MH table by replacing the MH’s Type value with Visited VLR and the Pointer value with the LA’s; location.

Mobility Management Scheme for Reducing Location Traffic Cost

4.

5.

345

The LA replies a message to the old VLR, and updates its own MH table. The
Type value of the mobile client is not changed. The Pointer value is modified
to the new VLR’s location.
End.

2.2 Call Tracking
We describe the call tracking operation. The algorithm of the call tracking is as follows.
1. When a VLR receives a request of locating a callee, it first checks whether its
Mobile Host table has the callee’s record. If yes, then sends the locating requite
to the LA stated in this record. Otherwise, jump to Step 7.
2. / The caller is currently at a location where the callee visited before./
if the record of the Mobile Host table of the LA stated in Step 1 says that this
LA is a “Visited LA”, then goto Step 3. If it says “Latest LA”, goto Step 4.
3. The locating request is forwarded to this visited LA. While the request is forwarded to the next LA, the callee’s record is again searched from this LA’s
Mobile Host table. Goto Step 2.
4. The latest LA finds the callee’s record from the Mobile Host table. If the value
of the Pointer field is NULL, then the callee is right in one of this LA’s governing RAs. Hence, a message is forwarded to the caller’s VLR to make the
connection. Goto step 13. If the value of the Pointer field is not NULL, then it
must be a VLR who is currently overseeing the callee. Hence, the call tracking
request is sent to the latest VLR to which the Pointer field refers.
5. The latest VLR sends a message to the caller’s VLR to make a connection.
6. Goto Step 13
7. / The caller is at a location where the callee has not visited before. Updates of
the callee’s new location in the LA, VLR, and HLR are associated with this call
tracking operation /
8. The HLR forwards the request to the callee’s LA.
9. The callee’s latest LA forwards the request to the latest. Also, the callee’s record in this VLR’s Mobile Host table is updated by replacing its Type with
“Latest LA” and Pointer with NULL.
10. The callee’s VLR acknowledges the receipt of the message to the LA and the
LA will then update the callee’s record in its Mobile Host table by replacing
type with “Visited LA” and Pointer with a pointer to the callee’s current residing.
11. The callee’s VLR sends a message to the HLR. The HLR updates the callee’s
new location to the new latest .
12. The HLR forwards the message about the current location (VLR) of the callee
to the caller’s VLR and the connection between the caller’s VLR and the callee’s VLR is built.
13. End.

346

B.-M. Min, J.-G. Jee, and H.S. Oh

3 Performance Model
We present the cost models that used to evaluate the performance of the proposed
strategy. We list the parameters used in the models. Then, we derive the cost functions
for the mobility strategies to be compared. The parameters used in our cost models are
listed in Fig. 2. The costs of the IS-95strategy, was discussed in the literature [4]. But
the environments and the details that were referenced in their derivations are different
in many ways. In order to make a fair and reasonable comparison, we make some
general assumptions and based on which we derive their cost functions in a uniform
way. As the local database processing cost is insignificant comparing to the long
communication time, we only consider communication cost in this derivation. Communication cost is dependent on the “distance” between two parties, and is classified
into three levels: two parties are under different RSTPs, two parties are under the
same RSTP but different LSTPs, and two parties under the same LSTP. Their costs
are respectively C1, C2, and C3, we also need to use probability to model the location
distribution of two communicating parties. VLR, and two linked LAs. For simplicity,
in all three sub-cases we assume that the two communicating parties are arbitrarily
distributed.
Cost Function: The tasks of location management include managing location registration and call tracking. Hence, the location management cost is computed according
to these two operations. As the ratio of the number of calls to mobility and defined as

Total cos t =

1
⋅ Re gistration cos t + Call tracking cos t.
CMR

Cost of IS-95: The total cost of the IS-95 strategy can be represented as follows.

C IStotal
−95 = (

1
) ⋅ C ISR −95 + C IST −95
CMR

The registration cost and the call tracking cost of the IS-95 strategy is therefore.

C ISR −95 = 2 ⋅ C1 ,

C IST −95 = 4 ⋅ C1 .

Cost of Proposed Method: From the previous discussion, we understand that the
difference of the registration operation between the proposed strategy and the Static
LA strategy is that the MH record of a host is saved in the VLRs that the client has
visited, whereas it’s not in the LA strategy. Therefore, the registration cost of those
two strategies should be the same. That is,
R
C proposed
= PL ⋅ (2 ⋅ C 3 ) + PR ⋅ (2 ⋅ C 2 ) + (1 − PL − PR ) ⋅ (2 ⋅ C1 )

For the call tracking operation, two cases are involved: The caller is at a VLR that the
callee has never visited. The caller is at a VLR that the callee visited before.

C Tprooposed

= (1 −

k

∑

i=0

T
p i ) ⋅ C LA
+

k

∑ (p
i=0

i

⋅ ( i ⋅ C proposed

− link

).

Mobility Management Scheme for Reducing Location Traffic Cost

Meaning

Symbol

C1
C2
C3
PL
PR

CMR

Pi

347

The cost of sending a message from VLR to another VLR
under a different RSTP
The cost of sending a message from VLR to another VLR
under a different LSTP but the same RSTP
The cost of sending a message from VLR to another VLR
under the same LSTP
The probability of a mobile client’s moving into a new RA
which is under the same LSTP as the last RA that the client
just left
The probability of a mobile client’s moving into a new RA
which is under the same RSTP as the last RA that the client
just left
The call-to-mobility ratio
The probability that a caller’s request is issued from LAi and
its overseeing VLRs
Fig. 2. Symbols of the parameters

4 Performance Analysis
From the above discussion, we see two important factors that affect the performance
of the proposed strategy: K and Pi. Both of these parameters help to indicate how
many calls could be from a VLR that the callee has visited in the past. For such callers, the locating cost could be cheap. But the tradeoff is that a long LA link will increase the cost for traversing through the LAs. Hence, we study the effect of these
two factors. Also, we vary the ratio C1 /C3, which represents varying region size of a
RSTP versus a LSTP. This is a general factor which affects all strategies. The default
values of the parameters used in our evaluation are given ; C1, C2, and C3 are 4, 2, 1,
respectively, PL is 0.7, PR is 0.2, CMR is 0.5, Ks is 6, and Pi is 0.05. Pi is the probability that a caller places a call from a VLR that happens to be under one of the linked
LAs of the callee. When this occurs, the call tracking cost is cheap. We vary Pi from
0.01 to 0.16. As the default K is 6, the total probability of a call from the VLR under a
linked LAs is actually 0.06~0.96. The result given in Fig. 3 shows. However, for the
proposed method a dramatic decrease of the cost when Pi increases. Although in
general Pi may not be large for every kind of MHs, it could definitely be so for a
certain type of users. Our performance result shows that the proposed strategy is especially good for managing MH of this kind. Figure 4 shows the result by varying
length of this link K. A large K means that many VLRs that are under the linked LAs

348

B.-M. Min, J.-G. Jee, and H.S. Oh

can locate a callee through the providing links of LAs, which helps to reduce the locating cost. Hence, the higher the K, the lower the cost of the proposed strategy. The
improvement of the proposed strategy over the IS-95 strategies is very significant.
70

65
60

60

55
50

50

Time Cost

45

40

40
35

30

20

IS-95

30

Proposed method

25

IS-95
Pro p o s ed m e th o d

20
10

0

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0. 1

0.12

0.14

Fig. 3. Probability from LAi

0.16

15

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Fig. 4. Length of link

5 Conclusions
In this paper the proposed strategy could be reduced location traffic cost. The proposed strategy avoids updating the host’s location to the HLR when the client moves
to a new VLR. The host’s new VLR always updates the host’s location to the LA. We
also derived the cost models of the proposed strategies and several other methods. Our
analysis results reveal that in most case the proposed strategy performs better than the
IS-95 strategies.

References
1. Amotz Bar-Noy and Ilan Kessler, “Tracking Mobile Users in Wireless Communication
Networks,” IEEE Trans. on Information Theory, Vol. 39, 1993
2. Ing-Ray Chen, Tsong-Min Chen, “Modeling and Analysis of Forwarding and Resetting
Strategies for Location Management in Mobile Environments,” Proc. of ICS’96, 1996
3. Ing-Ray Chen, Tsong-Min Chen, and Chiang Lee, “Performance Characterization of Forwarding Strategies in Personal Communication Networks”, Proc. of IEEE COMPSAC`97,
1997
4. Ing-Ray Chen, Tsong-Min Chen, “Performance Evaluation of Forwarding Strategies for
Location Management in Mobile Networks”, the Computer Journal, Vol. 41, No. 4, 1998,
5. Ing-Ray Chen, Tsong-Min Chen, and Chiang Lee, “Analysis and Comparison of Location
Strategies for Reducing Registration Cost in CS Networks”, Wireless Personal Communications journal, Vol. 12, No. 2, 2000, pp. 117-136.
6. EIA/TIA IS-41.3, “Cellular Radio Telecommunications Intersystem Operations”, Technical
Report (Revision B), July 1997.
7. Joseph S. M. Ho and Ian F. Akyildiz, “A Dynamic Mobility Tracking Policy for Wireless
Personal Communications Networks”, Prof. of GLOBECOM`95, 1995,

