Simulation of Molecular Evolution Using
Population Dynamics Modelling
Sergei V. Semovski1
Limnological Institute SB RAS, Ulanbatorskaya 3, Irkutsk 664033 Russia
semovsky@lin.irk.ru

Abstract. Neutral evolution of nucleotide sequences is simulated in
the framework of adaptive population dynamics. Simulated speciation
events, changes in demographic history, and migration are traced using
resulting molecular data. Various scenarios are considered including oneand two-dimensional populations, and competition lottery system.

1

Introduction

It has been shown recently that DNA sequences retain much more information
on the past events than simply the degree of relation between species. The main
successes in the direction of interpreting this information have been achieved in
the framework of the coalescence theory which has allowed scientists to obtain
the demographic history of human beings. We use mathematical modelling to
simulate evolutionary and demographic processes in populations consisting of
objects with diﬀerent ecological parameters such as mobility, number of progeny
etc., and include into each object tracer mutable ”DNA sequences”, which are
extracted after each simulation and analysed with various molecular phylogenetic
approaches. This will enable us to match the inferences to the known history.
Population dynamics is a ﬂexible tool, giving opportunities to investigate
various practically important ecological situations. In the Lab of molecular systematics, at the Limnological Institute we concentrate mainly on studies of
benthic invertebrates (see [1])). Several models of molecular evolution valid for
low-mobile species are presented here including a one-dimensional population,
which is the model of littoral of an ancient lake, and diﬀerent ecological and
evolutionary patterns in a two-dimensional community.

2

Model

Let us consider a population existing in the environment with limited resource,
according to a generalisation [2] of the well-known logistic equation:
dS(x, t)
= r · S(x, t) · 1 −
dt

C(x − y)S(y, t)
dy .
K(x)

M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3039, pp. 736–741, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

(1)

Simulation of Molecular Evolution

737

Here S(x, t) denote the number of individuals with value of ecological character
(polygen) x in time t. Resource distribution and competition between individuals
are considered to be gaussian functions:
K(x) = K0 exp −

(x − x0 )2
2
2σK

(2)

z2
.
2
2σC

(3)

and
C(z) = exp −

The probability of progeny survival depends on the genetic distance between
the parents. The local minimum in zero point is due to inbreeding, and the local
maximum is due to heterosis. Hybrid depression at genetic distances larger then
K0 causes reproductive isolation of genetically diﬀerent organisms.
Rare mutations occur with the probability equal to 0.01 and their deviation
from parent genotype corresponds to gaussian distribution
Ψ (x) = (2πσΨ2 )−1 exp −x2 /σΨ2 ,
σΨ2

(4)

where
is dispersion of the genotype of the rare mutant. The individualoriented model has been used for all calculations.
For spatially distributed individuals the generalization of the model [2] is
proposed in [3]. The general idea of application of (1) is in the introduction of the
Gaussian competition between individuals in the space. Then integral operator
on the right side of (1) becomes multidimensional and contains an additional
2
kernel Csp (z) = exp − 2σz 2 responsible for competition in the space. Here z is
sp
the distance between individuals in the space and σsp deﬁnes the intensity of
spatial competition. Note that for the sake of calculation time it is possible to
use rectangular kernel instead of Gaussian. Such formulation will correspond to
the limited capacity of the spatial cell. It is possible to use the same attempt
to describe the dynamics of interacting populations. If competition for the same
resource takes place in the space, individuals from diﬀerent populations interact
according to the integral operator with kernel Csp , however, in the ”genetic”
space of the quantative trait competition is intra-speciﬁc.
In order to bring the neutrally evolving marker into the individually oriented
model we consider that each individual bears a neutrally evolving nucleotide
sequence represented here by integer vector with elements having values from
1 to 4 We consider all mutations in this sequence neutral that have no impact
on the adaptation of individuals. The progeny inherits parental sequence with
mutations occurring with the probability of .001 per generation. In the case of a
bisexual population this sequence would be considered to be inherited from one
of the parents only (maternal inheritance), which corresponds to mitochondrial
DNA. The set of neutral sequences resulting from a simulation was used for
phylogenetic inferences, which were performed with the program ﬁtch from the
package PHYLIP [5]. The phylogenetic trees were visualized with the program
njplot [4]. Program system IDL (Reseach Systems Inc.) has been used intensively
for computations and results presentation.

738

S.V. Semovski

Fig. 1. Simulation of evolutionary history using model (1)

2.1

Molecular Evolution

Incorporating the molecular evolution in the population dynamics model (1)
produces a suitable tool to validate those methods of bioinformatics which have
been developed to reconstruct details of evolutionary history based on the present
samples of those DNA sequences which are selectively neutral. One of important
questions is the correlation of demographic changes in population history and
speciation events with past changes in the environment. In [6] some details are
presented of the application of the model (1) to reconstruct the evolutionary
history for diﬀerent scenarios of environmental change impact on speciation intensity. In Fig. 1 one can see formation of genetically isolated subpopulations
after change in ﬁtness. Fig. 2 demonstrates application of molecular phylogeny
to resulting molecular data.
2.2

Spatial Patterns of Speciation

Bottom communities of ancient lakes demonstrate various spatial patterns in
speciation. In the shallow littoral zone along the shore the benthic community
presents approximately a one-dimensional population. In [3] using a generalization of the model (1) diﬀerent situations of speciation in space have been demonstrated depending on mobility of organisms. For low-mobile species formation
of diﬀerent, genetically isolated colonies is possible, which is close to allopatric
speciation but without geographical barriers. For moderate mobility parapatric

Simulation of Molecular Evolution

739

Fig. 2. Reconstruction of evolutionary history of the case presented in Fig. 1 using
resulting molecular data

Fig. 3. Speciation patterns for two competitive populations on a plane. 1 and 2 are
spatial positions of two genetically diﬀerent morphs of population A, 3 and 4 are spatial
positions of two genetically diﬀerent morphs of population B

speciation takes place, for which zones of genetic contact are typical, both permanent and temporary, with migration or without it. For highly mobile organisms
situation becomes close to zero-dimensional case (1) and we have sympatric speciation with full mixing of newly formed subpopulations.

740

S.V. Semovski

Fig. 4. Co-evolution patterns of two competing populations on a plane

2.3

Co-evolution in Competing Populations

Co-evolution and co-speciation is known for many forms of interaction between
species in nature. It is possible for host and parasite pairs, preys and predators.
We have a plan to investigate co-evolutionary patterns for diﬀerent forms of
ecological interaction. Results presented here are derived using a model of coevolution of spatially distributed organisms which compete for a limited resource.
For many natural communities the well-known principle of competitive exclusion is not valid. One of the examples one can ﬁnd in benthic ecosystems. One
of verbal models is based on the idea of ”competition lottery”, when newborn
oﬀspring have equal probability to occupy areas which are free due to organisms
mortality. The numerical realization of this idea is based on a three-dimensional
generalization of the model (1), where one dimension is a quantative trait (polygenus) and two domensions are spatial. Fig. 3. demonstrates spatial patterns
of new parapatric (being in contact) genetically diverging morphs for two competitive species on a plane. To neglect boundary eﬀects in calculations we use
torus. Co-evolution patterns in the ”genetic” space are presented in Fig. 4.
Changes in the environment during evolutionary history can have diﬀerent
consequences for competing populations, correlative and anti-correlative. Fig. 5
demonstrates the analysis of evolutionary history using resulting molecular data
and frequency diagram of pair-wise genetic distances of organisms in the population. Peaks in this diagram correspond to moments of population growth[7],
or to moments of speciation [6], minima - to population decline or to decrease in

Simulation of Molecular Evolution

741

speciation rate. In Fig. 5 two populations demonstrate opposite reactions to the
changes in the model environment. Note that a similar anti-correlation has been
noted recently for sand-dwelling and rock-dwelling cichlids in lake Tanganyika
[8] using a statistical analysis based on a big array of molecular data.

Fig. 5. Frequency diagram for genetic distance (number of substitutions) in two competing populations on a plane which react in diﬀerent ways to changes in the model
environment

References
1. Sherbakov D.Yu.: Molecular phylogenetic studies on the origin of biodiversity in
Lake Baikal. Trends in Ecol.and Evolution 14 (1999) 92–95.
2. Dieckmann U., Doebeli M.: On the origin of species by sympatric speciation, Nature, 400 (1999) 354–357.
3. Semovski S.V., Bukin Yu.S., Sherbakov D.Yu.,: Speciation in one-dimensional population. Int.J.of Modern Phys. 14 (2004), (to appear).
4. Gouy, M. : NJPLOT(m.gouy@biomserv.univ-lyon1.fr)
5. Felsenstein, J.: PHYLIP, Phylogeny Inference Package
http://evolution.genetics.washington.edu/phylip.html
6. Semovski S.V., Verheyen E., Sherbakov D.Yu.,: Simulating the evolution of
neutrally evolving sequences in a population under environmental changes.
Ecol.Modelling, (to appear)
7. Rogers, A.R., Harpending, H. : Population growth makes waves in the distribution
of pairwise genetic diﬀerences, Mol.Biol.Evol., 9 (1992) 552–569.
8. Nevado B., Sherbakov D.Yu., Verheyen E., : private communications.

