Fully Kinetic Particle-in-Cell Simulation
of a Hall Thruster
Francesco Taccogna1, Savino Longo1,2, Mario Capitelli1,2, and Ralf Schneider3
1

Dipartimento di Chimica dell’Universitài di Bari, via Orabona 4, 70126 Bari, Italy
cscpft61@area.ba.cnr.it
2
IMIP-CNR, sect. Bari, via Orabona 4, 70126 Bari, Italy
3
Max Planck Institute für Plasmaphysik, Wendelsteinstr. 1, D-17491 Greifswald,
Germany

Abstract. A 2D axisymmetric fully kinetic Particle-in-Cell (PIC) model of the
atom (Xe), ion (Xe+) and electron dynamics of a stationary plasma thruster
(SPT) is developed. Electron-neutral elastic scattering, excitation and
ionization processes are modelled by Monte Carlo collision methodology. The
interaction of the plasma discharge with the ceramic walls leads to plasma
recombination, energy loss and secondary electron. These phenomena are
included into the model by different approaches. The electric field is selfconsistently solved from the Poisson equation, while the magnetostatic field is
precomputed. The code is applied to a scaled SPT thruster geometry where
fundamental physics parameters are kept constant. The model reproduces the
discharge ignition dynamics. The numerical results will provide a better
understanding of the experimentally observed enhanced axial electron current
and high frequency oscillations.

1 Introduction
The modelling of electric thruster is a very important issue in view of the increasing
importance of such propulsion in all space applications when specific impulse, and
not just power, is important, i.e. for satellite guidance, orbit transfer and deep space
exploration projects.

Fig. 1. Schematic representation of the discharge chamber in the SPT-100 thruster

M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3039, pp. 588–595, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

Fully Kinetic Particle-in-Cell Simulation of a Hall Thruster

589

A SPT can be schematically described (see Fig. 1) as an anode-cathode system,
with a dielectric annular chamber where the propellant ionization and acceleration
process occurs [1]. This thruster works using a perpendicular electric and magnetic
fields configuration. A magnetic circuit generates an axisymmetric and quasi-radial
magnetic field between the inner and outer poles. In operation, an electrical
discharge is established between an anode (deep inside the channel), which is acting
also as a gas distributor, and an external cathode, which is used also as an electron
emitter. In this configuration, cathode electrons are drawn to the positively charged
anode, but the radial magnetic field creates a strong impedance, trapping the
electrons in cyclotron motion which follows a closed drift path inside the annular
chamber. The trapped electrons act as a volumetric zone of ionization for neutral
propellant atoms and as a virtual cathode to accelerate the ions which are not
significantly affected by the magnetic field due to their larger Larmor radii.
Generally, xenon is used as propellant. The quasi-radial magnetic field and the
channel length L are chosen so that:

rL ,e << L << rL ,i
ω c ,i τ i << 1 << ω c ,e τ e

(1)

where rL is the Larmor radius, ωc is the angular cyclotron frequency, τ is the mean
time between collisions and the subscripts e and i means electrons and ions.
Electrons are strongly magnetized, whereas ions are non-magnetized. The resulting
external jet composed by the high speed ion beam is subsequently neutralized by
part of electrons coming from the external cathode-compensator. The presence of an
insulator as wall material has a profound effect on the plasma within a Hall type
thruster. After an impact with dielectric walls, high energy electrons are absorbed
and release less energetic secondary electrons that are more firmly confined by the
magnetic field. The result is that the dielectric wall limits the temperature of the
electrons confined into the channel. By limiting the electron temperature, a smooth
continuous variation of the plasma potential results. These effects will be specially
addressed within this work.
Models of Hall thrusters have been developed using hybrid fluid-particle
approaches [2-7] to aid in the optimization of the performance of the thruster. In all
these models, electrons are described as a fluid by the first three moments of the
Boltzmann equation. They are 1D (axial or radial), quasi-1D (considering wall
losses) or 2D (in the plane (r,z) or (r,θ)), and steady-state or transient (on the ion
time scale). Most of the models are based on the quasi-neutrality (QN) assumption.
Therefore, Poisson’s equation is not solved and the constraints related to the explicit
time integration of the transport equations and explicit space integration of the
Poisson’s equation were therefore eliminated. This assumption considerably
simplified the numerical aspect of the simulation. Usually, in the electron
momentum transport equation, Bohm and/or near-wall conductivity were included
by means of empirical fitting parameters. A question which cannot be resolved by
these models, and which in fact strongly limits the reliability of their results, is the
electron transport in SPTs, and in particular the important role that the electron
interactions with the channel walls play together with volume processes. As a result,

590

F. Taccogna et al.

SPT performance is affected by both the state of the wall surface and the properties
of plasma structures on Debye and electron-Larmor scales. Therefore, the
construction of a self-consistent theory of SPT processes requires a kinetic
description of not only heavy particles (atoms and ions), but of electrons as well. To
accomplish this, we present a two-dimensional axisymmetric Particle-In-Cell (PIC)
[8,9] model using Monte Carlo Collision (MCC) method to take into account
electron-neutral interactions. Secondary electron emission from the wall is simulated
by a probabilistic model [10]. The electric potential is calculated solving Poisson
equation solution without assuming quasi-neutrality.
We first describe in Sec. 2 the numerical model. The results are presented and
discussed in Sec. 3.

2 Numerical Method
2.1 Geometrical Scaling
To capture electron dynamics, we need a time-step on the order of the plasma
oscillation. Unfortunately, using the real mass ratio, neutral particles will require
millions of such time-steps to cross the simulation region. In order to speed-up the
code we have reduced the dimension of the discharge while preserving the values of
the relevant parameters that govern the physics [11]. All the basic plasma
characteristics in gas-phase ionization devices rely heavily on the ionization process,
whereby the neutrals are ionized in collisions with the electrons. As the size of the
device is reduced, everything else remaining constant, the number of collisions that
the electrons and the neutrals experience with each other as they traverse the
effective length of the device is reduced. Thus, in order to maintain the effective
collision probability, it is necessary to increase the number densities of all the
species in proportion, that is the mass flow rate of propellant should scale as:

 = M n cs A ∼ L
m
Xe N

(2)

where MXe, nN and cs are the neutral mass, density and thermal velocity respectively,
while A is the area of the anode. Moreover, to preserve the effectiveness of the
electron confinement scheme (the ratio of the Larmor radius to the thruster
dimension) under scaling, the strength of the magnetic field must vary inversely
with length. The discharge current Id, determined as the product of the current
density times the area of the device, scales proportionally with length. Consequently
the thrust T, that is the total force undergone by the SPT in reaction to the
acceleration of the ions, scales linearly with the length while the specific impulse
 g remains invariant under geometrical scaling. Here we have assumed
I sp = T / m
that the electron temperature is constant and independent of scale, as was shown in
Ref. [11]. However, the benefits of this trick are limited. First, the plasma frequency
must remain shorter than the electron gyrofrequency. Also, the Debye length must
remain a small quantity with respect to overall thruster dimensions. If the sheaths
become too large, they can interfere with the discharge. Under these constraints the
geometrical reducing factor was ζ=0.02.

Fully Kinetic Particle-in-Cell Simulation of a Hall Thruster

591

2.2 Magnetic Field

Because the self-induced magnetic field is negligible compared to the applied field
from the Hall thruster’s coils, the simulation uses only a constant magnetic field.
Under this condition we can define the magnetic potential φB and use the
corresponding Laplace equation to solve for the magnetic field. Boundary conditions
are the same used by Fife [3]: at the right and left boundaries, one has zero flux,
while on the outer magnetic pole, one has φB = 1, and on the inner pole one has φB =
0. We then solved for φB across the domain, and took the gradient to arrive at the
magnetic field B. Finally, we specified a control point and a field strength at that
control point, and used that to normalize the field.
2.3 Neutral Gas Particle Kinetics

The neutral density in this test case is two order of magnitude higher than the plasma
density. Therefore we let neutral super-particles be some integral number sN=100
times larger than plasma super-particles. As a neutral undergoes ionization events,
sN decreases by one unit until sN=0 and the particle disappears. We initialize the
simulation by expanding a plume of neutrals from the anode with a long time-step
until we approach a steady state. The number of neutrals macroparticles created at
the anode line (z=0) per time-step ∆tN, is a function of the scaled mass flow rate
according to:
′
m
∆N N =
∆t N
(3)
Mw N
where wN is the neutral statistical weight. They are injected with a radial position
sampled from an uniform cylindrical density distribution and their initial velocity
distribution is taken to be half-Maxwellian with a temperature of typically 500 K, by
using the polar form of the Box-Muller transformation for velocity. Neutrals can
disappear when they reach the right boundary of the geometry. Neutrals which hit
the anode and walls are re-emitted according to an half-Maxwellian at a wall
temperature (900 K) based on experimental data. One must consider the probability
for a particle crossing the surface to have a given direction. This probability density
actually follows a cosine law, due to the fact that particles with a large velocity
component along the normal to the surface escape more frequently than others. The
probability densities for axial and azimuthal velocity components are Gaussian
distribution (the polar form of the Box-Muller transformation was used), while the
probability density for the radial component is a Rayleigh distribution. Neutralneutral collisions may be ignored, assuming a neutral free molecular regime because
the mean free path is much longer than thruster dimension.
2.4 Plasma Phase

When neutral particles have filled the simulation region, electrons are introduced
each time step ∆t from the exit plane (the cathode is not included in the simulation
region) with a steady state current control method of electron injection [12]:

592

F. Taccogna et al.

ne =

I

t
c
c
d
− n + ne
i
qw

(4)

where w is the statistical weight of electron super-particles, q is the elementary
c

c

charge, ∆n i and ∆n e are the number of ions and electrons passing the free space
boundary each iteration. Electron initial velocity distribution is taken to be halfMaxwellian with a temperature of typically about 15 eV. They can lose energy and
change momentum by collisions (elastic scattering, excitation and ionization) with
neutrals. These interactions are modelled by MCC technique and scattering cross
sections are gathered from the literature [12]. For each electron we calculate the
probability of an e-N scattering in a time ∆tcoll short with respect to the mean free
flight time:
3

3

k =1

k =1

Ptot = n N σ tot ( v e )v e ∆t e = ∑ n N σ k ( v e )v e ∆t e = ∑ Pk

(5)

where nN is the neutral density, σtot is the total electron-neutral cross section, ve is
the electron velocity and P1, P2 and P3 are the probability for the occurrence of
collisional event 1, 2, and 3, respectively. Ptot is compared with a random number rd
sampled from an uniform distribution in the range [0,1] in order to decide if a
collision event happens (in our case ∆tcoll is chosen so that Ptot<10-2). If Ptot>rd, we
compare another random number to the cross sections for elastic scattering,
excitation, and ionization to determine which type of event occurs. We choose the
collisional event j if
j− 1

j
Pk
Pk
<
r
≤
∑
∑
d
k =1 Ptot
k =1 Ptot

(6)

In all cases, the electron is scattered isotropically. If the collision is inelastic, energy
(8.32 eV for the first excitation and 12.1 eV for the first ionization) is subtracted
from the electrons. In the case of ionization, ions and secondary electrons are
created at the primary electron's location. The energy of primary and secondary
electrons is divided randomly.
When an electron strikes the dielectric wall (Boron Nitride BN), we decide the
number of electrons emitted on the basis of the energy and the angle of impact of the
incident electron implementing the probabilistic model of Furman and Pivi [10]. The
energy spectrum of the emitted electrons is able to reproduce the three different type
of secondary electrons, that is backscattered (high energy region), rediffused
(middle energy region) and true secondary electrons (low energy region). For
simplicity, we assume the same emission-angle distribution (∼cosθ and uniform
azimuthal angle) for all electrons, regardless of the physical mechanism by which
they were generated.
Verboncoeur interpolation method [13] which guarantees charge density
conservation on a radial metrics is used to weight particles to the grid nodes, where

Fully Kinetic Particle-in-Cell Simulation of a Hall Thruster

593

the field equations are solved, and to weight the fields back to the particles. The
electric potential is re-calculated each time-step using finite differences method for
Poisson equation which is solved iteratively using successive over-relaxation (SOR)
with Chebyscev acceleration technique [8]. As regards the boundary conditions, we
keep the electric potential constant at the anode and at the exit plane and we also
assume that the electric field changes its sign at the dielectric surface and its
magnitude remains the same [14]. Then, the boundary condition at the walls can be
written as:
ρ
Ew = −
(7)
2ε 0
where ρ is the surface charge density and ε0 is the free space permittivity constant;
the possible surface conductivity of the dielectric is neglected. The potential at the
wall surfaces is assumed to be zero. Electrons are moved discretizing the equations
of motion by the leapfrog method of Boris [9]. All electrons which hit the anode
boundary and the free space boundary are deleted. At the end of each electron loop,
ions are created at the ionization locations. The initial ion velocity is set equal to the
local neutral background velocity, but ions and neutrals are moved once each 100
electron loop. An ion which impacts the anode and the walls disappears and a
neutral is created with one half of the ions initial kinetic energy, but with a random
velocity direction. The particle is thus partially accommodated in energy, and fully
accommodated in momentum. At the free space boundaries, all particles are deleted
and a count of electron, ion and neutral fluxes is maintained.

3 Results and Discussions
In this section, we present the simulation results (scaled values) at the following
operating conditions: channel length L=2.5 cm, inner radius Rin=3.5 cm, outer radius
 = 3 mg/s , discharge
Rout=5 cm, discharge voltage φd=300 V, mass flow rate m
-5
pressure P=2x10 mbar, discharge current Id=3.2 A, maximum radial magnetic field
Br,max=150 Gauss.
Figure 2(a) shows long time history of electron, ion and neutral total number
macroparticles. We can see that charged particles continue to oscillate (the
simulated discharge is not stable), while the number of neutrals is not strongly
changed due to the fact that one neutral transit time corresponding to the simulation
time is not sufficient to see the low frequency phenomena related to the neutral
scales.
The colour plots of Figs. 2(b)-3 demonstrate the main features of the discharge
and show, respectively, the space variation of the electric potential, plasma density
and electron temperature. As it can see in Fig. 4(b), most of the potential drop
occurs in the exhaust region, where the magnetic field is large. This decrease
compensates the low electron conductivity in this region and ensures current
continuity. It is customary to allocate the acceleration region here. The large axial
electric field resulting from this voltage drop is responsible for accelerating the ions
from the ionization region to the exit plane and the electron from the outlet to the

594

F. Taccogna et al.

anode. From the figure, also the little anode drop (∼20 V) and the lateral wall
sheaths, whose voltage drop decreases from the anode to the outlet, are evident.
However, the computed potential vanishes at the channel exit, while observations
[15] indicate that only one-half to one-third of the potential drop takes place
downstream of the thruster exit. This difference is due imposing the zero potential
boundary condition at the exit plane in the numerical simulation, i.e., the full
potential drop is forced to occur inside the channel.

5

2 10

1.00

35
1.1E2
1.8E2
2.1E2

0.95

1,5 105

2.5E2
macroparticles

0.90

r (mm)

1 105
electrons
ions

3.2E2

70

0.85

0.80

5 104

neutrals

0.75

2.8E2
1.4E2

0
0

-7

2 10

-7

4 10

-7

6 10

-7

8 10

-6

1 10

-6

0.70

-6

1,2 10 1,4 10

0.0

0.1

0.2

t (s)

0.3

0.4

0.5

z (mm)

Fig. 2. (a) Long time history of electron, ion and neutral macroparticles. (b) Profile of the
plasma potential

The space variation of the plasma density (Fig. 3.a) shows that the plasma
reaches its maximum in the center of the channel and in the ionization region, while
it decreases in the acceleration region due to the increasing ion velocity. The
electron temperature (Fig. 3.b), calculated in each cell from the usual formula
reaches a maximum (18 eV) close to the exhaust and decreases to about 6.7 eV in
the low electric field region. The peak can be attributed to Ohmic heating due to the
maximum azimuthal drift velocity in this region. Furthermore, the drop near the
walls is a consequence of the emission of cold secondary electrons from the
insulators. These numerical results are consistent with our global understanding of
the stationary plasma thruster and reproduce quite well the experimental
observations [15].
1.00

1.00

0.95

0.95

3.5E19

1.4E19
2.8E19
4.2E19

5.2
0.90

r (mm)

r (mm)

0.90

0.85

4.9E19
5.6E19
0.80

0.40
5.2
10
10
7.6

0.85

7.6

0.80

2.1E19

10

7E18
0.75

0.75

0.70

0.70

7.6

10

0.40

2.8
0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

z (mm)

0.4

0.5

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

z (mm)

Fig. 3. Profile of the electron (a) density and temperature (b)

0.4

0.5

Fully Kinetic Particle-in-Cell Simulation of a Hall Thruster

595

5 Conclusions
A 2D(r,z)-3V numerical model was developed to assess the effect of dielectric walls
in stationary plasma thrusters. The model consists of a fully kinetic PIC-MCC for
the plasma phase. The emission of secondary electron by electron impact from the
walls is taken into account by a probabilistic model simulating the different kind of
electrons created at the wall, backscattered, rediffused and true secondaries. In order
to make the simulation possible and model the electron dynamics, a new kind of
scaling-law is applied for the PIC model.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.

Zhurin, V. V., Kaufman, H. R., Robinson, R. S.: Plasma Sources Sci. Technol. 8
(1999) R1.
Komurasaki, K., Arakawa, Y.: J. Prop. Pow. 11(6) (1995) 1317.
Fife, J. M.: PhD thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technologies (1998).
Hagelaar, G. J. M., Bareilles, J., Garrigues, L., Bœuf, J.-P.: J. Appl. Phys. 91(9)
(2002) 5592.
Koo, J. W., Boyd, I. D.: AIAA paper 2003-10113 (2003).
Garrigues L. : PhD thesis, Université Paul Sabatier, Toulouse (1998).
Levchenko I., Keidar M.: IEPC-2003-162 (2003).
Eastwood, J. W., Hockney, R. W.: Computer Simulation using particles, McGrawHill, New York (1981).
Birdsall, C. K., Langdon, A. B.: Plasma Physics via Computer Simulation, Mc-GrawHill, New York (1985).
Furman, M. A., Pivi, M. T. F.: Phys. Rev. Special Topics – Accel. and Beams 5(12)
(2002) 124404.
Khayms, V.: PhD thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (2000).
Szabo, J. J. Jr.: PhD thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (2002).
Verboncoeur, J. P. : J. Comp. Phys. 174 (2001) 421.
Morozov, A. I., Savel’ev, V. V.: Plasma Phys. Rep. 28(12) (2002) 1017.
Bishaev, A. M., and Kim, V. P.: Sov. Phys. Tech. Phis. 23 (1978) 1055.

