Standard of Molecular Dynamics Modeling and
Simulation of Relaxation in Dense Media
Alexey Y. Kuksin, Igor V. Morozov, Genri E. Norman, and
Vladimir V. Stegailov
Institute for High Energy Densities, Russian Academy of Sciences
IHED-IVTAN, Izhorskaya 13/19, Moscow 125412, Russia
bogous@orc.ru

Abstract. Approaches to simulation and modeling of relaxation in
dense media are developed which would be universal for some classes
of relaxation processes. Three examples of relaxation in strongly dissimilar multi-scale systems are considered: equilibration of electrons and ions
in a nonisothermal nonideal plasma, lifetime and nucleation of crystals
at superheating, void formation in a crystal under negative pressures.

1

Introduction

Molecular dynamics (MD) method could be a powerful tool for studying nonequilibrium states and relaxation phenomena in dense many-particle systems. In this
connection we would mention studies of melting front velocity [1], damping oscillation regime in one-component nonideal plasmas [2], relaxation to equilibrium
in two-component two-temperature nonideal plasmas [3,4], recombination relaxation in ultracold plasmas [5], spontaneous decay of a superheated crystal [6],
relaxation of SH radical in solid krypton [7], equilibration and sampling of a
biomolecule [8], protein folding [9], relaxation in shock wave front [10].
Modeling and simulation of relaxation is a relatively new sector of computer
science where the standard of approaches, models and numerics has not been
established. This paper contribute to the development of this standard. In section 2 approaches are considered which are speciﬁc for the problem studied.
They are diﬀerent from those used in modeling and simulation of equilibrium
dense media. Some examples of our results are presented in section 3 which validate the approaches developed. The examples chosen correspond to multi-scale
systems: two timescales in plasma due to the electron-ion mass ratio, short and
long relaxation stages in plasma due to dynamics and stochastic regimes; the
lifetime and the decay duration in metastable crystals which are diﬀerent by
several orders of magnitude.

2

Standard

Any conventional MD simulation starts from more or less arbitrary initial conditions. Then diﬀerent approaches are applied to equilibrate the system. Only
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3039, pp. 596–603, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

Standard of Molecular Dynamics Modeling and Simulation

597

subsequent equilibrium run is used to obtain the useful information. The objective of the simulation of relaxation is of the opposite sense, i.e. to get the
information from the non-equilibrium part of the MD run, from that part which
is discarded and is not used in equilibrium MD simulations. It is evident, that
the requirements to the simulation and modeling of the relaxation should diﬀer
from those for the equilibrium ones.
Initial state. The choice of the initial state cannot be an arbitrary one. The
initial state should correspond to the physical problem we would like to study.
The physical system is modeled with respect to the boundary conditions, the
character of non-equilibrium and the minimum particle number which is required
to reproduce in simulation the main features of the relaxation process studied.
Ensemble of initial states. One initial state is not suﬃcient as a rule to achieve
the satisfactory accuracy. So an ensemble of initial states is needed to obtain a
number of MD runs and perform the averaging of the results. Each state in
the ensemble should diﬀer from each other signiﬁcantly but all of them are to
be equivalent with respect to the non-equilibrium problem studied. The last
requirement needs some art and can be checked by the following criteria. The
increase
of the number I of initial states increases the accuracy of averaging as
√
I and does not shift the mean value.
Ensemble-dependence. Non-equilibrium states can be diﬀerent for the same
media. Diﬀerent ensembles of initial state correspond to those cases in the simulation. The problem is if there are some features of the relaxation processes
which are ensemble-independent.
Dynamic and stochastic relaxation. The inherent feature of MD dynamical
system is the Lyapunov instability. Due to this instability there appears a dynamic memory time tm which limits the time interval when the Caushy problem
is valid for MD numerical integration. For times greater than tm MD trajectory
“forgets” its initial conditions and ceases to correlate with the hypothetical Newtonian trajectory with the same initial conditions [11,12]. We expect that the
duration of ensemble-dependent part of the relaxation correlates with tm .
Number of particles. Correlation lengths do not remain constant during the
relaxation. The account of these lengths is of a great importance when the cooperative phenomena are considered, e.g. nucleation or plasma waves. The MD
box size should be greater than the maximum correlation length which might
appear during the relaxation process.
Instantaneous diagnostics. New procedures are to be used to ﬁnd characteristics of relaxation at a given moment of time, e.g. parameters which qualitatively
show the overall degree of deviation from the Maxwellian velocity distribution
and from the Gaussian distribution of crystal particles in space. The distribution form shows the details of the deviations. The diagnostics can be applied
separately to diﬀerent regions in space for non-homogeneous cases.
Time-averaged diagnostics. Averaging over a relatively long period is also
needed to obtain e.g. the values of dynamic structure factor. The procedures are
suggested [4,13] which imply freezing of the instantaneous non-equilibrium state
for the period of measurement. The idea is to introduce the energy exchange

598

A.Y. Kuksin et al.

with an external bath keeping constant the non-equilibrium excitation. It is
necessary to check that this procedure does not transform the non-equilibrium
state during the period of measurement. Then the external source is switched
oﬀ and the relaxation continues as if there were no period of freezing.
Numerics. Numerical integration with a variable time step is applied if the
relaxation includes dramatic increase of velocities of some particles [5]. Pair
distribution function is a sensitive tool to detect particles which could approach
potentially forbidden small distances due to insuﬃciently small time step.
Parallel computations. As well known, MD code is hard to parallelise because
of many network communications required for the force calculation procedure.
An alternative parallelising algorithm is possible in case of simulation of the relaxation. Since the averaging over initial states is required the relaxation from
diﬀerent initial states can be calculated in parallel. The network load is very
low in this case. Therefore this algorithm should be used to calculate the relaxation whereas the standard one to obtain an ensemble of initial states (e.g. in
subsection 3.1).
Analytics. Relaxation process can be too long to be simulated by MD in
particular for multi-scale systems. Models are used in this case. The results
obtained are rescaled with the help of analytic expressions which should be
found.

3
3.1

Validation of Standard
Relaxation in Two-Component Nonideal Plasmas

We consider a fully-ionized two-component plasma of N electrons and N ions
with masses m and M , respectively. The ions are singly ionized. The formation of
the bound states should be prohibited in classical MD simulations of the systems
of free charges by the appropriate choice of the interaction pseudopotential. We
use the so called “corrected Kelbg” pseudopotential [14]. As low bound states
are excluded the pseudopotential does not depend on the chemical element. The
number of ions in present simulations is N = 64–800. The choice of N and
another details of simulations are discussed elsewhere [4,11].
The initial nonequilibrium state is characterized by diﬀerent temperatures of
electrons Te and ions Ti . We used the initial conditions where the velocities of
electrons or/and ions are equal to zero. There are also two variants of the initial
spacial conﬁguration of the cold ions. The ﬁrst variant is a crystal structure with
cubic lattice which corresponds to the state after ionization in solids. The second
one is a quasi-random conﬁguration obtained from the equilibrium isothermal
electron-ion plasma with the same number density.
The results of MD runs are averaged over an ensemble of I = 50 − 200
initial
√ states. Provided the result is N -independent, the relative error is given by
1/ N I. The error bars in ﬁgures below correspond to the conﬁdence coeﬃcient
0.68. The bars are not indicated if they are smaller than the size of the points.
The values of Te and Ti are obtained as the average kinetic energy of the particles

Standard of Molecular Dynamics Modeling and Simulation
8
7
6

tB/te

(a)

tnB/te

(b)

t1B/te

5

(c)

1

100

4

599

3
2

tB ~ (M/m)a

10
1

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

G

0.5

0.1

1

10

1

G

M/m
10

100

0.1
1000 0.1

1

Fig. 1. The dependencies of the duration of the nonexponential relaxation stage τnB
on the nonideality parameter (a) and of the exponential relaxation time on the mass
ratio (b) and on the nonideality parameter (c) for diﬀerent initial conditions: Ti (0) =
0 (crystal) — circles, Ti (0) = 0 (quasirandom) — squares, Te (0) = 0 — rhombus,
Te (0) = Ti (0) = 0 — triangles.
(a) The dynamical memory time tm — crosses, the dashed line is drawn through the
crosses to guide the eye.
(a) Straight lines correspond to the power ﬁts τB ∼ (M/m)α . Γ = 1.28.
(c) Solid curve corresponds to the Landau formula (1), dashed curve — the same with
the ﬁxed Coulomb logarithm Le = 3.2

T (t) =

1
2N I

N,I
j,k

2
mvjk
(t). The relaxation is charactarized by the the decrease of

the diﬀerence of electron and ion temperatures ∆T = |Te − Ti | which following
the Boltzmann equation has the exponential asymptote ∆T ∼ exp{−t/τB }.
Nonexponential relaxation. The distinguishing feature of a nonideal plasma is
a nonexponential stage of the relaxation which precedes the exponential one. The
duration of this stage τnB does not depend on the mass ratio for M/m ≥ 100. It
increases with the increase of the nonideality parameter (Fig. 1a), τe = 2π/ωp ,
ωp = 4πne e2 /m is the period of electron plasma oscillations, ne is the electron
number density. The plasma nonideality is characterized by the parameter Γ =
e2 (4πne /3)1/3 /(kB T ), where T is the ﬁnal temperature at the end of relaxation.
As seen τnB depends on the initial conditions but stays comparable with tm .
The kinetic equation used to calculate relaxation in ideal plasma implies
that the collisions are statistically independent and the particle motion is stochastic. However the time of the stochastization or dynamical memory time tm
in nonideal plasma becomes greater than the time between collisions [11].
Dependence of the exponential relaxation time τB on plasma properties. The
dependence of τB on the mass ratio is shown in Fig. 1b. As seen, diﬀerent initial
conditions result in close values of τB (M ). The lower relaxation time for the
crystal-like initial conﬁguration of ions is caused by an additional heating of
ions due to reconﬁguration and correlation build up in the ionic subsystem. The
mass dependence can be ﬁtted by the power ﬁt τB /τe ∼ (M/m)α in all cases in
Fig. 1b. The dependence of α on the nonideality parameter can be ﬁtted by the
parabolic curve α(Γ ) = 1 − 0.15 Γ + 0.035 Γ 2 , 0 < Γ < 4.

600

A.Y. Kuksin et al.

The dependencies of τB on the ion mass and Γ can be separated as
τB (Γ, M ) = τB1 (Γ )(M/m)α(Γ ) . The dependence of τB1 (Γ ) is presented in Fig. 1c.
As seen the initial conditions do not aﬀect τB1 signiﬁcantly. In the weak nonideality region the MD results are in a good agreement with the Landau theory [15]
τB∗ =

1
3 (mTi + M Te )
√
,
4
e ne Le
16
2πmM

(1)

where Le is the Landau logarithm. The deviation becomes crucial with the increase of Γ .
One can estimate the relaxation times in real experimental conditions using
given Γ -dependence and mass-dependence. The error of determination of coefﬁcients αB and αnB is about ξα = 5%. The corresponding error of the extrapolation of relaxation times e.g. for aluminium is ξτ = log(Mr /M )ξα = 40%,
where Mr /M is the ratio between real and model ion masses. The obtained precision is enough for comparison by an order of magnitude. The results of such
extrapolation correlate with the experimental data [16].
3.2

Decay of Metastable Crystals

A system under study is a fcc crystal of particles interacting via Lennard-Jones
potential U (r) = 4 ((σ/r)−12 −(σ/r)−6 ). Periodic boundary conditions are used.
Decay of crystal subjected to constant rate heating. Superheated solid is a
state of matter that can be realized only under particular conditions of high rate
energy impacts and/or very low concentration of defects and impurities which
could lead to heterogeneous melting (e.g. see [17,18,19]).
Particle structure is prepared for the simulation to be an ideal lattice initially.
The system is equilibrated for 104 time steps at the temperature T = 0.04
(extremely low temperature is chosen to preserve the crystal structure completely
defect-free). The particular value of temperature is not crucial for the following.
The ensemble of initial states can be chosen from the equilibrium run.
Then the model crystal is subject to the isochoric heating at the constant
rate T˙ = 6 × 10−4 ( 3 /mσ 2 )1/2 . The heating is performed by velocity rescaling
in the spirit of the Berendsen thermostat technique. As heating is being done
the temperature of the model crystal becomes higher than the melting temperature at the given density Tm = 1.25 . When temperature reaches T = 1.52
crystal structure decays into liquid. Phase transformation leads to the step in
the dependence of the averaged potential energy U on time t (see Fig. 2).
Structural changes are well manifested in terms of the Lindemann parameter
δL = ∆r2 /rnn , where ∆r2 is the displacement of particles from the ideal fcc
lattice sites averaged over all the particles in the simulation box at the current
time step, rnn is the nearest neighbour distance in the lattice. According to the
Lindemann criterion of melting δL = 0.12−0.13 for simple crystals at the melting
temperature Tm . This relation holds for the case considered (Fig. 2). However
at T = Tm there is no phase transition but the crystal becomes superheated and
δL achieves the values of 0.4 before decay.

Standard of Molecular Dynamics Modeling and Simulation
(t1) (t2)

T
1.5
1

Tm

(t3)

dL

ar

6

4

0.5

1

U
26.5

(c)

(b)

2

26
25.5
1500

(t3)

(t1) (t2)

10

(a)

601

2000

2500

t

3000

0.1
1500

2000

2500

t

0
3000

Fig. 2. The time-dependencies: (a) the temperature T , (b) the average potential energy
of particles U , (c) the Lindemann parameter δL (solid) and the non-Gaussian parameter
αr (dashed). The time is given in units (mσ 2 / )1/2 . N = 6912; ρσ 3 = 1

Another parameter αr = 0.6( ∆r4 / ∆r2 2 )−1 shows the degree of deviation
of the distribution of displacements from the Gaussian shape (αr = 0 for the
Gaussian distribution). There is a peak on the αr dependence on time which
corresponds to the emergence of collective modes in the motion of particles.
This phenomenon can be considered as a precursor of decay under heating. It
does not produce any eﬀect on the potential energy time dependence, however
Lindemann parameter turns to the faster increase during this peak. After the
decay motion of particles becomes irregular, so that αr vanishes and δL gets the
diﬀusion-like dependence on time. The loss of long range order is well seen in
the evolution of the radial distribution function (in an animation).
The system evolution can be divided into three parts: 1) heating and superheating up to the appearance of the melting precursor; 2) the emergence of
collective modes in the particle motion; 3) the decay to the liquid state. The process of the relaxation in the case of the superheated crystal decay is connected
with homogeneous nucleation that allows to apply the formalism of the classical
nucleation theory (see [20,6] for details).
Void formation in crystals under negative pressure. A condensed matter can
exist at negative pressures. Such states were observed experimentally, e.g. in [21].
Negative pressure states are the metastable ones, so they can exist only
a limited period of time. Then the states decay spontaneously and voids are
formed. The temperature T and number density ρ are chosen for the simulation
to obtain a state near spinodal in order its lifetime can be reached during the
MD run. Initial velocities are taken from Maxwellian distribution.
The results are presented for certain examples in Fig. 3-4. Time dependencies
for T , pressure P , parameters δL , αr and αv are given in the Lennard-Jones
units. Parameter αv shows the degree of the deviation from the Maxwellian
distribution. The metastable state with approximately constant T and P exists

602

A.Y. Kuksin et al.

0.4
0.3

T

(t2)

(t1)

(t3)

2

dL

(t2)

(t1)

(t3)

-1

0.2

1.6
102

0.2
0.1
0

104

ar av

0.1

1.2

P

1

0.8

0

-2

0.4

-3

-5
250

10-2

t

-4
260

270

280

290

t
300

250

260

270

280

290

300

Fig. 3. The time-dependencies of T , P (points), δL (bold solid), αr (dashed) and αv
(solid) along the last interval of the MD run. N = 4000

during ∼ 275(mσ 2 / )1/2 which is much greater than tm , then spontaneous decay
starts. It takes only few time units to form new more or less stationary state.
The non-zero value of αv points to the fact that the Maxwellian distribution is
broken during the short decay period. The time t1 in Fig. 3 corresponds to the
long-order structure, while the structures at t2 and t3 reveal only short order.
The microscopic picture of the spontaneous decay is presented in Fig. 4. The
decay starts with the local disordering of the crystal structure. The voids appear
in the melted regions only at the next stage of the decay. Another characteristic
feature of the decay is observed: the structure formed is strongly non-uniform. At
least three phase states can be distinguished: crystal clusters, disordered regions
and voids. In fact the ﬁnal state of our MD run is not an equilibrium one, since
the pressure remains to be negative till the end of our simulation (Fig. 3).

Fig. 4. The microscopic picture of the slab inside the MD cell for two moments of time
corresponding to the decay process. The grey scale shows the degree of disordering. N
= 32000, ρ = 0.8 σ −3

Standard of Molecular Dynamics Modeling and Simulation

4

603

Conclusions

At attempt is done to formulate standard requirements to MD modeling and
simulation of relaxation processes in dense media, which would be more or less
universal and independent of the physical systems studied. The main features
are considered which are new with respect to the simulations of equilibrium systems: 1) physically proven choice of the ensemble of initial non-equilibrium states for averaging the relaxation MD runs; 2) consideration of both ﬁrst ensembledependent stage of relaxation and subsequent stage which might be ensembleindependent and remind of Boltzmann exponential relaxation; 3) calculation
of dynamical memory time tm and comparison of tm with the duration of the
ﬁrst stage of relaxation; 4) instantaneous and time-averaged measurement procedures which are speciﬁc for studying the relaxation processes; 5) analytical
extrapolation approaches to estimate relaxation times which are too long to be
simulated by MD, especially for multi-scale systems. Three examples of relaxation are considered: equilibration of electrons and ions in nonideal plasmas,
decay of metastable crystals under superheating or stretching.
Acknowledgments. This research is partially supported by grants NWORFBS 047.016.007, RFBS 03-11-90272v, “Integracia” U0022 and project “Parallel computations on multiprocessor computer systems” of RAS. AK, IM and
VS acknowledge the support from “Dynastia” foundation and the International
center of fundamental physics in Moscow. The computations were performed on
the cluster granted by DAAD.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.

Wang, J., Li, J., Yip, S., Wolf, D., Phillpot, S. Physica A 240 (1997) 396
Zwicknagel, G. Contrib. Plasma Phys. 39 (1999) 155
Hansen, J.P., McDonald, I.R. Phys. Lett. 97A (1983) 42
Morozov, I.V., Norman, G.E., et al. J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 36 (2003) 8723
Kuzmin, S.G., O’Neil, T.M. Phys. Plasmas 9 (2002) 3743
Norman, G.E., Stegailov, V.V., Valuev, A.A. Contrib. Plasma Phys. 43 (2003) 384
Firsov, D.A., Grigorenko, B.L., et al. Chem. Phys. Lett 338 (2001) 317
Stella, L., Melchionna, S. J. Chem. Phys., 109 (1998) 10115
Snow, C.D., Nguyen, H., Pande, V.S., Gruebele, M. Nature 420 (2002) 102
Tanguy, D., Mareschal, M., Lomdahl, P.S., et al. Phys. Rev. B 68 (2003) 144111
Morozov, I.V., Norman, G.E., Valuev, A.A. Phys. Rev. E 63 (2001) 036405
Norman, G.E., Stegailov, V.V. Computer Physics Comm. 147 (2002) 678
Gibbon, P., Pfalzner., S. Phys. Rev. E 57 (1998) 4698
Ebeling, W., Norman, G.E., et al. Contrib. Plasma Phys. 39 (1999) 61
Lifshitz, E.M., Pitaevskii, L.P. Physical kinetics (Oxford: Pergamon) (1981)
Riley, D., Woolsey, N.C., McSherry, D., et al. Phys. Rev. Lett. 84 (2000) 1704
Bonnes, D.A., Brown, J.M. Phys. Rev. Lett. 71 (1993) 2931
Jin, Z.H., Gumbsch, P., Lu, K., Ma, E. Phys. Rev. Lett. 87 (2001) 055703
Sheng-Nian Luo, Ahrens, T.J., C
¸ a˘
gin T., et al. Phys. Rev. B. 68 (2003) 134206
Norman, G.E., Stegailov, V.V. Doklady Physics 47 (2002) 667
Kanel, G., Razorenov, S., Baumung, K., Singer, J. J. Appl. Phys. 90 (2001) 136

