Need for a Prescriptive Taxonomy of Interaction for
Mathematical Cognitive Tools
Kamran Sedig
Cognitive Engineering Laboratory
The University of Western Ontario
London, Ontario, Canada
sedig@uwo.ca

Abstract. Cognitive tools encode and display information in different representational forms. Through interaction with these representations, people can
make sense of and reason about the information. Mathematical cognitive tools
can allow people to interact with mathematical ideas in ways and levels not
hitherto possible. These tools can support reasoning and enhance the experience
and understanding of mathematics. However, currently, there exists no prescriptive taxonomy of interaction with mathematical representations to guide
designers of mathematical cognitive tools. Given different representations, cognitive activities, and users, such a taxonomy can help designers know what interaction techniques to use, when, and to what end. This paper discusses the
need for the development of a comprehensive prescriptive taxonomy of interaction with visual representations used in mathematical cognitive tools. Additionally, the paper outlines some inter-related lines of action that can be followed to
develop such a taxonomy.

1 Introduction and Background
Mathematical knowledge is an important asset in knowledge societies, where people
work with their minds more than their bodies. Yet, due to the highly formal nature of
mathematics, its abstract representational forms, and the means by which it is communicated, many people do not find mathematical ideas readily understandable, nor
engaging. New computational technologies can help. Just as technological tools enhanced the physical reach and capabilities of people during the Industrial Revolution
and helped increase their productivity, computational technologies can enhance our
minds [1]. As Norman [2] states, “Without external aids, memory, thought, and reasoning are all constrained… The real powers come from devising external aids that
enhance cognitive abilities… It is [external aids] that make us smart.”
One category of external aids are cognitive tools or technologies, tools that people
can use to support, guide, and enhance their mental activities and increase their productivity.1 These tools allow for the encoding and displaying of information in differ
1

Many terms have been used to signify cognitive tools: mindtools, instruments and technologies of the mind, information artifacts, mental gadgets, and so on [1, 2, 3]. This paper uses
the term cognitive tools to refer to interactive computational devices, specifically interactive
software applications.

M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3038, pp. 1030–1037, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

Need for a Prescriptive Taxonomy of Interaction for Mathematical Cognitive Tools

1031

ent representational forms. Through interaction with these representations, different
cognitive tasks can be performed, such as visualizing, analyzing, interpreting, meaning making, decision making, planning, problem solving, and learning [4]. These
tools can be our partners in cognition, carrying some of the cognitive load and helping
us perform mental activities of different degrees of complexity, some even impossible
to accomplish without their aid [3, 4]. Examples of these tools include interactive
visualization software to customize and observe climatological patterns, mind mapping tools to help externalize and organize thoughts and concepts, and online interactive mathematical applets to investigate how velocity and position graphs relate.
Mathematical cognitive tools (MCTs) are a subset of cognitive tools, intended to
support interaction with mathematical objects, concepts, and problems. By using
appropriate, innovative human-computer interaction techniques, MCTs can allow
people to explore mathematical ideas in ways and levels not hitherto possible, supporting reasoning and enhancing understanding of mathematics, and, hence, contributing to the creation of a more mathematically literate and productive society.
Two of the main components of MCTs are: representations and interaction.
1.1 Representations
External representations play a central role in the communication and understanding
of mathematics. There are two broad types of representations: algebraic and visual.
The former are made of formal, language-like symbols; the latter are made of imagebased, graphical notations [5]. This paper is concerned with the latter: visual mathematical representations (VMRs). Research shows that human beings process and
manage visual representations more efficiently than algebraic representations [5, 6].
Some examples of VMRs from different areas of mathematics include 3D and 4D
geometric structures, statistical graphs, and tiling patterns. These graphical notations
encode structural, relational, functional, and semantic properties of concepts, objects,
patterns, problems, and ideas in mathematics. In other words, they embody the
meaning that the images try to communicate. Effectiveness and appropriateness of an
image depend to a large degree on how its users interpret it and make sense of its
inherent meaning as well as how well it fits and supports the cognitive task [2, 5, 7].
Making sense of and reasoning with VMRs often depends on a process in which the
user browses a visual image, poses ‘what if’ questions to it, and rearranges it until its
meaning is gradually understood and then uses the representation for performing
cognitive tasks [8]. This cognitive process of decoding and application can be mediated and supported through appropriate user interaction with VMRs.
1.2 Interaction
Interaction with a VMR has two aspects: a user acting upon the VMR through the
intermediary of a human-computer interface, and the VMR communicating back
through some form of reaction or response [9]. This addition of reaction, responsiveness, or interactivity to static visual representations enhances their communicative
power and leads to some general benefits [7, 10, 11, 12]: supporting emergent understanding of encoded ideas; making mental manipulation of ideas easier; providing
opportunities for experimentation, discovery, and hypothetical reasoning; supporting

1032

K. Sedig

‘doing’ rather than ‘watching’; facilitating acquisition of qualitative insight into the
nature of representations; supporting cognitive tracing and computational offloading
by allowing users to think in partnership with a representation; and, serving as a coordinator between the internal mental models of users and an external representation.
Although, as discussed above, we know that interaction has general benefits,
designing interaction to effectively mediate, support and enhance cognitive activities
is challenging [9, 10]. It has been shown that using the wrong type of interaction can
actually constrain human thinking and have negative, undesirable consequences [10,
13]. Just as users use different reasoning and thinking styles to approach different
cognitive tasks [4], so they need different interaction techniques to mediate and
support their reasoning with different VMRs [14]. Interaction technique and style play
a crucial role in how users’ minds are engaged with VMRs – that is, how they reason,
what cognitive strategies they employ, how deeply they process the visual information, what knowledge they construct, and how well they learn [9, 13, 14, 15]. The
types of VMRs used and the various given cognitive tasks for an MCT have a significant bearing on the types of interaction that are effective and should be used. Just as
the effectiveness of a representation depends on whether it is appropriate for a given
task, a given interaction technique should also fit the task, as it extends and mediates
the representation in the process of cognitive activities.

1.3 Design Taxonomies
Being a young research area, much of the early research in cognitive technologies has
been devoted to the building of domain-specific tools. This process of tool building
has been needed for experimentation and has led to dozens of innovative interaction
design techniques across different types of cognitive tools. When designing interaction for VMR-based MCTs, however, there exists no conceptual framework to
guide the design. Often times, designers use techniques developed to support productivity tasks, which may not fit learning tasks. These tasks have different requirements
and goals. In productivity tools, the goal is to reduce the user’s cognitive effort;
whereas in learning tasks, the goal is to engage users in mindful cognition [9, 15]. To
address this type of problem in human-computer interaction, task and interface
taxonomies are often developed [10]. A taxonomy abstracts, articulates, decomposes,
and organizes a problem space, which, consequently, can facilitate analysis and
understanding, provide opportunities for comparing different techniques, guide
designers, and foster innovation and advancement [10]. There are two broad types of
taxonomies: descriptive and prescriptive. Descriptive taxonomies characterize the
decomposed elements of the problem space and provide examples of them. Prescriptive taxonomies, on the other hand, prescribe design rules and guidelines for the
elements of the problem space and can provide best-practice examples of existing
systems and techniques. Currently, there exist a number of taxonomies dealing with
visualization and visual representations, interface styles, interactive externalizations,
and interface tasks [3, 10, 12, 16, 17]. Though some of the terms and ideas used in
these taxonomies are relevant to the objectives of designing MCTs, none of them
prescriptively address how these tools should be designed to fit and support the
cognitive tasks of the users.

Need for a Prescriptive Taxonomy of Interaction for Mathematical Cognitive Tools

1033

Recently, Sedig and Sumner [9] have developed a descriptive taxonomy of
interaction with VMRs. This taxonomy organizes and characterizes the different
interaction techniques that can be used in MCTs. The techniques are organized and
characterized according to their common features. The taxonomy consists of three
primary interactions (conversing, manipulating, and navigating) and twelve secondary
interactions (animating, annotating, chunking, constructing, cutting, filtering, fragmenting, probing, rearranging, repicturing, scoping, and searching). The taxonomy
also identifies ten dimensions of interactivity (affordance, computational offloading,
constraints, control, distance, feedback, flow, focus, participation, and scaffolding).
Though a step in the right direction, this taxonomy is not prescriptive.
This paper proposes that there is a need for systematic research to develop a comprehensive prescriptive taxonomy of interaction for VMR-based MCTs. As online
MCTs are now being delivered on the WWW as applets [17], and with the pervasiveness of the Internet, MCTs can virtually affect millions of people in terms of their
application of mathematics in knowledge development and production. Since interaction is one of the central, distinguishing features of e-learning, a prescriptive taxonomy of interaction can guide the design and evaluation of not only MCTs, but also
other types of cognitive tools. Mathematics has a rich repertoire of representational
forms. As such, many interface concepts and interaction techniques developed for
MCTs can transfer to cognitive tools embedding other knowledge domains.

2 A Proposed Strategy
This section proposes a strategy for conducting research to develop a prescriptive
taxonomy of interaction and outlines some of the methodological actions needed to
achieve the objectives of this type of research.
2.1 Problem Statement
Before discussing how a prescriptive taxonomy can be developed and what lines of
action are needed for this research, this paper presents a problem statement to demonstrate some questions that may arise in the course of designing interaction for MCTs.
The problem statement can be as follows:
Given a VMR, a cognitive task or activity, and a prototypical user, what
interaction technique(s) should be designed to render an MCT effective—
that is, what technique(s) would support and enhance the user who is
engaged with the cognitive task involving the VMR? How should
interactivity (e.g., feedback or scaffolding) be operationalized to enhance the
technique(s)?
Three scenarios are presented to situate the problem in real cases:
1) Chemists need to have good cognitive maps of the structures of different 3D
lattices in order to reason about crystals. Given a tetrahedral lattice structure, the
goal is to help chemistry students form an accurate cognitive map of the structure
so they can mentally visualize it and reason about similar structures. What technique should be used to support the task of forming a cognitive map of a 3D

1034

K. Sedig

structure? Should the user ‘walk’ on the structure or ‘fly’ through and/or around
it? Should the user annotate the structure by marking it with visual breadcrumbs?
2) Four-dimensional polytopes can have many and varied geometric components,
making their visualized image complex, cluttered, and noisy. Given a rendered
visualization of a 4D polytope, a mathematician must make sense of the image by
identifying, locating, and distinguishing its faces and cells, which are some typical cognitive tasks performed on visualizations [16]. What interaction techniques
support these cognitive tasks? Should the user interact with the VMR directly or
not? Should the visualization be fragmentable?
3) Polyhedra solids can be transformed from one shape to another by truncating
and/or augmenting their vertices and edges. Given a set of polyhedra solids, the
goal is to explore and investigate how these transformations take place. Should
these transformation processes be animated or should the user manipulate these
VMRs to morph them? Should the interaction be continuous or discrete? Should
the user interact with these VMRs directly or indirectly? What are the tradeoffs?
Without a framework within which to analyze and answer these questions, it is difficult to know how to design an MCT, the design remains arbitrary, and it is not easy to
predict the impact the design may have on its users.
2.2 Towards a Prescriptive Taxonomy of Interaction
To address the types of questions posed in the above problem statement, we need to
develop a prescriptive taxonomy of interaction with VMRs. Such a taxonomy should
contain methods, rules, and guidelines for the design of MCTs in order to facilitate
and support performance of given cognitive tasks by some prototypical users. These
rules and guidelines should help with the analysis, prediction, and prescription of
aspects of design as they pertain to mind-MCT interaction. The taxonomy should be
tied to appropriate cognitive frameworks and provide a vocabulary that the designers
can use when investigating and evaluating the implications of their design choices.
In order to develop such a taxonomy, several inter-related lines of action are proposed below. Although these lines of action are presented sequentially, aspects of
them can overlap and take place simultaneously.
1) Creation of test-bed MCTs. In order for the taxonomy to cover a wide range of
VMRs and cognitive tasks, it is necessary to have a varied and rich set of MCTs
which instantiate different techniques and can be used as test beds. Our research
group has already created several MCTs dealing with areas such as 2D transformation geometry, 2D and 3D lattices, 2D polygonal patterns, 3D solids, 4D
complex polytope visualizations, state-transition diagrams, and visual mathematical programming. We are in the process of building more tools. However,
what is needed is for research groups to collaborate to build more tools and share
them with each other. We need a large repertoire of these test-bed MCTs.
2) Designing and conducting of usability studies. Interaction techniques used in the
MCTs should be tested with quantitative and qualitative methods to assess their
effectiveness and observe their patterns of use. Conducting such studies will
allow for comparison of different techniques. As more studies are conducted,
features of these techniques can be validated, abstracted, and generalized [1, 10].
This process will also help create profiles for prototypical users. There have been

Need for a Prescriptive Taxonomy of Interaction for Mathematical Cognitive Tools

3)

4)

5)

6)

1035

a few such studies, and the results clearly suggest that interaction techniques
affect learning for better or worse. There needs to be a more concerted and systematic way of conducting these studies. A descriptive taxonomy of interaction,
such as the one developed by Sedig and Sumner [9], can provide a framework
within which these studies are conducted.
Development of rules and guidelines. Results obtained from (2) should be analyzed to distill rules and guidelines for interaction with VMRs. Some important
issues to consider will be: type of rules (e.g., if-then vs. procedural decision
trees); representation of rules; and, level of granularity and degree of abstractness
of rules. There are a few studies whose findings can be regarded as general,
embryonic rules [13, 14, 15]. For instance, from one of the studies [13], the following rule can be distilled: if a VMR represents a concept (e.g., rotation), and
the concept is made of sub-concepts encoded as different visual elements in the
VMR (e.g., angle of rotation and center of rotation), and the cognitive task is to
understand the concept, then gradual removal of the VMR’s visual elements helps
users take notice of its sub-concepts. Such rules and guidelines, however, should
be further developed and validated to generalize to a wide set of user types and
VMRs. This can be done by incorporating and evaluating a rule in the context of
other MCTs so that the rule is refined and its validity increases.
Organization of rules into taxonomy. A three dimensional structure, such as a
cube, can be used to help organize and onto which map the rules developed in (3).
The axes of the cube would represent the three-tuple (user, cognitive task, VMR),
and its cells would point to a set of rules prescribing which interaction techniques
to use and would provide examples of best-practice MCTs that incorporate these
techniques. For instance, an instantiation of the rule in (3) is embodied in an MCT
that a designer can study as a practical application of that rule [5].
Decomposition of taxonomy axes. There exist classification schemes for visual
representations [18], cognitive tasks [19, 20], and user types [19]. For instance, a
structural classification of six types of visual representations along 10 characteristics has been developed [18], though not explicitly about VMRs. This and
other classification schemes can be used as starting points for decomposing the
taxonomy axes. Through evaluation and analysis, these schemes can gradually
evolve and be refined. The strategy to be used for decomposing the axes in (4)
can play an important role in the usability and effectiveness of the proposed
taxonomy [10]. Issues to consider include type and level of granularity of decomposition. For instance, should decomposition be in terms of higher-level,
conceptual tasks such as ‘formation of cognitive maps’, or should it be in terms of
lower-level tasks such as ‘locating an element’, or should it be hierarchical,
encompassing several levels? Furthermore, should the VMR axis be decomposed
using broad categories or specific categories? For instance, the axis may have
specific elements such as 3D lattices and 3D solids, or a broader category such as
3D structures.
Validation of rules and taxonomy. Validation of the rules and the taxonomy will
be an important line of action. By necessity, the development and validation of a
prescriptive taxonomy is evolutionary. However, there are some general steps that
can increase the validity of such taxonomies [1]: 1) repeated evaluation of rules
using reliable testing instruments, 2) designing and evaluating MCTs with and
without the use of the taxonomy and comparing the results, and 3) having outside
experts review, evaluate, and test the rules and the categories.

1036

K. Sedig

3 Summary
Interaction plays an important role in helping learners (or users) make sense of visual
mathematical representations. Given different visual mathematical representations,
cognitive tasks, and users, designers often need to use different interaction techniques.
Therefore, they need to know what interaction techniques to use, when, and to what
end. Using the wrong type of interaction can constrain human thinking and have
negative, undesirable consequences for learners. Human-computer interaction designers use design taxonomies, particularly prescriptive ones, to facilitate analysis and
understanding of design requirements, to provide opportunities for comparing different techniques, and to guide designers. Currently, there exist no design taxonomies to
guide the design of interactive mathematical cognitive tools containing visual representations. This paper calls for the development of a comprehensive prescriptive taxonomy of interaction for mathematical cognitive tools.
To develop such a taxonomy, the paper proposes several inter-related lines of
action. These lines of action are as follows: creating a large repertoire of mathematical cognitive tools that can be used as test-beds for experimenting with different
design requirements; designing and conducting usability studies to investigate and
compare different interaction techniques to find out how they support understanding
of different mathematical concepts and to what end; developing general rules and
guidelines for interaction design as a result of usability studies performed with a large
set of test-bed tools; taxonomizing design rules and pointing designers to tools that
embody best-practice examples of these prescriptive rules; and, as the rules and the
taxonomy evolve, constantly evaluating them to increase their validity.
The scope of such a research agenda calls for collaboration among researchers in
this area. As mathematics has a very rich repertoire of representational forms, many
of the guidelines and interaction techniques developed in this area can transfer to
other cognitive tools embedding other knowledge domains.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Jonassen, DH (ed.): Handbook of research for educational communications and technology. Simon & Schuster Macmillan (1996)
Norman, DA: Things that make us smart: Defining human attributes in the age of the
machine. Addison Wesley (1993)
Beynon, B, Nehaniv, CL, Dautenhahn, K (eds.): Cognitive technology: Instruments of
mind. Proceedings of International Cognitive Technology Conference. Springer-Verlag
(2001)
Lajoie, S (ed.): Computers as cognitive tools. Lawrence Erlbaum Assoc. (2000)
Skemp, RR: The psychology of learning mathematics. Penguin Books (1986)
Card, SK, Mackinlay, JD, Shneiderman, B. (eds.): Readings in information visualization:
Using vision to think. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers (1999)
Strothotte, T: Computational visualization: Graphics, abstraction, and interactivity.
Springer-Verlag (1998)
Stylianou, D: On the interaction of visualization and analysis: The negotiation of a visual
representation in expert problem solving. Journal of Mathematical Behavior 21: (2002)
303-317

Need for a Prescriptive Taxonomy of Interaction for Mathematical Cognitive Tools
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.

1037

Sedig, K, Sumner, M: Characterizing interaction with visual mathematical representations.
International Journal of Computers for Mathematical Learning. Kluwer Academic
Publishers (Under review)
Carroll, JM (ed.): Designing interaction: Psychology at the human-computer interface.
Cambridge University Press (1991)
Hanson, A, Munzner, T, Francis, G: Interactive methods for visualizable geometry. IEEE
Computer, (1994) 27(7): 73-83
Tweedie, LA: Characterizing interactive externalizations. In Proceedings of CHI '97,
(1997) 375-382
Sedig, K, Klawe, M, Westrom, M: Role of interface manipulation style and scaffolding on
cognition and concept learning in learnware. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human
Interaction, (2001) 1(8), 34-59
Sedig, K, Rowhani, S, Morey, J, Liang, H: Application of information visualization
techniques to the design of a mathematical mindtool: A usability study. Palgrave
Macmillan Ltd. Information Visualization, (2003) 2(3): 142-160
Golightly, D: Harnessing the interface for domain learning. In Proceedings of CHI '96,
(1996) 37-38
Keller PR, Keller MM: Visual cues: Practical data visualization. IEEE Computer Society
(1993)
Gadanidis, G, Sedig, K, Liang, H: Designing online mathematical investigations. Journal
of Computers in Mathematics and Science Teaching. Association for the Advancement of
Computing in Education (In press)
Lohse, GL, Biolsi, K, Walker, N, Rueter, HH: A classification of visual representations.
Communications of the ACM, (1994) 37(12): 36-49
Jonassen, DH, Tessmer, M & Hannum, WH: Task analysis methods for instructional
design. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates (1999)
Schraagen, MC, Chipman, SF & Shalin, VL (eds.): Cognitive task analysis. Lawrence
Erlbaum Assoc (2000)

