Computational Aspects of Data Assimilation
for Aerosol Dynamics
A. Sandu1 , W. Liao1 , G.R. Carmichael2 , D. Henze3 , J.H. Seinfeld3 , T. Chai2 ,
and D. Daescu4
1

Department of Computer Science Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University, Blacksburg, VA 24060. {sandu,liao}@cs.vt.edu
2
Center for Global and Regional Environmental Research, University of Iowa, Iowa
City, IA 52240. {gcarmich,tchai}@cgrer.uiowa.edu
3
Department of Chemical Engineering, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena,
CA 91152. {daven,seinfeld}@caltech.edu
4
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Portland State University, Portland,
OR 97207. daescu@pdx.edu

Abstract. In this paper we discuss the algorithmic tools needed for data
assimilation for aerosol dynamics. Continuous and discrete adjoints of the
aerosol dynamic equation are considered, as well as sensitivity coeﬃcients
with respect to the coagulation kernel, the growth rate, and emission
and deposition coeﬃcients. Numerical experiments performed in the twin
experiment framework for a single component model problem show that
initial distributions and the dynamic parameters can be recovered from
time series of observations of particle size distributions.

1

Introduction

As our fundamental understanding of atmospheric particles and their transformations advances, novel computational tools are needed to integrate observational data and models together to provide the best, physically consistent estimate of the evolving state of the atmosphere. Such an analysis state better
deﬁnes the spatial and temporal ﬁelds of key gas and particle phase chemical
components in relation to their sources and sinks. Assimilation of chemical information is only now beginning in air quality/chemistry arenas [1,7,8,10,11],
but oﬀers the same motivations as those realized in the ﬁeld of meteorology. Assimilation techniques can be utilized to produce three-dimensional, time varying
optimal representations of the particle distributions in the atmosphere, that are
consistent with the observed physical and chemical states.
Forward modeling of aerosols predicts the evolution of particle size distributions given the known parameters of the evolution (coagulation kernel, growth
rate, emission rates and deposition velocities) as well as the initial size distribution. Numerous numerical methods have been proposed in the literature for
The authors thank the National Science Foundation for supporting this work through
the award NSF ITR AP&IM 0205198. The work of A. Sandu was also partially
supported by the award NSF CAREER ACI 0093139.
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3038, pp. 709–716, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

710

A. Sandu et al.

solving particle dynamics, e.g. [4,6] etc. The inverse modeling problem consists
of recovering the initial or emitted size distribution and the parameters of evolution given information about the time evolution of the system, for example
periodic measurements of the number, surface, mass, or volume density.
In this paper we discuss the computational tools needed for inverse modeling
of aerosol dynamics, including continuous and discrete adjoints of the dynamic
equation are derived, as well as sensitivity coeﬃcients with respect to the coagulation kernel, the growth rate, and emission and deposition coeﬃcients. A
detailed derivation is given in [12,13]. At this time we do not treat chemical
and thermodynamic transformations, and consider only space independent (box)
models. The methods discussed here are a ﬁrst step toward the goal of performing data assimilation for comprehensive three-dimensional particle, chemistry,
and transport models.

2

Forward Modeling of Particle Dynamics

2.1

Continuous Formulation

We consider the particle dynamic equation in number density formulation, with
particle volume the independent variable. The size distribution function (number
density) of a family of particles will be denoted by n(v, t); the number of particles
per unit volume of air with the volume between v and v + dv is n(v, t)dv. This
describes completely a population of single-component particles. The aerosol
population undergoes physical and chemical transformations (Seinfeld and Pandis, [14]) which change the number density in time:
∂
∂n(v, t)
=−
[I(v, t) n(v, t)]
∂t
∂v
1 v
+
βv−v ,v n(v , t) n(v − v , t) dv
2 0
∞

−n(v, t)
n(v, t = to ) = no (v) ,

(1)

βv,v n(v , t)dv + S(v, t) − L(v, t) n(v, t) ,

0

n(v = 0, t) = 0 .

In this equation I(v, t) = dv/dt is the rate of particle growth (e.g., due to condensation, evaporation, deposition and sublimation), βv,v is the coagulation kernel,
S(v, t) is any source of particles of volume v (e.g., nucleation and emissions)
and L(v, t) is the ﬁrst-order rate of removal of particles of volume v (e.g., by
deposition).
2.2

Discrete Formulation

Here we use a discrete formulation of (1) based on the piecewise polynomial
approach as described by Sandu [9] and (for simplicity of the presentation) on the
Forward Euler time stepping scheme. The ﬁnite dimensional approximation of

Computational Aspects of Data Assimilation for Aerosol Dynamics

711

the number distribution n(v, t) is taken in the space spanned by the set {φi }1≤i≤s
of piecewise polynomial basis functions. The equation (1) is discretized as
nk+1 = nk + ∆t G(tk )nk + F (nk ) + A−1 B n k , n k + S (t k ) − L(t k )n k . (2)
The growth terms are discretized using a Discontinuous Galerkin approach where
F (nk ) is the Godunov ﬂux diﬀerence and
∞

Gi,j (t) =

0

I (v , t)φi (v )φ,j (v ) dv .

The coagulation terms are discretized using a collocation approach [9] with
collocation points {cj }1≤i≤s , such that
Ai,j = φj (ci ) , {B(n, n)}i = nT B i n ,
1 cj
j
Bi,k
βv,cj −v φi (cj )φk (cj − v) dv −
=
2 0

3

∞

βv,cj −v φi (v)φk (cj − v) dv .

0

The Inverse Modeling Problem

Variational methods (e.g., 4D-Var) provide an optimal control approach to the
data assimilation problem. The optimal analysis state is obtained through a
minimization process to provide the best ﬁt to the background estimate and to
all observational data available in the assimilation window.
To be speciﬁc assume that observations y 1 . . . y N are available at the discrete times t1 . . . tN . The observed quantities are functions of the model state,
y(t) = h n(v, t) . Observations can be particle number or mass densities, optical
properties etc. The initial value of the solution no and/or the problem parameters p (i.e. I, β, S and L) are not known accurately, and data assimilation uses
the information from observations to better estimate them.
A cost functional that measures the mismatch between model predictions
and observations is
1
1
T
T
J (no , p) = (no − noB ) R0−1 (no − noB ) + (p − pB ) B −1 (p − pB ) (3)
2
2
+

1
2

N
k=1

y k − h nk

T

Rk−1 y k − h nk

.

The ﬁrst two terms penalize the departure of the initial solution and parameters
from the apriori estimates (noB and pB ), and are called background terms. The
matrices R0 and B are error covariances associated with background terms and
Rk are error covariances associated with observations. The parameters no and
p, which initially have values noB and pB , are adjusted such that the value of the
functional is minimized. The minimization procedure needs the value of J and
of its gradients with respect to the model parameters ∇no J and ∇p J . For given
values of (no , p) the functional value is obtained by a forward integration of the
forward model, while its derivatives can be eﬃciently obtained through adjoint
modeling as explained below.

712

3.1

A. Sandu et al.

Continuous Adjoints of the Dynamic Equation

In the continuous formulation one derives the adjoint of the exact dynamic equation (1), to obtain the derivative of the exact solution. The adjoint equation of
the tangent linear model of (1) for the cost functional (3) is deﬁned on each time
interval (tk−1 , tk ) between consecutive observations for k = N, N − 1, . . . , 1 by
∂λ(v, t)
∂λ(v, t)
I(v, t) −
=−
∂t
∂v
∞

+λ(v, t)

∞
v

λ(v , t)βv,v −v n(v − v, t) dv

k

λ v, t −

∞

βv,v n(v , t) dv +
0

λ(v , t)n(v , t)βv ,v dv
0

+λ(v, t)L(v, t) ,
tk−1 + ≤ t ≤ tk −
= λ v, tk + + Rk−1 y k − h nk ,

λ v, tN + = 0 ,
λ(v = 0, t) = 0 ,

(4)

( → 0)

λ(v, to ) = λ(v, to + ) + R0−1 (no − noB ) ,
λ(v = ∞, t) = 0 .

A complete derivation of the adjoint equations and the sensitivity relations is
given in [12]. The gradients of the cost functional (3) with respect to forward
model parameters are [12]:
∇no J = λ(v, to ) ,
T

∇I(v,t) J =

∂λ(v, t)
n(v, t) ,
∂v

1
−λ(v, t) + λ(v + v , , t) n(v, t)n(v , , t) dt
2
t0
∇S(v,t) J = λ(v, t) , ∇L(v,t) J = −λ(v, t)n(v, t) .
∇βv,v, J =

All the above derivatives of the cost functional can be obtained by one integration
of the forward model (1) during which the state n(v, t) is saved, followed by a
single backwards in time integration of the adjoint model (4). When solving the
data assimilation problem each optimization iteration requires one evaluation of
the cost functional and one evaluation of its gradient, i.e. one forward and one
backward integration.

3.2

Discrete Adjoints of the Dynamic Equation

In the discrete approach the numerical discretization (2) of the the particle
dynamic equation is considered to be the forward model. This is a pragmatic
view, as only the numerical model is in fact available for analysis. The adjoint
of the discrete model (2) is formulated and solved. The approach amounts to
computing the derivatives of the numerical solution, rather than approximating
the derivatives of the exact solution. Clearly, the formulation of the discrete
adjoint equation depends not only on the dynamic equation, but also on the
numerical method used to solve it.

Computational Aspects of Data Assimilation for Aerosol Dynamics

713

Direct Approach. Taking the adjoint of the discrete equation (2) leads to a
method to propagate the adjoint variables backwards in time [12]. The adjoint
equation of (2) reads
λk−1 = λk +∆t GT (tk−1 )+FnT (nk−1 )+ (B +B T )×nk−1 A−T −L(tk−1 ) ·λk (6)
+Rk−1 y k − h nk
λ

N

=0,

o

o

λ ←− λ +

,
R0−1

k = N, N − 1 . . . 1
(no − noB ) .

(7)

The adjoint variable at to gives the gradient of the cost functional (3) with respect
to the initial distribution, λ0 = ∇no J. Note that this is the derivative of the numerical solution as used in the deﬁnition of (3), as opposed to the continuous adjoint formulation (5a), where λ0 deﬁnes the derivative of the continuous solution.
In practice the continuous forward model (1) is solved numerically, and so is
the continuous adjoint equation (4). Therefore the continuous adjoint approach
is in practice a hybrid approach. The operations of numerical discretization and
adjoint do not commute in general, and consequently the numerical solution of
(4) is diﬀerent from the discrete adjoint (6). For data assimilation problems one
needs the derivative of the numerical solution, i.e. the discrete adjoints are in
principle preferred. For sensitivity studies using the adjoint method one wants
to approximate the sensitivities of the continuous model, and the continuous
adjoint seems more appropriate.
Automatic Diﬀerentiation. Given a program that implements the forward model,
automatic diﬀerentiation builds a new, augmented program, that computes the
analytical derivatives (accurate up to machine precision) along with the original program [3]. Diﬀerent modes of automatic diﬀerentiation can produce the
tangent linear model or the discrete adjoint model. In this paper we use the
automatic diﬀerentiation tool TAMC [15] of Giering and Kaminski to generate
the discrete adjoint derivatives.
Automatic diﬀerentiation only requires (an implementation of) the original forward model. It constructs gradients for complicated forward models, and
even models which contain legacy code. Next, automatic diﬀerentiation produces
derivatives of the numerical solution which are appropriate for optimization purposes.

4

Numerical Results

The Test Problem. For the numerical experiments we consider the test problem
from [2]. With Nt the total initial number of particles, Vm the mean initial
volume, the constant coagulation kernel βv,w = β0 , and the linear growth rate
I(v) = σo v, the problem admits the analytical solution
nA (v, t) =

4 Nt
· exp
Vm (Nt βo t + 2)2

−2v exp (σo t)
− σo t
Vm (Nt βo t + 2)

.

714

A. Sandu et al.

We solve the dynamic equation for βo = 2.166 × 10−6 cm3 h−1 particles−1 , σo =
0.02 h−1 , Nt = 104 particles, Vm = 0.03 µm3 . The values are chosen such that
coagulation and growth have eﬀects of comparable magnitude. The size range is
truncated to Vmin = 10−3 µm3 , Vmax = 1µm3 . A piecewise linear discretization
with 8 log-uniform bins is employed. The time interval is [t0 = 0, T = 48] hours,
and the time step ∆t = 6 minutes. The actual implementation is done in the
(equivalent) volume concentration density formulation.
The experiments are carried out in the twin experiment framework. A run
with the reference values for initial conditions, coagulation kernel, and growth
rate is used to generate hourly pseudo-observations {y1 . . . yM } of the number
density, or a function of the number density.
The model is re-run with perturbed values of the initial conditions, coagulation kernel, and growth rate. The cost functional (3) is deﬁned without background terms, and with observation covariance matrices equal to identity Rk = I.
The lack of background terms is justiﬁed by our apriori knowledge of the fact
that the initial guesses are wrong, while the observations are correct. The minimization algorithm is LBFGS [5], and the adjoint gradients are generated by
TAMC. During optimization we prescribe the following bounds for the growth
and coagulation parameters: 0.0 ≤ σ ≤ 0.5 and 0.0 ≤ β ≤ 10−4 .
As a measure of accuracy in the optimization process we consider the RMS
diﬀerence between the reference and the optimized solutions:
RM S =

1
ndof+2

ndof
j=1

o
no
ref [j]−nopt [j]
no
ref [j]

2

+

σref −σopt
σref

2

+

βref −βopt
βref

2

In the data assimilation experiments the initial guesses are obtained by signiﬁcant perturbations of the reference values, with βp = 5 βo and σp = 25 σo .
Sensitivity Analysis. Adjoint calculations are a useful tool for sensitivity analysis. A widely used measure of the relative change in the functional due to relative
changes in the input parameters is given by the logarithmic sensitivities
s = ∂ log J tF

/ ∂ log V (to ) .

Figure 1 shows the logarithmic sensitivity of the mean volume densities in bins
4 and 8 at the end of the 48 hours simulation interval with respect to the initial
mean volume densities (left) and slopes (right). For both cases relative changes
in the bin slopes have a considerably smaller inﬂuence on the ﬁnal result than
relative changes in the mean densities.
Data Assimilation. We ﬁrst consider a complete set of hourly observations, i.e.
all parameters of the solution (mean concentrations and slopes in each bin) are
observed once every simulation hour. The test problem consists of the evolution
under both coagulation and growth.
In Figure 2 the results for recovering simultaneously the initial distribution,
β and σ are shown. This experiment is challenging for the inversion procedure
since perturbations now aﬀect not only the initial distribution, but the dynamic

Computational Aspects of Data Assimilation for Aerosol Dynamics
0.1

∂ log Si (tF) / ∂ log V(t0)

Bin 4
Bin 8

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

i

∂ log V (tF) / ∂ log V(t0)

0.6

0.1
0

715

Bin 4
Bin 8

0

−0.1

−0.1
1

2

3

4
5
Bin Number

6

7

8

1

2

3

4
5
Bin Number

6

7

8

Fig. 1. The logarithmic sensitivities of the mean volume densities in bins 4 and 8
w.r.t. the initial distribution bin averages (left) and bin slopes (right).
0

6000

0

10
Reference
Perturbed
Optimized

10

β and σ Values

RMS
Cost Fun

−2

10

Volume Density

Normalized Value

5000
4000
3000
2000

1

20
40
60
80
No. of Iterations

100

0
−3
10

σ Optimized
σ Reference
β Optimized
β Reference

−4

10

−6

1000
−4

10

−2

10

10
−2

−1

0

10
10
10
Particle Volume [ µm3 ]

1

20
40
60
80
No. of Iterations

100

Fig. 2. Results for recovering V o , β and σ for coagulation and growth from a complete
set of hourly observations.

equation itself (through β and σ). The left Figure 2 panel shows the decrease
of the cost function and RMS error with the number of iterations. The central
panel shows the exact, reference, perturbed, and optimized distributions at the
initial time. The optimized distribution is visually identical to the reference one.
The right panel shows the reference and optimized β and σ, which are recovered
accurately. Recovering only the initial distribution or only the parameters σ,
β is easier and in both cases the minimization procedure converges in a small
number of iterations.
Additional data assimilation experiments were carried out and the following
conclusions were drawn: (1) The recovery procedure works even if observations
are provided in only some of the bins. However less frequent observations in all
bins are to be preferred to frequent but partial observations; (2) Observations of
total surface, number, or volume density lead to a good recovery of densities only
in the large size bins; (3) For the growth equation the optimization converges
faster with the continuous adjoints, as compared to discrete adjoints; (4) The
optimization performs similarly with discrete adjoints obtained by the direct and
the automatic implementation.

5

Conclusions and Future Work

In this paper we have discussed the algorithmic tools needed for inverse aerosol
modeling. Continuous and discrete adjoints of the integro-diﬀerential particle
dynamic equation have been derived, together with formulas for sensitivity coefﬁcients with respect to the coagulation kernel, the growth rate, and emission and

716

A. Sandu et al.

deposition coeﬃcients. Numerical tests were carried out using a single component
particle dynamics model problem. From hourly measurements of the particle size
one can recover the initial distribution as well as the parameters of the model.
The overall conclusion is that variational data assimilation is a feasible approach for particle dynamics. Discrete adjoints can be obtained easily through
automatic diﬀerentiation, while continuous adjoints are a useful alternative.
A testing of the computational tools developed in this paper for a realistic
growth problem of three-species aerosols is presented in [13]. Future work will
extend the inverse modeling of aerosols to include chemical and thermodynamic
processes. The techniques developed will be used ultimately to perform data
assimilation in full three-dimensional models.

References
1. H. Elbern, H. Schmidt and A. Ebel. Variational data assimilation for tropospheric
chemistry modeling. Journal of Geophysical Research 102(D13):15967–15985, 1997.
2. F.M. Gelbard and J.H. Seinfeld. Coagulation and growth of a multicomponent
aerosol. Journal Of Colloid and Interface Science 63(3):472-479, 1996.
3. Andreas Griewank. Evaluating Derivatives: Principles and Techniques of Algorithmic Diﬀerentiation Frontiers in Applied Mathematics, SIAM, 2000.
4. M.Z. Jacobson. Fundamentals of atmospheric modeling. Cambridge University
Press, 1999.
5. J. Nocedal. Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, NorthWestern University, http://www.ece.northwestern.edu/ nocedal/lbfgs.html
6. A. Sandu and C. T. Borden. A Framework for the Numerical Treatment of Aerosol
Dynamics. Applied Numerical Mathematics 45:475–497, 2003.
7. A. Sandu, D. Daescu, and G.R. Carmichael. Direct and Adjoint Sensitivity Analysis
of Chemical Kinetic Systems with KPP: I – Theory and Software Tools. Atmospheric Environment 37:5083-5096, 2003.
8. D. Daescu, A. Sandu, and G.R. Carmichael. “Direct and Adjoint Sensitivity Analysis of Chemical Kinetic Systems with KPP: II – Validation and Numerical Experiments”, Atmospheric Environment 37:5097-5114, 2003.
9. A. Sandu. Piecewise Polynomial Solutions of Aerosol Dynamics. Submitted, 2004.
10. A. Sandu, D.N. Daescu, T. Chai, G.R. Carmichael, J.H. Seinfeld, P.G. Hess, and
T.L. Anderson. Computational Aspects of 4D-Var Chemical Data Assimilation
in Atmospheric Models. F. Darema (ed.), Dynamic Data Driven Applications
Systems, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2004.
11. A. Sandu, D.N. Daescu, G.R. Carmichael, and T. Chai. Adjoint Sensitivity Analysis of Regional Air Quality Models. Submitted, 2003.
12. A. Sandu, W. Liao, G.R. Carmichael, D. Henze, and J.H. Seinfeld. Inverse Modeling
of Aerosol Dynamics Using Adjoints – Theoretical and Numerical Considerations.
Submitted, 2004.
13. D. Henze, J.H. Seinfeld, A. Sandu, W. Liao, and G.R. Carmichael. Inverse Modeling
of Aerosol Dynamics. Submitted, 2004.
14. J.H. Seinfeld and S.N. Pandis. Atmospheric chemistry and physics. From air pollution to climate change. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1997.
15. Ralf Giering. Tangent Linear and Adjoint Model Compiler,
http://www.autodiﬀ.com/tamc.

