Expression of a Set of Points’ Structure within a Specific
Geometrical Model
Jean-Luc Mari and Jean Sequeira
LSIS Laboratory - LXAO Department
M´editerran´ee University
ESIL, Campus de Luminy, case 925, 13288 Marseille cedex 9, France,
jlmari@esil.univ-mrs.fr,
: http://esil.univ-mrs.fr/˜jlmari/

Abstract. We present a new approach based on a multi-layer model to represent
the structure of an object defined by a cloud of points. This technique focuses on the
ability to take into account both the global characteristics and the local specificities
of a complex object, on topological and morphological levels, as well as on the
geometric level. To do that, the proposed model is composed of three layers. We
call the boundary mesh the external layer, adding a multiresolution feature. We
enhance this representation by including an internal structure: the inner skeleton,
which is topologically equivalent to the input object. In addition to that, a third
layer links the structural entity and the geometrical crust, to induce an intermediary
level of representation. This approach, which overcomes the limitations of skeleton
based models and free-form surfaces, is applied to classical and medical data
through a specific algorithm.

1

Introduction

The two main classes of approaches to represent a shape are skeleton based models and
free-form surfaces, which are manipulated with control points. The first class allows us
to determine the structure of an object, limiting the surface considerations. The second
class permits to control the boundary of the shape precisely, but often neglects the general
vision we expect. Most of the modeling techniques compensate these lacks by adding
features which make the underlying model more complex, but none of them really takes
into account both the global and the local specificities of the shape.
In this paper, we focus on designing a modeling method which integrates the local
geometric characterization of one class, and the ability to represent the topology and the
morphology of the other class.
We use this specific model to reconstruct a set of points. On the opposite of classical
methods, our aim is not only to characterize the boundary of the related object. Even
if this is sufficient to represent the solid, we want a topological and a morphological
descriptor of the object, as well as a coherent link between the various structures. To do
that, we introduce three layers whose roles are to take into account these features.
In Sect. 2, we skim over different models’ formalizations, to extract the key characteristics of our approach. In Sect. 3, we describe the principle of a new modeling
approach. We define the model by developing its three main entities: the inner skeleton,
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3039, pp. 156–163, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

Expression of a Set of Points’ Structure

157

the external layer and the transition layer. Then we detail the reconstruction process
itself in Sect. 4. We finally validate the approach with examples (one of them being from
real medical data) in Sect. 5.

2

Overview

Implicit Surfaces and Skeletons. Most of the skeleton based techniques use the formalism of implicit surfaces. These surfaces, whose skeleton is usually a set of geometrical primitives, have been more and more employed in computer graphics over the
past 15 years. These approaches have several advantages, such as providing a compact
and volume-based representation of the object. Moreover, the skeleton supplies the topological prior assumption and the structural information. However these surfaces are
rather dedicated to represent smooth objects, sharp edges being more difficult to obtain.
Moreover, the characterization of details implies to take into account a large number of
primitives. These arguments point out the fact that it is difficult to get a local control
with such surfaces because of the growing number of primitives to consider.
Surfaces Defined by Control Points. The most common formalism to represent a freeform object consists in using a parametric surface.Among these kinds of surfaces, defined
by control points, there are the classical B´ezier, B-splines and NURBS. The control points
imply an intuitive and precise appreciation of the shape to model. Particularly, it is for
this reason these surfaces are frequently used in CAD/CAM: they permit an intrinsic
local control on the object’s geometry. However, the modeling of objects with complex
topologies (like with branching shapes or holes) keeps on being a traditional problem.
Moreover, this kind of representation is hard to apprehend on a global level. If we wish
to deform an initial model by stretching it, we have to move the right set of points, and
to verify the induced transformations on the shape. Although high level operators exist
to solve this problem (like warping), these manipulations are fussy and hard to calibrate
(taking into account a small set of points or the whole object).
Similar Techniques. Among the approaches that emerge from the problematics to take
into account both global and local characteristics of a 3D object, there are hierarchical
B-splines (H-splines) [1], simplex meshes [2] and enhanced implicit methods (skins
[3]). Multiresolution techniques are frequently used according to the complexity of the
geometrical details and the size of the data. Most of the time, it consists in representing the
object within several levels of detail [4,5,6]. In this frame, the formalism of subdivision
surfaces is more and more used, as it presents a powerful multiresolution feature. It is
nowadays used into a large panel of applications in computer graphics [7,8].
An Interesting Compromise. The approaches with skeletons show that instead of considering the skeleton’s instability, we should take into account that it is not well adapted
to surface phenomena, but rather to shape description. The control points approaches
provide a very good control on differential properties, but hardly any on topology and
morphology. We need a model that integrates in a coherent way the global and local
characteristics of these two approaches.

158

J.-L. Mari and J. Sequeira

3 The Multilayer Model
The model must allow us to control these three concepts in a coherent framework: the
topology (to be able to model complex shapes with no prior assumption), the morphology
(including a shape descriptor) and the geometry (integrating a crust entity for precise
handling). Moreover, according to the size of the data to model, we wish to include the
multiresolution feature. We can define the aims of our modeling approach in two points:
we want both the global structure and the boundary surface; and we want to detach the
surface representation from the global shape’s.
The model is composed of three layers (see Fig. 1-a). The first layer, the internal
one, that we call inner skeleton (layer LI ). It defines the global structure of the shape, on
topological and morphological levels. The external layer (layer LE ) characterizes the
local variations of the shape’s surface, regardless of the skeleton. The transition level
LT represents the articulation between the internal and external layers.
The goal of this split between local and global characterization is that the local
perturbations on the surface do not deteriorate the global shape descriptor which is the
inner skeleton, and that the transformations on this inner structure are propagated on the
external layer.
Inner Skeleton. The inner skeleton LI is a homotopic kernel enhanced by morphological features. We define the inner skeleton LI on a structural level as a 3-complex, i.e. a
set of tetrahedrons, triangles, segments and points. The edges define the connectedness
relations between vertices. When three neighbors are connected, we obtain a triangle,
and when four neighbors are connected, we obtain a tetrahedron (Fig. 1-b). A cycle of
edges defines a one-holed surface.

Fig. 1. (a) Scheme of the 3-layer model. (b) Example of 3D structure for the inner skeleton. (c)
The three layers and the links between the primitives

External Layer. The external layer LE is a simple triangulation. The vocation of this layer
is to define the geometry of the object, given as a set of unstructured points. The multithe maximal level of
resolution feature is supported by this layer. Considering L100%
E
r%
detail for this layer, the various resolution levels are defined by LE , with rmin ≤ r ≤ 100,
rmin being the percentage below which the layer becomes non-manifold.
Transition Layer. The transition layer LT represents an intermediate geometrical level
and a structural entity which makes the link between the global definition and the local
characterization of an object. The inner and external representation levels are both as
important and we want to characterize the articulation between them.

Expression of a Set of Points’ Structure

159

In the geometrical frame, we define the transition layer as an intermediary triangulation between the two other entities. It induces a structural link allowing us to go from
one layer to another (i.e. an element of the external layer can refer to an element of the
r
%
inner layer and vice versa). Furthermore, we set the equality LT = LEmin between the
transition layer and the minimal resolution level of the external layer. The fact that LT is
the most simplified level of LE provides a natural evolution from L100%
to the transition
E
layer LT by mesh reduction in the reconstruction process.
Transition Graph. In addition to the previous geometrical definition, the transition layer
includes a particular data structure: the underlying graph GT linking the two skeletons
allows us to set coherent relations within the object (see Fig. 1-c). The edges of this
graph are defined by a shortest distance criterion [9].

4

Reconstruction

In this section, we develop the reconstruction process related to the proposed model in
order to express how the three layers are obtained, starting from a 3D set of points.
The main idea is to get an expression of the structure of an unorganized cloud of
points, given as input data. We do not simply want to characterize the boundary of the
shape with the external layer. Even if it is sufficient to represent the related solid, we
attempt to exhibit a topological and morphological descriptor of the object. This point
is fundamental, because efficient techniques of reconstruction are numerous, but they
principally focus on the surface reconstruction without taking the structure into account.
4.1

Specific Process

The process is composed of two stages, themselves being most of the time well known
techniques in computer graphics. However, concerning the first stage, we developed an
original method to obtain the inner skeleton by doing an homotopic peeling applied to
an octree.
The following algorithm consists of two independent steps: the extraction of the inner
skeleton and the characterization of the crust (from the external layer to the transition
layer). We illustrate the process by considering the Stanford bunny1 data in the initial
form of a cloud of points (cf. Fig. 2-a) . It is a simple object, of genus zero, but more
complex examples are given in the next section.
1. Inner skeleton extraction
a- Embedding the cloud of points into a digital volume
b- Coding the digital volume into an octree
c- Peeling the octree (topological conservation)
Interactive selection of the ending points (morphological characterization)
d- Computing the complex related to the reduced octree
=⇒ Inner skeleton
2. Computing the external layer and the transition layer
a- Polygonizing the cloud of points
=⇒ External layer
b- Mesh simplification
=⇒ Transition layer
c- Computing the transition graph

1

available at the URL: http://www-graphics.stanford.edu/data/

160

J.-L. Mari and J. Sequeira

4.2

Inner Skeleton Extraction

The inner skeleton extraction goes through a conversion of the data into the discrete
space ZZ3 . We wish to characterize the topology and the global shape, by keeping only
a small set of relevant voxels (or groups of voxels).
Step 1: Embedding the Cloud of Points into a Digital Volume. Let C be the initial cloud
of points. We adopt the same principle found in [10] to embed C into a digital volume
V (Fig. 2-b).
Step 2: Octree Conversion. The digital volume is then converted into an octree [11],
to keep in mind the notion of voxels grouping. A single voxel does not represent an
important morphological detail, but on the contrary, a block of voxels defines a large
area that has to be included into the structure of the inner skeleton (Fig. 2-c).
Step 3: Interactive Thinning of the Octree. We adopt a classical thinning process, whose
asset is to supply a homeomorphic entity related to the object. There is no algorithm
dealing with octrees in such a way, so we use a simple algorithm initially designed for
digital volumes, and we adapt it to work on octrees (by modifying the neighborhood
relationship and the local thinning criterion). The thinning (or the peeling) problematics
first appeared in ZZ2 [12]. The principle is to delete the pixels that do not affect to
topology of the object. Such points are said simple: when erased, no holes are created
and no components are disconnected. [13] extended this concept to ZZ3 . To extend this
criterion to an octree, we defined in [9] the ω-neighborhood as the equivalent to the 26neighborhood in ZZ3 , and the ω-neighborhood as the equivalent to the 6-neighborhood
(for the complementary object, i.e. the background).
We expose the algorithm used to peel an octree, which is derived from the initial
thinning process into a digital volume. In our case, the size of the octree elements
intervenes.
PeelingGridSize := 1
Repeat
FindTargets()
Repeat
finish := TRUE
For each target o of Ω
If Simple(o)
Then
Delete(o)
finish := FALSE
Until finish
PeelingGridSize := PeelingGridSize * 2
Until PeelingGridSize > 2max order

The routine FindTargets() computes the list of the octree elements of the object
whose size equals the current peeling grid size (i.e. elements that can be erased). The
Figs. 2-d,e illustrate two steps of the bunny peeling with this algorithm. We enhance this
algorithm by adding the interactive feature that allows the user to guide the process. It
consists in setting representative elements, which contribute to the morphology as ending
points. When the current element is such a point, it cannot be removed. The Figs. 2-f,g
show the result when four ending points are selected by the user: the ears, the nose and
the tail. The resulting octree is really homeomorphic to the initial object, and it supplies
a good morphological characterization.

Expression of a Set of Points’ Structure

161

Step 4: Computing the Complex Related to the Reduced Octree. The last step to get the
inner skeleton LI consists in computing the reduced octree into a complex. This is done
thanks to the ω-neighborhood. Edges, triangles and tetrahedrons are created according
to the adjacency of the octree elements (Fig. 2-h).

Fig. 2. (a) Initial cloud of points. (b) Digital volume. (c) Octree of the bunny. (d,e) Two peeling
steps. (f,g) Setting four ending points. (h) Inner skeleton. (i,j,k,l) Some LoDs of the bunny. (m)
The transition layer of the bunny. (n,o,p) Distribution of the points between the three layers

4.3

From the External Layer to the Transition Layer

Step 1: Polygonizing the Cloud of Points. The finest geometrical characterization of the
external layer L100%
is a classical triangulation of the data points (see Fig. 2-i). We used
E
the Cocone module described in [14].
Step 2: Multiresolution and Transition Layer. The Figs. 2-j,k,l show some reduced
meshes of the bunny, until L1%
E which is the last step before the triangulation becomes
non-manifold (cf. Fig. 2-m). We go from the external to the transition layer, and we set
LT = L1%
E to define the geometrical characterization of the transition layer. All the mesh
simplifications in this paper have been done using QSlim module [5].
Step 3: Computing the Transition Graph. To make the link between structural and
geometrical levels of the model, the last step of the whole process is the computation
of the transition graph GT . The Figs. 2-n,o,p show the distribution of the points of LT

162

J.-L. Mari and J. Sequeira

according to the points of LI (n), the points of LE according to the points of LT (o),
and the points of LE according to the points of LI (p).

5 Validation and Examples
In addition to the bunny’s example, we go further into the validation of our approach by
taking three other examples. The horse and the dragon (a one holed object) are classical
clouds of points from the Stanford database, and the last example comes from medical
imaging (a foetus’s heart). Such an organ presents a complex structure. The table below
illustrates the number of vertices according to the layers for each example. The Fig. 3
shows the inner skeleton, the transition layer and the external layer of the three objects.
Number of vertices
Bunny
Horse
Dragon
Heart

LI
24
97
63
1310

LT
76
244
108
1596

L100%
E
7030
48485
44315
35260

Fig. 3. Expression of the structure of four objects within the reconstruction process

6

Future Work

At the current level of the approach’s elaboration, we envisage several points which we
feel are necessary to be dealt with as future work.
The good morphological properties of the inner skeleton could be used in a shapes’
recognition module. The aim being to classify an object on topological and morphological criterions, the process could lie on a catalog of typical objects arranged according
to shape indications. This analysis perspective could be applied to computer vision,
robotics, etc.
The major work to do in the future is the animation of a reconstructed object. This
can only be done if the object is well positioned (as an evidence, it cannot work on the
bunny, as legs are not defined by the inner skeleton). For example, to animate a character

Expression of a Set of Points’ Structure

163

expressed by the 3-layer model in a standing position (limbs being well defined), specific
rules have to be determined to move external and transition layers after handling the
skeleton.

7

Conclusion

We have presented a new shape formalism, which aims to give an explicit expression
of an unstructured cloud of points, through three entities. The external layer defines the
crust of the object in a classical way. In addition to that, the transition layer and, above
all, the inner skeleton, allow us to get the structure of the object. This is done not only
by characterizing the global shape, but also by a specifying a relevant topological entity.
Moreover, we have validated our approach on typical data and on complex medical data.
We believe the underlying model can be applied to several applicative domains, taking
part of the inner skeleton’s assets.

References
1. D. R. Forsey, R. H. Bartels: Hierarchical B-spline refinement. Computer Graphics (Proceedings of SIGGRAPH’88) (1988) 22:4 205–212
2. H. Delingette: Simplex Meshes: a general representation for 3D shape reconstruction. INRIA
Reseach Report 2214 (1994)
3. L. Markosian, J. M. Cohen, T. Crulli, J. Hugues: Skin: a constructive approach to modeling
free-form shapes. Computer Graphics Proceedings (SIGGRAPH’99) (1999) 393–400
4. W.J. Schroeder, J.A. Zarge, W.E. Lorensen: Decimation of triangle meshes. ACM Computer
Graphics (SIGGRAPH ’92 Proceedings) 26 (1992) 65–70
5. M. Garland, P.S. Heckbert: Surface Simplification Using Quadric Error Metrics: Computer
Graphics (Annual Conference Series) 31 (1997) 209–216
6. M. Eck, T. DeRose, T. Duchamp, H. Hoppe, M. Lounsbery, W. Stuetzle: Multiresolution
analysis of arbitrary meshes. SIGGRAPH’95 Proceedings (1995) 173–181
7. M. Lounsbery, T. DeRose, J. Warren: Multiresolution analysis for surfaces of arbitrary topological type. ACM Transactions on Graphics 16:1 (1997) 34–73
8. A. Lee, W. Sweldens, P. Schr}oder, L. Cowsar, D. Dobkin: MAPS: Multiresolution Adaptive
Parameterization of Surfaces. Computer Graphics Proceedings (SIGGRAPH’98) (1998) 95–
104
9. J.-L. Mari: Mod´elisation de formes complexes int´egrant leurs caract´eristiques globales et leurs
sp´ecificit´es locales. PhD Thesis, Universit´e de la M´edit´erran´ee - Aix-Marseille II (France)
(2002). http://www.esil.univ-mrs.fr/˜jlmari/
10. E. Bittar, N. Tsingos, M.-P. Gascuel: Automatic reconstruction of unstructured 3D data:
Combining a medial axis and implicit surfaces. Computer Graphics Forum (Eurographics’95
Proc.) 14 (1995) 457–468
11. D. Meagher: Geometric modeling using octree encoding. IEEE Computer graphics and Image
Processing 19:2 (1982) 129–147
12. A. Rosenfeld: A characterization of parallel thinning algorithms. Information Control 29
(1975) 286–291
13. G. Bertrand: Simple points, topological numbers and geodesic neighborhoods in cubic grids.
Patterns Recognition Letters 15 (1994) 1003–1011
14. N. Amenta, S. Choi, T.K. Dey, N. Leekha A simple algorithm for homeomorphic surface
reconstruction. 16th ACM Symposium on Computational Geometry (2000) 213–222

