Managing Information Models for E-health via Planned
Evolutionary Pathways1
Helmut Duwe
Institute of Aerospace Medicine, German Aerospace Center (DLR),
Cologne, Germany
Helmut.Duwe@dlr.de

Abstract. E-Health is one of the many e-application areas promising to increase
global connectivity and computational power of applied computer networks.
Information modelling is an essential ingredient of developing e-health
applications. The theoretical foundations of information modelling are growing.
System theory, semiotics, semantics, and ontology have become allied partners
to build powerful information models. Phrases like “ontology-based conceptual
modelling” indicate this process of sophistication. When developing practical ehealth systems the management of complexity is still a major challenge.
Evolutionary pathways seem to be an appropriate approach to handle
complexity. Significant gaps between existing pieces of avantgarde academic
theory and broad practical success stories are seen. The idea of planning
evolutionary pathways as mechanism to handle information model complexity
is illustrated in one area, namely the development of a study and subject record
manager for health-relevant physiology research.

1

Introduction

May be the 21st century will be known in the far future as the rise of the e-ages. Ebusiness, e-commerce, e-government, e-science, last not least e-health are ringing in
the decades which will hopefully see a tremendous increase in global connectivity and
computational power of computer networks.
Herewith, a major issue of the ethical debate as well as the technical agenda is the
handling of the right balance between simplicity versus complexity of representing
data, information and knowledge concepts. Per se simplicity is not bad and
complexity is not good, contextual adequacy is required.

2

Finding the Right Adequacy between Simplicity and
Complexity

The handling of information has become a multidisciplinary scientific effort. The
subject matter disciplines themselves have developed vast infrastructures to handle
data, information and knowledge (e.g. Medline).
1

The views and conclusions contained in this paper are those of the author and should not be
interpreted as representing the official policies of any organization.

M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3039, pp. 1140–1147, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

Managing Information Models for E-health via Planned Evolutionary Pathways

1141

The following examples shall illustrate that existing approaches, useful as building
blocks for e-health information models, indicate the need for paving the roads and
bridges in-between.
A simple, but effective, mechanism to handle data for clinical trials has been set up
by the CDISC (Clinical Data Interchange Standards Consortium) group. In the
CDISC Operation Data Model (ODM)2 the actual clinical data are handled as
attribute-value pairs, as such a trivial technical approach.
The general approach behind this is called EAV (Entity-Attribute-Value) concept.
It holds to a large extend the subject matter complexity within the data content and
operates on the metadata level mainly with the very generic concepts of entity,
attribute and value. It has been shown [see Brand et al] how this content internal
complexity can be unfolded in Clinical Trial Data Management Systems, which are
technically based on relational databases.
The unfolding of structural representations from internally complex data content to
managed information objects with adequate metadata functionality is not only an
issue of reliable “older” technologies like relation database systems, but also of
object-oriented approaches. It is proven technique to avoid the explosion of classes
via generic classes and attributes. Attributes work here as containers for typed
content. The making of typologies is shifted in this case from a class typology (with
explicit metadata entities) to the content structure (with more or less known internal
metadata).
The examples to illustrate the potential and the handling difficulty with complex
information and information models are taken from the LOINC (Logical Observation
Identifier Name and Codes) and the openEHR (open Electronic Healthcare Record)
project.3
The LOINC standardisation efforts of laboratory and clinical observations take
care to find systematic names as universal identifiers. A LOINC long name has 6
parts: the component (analyte), the property measured, a time aspect, the sample type,
the scale type, and where relevant the method used. A variant of an oral glucose
tolerance test is written for example as GLUCOSE^1H POST 100 G GLUCOSE
PO.4 The precision of the naming needed can drive the appearance of the names
towards what the creators of LOINC call themselves “awkward”. Nevertheless,
LOINC is not only a terminology listing, it is a very important starting point for more
elaborated information models of all the identified and hence listed concepts.
The actors behind the openEHR (open Electronic Health Record) initiative have
accumulated a rich documentation of information models, suitable to play a vital role
in developing advanced healthcare record systems. Only one valuable central aspect
should be mentioned here, namely the undertaking to clarify such an abstract concept
as “data structure”. The “Data Structures Reference Model” of openEHR contains
sophisticated representations of a complex “structure” concept. Fundamental kinds of
2

3

4

After all, the CDISC standards have their strength through the stringent way they require the
explicit documentation of the metadata and by the richness in which they have captured the
subject matter semantics of clinical trials.
Further examples could have been taken from HL7 V3 RIM (Health Level 7, Version 3,
Reference Information Model), due to size limitation of this paper this was not possible.
H for hour, G for gramme, PO for per ora.

1142

H. Duwe

structure are identified, for example “single (values)”5 (singularity), “list”, “table”,
“tree” and temporal ones like “history”, “event”, and more. Further concepts like treetables and table-trees are thinkable and already implemented here and there. The
challenge comes with the linking of complex subject matter issues and data structures.

3

Some Fundamentals of Modelling Theory Exploited for
E-health

It is stated here that system theory and semiotics shall not be underestimated when
working in the field of information modelling [see Duwe et al].
Here, only the triadic sign relationship as core concept of semiotics shall be given as
absolute basics. In the triadic sign relationship the nature of language is seen as a
triangle of the reality object (thing), the representing sign or symbol (ink on paper or
signs on a computer display), and the mental process of having a concrete thought
based on sensory inputs (interpretant). The mapping of concepts into this triangle is
still a major scientific challenge. For example, what is about the reality aspect of
“visions” which bear “reality” years later ? What is about brain processes without
sensory input from a reality source like it happens with synaestesia.
Within the scope of these considerations it is only important to keep all three
corners of the triadic sign relationship in mind, when a term and concept is discussed.
The Renovated6 Alliance Partners
An improved modelling theory for e-health applications should assimilate some of the
major advancement made in conceptual modelling, in data semantics and ontologies.
The first cycle of UML (Unified Modelling Language) modelling during system
analysis and early system design is basically centred around conceptual modelling. It
has to be distinguish from the specification modelling in a second cycle, more or less
the late phase of the system design phase of software development.
Handling the vocabulary of a knowledge domain is the key to semantic analysis.
The primary issue of data semantics and hence semantic interoperability is the
clarification of meaning. When reading the themes of conferences dealing with data
semantics the overlap with conceptual modelling and data ontology becomes obvious.
Gruber calls ontologies an “explicit formal specification of a shared
conceptualisation”. [Gruber, cited after Heese, see Heese]. This illustrates once more
the closeness of the term “ontology” and “concept/conceptual modelling”, finally
showing that (A) conceptual modelling, (B) data semantics and (C) data ontology are
highly interwoven. Further topical constructions as for example “foundational
ontologies” [see Schneider] represent the peak with regard to catching abstract
complexity.

5
6

resulting in class names like SINGLE_S, TREE_S, TABLE_S, etc.
This word is used to indicate the picture of “high technology interiors (informatics) in ancient
buildings (ontology)”.

Managing Information Models for E-health via Planned Evolutionary Pathways

A Conceptual Modelling

B Data semantics

1143

C Data ontologies

C

A

B

Fig. 1. Relationship between conceptual modelling, data semantics and ontologies

4

The Practical World of Information System Development in
E-Health

Abstract modelling theory has to find more intensively its way into the real practical
world of developing information systems for e-health.
A variety of textbooks of software engineering deliver good overviews of Software
Engineering (SE) process models. The most well known kinds of SE process models
are the so-called waterfall model, the V-model, the OO-models, and models with
richness regarding model evolution like the incremental, the evolutionary and the
spiral model. A model with increasing importance is the so-called Rational Unified
Process (RUP) approach. RUP has been basically elaborated by the founding fathers
of UML, which have pointed more than once to the importance of iterative and
incremental development of software. There is a fruitful influence of these SE process
models on each other noticeable. For example, the V-model, itself a highly structured
waterfall model with integrated quality assurance, has incorporated incremental
extension mechanism.
The health domain is huge. Some tentative figures from medical terminology
systems shall give a first impression on the magnitude of complexity. The
International Classification of Disease (ICD) contains in its four-level systematics
more than 12.000 disease classes; the Medical Subject Heading (MeSH) covers
around 20.000 main key words; the Logical Observation Identifier Names and Codes
(LOINC) system lists more than 30.000 universal identifiers for laboratory and
clinical observations, the Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine (SNOMED) covers
a complex set of 200.000 terms, and the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS)
project works with more than 600.000 concepts and more than a million terms. The
estimation of concepts with relevance for medicine yields figures as high as 50
million.

1144

H. Duwe

The Institute of Aerospace Medicine (DLR-IAM) organizes and performs studies
in the fields of human physiology, biology and medical technology. Scientific studies
vary in the degree of complexity. An individual study is usually carried out by one
institution, whereas a multi-centre study is performed by two or more institutions
based on a common study protocol. Integrated studies comprise several related
individual studies which are conducted by one or several institutions sharing test
subjects, staff and resources at one study site. To support a wide range of study types
the DLR-IAM is developing together with the Institute of Information processing and
Computer supported new Media (IICM) at Technical University of Graz an open
Electronic Study Record Manager (openESRM)7. The openESRM is based on an open
Medicine Telematics Platform. This platform provides comprehensive security
mechanisms like authentication, authorization, digital signature.
The Study Protocol Information Model of RCRIM8 was studied as input for an own
study protocol information model. Putting all available parts of the RCRIM Protocol
Model together indicates a little bit the growing complexity of modelling a subject
matter like “Clinical Trials”.
Displaying complete information models like RCRIM study information model or
the HL7 V3 RIM tends to cover whole walls. Evolutionary extensions of one concept
adds a further dimension of complexity to this “wall paper” phenomenon.
According to the idea of evolutionary pathways each identified “element” of such
an information model will get a “genealogy vector”. For each concept a multigeneration design shall be prepared that marks the way from simple to complex.
The staging shall be briefly illustrated with the OpenESRM concept of “Study”,
being here (besides “Study Record”) the “root concept” (or root class). The
prospective genealogy of the concept “Study” starts in the baseline generation with a
simple associate construction, more or less a kind of mind mapping exercise.
The second generation has been designed with a data skeleton class, to delegate the
basic data set just like it is done with the ProtocolSkeleton class of the RCRIM model.
But, the StudySkeleton class is a data type candidate to be used throughout the entire
life cycle, for example as super-class for the ProtocolSkeleton too (RCRIM has done
the delegation so fare only for the Study Protocol). To reduce redundancy, generic
sets of data are extracted and keep available for whatever other concept (class) is
interesting to use it.
The third generation introduces the Collection concept as used within the
“PlannedStudy” class of the RCRIM Protocol Model. The fourth generation of the
Study class is designed as mix of singularity attributes and collection attributes.
Furthermore, the problem of modelling “static” and “dynamic” features of a
phenomenon is here reflected very intensively.
“Study” had been defined as a specific “process”. The Workflow IT community
has extensively reflected the term “process”. But, a typical definition here just states
that processes are chains of activities. The settlement of an adequate model of
7

8

The description of the ESRM concepts are based on DLR-IAM internal papers, major
contributions to the concepts have been mainly made by Doris Wilke and Erwin Bartels,
especially the identification and description of the process activities is taken (with minor
deviations) from the work of Doris Wilke.
Regulated Clinical Research Information Model, the main player are here the CDISC group,
the HL7 group, and FDA (the U.S. Federal Food and Drug Administration)

Managing Information Models for E-health via Planned Evolutionary Pathways

1145

“process” is currently tried as part of a “cinematographic concept” of a “dynamic
world (segment)”. Here, a “process” should be modelled as “series of moving static
still images”. “Images” are then “situations”, or “snapshots of reality” as McCarthy
defines situations [see: McCarthy].
The author of this paper intends to elaborate the fifth generation of the “Study”
class as illustration of advanced ontological concepts (going in the direction of Luc
Schneider and utilizing the work of the new Leipzig Institute of Formal Ontology and
Medical Information Science). The fifth generation of the concept “Study” is up to
now thus a stage with an uncertain degree of feasibility. Nevertheless, the linking of
realizable and experimental stages of an concept implementation is an important issue
of technology assessment.
Last not least, the continuity of one and same concept is aligned with the
explication of the subject matter, keeping the explication as close as possible to the
use to normal natural language and domain language. The technical explication can
and must use artificial constructs to remove ambiguity (with formal languages), for
example use such term constructs for different aspects of the concept “Study” as
StudyStructure (static), StudyProcess, StudyProcessStructure.

5

The Methodological Quintessence of Evolutionary
Information Modelling

Already in the early nineties groups like Hahn et al [see Hahn] discussed the problem
of concept versioning and concept drift. They proposed tracking methods to follow
evolutionary concepts in dynamic settings and favoured an incremental concept buildup [see Klenner 1994, Hahn 1994]. Therefore, features like versioning, incremental
development, iterative improvement have not only to be considered as elements of
general software engineering, but are also important as explicit technique for
conceptual information modelling in applied domains.
It becomes quite obvious that other techniques have to complement the
methodological tool set of information modelling. The most important elements shall
be an advanced definition approach [see Swartz] and an applied context theory of
meaning.

6

Outlook

Linking information modelling of health systems, basic life science and clinical
practice to gain evidence based feedback loops should be a scientific subject topic
put forward as issue on a e-health road map. Here, questions and answers concerning
the need for and affordability of semantic grid computing [see De Roure] for e-health
should have their place.

1146

H. Duwe

Fig. 2. The life cycle of a study and the main activities

To formulate an e-health road map for Common Europe is a science policy topic. An
action item on this “road” could be the set up of a Model Library of European Generic
Health System Components. Building an e-health system with a global generic
backbone and integrating national as well as cultural variations is a global task to be
put forward to gain benefits for all (e-health for all). After all, numerous groups
around the globe may contribute to the effort that some day several millions of
specific and inter-related health concepts will be available as computer-based reusable model modules.
Acknowledgement. The author thanks Andrea Nitsche for critical-constructive
proofreading.

Managing Information Models for E-health via Planned Evolutionary Pathways

1147

References
1.

Duwe H, Schwartmann D, Bartels E: The Relevance of System Modelling and Semantic
Analysis for the Development of E-Health Applications, International Conference on EHealth in Common Europe, Kraków, 2003
2. Clinical Data Interchange Standards Consortium (CDISC), http://www.cdisc.org
3. Logical Observation Identifier Names and Codes (LOINC). User Guide, edited by
McDonald et al, http://www.regenstrief.org/loinc
4. openEHR (Electronic Health Record), http://www.openEHR.org
5. Schneider L: Designing Foundational Ontologies. The Object-Centered High Level
Reference Ontology OCHRE as a Case Study, in: I.Y. Song et al. (Eds.), ER 2003, LNCS
2813, 2003. pp. 91-104
6. Regulated Clinical Research Information Model,
http://www.hl7.org/Special/committees/rcrim/rcrim.htm
7. Friedman LM, Furberg CD, DeMets DL: Fundamentals of Clinical Trials, St. Louis, 1996
8. Brandt CA et al: Metadata-driven creation of data marts from an EAV-modeled clinical
research, International Journal of Medical Informatics, 65, 2002, pp. 225-241
9. Hahn U, Klenner M: Tracking the evolution of concepts in dynamic worlds, in: D.
Karagiannis (Ed.), DEXA ’94 – Database and Expert System Applications, Proceedings of
the 5th International Conference, Athens, Greece, September 7-9, 1994, Berlin, pp. 410419
10. McCarthy: Actions and Other Events in Situation Calculus,
http://www-formal.stanford.edu/jmc/
11. Swartz N: Definitions, Dictionaries, and Meanings,
http://www.sfu.ca/philosophy/swartz/definitions.htm
12. De Roure D, Jennings NR, Shabolt: The Semantic Grid. A Future e-Science Infrastructure,
http://www.semanticgrid.org

