Inter-ﬁnger Connection Matrices
Vladimir M. Zatsiorsky1 , Mark L. Latash1 , Fred Danion2 , Fan Gao1 ,
Zong-Ming Li3 , Robert W. Gregory4 , and Sheng Li5
1
2

Department of Kinesiology, The Pennsylvania State University, USA
Facult´e des Sciences du Sport, Universit´e de la Mediterran´ee, France
3
Musculoskeletal Research Center, University of Pittsburgh, USA
4
School of Education, University of Kansas, USA
5
Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago, USA

Abstract. Fingers of the hand are interdependent: when a person moves one ﬁnger or produces a force with a ﬁngertip, other ﬁngers of the
hand also move or show force production. Hence, no direct correspondence exists between the neural commands to individual ﬁngers and ﬁnger forces. The relations among ﬁngers are described with inter-ﬁnger
connection matrices, IFM. The IFMs depend on the number of ﬁngers
involved in the task. This presentation addresses three aspects of the
IFMs: (1) computation of the IFMs, (2) role of ﬁnger interdependence
during manipulation of hand-held objects and (3) inter-individual diﬀerences in the IFMs.

When a person moves one ﬁnger or produces a force with a ﬁngertip, other ﬁngers of the hand also move or show force production[12,6,4]. This phenomenon
has been termed enslaving[18,19]. The ﬁnger interdependence is due to three
sources/mechanisms: (1) peripheral connections, both tendinous[8] and intermuscular myofascial[5], (2) multi-digit motor units in the extrinsic ﬂexor and
extensor muscles[6], and (3) central neural connections[13]. Due to the enslaving, there is no direct correspondence between neural commands to individual
ﬁngers and ﬁnger forces.
The relations among ﬁngers can be described with inter-ﬁnger connection
matrices, IFM [18,11]. The IFMs depend on the number of ﬁngers involved in
the task. The reason behind this dependence is a so called force deﬁcit: a maximal
force exerted by a ﬁnger in a multi-ﬁnger task is smaller than a maximal force
produced by this ﬁnger in a single-ﬁnger test. The deﬁcit increases with the
number of ﬁngers involved in the task[9,10]. Existence of the force deﬁcit makes
determination of the IFMs in static tasks nontrivial: recording of ﬁnger forces
while the subject tries to press with only one ﬁnger does not account for the
force deﬁcit and, hence, is not suﬃcient to determine an IFM. This presentation
addresses three aspects of the IFMs: (1) computation of the IFMs, (2) role of
ﬁnger interdependence during manipulation of hand-held objects and (3) interindividual diﬀerences in the IFMs.
This study was partly supported by NIH grants AR 048563, NS-35032 and AG-18751.
The support from the Whittaker Foundation to Dr. Z.M. Li is also acknowledged.
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3039, pp. 1056–1064, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

Inter-ﬁnger Connection Matrices

1

1057

Computation of the IFMs

So far, two techniques have been used to compute the IFMs: (a) neural networking and (b) algebraic approximation.
1.1

Neural Networks

The three-layer network model is shown in Fig. 1. The model consists of three layers: the input layer that models a central neural drive; the hidden layer modeling
ﬁnger ﬂexors serving several ﬁngers simultaneously, and the output layer representing ﬁnger force output. Note the existence of direct input-output connections
that model muscular components that serve individual ﬁngers. The networks incorporate the following ideas/hypotheses:
(a) Existence of two groups of muscle components. Each muscle/compartment
of the ﬁrst group serves an individual ﬁnger (unidigit muscles; intrinsic muscles of the hand) and each muscle/compartment of the second group serves
several ﬁngers (multi-digit muscles; extrinsic muscles of the hand). The ﬁrst
group of muscles is represented in the neural networks by a direct one-toone connection from the input to the output layer. The second group is
represented by the middle layer and its multiple connections.
(b) The force deﬁcit phenomenon is modeled by speciﬁc transfer characteristics
of the middle layer neurons: the output of the middle layer was set as inversely proportional to the number of ﬁngers involved. Note that in the model,
the force deﬁcit eﬀects are only assigned to the multi-digit muscles of the
hand.
(c) The enslaving eﬀects are modeled by the connection weights from the middle
to the output layer.

Fig. 1. Basic network. The hidden layer models the extrinsic hand muscles (those that
are located in the forearm) having multiple connections to all four ﬁngers while direct
input-output connections represent the intrinsic hand muscles (those that are located
in the hand) that serve individual ﬁngers. The index, middle, ring and little ﬁnger
correspond to 1, 2, 3, and 4, respectively.

1058

V.M. Zatsiorsky et al.

The net input to the j th unit of the hidden layer from the input layer is
4
(1)
sj

(1)

=
i=1

wij xi

j = 1, 2, 3, 4

(1)

where wij are connection weights from the ith unit in the input layer to the j th
unit in the hidden layer. The characteristic of input/output in the hidden layer
is described as
(1)
wjj xj
(1)
zj = f1 (sj ) = (1)
j = 1, 2, 3, 4
(2)
sj
(1)

where zj is the output from the hidden layer. The net input to the k th unit in
(2)
the layer (sk ) from the hidden layer is expressed as
4
(2)

sk =

(2)

j=1

wjk zj + vk xk

k = 1, 2, 3, 4

(3)

where wjk are connection weights from the j th unit in the hidden layer to the k th
unit in the output layer. vk are the connetion weights directly from the k th unit
in the input layer to the k th unit in the output layer. An identity input/output
transfer relationship was deﬁned at the output layer, i.e.
(2)

(2)

(2)

yk = f2 (sk ) = sk

k = 1, 2, 3, 4

(4)

The inputs to the network were set at xi = 1, if ﬁnger i was involved in the task,
or xi = 0 otherwise. The weights from the input layer to the hidden layer were
(1)
set as a unit constant (wij ). The network was trained using a backpropagation
algorithm[1].
The developed network yielded a relation between the neural commands and
the ﬁnger forces:
[F ] = k[w][c] + [v][c]
(5)
where [F ] is a (4 × 1) vector of the ﬁnger forces, [w] is a (4 × 4) matrix of
inter-ﬁnger weight coeﬃcients, [c] is a (4 × 1) vector of dimensionless neural
commands (command to a ﬁnger ranges from 1.0, when a ﬁnger is intended to
produce maximal force, to 0.0, if the ﬁnger is not intended to produce force),
[v] is a (4 × 4) diagonal matrix with gain coeﬃcients that model the inputoutput relations for single-digit muscles, and k is a coeﬃcient that depends on
the number of ﬁngers in the task (0 ≤ k ≤ 1). The value of k was set either at
1/n, where n is the number of intended ﬁngers in the force production task, or
computed by the network; the two approaches yielded similar results[18]. From
(5) it follows that a command cj sent to a ﬁnger j (j = 1, 2, 3, 4) activates all
other ﬁngers to a certain extent (enslaving eﬀects). For a given n, in particular
for n = 4, (5) can be reduced to
[F ] = [W ][c]

(6)

where [W ] is the (4 × 4) IFM accounting for both force enslaving and force
deﬁcit[17,18,11].

Inter-ﬁnger Connection Matrices

1.2

1059

Algebraic Approximation

Recently, Danion et al.[2] suggested a diﬀerent equation in which the force deﬁcit
is represented by a coeﬃcient related to the number of explicitly involved ﬁngers
and the IFM accounts only for enslaving:
[F ] =

1
n0.66

[W ][c]

(7)

where 1/n0.66 is an empirical force deﬁcit coeﬃcient and [W ] is a ’pure’ enslaving
matrix. The elements of [W ] can be easily estimated without the neural network
computations from single-ﬁnger maximal force contraction (MVC) tasks.
The above approach inspired a mode-control hypothesis of ﬁnger coordination. According to the hypothesis, for each single-ﬁnger task, the CNS controls
a unique variable (a Mode) leading to force production by the master ﬁnger,
as well as by the enslaved ﬁngers. For instance, when a subject produces force
voluntarily with the index ﬁnger (I), Mode-I is recruited by the CNS. Due to
the enslaving phenomenon, Mode-I also leads to force production by the middle,
ring, and little ﬁngers. Similarly, voluntary force production by the middle (M),
ring (R) or little ﬁnger (L), is assumed to involve corresponding Modes (ModeM, Mode-R, and Mode-L, respectively). Therefore, a Mode can be viewed as
a collective variable, which leads to activation of many hand muscles bringing
about a speciﬁc pattern of force production by several ﬁngers.

2

The Role of Finger Interdependence during
Manipulation of the Hand-Held Objects

An interest to the IFMs greatly increased when it was shown that the enslaving
occurs during natural grasping[17]. Knowledge of the IFMs allowed to reconstruct the intensity of neural commands sent to individual ﬁngers and to estimate the magnitude of the enslaving eﬀects, the force exerted by ﬁnger i due to
the command sent to ﬁnger j.
If the vector of ﬁnger forces [F ] and IFM matrix [W ] are known the vector of
the neural commands can be determined by inverting (6). The vector of neural
commands is then
(8)
[c] = [W ]−1 [F ]
To test whether the various observed force-sharing patterns were optimal,
optimization methods have been employed. The norms of the following vectors
were employed as cost functions:
(G1) Finger forces.
(G2) Finger forces normalized with respect to the maximal forces measured in
single-ﬁnger tasks.
(G3) Finger forces normalized with respect to the maximal forces measured in
a four-ﬁnger (IMRL) task.

1060

V.M. Zatsiorsky et al.

(G4) Finger forces normalized with respect to the maximal moments that can
be generated by the ﬁngers while grasping an object with ﬁve digits.
(G5) Neural commands.
The main distinction between the ﬁrst four cost functions and the ﬁfth one lies
in the way of ﬁnger interdependence being accounted for: the cost functions based
on the ﬁnger forces neglect the ﬁnger interdependence while the optimization of
neural commands accounts for it.
In experiments with static holding of a handle with an attached load, when
the subjects were required to produce diﬀerent combinations of force and torque,
some (’agonist’) ﬁngers generated moments in the direction required by the task
while other (’antagonist’) ﬁngers produced moments in the opposite direction.
Optimization of neural commands was able to model such ’antagonist’ ﬁnger
force production and resulted in a better correspondence between the actual and
predicted ﬁnger forces than the optimization of various norms of the ﬁnger forces
(Fig. 2, next page). Hence, during grasping strong commands to particular ﬁngers
activate also ﬁngers that generate moments of force in the direction opposite to
the direction required by the task.

3

Inter-individual Diﬀerences in the IFMs

Individuals forming the general population may be expected to show both similarities and diﬀerences in the way their central nervous system organizes ﬁnger
interaction. These diﬀerences may be related to such gross characteristics as the
amount of total maximal ﬁnger force a person can produce[15] or to more subtle
individual factors such as experience with particular tasks that require precise
ﬁnger coordination[16]. An IFM for a hand contains 16 numbers. Hence, in general, individual diﬀerences in ﬁnger interaction, as reﬂected in IFMs, may require
16 variables to be fully described. We hypothesize, however, that a signiﬁcantly
smaller number of variables may be suﬃcient to describe diﬀerences among individuals without special skills. Hence, we aimed to discover such variables and
relate them to indices of ﬁnger interaction introduced in earlier studies.
To this end, we recorded maximal ﬁnger forces in single-ﬁnger and multiﬁnger tasks in 20 right-handed university male subjects. The data were analyzed
in the following way:
(A) The individual IMFs were computed by the artiﬁcial neural network shown
in Fig. 1. We will call these matrices the non-normalized IFMs. The sum of
the elements of a non-normalized IFM equals the total force of all ﬁngers in
the four-ﬁnger task.
(B) Normalized IFMs were computed by dividing the elements of a nonnormalized IFM by the sum of its elements, i.e. by the total force of the
four ﬁngers in the IMRL task. The sum of the elements of a normalized
IFM equals one. Both normalized and non-normalized IFMs were used for
the further analysis.

Inter-ﬁnger Connection Matrices

1061

Fig. 2. Comparison of actual force data with force patterns predicted by diﬀerent
optimization criteria. Criteria G1-G4 do not predict the antagonist moments while the
optimization of neural commands does.

(C) The similarities/dissimilarities (proximities) between the individual matrices have been quantiﬁed. Suppose we have two IFMs computed on subjects
s1 and s2. The corresponding matrices are A and B and their diﬀerence is
(A − B). The dissimilarity of the matrices was computed as a square root
of the trace of a matrix, (A − B)T (A − B), that is
δij = {trace[(A − B)T (A − B)]}0.5

(9)

where the superscript T denotes the transpose. In order to avoid confusion
with the ’distances’ determined in the multi-dimensional scaling (MDS)
method (see below) and following the accepted terminology, we called δij a
proximity of matrices A and B, i.e., the proximity of subjects s1 and s2.
The 190 computed values of δij were arranged in a 20 × 20 proximity matrix
∆.
(D) The MDS was performed on the proximity matrix. The proximity matrices
∆ for both normalized and non-normalized IFM were input into MDS function module to perform MDS analyses ( Statistica, Statsoft Inc, OK, USA).
The MDS program transforms the proximity data into Euclidean distances
in a low-dimensional space. The Euclidean distances and the monotonic
function that transforms the proximities into distances[7] were estimated
by minimizing the following stress function:
[f (δij − dij ]2 /

stress =
i

j

i

j

d2ij

(10)

where dij are the distances and f (δij ) indicates a monotonic transformation of the elements δij of the input proximity matrix ∆. To estimate the
goodness-of-ﬁt the following values of stress are usually recommended: 0.2
- poor, 0.1 - fair, 0.05 - good [7].
(E) To identify the meaning of the dimensions in the 2- and 3-dimensional spaces yielded by the MDS, individual coordinates of the subjects along the

1062

V.M. Zatsiorsky et al.

two/three dimensions (using both non-normalized and normalized IMFs)
were correlated with the following variables: (1) sum of ﬁnger forces during
four ﬁnger (IMRL) task; (2) - (5) individual ﬁnger forces during single ﬁnger (I, M, R, L) tasks, N; (6)-(9) shares of ﬁnger contribution into the total
force during a four-ﬁnger task, % (I/IMRL, M/IMRL, R/IMRL, L/IMRL);
(10) location of the resultant force of the four ﬁngers along the medio-lateral
axis, mm (Location) [10]; (11) and (12) traces of the IFMs, both normalized
and non-normalized, - they represent the total sum of the ’direct’ ﬁnger forces, in N and percents, respectively; (13) and (14) sums of the oﬀ-diagonal
elements of IFMs, both normalized and non-normalized,- they represent the
total amount of the enslaved ﬁnger forces, in N and percents, respectively;
(15) and (16) the size of the hand, its length and width, respectively.
Number of dimensions. The stress as a function of the number of dimensions
(the so-called ’scree plot’) is presented in Fig. 3. For non-normalized IFMs the
stress can be represented suﬃciently well in two dimensions (although the threedimensional representation is more accurate) while at least three dimensions
are necessary to account for the individual diﬀerences in the normalized IFMs.
The decrease in dimensionality achieved by the MDS was substantial: from the
20 × 20 proximity matrix to 2- or 3-dimensional spaces.

Fig. 3. Scree plots (stresses vs. number of dimensions). For non-normalized IFMs the
stress was 0.098 at two dimensions and it was 0.027 at three dimensions. The stress
for the normalized IFMs equaled 0.102 at two dimensions and it was 0.045 at three
dimensions.

Interpretation of the dimensions. To interpret the meaning of the computed
dimensions, they were regressed on a set of ﬁnger force parameters described
in the text. For the non-normalized IFMs an interpretable dimension was the
strength of the subjects. For the normalized IFM’s, two dimensions were interpreted: (a) the location of the point of resultant force application along the
medio-lateral axis that is deﬁned by the pattern of force sharing among the ﬁn-

Inter-ﬁnger Connection Matrices

1063

gers and (b) the total contribution of the enslaved forces into the total ﬁnger
force.
In summary, the employed set of methods: experimental recording of ﬁnger→
forces artiﬁcial network modeling and determining of individual IFMs→ computing diﬀerences (proximities) between the individual IFMs→MDS oﬀers promise
for future research.

References
1. Bose, N.K., Liang, P.: Neural network fundamentals with graphs, algorithms and
applications. McGraw-Hill, New York (1996)
2. Danion, F., Schoner, G., Latash, M.L., Li, S., Scholz, J.P., Zatsiorsky, V.M.: A
mode hypothesis for ﬁnger interaction during multi-ﬁnger force production tasks.
Biol Cybern 88 (2003) 91–98
3. Gao, F., Li, S., Li, Z.M., Latash, M.L., Zatsiorsky, V.M.: Matrix analyses of interaction among ﬁngers in static force production tasks. Biol Cybern 89 (2003)
407–414
4. Hager-Ross, C.K., Schieber, M.H.: Quantifying the independence of human ﬁnger
movements: comparisons of digits, hands, and movement frequencies. J Neurosci
20 (2000) 8542–8550
5. Huijing, P.: Muscular force transmission: a uniﬁed, dual or multiple system? A review and some explorative experimental results. Arch Physiol Biochem 107 (1999)
292–311
6. Kilbreath, S.L., Gandevia, S.C.: Limited independent ﬂexion of the thumb and
ﬁngers in human subjects. J Physiol 479 (1994) 487–497
7. Kruskal, J.B., Wish, M.: Multidimensional Scaling. Sage Pub., London (1978)
8. Leijnse, J.N.: Measuring force transfers in the deep ﬂexors of the musicians’ hand
:theoretical analysis, clinical examples. J Biomech 30 (1997) 873–882
9. Li, Z.M., Latash, M.L., Newell, K.M., Zatsiorsky, V.M.: Motor redundancy during
maximal voluntary contraction in four-ﬁnger tasks. Exp Brain Res 122 (1998)
71–78
10. Li, Z.M., Latash, M.L., Zatsiorsky, V.M.: Force sharing among ﬁngers as a model
of the redundancy problem. Exp Brain Res 119 (1998) 276–286
11. Li, Z.M., Zatsiorsky, V.M., Latash, M.L., Bose, N.K.: Anatomically and experimentally based neural networks modeling force coordination in static multi-ﬁnger
tasks. Neurocomputing 47 (2002)259–275
12. Schieber, M.H.: Individuated ﬁnger movements of rhesus monkeys: a means of
quantifying the independence of the digits. J Neurophysiol 65 (1991) 1381–1391
13. Schieber, M.H., Hibbard, L.S.: How somatotopic is the motor cortex hand area.
Science 261 (1993) 489–492
14. Schieber, M.H., Poliakov, A.V.: Partial inactivation of the primary motor cortex
hand area: eﬀects on individuated ﬁnger movements. J Neurosci 18 (1998) 9038–
9054
15. Shinohara, M., Li, S., Kang, N., Zatsiorsky, V., Latash, M.: Eﬀects of age and gender on ﬁnger coordination in maximal contractions and submaximal force matching
tasks. J Appl Physiol 94 (2003) 259-270
16. Slobounov, S., Chiang, H., Johnston, J., Ray, W.: Modulated cortical control of individual ﬁngers in experienced musicians: an EEG study. Electroencephalographic
study. Clin Neurophysiol 113 (2002) 2013–2024

1064

V.M. Zatsiorsky et al.

17. Zatsiorsky, V.M., Gregory, R.W., Latash, M.L.: Force and torque production in
static multiﬁnger prehension: biomechanics and control. I. Biomechanics. Biol Cybern 87 (2002) 50–57
18. Zatsiorsky, V.M., Li, Z.M., Latash, M.L.: Coordinated force production in multiﬁnger tasks: ﬁnger interaction and neural network modeling. Biol Cybern 79 (1998)
139–150
19. Zatsiorsky, V.M., Li, Z.M., Latash, M.L.: Enslaving eﬀects in multi-ﬁnger force
production. Exp Brain Res 131 (2000) 187-195

