Performance Evaluation of ENUM
Directory Service Design
Hyewon K. Lee and Youngsong Mun
School of Computing, Soongsil University, Seoul, Korea
kerenlee@sunny.ssu.ac.kr, mun@computing.ssu.ac.kr

Abstract. ENUM (tElephone NUmbering Mapping) is a protocol that brings
convergence between PSTN networks and IP networks using a unique worldwide
E.164 telephone number. This mechanism couples two completely different environments with E.164 number and allows users to utilize IP based application
services in PSTN networks and PSTN based application services in IP networks.
We propose a new way to organize and handle ENUM name servers to improve
the performance of name resolution process in ENUM based application service.
We have built an ENUM based network model when NAPTR (Naming Authority
PoinTeR) resource record is registered and managed by area code at the initial
registration step.

1

Introduction

ENUM maps telephone numbers into domain name and provides a connection between
IP network based services and PSTN based services [1]. This mechanism enables endusers to access web-sites, e-mail, fax, mobile-phone or instant message services with a
single telephone number. ENUM protocol promises uniqueness, flexibility and convenience to both IP network and PSTN users; however, there is no sufficient proof that
the performance of ENUM service is quite good to employ in Internet instead of using
conventional DNS. ENUM clients get only specific NAPTR Resource Records (RRs)
from name servers, not all NAPTR RRs, and further, NAPTR RRs joined to one E.164
number are too big to be cached in a local name server, so the availability of cached
NAPTR RR should be lower than the availability of cached conventional RR in local
name servers. Thus, people would have more a relatively long wait to get an appropriate response with ENUM service. In this paper, we discuss lookup service of ENUM,
estimate response time and present some techniques to improve its performance.

2

Related Works

2.1

DNS and Name Lookup Service

IP based applications are indispensable to DNS [2], so the correct operation of DNS plays
a prominent part in IP networks. Domain name is preferred to IP address because of its
This work was done as a part of Information & Communication fundamental Technology
Research Program supported by Ministry of Information & Communication in republic of
Korea.
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3038, pp. 1124–1130, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

Performance Evaluation of ENUM Directory Service Design

1125

readability and writability; however, physical hardware cannot understand this, so DNS
translates domain name into the logical IP address of device and provides information
to most IP based applications. DNS offers the other service, opposite mapping from IP
address to domain name.
DNS makes extensive use of caching to reduce server load, client latency and ultimately DNS traffic on the Internet. It is generally credited that cache is very efficacious
even in changeable and variable IP environment because information in DNS database
varies slowly, and small quantities of staleness are tolerable. Simply, the DNS caching
design prefers availability above freshness [2][6].
2.2

ENUM Lookup Service

ENUM first transforms E.164 numbers into ENUM domain names and then uses the
DNS-based architecture to access records from which URIs are derived. E.164 numbers
is used to provide users with a number of addresses, including those used for phone, fax
and email, at which the called party can be contacted.

3

Design of ENUM Directory Service

The ENUM delegation model is composed with three tiers: Tier 0 registry, Tier 1 registry,
and Tier 2 name server provider. At first, Tier 0 corresponds to the ENUM root level. At
this level, the ENUM architecture contains only one domain, called the ENUM root. The
Tier 0 name servers contain records that point to ENUM Tier 1 name servers. Secondly,
Tier 1 registry is an entity responsible for the whole management of the E.164 country
code for ENUM. Name servers of Tier 1 contain records that point authoritative name
servers for individual E.164 number or blocks of numbers in the country code. Finally,
Tier 2’s name servers contain NAPTR RRs with information for specific services. Name
servers of Tier 2 responses to queries from other name servers or clients.
Hierarchical design around administratively delegated name spaces and aggressive
use of caching are indispensable to the scalability of DNS [2] [6]. Contemporary DNS
resolution makes use of caching, and the cache hit rate is up to 90 % depending on the
starting state of database, so the response time of DNS query is independent with hop
count. On the contrary, the response time of ENUM query is dependent on hop count
because a local name server will not cache all of NAPTR RRs with E.164. The ENUM
resolution will have excessively low cache hit rate.
The high cache hit rate is closely connected with scalability; so alternatively, we
propose to separate Tier 2 name server’s role according to local area numbers to improve
ENUM performance. If Tier 2 name server represents one or more area codes, each local
name server will pre-learn and cache Tier 2 name server’s addresses corresponding area
codes. More than two Tier 2 name server providers can represent a specific area; and
moreover, one Tier 2 name server providers can represent more than one area, but their
information should be mutually exclusive except caching.

1126

H.K. Lee and Y. Mun

Fig. 1. Schematic topology of traced networks

4
4.1

Performance Evaluation
Modeling

The base assumptions for this experiment are as follows: domain name to query is
restricted only to the .kr domain, so any query whose answer is not in the local name
server’s zone file or cache, is forwarded to the .kr root name server. A query is only
generated in the SSU network, and the local name server is ns.ssu.ac.kr. Name server
administrator designates the nearest .kr root name server. The administrative name server
does not have any sub name server. Any current DNS name server can be the ENUM
Tier 2 name server. Name server processing time for ENUM and DNS lookups is assmed
to be same.
Once a local name server receives a query about NAPTR RR from a host, it first
searches its cache. If the local name server finds appropriate NAPTR RRs for the query, it
responds to the host, and the ENUM resolution is over. Otherwise, the local name server
forwards the query to the Tier 1 name server, which then returns a referral response,
composed of addresses of administrative Tier 2 name servers. The local name server
then forwards the query to the Tier 2 name server again. Then, the Tier 2 name server
builds response packet containing NAPTR RRs and send it back to the local name server.
As the local name server receives a response, it caches and forwards the response to the
host. Now, the ENUM client of the host receives NAPTR RR, and starts DNS name
lookup process to map NAPTR RR to IP address. DNS lookup process is identical to
ENUM lookup, except that the final response from an administrative name server is
IP address, not NAPTR RRs. Fig. 1 illustrates the name lookup process. The solid line
indicates the ENUM query process, while the dotted line indicates the conventional DNS
query process. The expected response time of each step in name lookup process, xi is
as follows, where i ≤ 1 then m = i, else m = i + 1:
m

xi = 2α

m

(nj − 1) + mβ + γ(i − 1) + 2
j=1

nj δ j ,
j=1

(1)

Performance Evaluation of ENUM Directory Service Design

1127

where ni 1 is a hop count in ith trace, α is router processing time, β is DNS name server
table searching time, γ is DNS name server table caching time, δ is query propagation
delay time between two hops, pλ is probability related to ENUM resolution, and pµ
is probability related to original DNS resolution. Especially, pλ1 is the probability that
local name server has NAPTR RR corresponding to a query, pλ2 is the probability that
Tier 1 registry’s name server gives address of Tier 2 name server corresponding to a
query. Similarly, pµ1 is probability that local name server can response to a query, and
pµ2 is the probability that root name server gives the address of administrative name
server corresponding to a query.
Assume that xλ is the response time of the ENUM resolution process, and xµ is the
response time of the DNS resolution process. The expectation of the response time for
the whole resolution process using ENUM is the sum of each expectation.
4.2 The Data-Statistical Analysis
To evaluate the response time, the processing speed of root name server, the cache hit
rate of local name server, and propagation time between two hops are measured via
experiments. For router processing time, simply benchmark from Cisco [4] was used,
and the router processing speed will be the reciprocal of throughput.
At first, for name server processing time, 5,000,000 virtual A records were used to get
DNS query processing time of .kr root server on July 2003. From Table 1, the processing
time of name server is 0.008 ms.
Table 1. Throughput of .kr root name server
DNS program
BIND 9.2.0
Queries sent
500,000

Zone file data
Virtual 5 ∗ 106 A
records
Queries completed
500,000

Query data
Virtual 5 ∗ 106 A
records in zone file
Started at
22:09:39

Check program
queryperf tool
Finished at
22:10:21

Secondly, an approximately one-day aged name server statistics from Soongsil university was used to get the response rate of the name server. The response rate (or cache
hit rate) has a deep connection with how long name the server has been turned on, so
we turned off and restarted the name server for the experiment. The response rate of
name server will be the total queries responded by the name server to total queries from
remote hosts.
Table 22 summarizes the traced statistics of ns.ssu.ac.kr. on October 2, 2003, and it
shows that response rate of name server is 88.48%, so we assume the value of pµ , as
1
2

n1 is always 1.
Following explanation is extracted from [5]. Some unimportant are excluded, and for detailed
information, see [5]. RQ is the count of queries received from relay. RR is the count of responses
received from relay. RIQ is the count of inverse queries received from relay. RNXD is the count
of no such domain answers received from relay. RFwdQ is the count of queries received from
relay that needed further processing before they could be answered. RFwdR is the count of

1128

H.K. Lee and Y. Mun
Table 2. Name server statistics (ns.ssu.ac.kr)

Date
Oct 2 2003

Place
Soongsil U.

RQ
2745590
RDUPR
1334
ROPTs
0
SFErr
0

RR
823370
RFail
1875
SSysQ
436914
SErr
0

RIQ
0
RFErr
0
SAns
2402330
RNotNsQ
2352

Time
(in sec)

since boot
150269

since reset
150269

RNXD
439968
RErr
237
SFwdQ
316407
SNaAns
131547

RFwdQ
0
RTCP
39866
SFwdR
710946
SNXD
797155

RFwdR
710946
RAXFR
0
SDupQ
81456

RDUPQ
22794
RLame
18549
SFail
13

Fig. 2. DNS, ENUM, and total response time

duplicate queries from relay. RDupQ is the count of duplicate queries from relay. RDupR is
the count of duplicate responses from relay. RFail is the count of server failure responses from
relay. SSysQ is the count of system queries sent to relay. SAns is the count of answers sent to
relay. SFwdQ is the count of queries that were sent to relay when the answer was not in the
name server’s zone or cache. SFwdR is the count of responses from some name server that
were sent to relay. SDupQ is the count of duplicate queries sent to relay. SNaAns is the count
of nonauthoritative answers sent to relay. SNXD is the count of no such domains answers sent
to relay.

Performance Evaluation of ENUM Directory Service Design

1129

Fig. 3. DNS, ENUM, and total response time when NAPTR RRs are managed by area code

pµ1 = 0.88, and pµ2 = 0.12. In addition to it, the cache hit rate of local name server for
ENUM query is supposed to be very low relatively to DNS query, and it will never get
ahead of DNS’s cache hit rate, because the number and size of NAPTR RR per E.164
number should be more and bigger than RR per IP, so we suspect that pµ1
pµ2 .
The propagation time between hops is measured by transmitting 60,000 40-byte
packets from one host to the first external router in SSU network on September 28,
¯ is 43.30 ms, and σ is 48.98ms. With 95
2003. The average of propagation time, X
% confidence level, the propagation time ranges from 42.91 to 43.70 ms. The average
propagation delay time between two hops is assumed to be 43.2 ms. Propagation delay
between hops follows an exponential distribution, and it is expressed as σi = − lgλ´R ,
where R is random number between 0 and 1, and average propagation delay time, λ1´ is
43.2 ms.
Let us now return to formula (1). β and γ will be same. Router processing time, α,β
and γ are negligible compared with other variables. Formula (1) and (2) can be revised
as follows, where i ≤ 1 then m = i , else m = i + 1:
m

xi = 2

nj δ j .

(2)

j=1
m

(nλj pλi + nµj pµi )δj .

E(X) = 2
j=1

(3)

1130

H.K. Lee and Y. Mun

As Fig. 2 indicate, DNS response time is insensitive to the increment of hop count
and has no relevance at all to cache hit rate for ENUM. On the other hand, ENUM
response time is very susceptible with increment of hop count and cache hit rate. As hop
count increases from 2hc to 5hc , ENUM response time at pλ1 rapidly jumps from 8sec
to 44sec approximately. As pλ1 increases from 0.1 to 0.3, ENUM response time at 5hc
falls approximately from 57sec to 44sec.
Fig. 2 proves clearly that ENUM lookup time is strongly deteriorated by increasing
in the total hop count (hc ), and total response time is decided by ENUM response time,
not by DNS response time.
To improve the total response time, it is inevitable to lessen total hop count, especially
caused by ENUM lookup. Name server for ENUM is bound with geographical location,
so it is difficult to lesson hop count, however, if we run name server to represent each local
area as proposed, query would be forwarded to directly the appropriate administrative
Tier 2 name server which possess NAPTR RRs corresponding E.164 number. Fig. 3
shows that response time rapidly falls off compared with Fig. 2. Under conditions that
pλ1 = 0.3 and 5hc , ENUM response time in two experiments is roughly estimated at
44sec and 12sec respectively.

5

Conclusions

ENUM provides connectivity to applications based on completely different communication infrastructures, with contemporary DNS. Simply, this mechanism enables PSTN
users to communicate with other parties in no matter what environment they belong to
and to access to resources on Internet.
In this paper, at first, we have analyzed original DNS query response time with
priority given to propagation time delay between two nodes. Secondly, we have estimated
ENUM query response time with the same condition of the first analysis. Results from
two experiments lead us to the conclusion that total response time is much correlated with
ENUM response time. We have proposed representative Tier 2 name server, so queries
from local resolvers are seldom. For the most part, queries are directly forwarded to
an appropriate administrative Tier 2 name server, and we have seen this idea promises
better performance in the ENUM resolution process.

References
1. Faltstrom, P.: E.164 number and DNS. RFC 2916, IETF(2000)
2. Mockapetris, P., Dunlap, K.: Development of the Domain Name System. Computer Communication Review, Vol. 18, No.4, SIGCOMM, ACM(1988) pp123–133
3. Recommendation E.164, The international public telecommunication numbering planSupplement 2: Number Portability, ITU-T (1998)
4. Next-Generation Solutions for the service-enabled Internet, third Quarter 2001 PACKET,
CISCO (2001)
5. Albitz, P., Liu, C.: DNS and BIND. 4th Ed, pp185–191, O’reilly (2001).
6. Jung, J., Sit, E., Balakrishnan, H., Morris, R.: DNS Performance and the Effectiveness of
Caching. Internet Measurement Workshop, SIGCOMM ACM(2001)

