Online Internet Monitoring System
of Sea Regions
Michal Piotrowski and Henryk Krawczyk
Department of Computer Architecture, Gda´
nsk University of Technology
bastian@eti.pg.gda.pl, hkrawk@pg.gda.pl

Abstract. The paper describes design and implementation problems
of on-line Web monitoring and visualization systems. The three-layer
architecture is proposed and example of oceanographic map documents
(XML) server is presented. A graphical user interface representing user
functionality is also given.

1

Introduction

Digital maps are becoming an integral part of many monitoring systems. The
representative example is a measurement system, which determines diﬀerent
parameters such as: water temperature, drift speed and direction referring to
a given geographic region. The system also can simulate diﬀerent emergency
events, such as oil spill at the sea and its dissipation in time. The general architecture is given in Figure 1 a). It is an on-line Web oriented application consisted
of three basic components: communication media (Internet), monitoring servers
which gather data from measurement systems and clients which display measurement data in a way convenient to end users [1]. In case of high time consuming
simulation parallel processing can be used.
Our main goal was to create visualization part of our system as elastic as
possible. Classical applications use bitmaps [2], but their big disadvantage is that
for every user action like panning, zooming map and toggling layers, a server
needs to generate the new map image. Besides, a bitmap could not be eﬀectively
utilized in other user applications. Using a vector format more processing is
oriented on client, because it stores a whole map and it can zoom, pan and toggle
layers without extra connection to server. However there is still one problem:
logical structure of the map document is not available, so we cannot eﬀectively
process them after generating map images. Using a subset of XML called Scalable
Vector Graphics (SVG) we could preserve logical structure of a map document.
Eventually we decided to create and use XML Map Documents.
In the paper we present architecture of the designed system and describe
its main layers. Next we concentrate on XML Map Documents and its server
implementation.

M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3036, pp. 557–560, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

558

M. Piotrowski and H. Krawczyk

b)
Visualization
(web browser with applets)

a)

Graphical view
of sea parameters
(XML document)

Clients

Internet

Map server application

1 1
0
0
0 1
1
0
00000
11111
Measurement
00000
11111
00000
systems11111
Sea regions

Monitoring
servers

Values of physical
parameters
Measurements database

Monitoring servers
Fig. 1. Idea of Monitoring System (a), Layered System Architecture (b)

2

Monitoring System Architecture

Figure 1 b) shows more details of the proposed architecture suitable for on-line
monitoring system of a sea area. The system consists of three standard tiers:
business logic (measurements database with map server application), presentation logic (map server application) and visualization tier.
Measurement data are originally inserted into the database as points. Each
point represents a geographic place (it has deﬁned latitude and longitude) and
suitable sea or atmospheric parameter like water or salty levels. This data can
be obtained from oceanographic models like HIROMB or ICM. Points of measurement data are converted into various map objects, what is done by special
scripts or corresponding developed code. It needs many calculations and resources so it is often impossible to make calculations in real time, while serving
map document. Therefore we preprocess measurement data and cache them in
a database.
In the presentation logic tier, the map and preprocessed measurement data
are converted in SVG (XML) document. For implementing such functions we
decided to use PHP. The map server takes a map data from the database and
convert them to the SVG document.
The last tier – visualization is located on users computer. It is a client application which displays SVG map, allows user to zoom, pan map and select displayed

Online Internet Monitoring System of Sea Regions

559

map’s layers etc. Apart from displaying maps it manages map documents and it
has JavaScript interface for dynamic visualization of simulations, like oil diﬀusion in the sea. To create client application we use Java applet technology and
Batik library which is a part of The Apache XML Project [3].

3

XML Map Documents

We use SVG format to create map documents. Graphical objects in SVG can be
grouped into layers. There is possibility to deﬁne a user coordinate system and
use scripting languages for processing events (e.g. mouse click on a graphical
object). SVG allows to insert private application data into ﬁle and to create new
tags and attributes which deﬁnes special shape types. Besides, SVG images can
be imported into popular vector image editing applications developed by Adobe,
Corel and many more. These applications will ignore a private application data
and they will display a graphical content of the ﬁle.
One of the challenges was to use SVG in such way, that graphical applications could display as much of the map as possible and we maintain logical
structure of the map. Bearing this in mind we designed coding of semantic data
referring to layers, map’s legend etc. The part of data which corresponds to logical structure of map is ignored by graphical applications but it is used by our
applet. Additionally each graphical object corresponds to one map object and
is labeled with measured value. This label will be interpreted by our applet and
by graphical applications.

4

Map Server Implementation and Testing

Map documents generator we have implemented in PHP. Server code performs
calculations connected to changing of coordinate system into screen coordinates,
generates appropriate map layers and adds XML (SVG) headers.
For developing the client application we have used Batik library which allows to create extensions. We used the extension mechanism to implement a class
used to display special map objects (special XML tag added to SVG maps). This
possibility is used because, we have encountered some problems with implementation of displaying map symbols, which have special behavior: they must not
change their size while zooming and they must not intersect with other symbols
on the same layer. Creating our own extension allowed us to optimize symbols
rendering speed by more than 5 times.
Figure 2 illustrates clients user interface. On the left side there is a list of
available layers, and we can choose layers to display. On the top, there is a toolbar for choosing date of measures, zooming and panning. At the bottom of this
applet there is a status bar with cursor’s current coordinates and messages. The
main part of applet’s window displays the map. We can see wind measurements
(speed and direction) showed as colored regions and symbols. There is also a
small window with some information about selected symbol (list of some other
measurements).

560

M. Piotrowski and H. Krawczyk

Fig. 2. Applet’s graphical user interface with map of wind’s speed and direction

5

Remarks

The client-server application creates measurement maps without loosing any
signiﬁcant data and delivers always present values of measured parameters. Big
advantage of our solution is that it can be used as a base for visualizing diﬀerent
simulation. Map displaying applet has a suitable JavaScript interface, which
allows viewing of dynamic changes of environment and simulated phenomenon.
The basic features of the proposed solution are as follows:
– ﬂexibility – it can be used in various environments, because a map is created
as a XML document, its logical structure can be interpreted. Besides, it can
be used as visualization of sea simulations results;
– interchangeability – XML map documents can be used not only with clients
(map viewer) but also with many other graphical manipulation applications;
– usability – all maps are on-line updated, so users have always access to latest
measurement data;
The obtained Web application is a good example of utilization of Web technologies for creating moder scientﬁc applications.

References
1. Michal Piotrowski, MSc. Thesis: Graphical Web Browser Interface To Oceanographic Database, Gda´
nsk University of Technology, Department of Computer Architecture, 2002
2. Plewe Brandon, GIS Online: Information Retrieval, Mapping, and the Internet,
Santa Fe, 1997
3. Apache Software Foundation, The Apache XML Project,
http://xml.apache.org, 2001

