Demonstrating Wireless IPv6 Access to a Federated
Health Record Server
D. Kalra 1, D. Ingram1, A. Austin 1, V. Griffith 1, D. Lloyd 1, D. Patterson 2,
P. Kirstein 3, P. Conversin 4, and W. Fritsche 5
1

University College London, CHIME, Holborn Union Building, Highgate Hill, London,
N19 3UA
2
The Whittington Hospital, Highgate Hill, London N19 5NF
3
University College London, Department of Computer Science
4
6WIND, Paris, France
5
IABG, Germany
d.kalra@chime.ucl.ac.uk

Abstract. This paper describes the practical implementation of a federated
health record server based on a generic and comprehensive architecture,
deployed in a live clinical setting and accessed from wireless and IPv6 network
test-beds. The authors, working at the Centre for Health Informatics and
Multiprofessional Education (University College London), have built up over
twelve years of experience within Europe on the requirements and information
models that are needed to underpin comprehensive multi-professional electronic
health records. The UCL federated health record server is running in the
Department of Cardiovascular Medicine at the Whittington Hospital in north
London. Through the EU 6WINIT project this infrastructure has been modified
to enable secure wireless access via IPv6.

1 Research and Development in Electronic Health Records
Realising the electronic health record has been at the heart of the EU Health
Telematics Framework Programmes. Considerable research has been undertaken to
explore the user requirements for adopting EHRs (e.g. published by the GEHR [1-5]
and EHCR Support Action projects [6]), resulting in architecture formalisms to
capture healthcare data comprehensively and in a manner which is medico-legally
rigorous and preserves the original clinical meaning, (e.g. GEHR and the CEN
standards ENV12265 [7] and ENV13606 [8]). These results recognise that personal
health data is often very sensitive and always to be regarded as confidential.
Other research has identified the requirements to support the communication of
EHRs within federated communities of healthcare enterprises to support shared
patient care across sites (the Synapses project [9-11]) and middleware architectures to
integrate across R&D projects (SynEx [12]). Outputs from these projects have
recently been consolidated within a PhD thesis based on the UCL demonstrator [13].
More recently parallel threads of research in Europe and Australia have been
united through the openEHR Foundation. This Foundation is an independent, not-forprofit organisation and community, facilitating the creation and sharing of health

M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3039, pp. 1165–1171, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

1166

D. Kalra et al.

records by consumers and clinicians via open-source, standards-based implementations (see www.openehr.org).
A new European (CEN) standard is presently being developed to define the way in
which clinical and EHR systems can interoperate to exchange patient records in a
systematic and medico-legally sound manner. This work, drawing on thirteen years of
European R&D, is being undertaken in close working relationship with openEHR and
with HL7 [14].
UCL Information Architecture
The Synapses approach to distributed healthcare records applied the methodology of
database federation to a standard and comprehensive schema, the Federated
Healthcare Record (FHCR) information architecture, mediated and managed through
a set of middleware services [11]. This has required a scalable model for representing
any conceivable health record information, created by any profession, speciality or
service, whilst recognising that the clinical data sets, templates etc. will be diverse,
complex and will change frequently as clinical practice and medical knowledge
advance.
A dual model approach has been adopted, which distinguishes a Reference Model,
used to represent the generic properties of health record information, and Archetypes
(conforming to an Archetype Model), which are meta-data used to represent the
specific characteristics of the various kinds of clinical data that might need to be
represented to meet the requirements of each particular profession, speciality or
service. The Reference Model represents the global characteristics of health record
entries, how they are aggregated, and the context information required to meet ethical,
legal and provenance requirements. Archetypes each define (and effectively
constrain) legal combinations of the building-block classes defined in the Reference
Model for particular clinical domains and contexts by specifying particular record
component names, data-types and prescribed value ranges, and values.

2 Federated Health Record Middleware Services
The federated health record (FHR) components are delivered via a set of middleware
services that enable a requesting service (e.g. a client clinical application, or another
middleware service such as a decision support agent) to access electronic health
record information from a diversity of repository servers (feeder systems). The feeder
systems may be on-site at an institution or connected remotely through
telecommunications services. These actions take place in accordance with the user’s
role-based privilege and are registered in an access audit trail. The London
demonstrator is utilising the following UCL-developed component services:
Federated Health Record services: a scalable run-time FHR environment
supporting distributed access to record components from new and legacy feeder
systems.
Archetype Object Dictionary Client and services: a means of facilitating feeder
system sign-up, of mapping each feeder system schema and of navigating the
federation environment.

Demonstrating Wireless IPv6 Access to a Federated Health Record Server

1167

Persons Look-up services: storing a core demographic database to search for and
authenticate staff users of the system and to anchor patient identification and
connection to the patient's federated healthcare record.
Expert Advisory (Decision Support) services: for anticoagulation management,
to calculate the patient's next treatment regimen and next monitoring interval. This
service is provided through specific agents called from a dedicated client and these
return data to this client.
Web-based applications: to provide end-user clinical views and functions.

Fig. 1. Core FHR components handling the request for and retrieval of patient records

All of the main components are written in Java, and are deployed within a
middleware environment managed through Novell Directory Services and JINI, an
open standard service-integration technology. This overall approach will allow the
ongoing development of flexible and portable applications with high-level graphical
user interfaces to be made where such applications can inter-operate across diverse
architectures and infrastructures. New web-based clinical applications have been
written using Java servlets to provide end user access to the patient records held
within the FHR server. Further details of this information architecture and
implementation may be found in [13, 15].

3 The 6WINIT Project
The IPv6 Wireless internet INITiative (6WINIT) project (2000-2002) was a European
IST Framework V initiative involving telecoms companies, equipment manufacturers,
solutions/software providers, universities and hospitals. Its objectives were to validate
the introduction of the new mobile wireless Internet in Europe, based on a

1168

D. Kalra et al.

combination of the new Internet Protocol version 6 (IPv6) and the new wireless
protocols (GPRS and UMTS). The UCL north London demonstrator was one of three
6WINIT clinical sites. 6WIND and IABG provided most of the wireless and IPv6
components used in this demonstrator. These were installed and configured locally by
the Computer Science department of UCL.
IPv6 Transition Mechanisms (tunnelling). Native IPv6 services from the main
application server were tunnelled via IPv4 from CHIME (north London) to Computer
Science (central London) using UCL’s main University Intranet. The 6WIND IP Edge
Device implements the v4-v6 migration mechanisms over a dual stack entirely
developed by 6WIND. An Edge device was configured and installed at CHIME, and
another at UCL Computer Science.
Security Mechanisms. A virtual private network (VPN) was required to provide
an authenticated and encrypted channel of communication between the clinical
applications server and the end-user specifically supporting the use of mobile devices
connected via wireless LAN, GPRS or UMTS. The IABG Road Warrior was installed
and configured to provide a VPN extension to mobile users based on IPsec, using a
Linux client for the mobile user and the 6WINDGate as an IPSec gateway.
Certificate-based key management. The CHIME clinical applications were
adapted also to communicate with a certificate server at UCL Computer Science
(developed by University of Murcia).

Fig. 2. Network architecture of the London demonstrator site

Figure 2 above shows the principal clinical application (health record) services,
located at CHIME, being delivered via an IPv6 stack infrastructure, sent to UCL
Computer Science and routed forward to the public Internet and to new IPv6 networks
(6BONE or UK6X). The communications pathway involves the use of some IPv4
networks, such as the UCL Intranet connecting CHIME in north London to Computer
Science in central London, and the public Internet. IPv6 access to the CHIME FHR

Demonstrating Wireless IPv6 Access to a Federated Health Record Server

1169

services and clinical applications has been validated from central London (WLAN),
Ipswich (WLAN and GPRS, provided by BT), Berlin (GPRS, provided by DTAG)
and Kista (UMTS, provided by Ericsson).

4 North London Demonstrator Setting
The north London demonstrator at which the UCL FHR services and clinical
applications are being evaluated comprises: the Department of Cardiovascular
Medicine at the Whittington hospital, 2-4 community-based cardiology clinics,
Several GP practices and community pharmacies in north London and patients
managing their own healthcare at home. The north London demonstrator vision is to
deliver the seamless shared care of patients with cardiovascular illness, in a managed
care environment. The clinical applications so far in use are summarised below.

Anticoagulant Application
This application provides a set of HTML web clients to enable the management of
anticoagulation therapy by clinical staff (or patients). The system incorporates drug
dosing decision support and recommends monitoring intervals between blood tests. It
has been used daily by staff at the Whittington Hospital since summer 2000, running
clinics with up to 120 patients per day. It is also accessed from outside the hospital by
two community pharmacists, and it is hoped to include other pharmacists, GPs and
patients as users in the near future.

Fig. 3. Anticoagulant client - viewing a clinic contact

1170

D. Kalra et al.

Rapid Access Chest Pain Clinic (RACPC)
This application provides clinicians working both inside and outside the Whittington
hospital with access to the record of patients having non-acute or sub-acute chest pain
(i.e. possible heart disease) symptoms. The primary clinical application has been
hosted on the same FHR server as the anticoagulant system, and shares the same core
middleware services. The application has been running live for nearly one year, and is
being used by nurse specialists providing a Rapid Access Chest Pain Clinic service
and a heart failure assessment service within the hospital and at patients' homes.

Fig. 4. RACPC client – viewing cumulative physical examination data

5 Conference and Technical Review IPv6 Demonstrations
Four proof of concept demonstrations of the 6WINIT infrastructure and clinical
applications were made during the project:
- 2 technical reviews including Ericsson’s IPv6 test bed in Stockholm;
- 2 international conferences: INET 2002 (Washington DC) and IST 2002
conference in Copenhagen.
These demonstrations have been documented in project deliverables and reports
(available from http://www.cs.ucl.ac.uk/research/6winit). The IST conference in
Copenhagen (November 2002) provided a valuable end-to-end validation of the
reliability of connection, the network performance and security. Although the IPv6
wireless access point was serving several simultaneous IPv6 Cluster demonstrations,
each web screen downloaded from London within about half a second. There were no
timeout problems or periods of inaccessibility, and the scaling, resolution and
performance of the Compaq iPAQ (adapted for IPv6) was excellent.
Ideally the UCL team had hoped to be able to deploy the validated 6WINIT
infrastructure in Whittington Hospital. This was not possible, due to the requirements
for the hospital to comply with national NHS and local vendor policies. Nevertheless,
the Department of Cardiovascular Medicine managed to deploy several elements of
the infrastructure on to internal departmental network. In practice this has meant an

Demonstrating Wireless IPv6 Access to a Federated Health Record Server

1171

IPv4 clone of the applications, web server, JINI and FHR services. It has not been
possible to deploy the 6WIND edge device or the Road Warrior within the
department. However, the view of the authors is that the demonstrations given, for
example at IST 2002, are a realistic vision of what is both clinically valuable and
technically acceptable for future distributed health care.

References
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.
8.
9.

10.

11.

12.
13.
14.

15.

Ingram D., Southgate L., Kalra D., Griffith S., Heard S. and others. The GEHR
Requirements for Clinical Comprehensiveness. European Commission, Brussels; 1992;
The Good European Health Record Project: Deliverable 4. 144 pages.
Ingram D., Hap B., Lloyd D., Grubb P. and others. The GEHR Requirements for
Portability. European Commission, Brussels; 1992; The Good European Health Record
Project: Deliverable 5.
Ingram D., Lloyd D., Baille O., Grubb P. and others. The GEHR Requirements for
Communication Capacity. European Commission, Brussels; 1992; The Good European
Health Record Project: Deliverable 6.
Ingram D., Murphy J., Griffith S., Machado H. and others. GEHR Educational
Requirements. European Commission, Brussels; 1993; The Good European Health Record
Project: Deliverable 9.
Ingram D, Southgate L, Heard S, Doyle L., Kalra D. and others. The GEHR Requirements
for Ethical and Legal Acceptability. European Commission, Brussels; 1993; The Good
European Health Record Project: Deliverable 8. 68 pages.
Dixon R., Grubb P.A., Lloyd D., and Kalra D. Consolidated List of Requirements. EHCR
Support Action Deliverable 1.4. European Commission DGXIII, Brussels; May 2001.
59pp. Available from http://www.chime.ucl.ac.uk/HealthI/EHCR-SupA/del1-4v1_3.PDF.
Hurlen P., Editor, Project Team 1-011. ENV 12265: Electronic Healthcare Record
Architecture. CEN TC/251, 1995.
Kay S. and Marley T., Editors, Project Team 1-026. ENV 13606: EHCR Communications:
Part 1 Electronic Healthcare Record Architecture. CEN TC/251; 1999.
Kalra D., Editor. The Synapses User Requirements and Functional Specification (Part A).
EU Telematics Application Programme, Brussels; 1996; The Synapses Project:
Deliverable USER 1.1.1a. 6 chapters, 176 pages.
Grimson W. and Groth T., Editors. The Synapses User Requirements and Functional
Specification (Part B). EU Telematics Application Programme, Brussels; 1996; The
Synapses Project: Deliverable USER 1.1.1b.
Grimson J., Grimson W., Berry D., Stephens G., Felton E., Kalra D., Toussaint P., and
Weier O.W. A CORBA-based integration of distributed electronic healthcare records
using the synapses approach. IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed. Sep 1998; 2(3):124-38.
Sottile P.A., Ferrara F.M., Grimson W., Kalra D., and Scherrer J.R. The holistic healthcare
information system. Toward an Electronic Health Record Europe '99. Nov 1999; 259-266.
Kalra D. Clinical Foundations and Information Architecture for the Implementation of a
Federated Health Record Service. PhD Thesis. University of London, 2003.
Kalra D, Freriks G, Lloyd D, Klein G, Beale T, Heard S, Schloeffel P, Maskens A,
Mennerat F, Ingram D. Towards a revised CEN standard for Electronic Health Record
Communication, in Brown P (ed) procs Mobile-Health Europe 2002. Medical Records
Institute. April 2002
Kalra D. Lloyd D. Austin T. O Connor A. Patterson D. Ingram D. Information
Architecture for a Federated Health Record Server, in Mennerat F (ed) Electronic Health
Records and Communication for Better Health Care Proceedings of EuroRec '01. Studies
in Health Technology and Informatics 2002 Issue 87: 47-71. IOS Press. ISSN: 0926-9630

