A Multi-scale Numerical Study of the Flow,
Heat, and Mass Transfer in Protective Clothing
Michal P. Sobera1,2 , Chris R. Kleijn1 , Paul Brasser2 , and
Harry E.A. Van den Akker1
1
2

Kramers Laboratorium voor Fysische Technologie, Delft University of Technology,
Prins Bernhardlaan 6, 2628BW, Delft, The Netherlands
TNO Prins Maurits Laboratory, P.O. Box 45, 2280AA, Rijswijk, The Netherlands

Abstract. A multi-scale study of the performance of protective clothing
has been performed by coupling various types of numerical simulation
of ﬂow, heat and mass transfer. From meso-scale Direct Numerical Simulation, it was found that the ﬂow underneath the clothing is laminar
and periodic, with a magnitude much smaller than the free stream velocity. Micro-scale Direct Numerical Simulation revealed a simple relation
between textile porosity and permeability. A good agreement was found
between ﬂow and heat transfer predictions of Direct Numerical Simulation and Reynolds Averaged simulation. From the latter, an engineering
correlation for heat and mass transfer was deduced.

1

Introduction

The demands on NBC (Nuclear-Biological-Chemical) protective clothing are
strict and mostly contradictory, requiring the combination of optimal protection and optimal comfort. This makes the design and development of eﬀective
NBC protective clothing complex. It is believed, that computational models of
ﬂow, heat and mass transfer can simplify this process. Flow, heat and mass
transfer in NBC protective clothing depend on phenomena at very diﬀerent scales, ranging from the sub-millimeter scales of textile ﬁbers and turbulent ﬂow
structures, via the centimeter to decimeter scale of the ﬂow around body parts,
to the meter scale of a full clothed person. Therefore, a coupled multi-scale modeling approach is necessary. In this paper we describe the development of such
an approach. Using Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD), we study NBC protective clothing on diﬀerent scales, focusing on diﬀerent aspects of ﬂow, heat and
mass transfer. Information from small scales is used to extract lumped models
for larger scales. Large-scale simulations are used to determine the conditions at
which small scale simulations are performed.

2

Multi Scale Modeling Strategy

We aim to develop predictive models for the performance of protective clothing
at full body scale. At this (macro-) scale it is not feasible to account for phenomena at the scale of the textile structure, nor is it possible to account for
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3039, pp. 637–644, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

638

M.P. Sobera et al.

the detailed properties of the turbulent ﬂow. Therefore, models are based on
large-scale, time-averaged Computational Fluid Dynamics descriptions of the
ﬂow, using the so called Reynolds Averaged Navier Stokes (RANS) approach.
The textile material is modeled as a porous material with particular macroscopic
properties. This approach was used in our previous study [1], were we investigated the inﬂuence of ﬂow and clothing properties on heat and mass transfer.
Two aspects of this kind of simulation require more detailed studies at smaller
scales: Firstly, the performance of RANS models in laminarizing ﬂow through
a porous material is unknown. Therefore, in this paper we extend and compare
our previous RANS study with DNS at meso-scale. We perform a detailed study
of the ﬂow around a single clothed limb modeled as a circular cylinder sheathed
by a porous layer (see Fig. 1) using DNS. From these simulations we evaluate
the performance of RANS turbulence models for the ﬂows of interest. Secondly,
engineering models for the lumped porous properties of the clothing material
can be deduced from micro-scale DNS analyzes of the ﬂow through the actual
geometry of the textile structure. Input from both the meso-scale DNS and the
micro-scale textile studies are used to improve and validate RANS simulations.
2.1

Meso-scale DNS

The ﬂow around a cylinder at subcritical Re has been studied by several authors [2,3,4,5,6,7], both numerically and experimentally. In the range of Reynolds
number Re = 103 to 107 (based on cylinder diameter and free stream velocity),
the ﬂow is periodic and transitional in character. In the present work, the focus
was on a subcritical ﬂow regime (103 ≤Re≤ 105 , corresponding to air velocities
of 0.1-10m/s around a typically sized limb) [2], in which, due to the vortex shedding the ﬂow is strongly unsteady. The boundary layer remains fully laminar up
to the separation point and transition to turbulence occurs in the wake.
The ﬂow around a cylinder sheathed by a second, larger, porous cylinder
(see Fig. 1), has received little attention. The general characteristics of the ﬂow
around a such an obstacle are expected to be similar to those of the ﬂow around a single solid cylinder. However, not much is known about the interaction
between the unsteady, turbulent ﬂow outside the porous cylinder and ﬂow inside the gap between the porous and the solid cylinder. For our DNS we used
the commercial CFD solver Fluent 6, which is based on an unstructured ﬁnite
volume formulation. Unstructured solvers have relatively high memory requirements (in our case ≈ 1 GB of RAM per 1M of computational cells). In order to
reduce the number of cells, local grid reﬁnement was applied, with a ﬁne mesh
in the vicinity of the cylinder and in the near wake region. The grid spacing in
this region was approximately 0.008D similar to that reported by Tremblay [7],
who studied the ﬂow around a cylinder by means of DNS with a structured CFD
code. In the far ﬁeld we used a slightly lower grid resolution. As a result, the
total number of cells in our simulations was ∼ 6 · 106 , as compared to ∼ 40 · 106
in the simulations of Tremblay.
The porous material was treated as a ﬂuid zone, where the pressure drop was
imposed as a sink in the momentum equation according to Darcy’s law. For its

A Multi-scale Numerical Study of the Flow, Heat, and Mass Transfer

639

u∞ T∞
solid cylinder

Θ Rs

Rp

gap

Ts
vτ

porous cylinder

Fig. 1. Schematic problem description for meso-scale approach (left) and computational representation of the net of ﬁbers (right)

resistance, values were set that were obtained experimentally from a sample of
real protective clothing. The cylinder length was πD, with periodic boundaries
at the end walls. Thus, in fact we simulated an inﬁnitely long cylinder. The
simulation was run with a constant time step ∆t = 0.001 uD∞ and was carried out
for 9 vortex shedding cycles after the ﬂow had developed, which was 33000 time
steps. Before applying our computational DNS approach to a cylinder covered
by a porous layer, we have ﬁrst tested it extensively for the well studied case of
ﬂow around a solid cylinder at subcritical Re. For this case, our results (e.g. time
averaged velocity proﬁles and turbulence spectra) were in very good agreement
with results published by Ma et al. [6] and Tremblay [7].
2.2

Micro-scale DNS

For the micro-scale simulations of the ﬂow around the textile ﬁbers we again
used Fluent. We created a so-called virtual textile, schematically presented in
the right-hand part of Fig. 1. Since NBC clothing consists of woven textile, the
geometric structure is ordered with only minor irregularities. The shape, diameter and distribution of the textile ﬁbers were based on average values observed
in a microscopic image of an actual NBC protective textile. A 3-dimensional ﬂow
domain was simulated, with the virtual textile plane halfway and parallel to the
inﬂow and outﬂow boundary of the domain. The inﬂow boundary conditions
were obtained from the meso-scale DNS simulations, from which it was found
that the ﬂow has laminarized in the vicinity of the textile. Periodic boundary
conditions were applied at the edges of the virtual textile. The total size of the
computational domain was about 200k cells. Due to the low ﬁber diameter and
low velocity (10−2 ≤Re≤ 101 , with Re based on the ﬁber diameter), the ﬂow
remains laminar and steady. A comprehensive study of the inﬂuence of diﬀerent
ﬁber volume fractions and diﬀerent inﬂow conditions on the pressure drop and
permeability has been performed. As outcome of these studies we obtained realistic values for the range of the textile resistances and the range of the superﬁcial
velocities through the porous layer. These values have subsequently been used
as input for the meso-scale DNS and meso-scale RANS simulations.

640

M.P. Sobera et al.

Fig. 2. Dimensionless velocity vy in the wake at x/D = 3 and tangential velocity vτ
inside the air gap at Θ = 45◦ , both in time (left) and Fourier (right) space

2.3

Meso-scale RANS

Two-dimensional engineering simulations of ﬂow, heat and mass transfer at
meso-scale were performed earlier in a comprehensive parameter study, details
of which have been reported in [1]. Based on this parameter study, a correlation
has been formulated, predicting heat and mass ﬂux through the protective clothing as a function of clothing properties and ﬂow conditions. Here we compare
these earlier results to results from present DNS.

3
3.1

Results and Discussion
Meso-scale DNS

As expected, the ﬂow inside the air gap (i.e. in the space between the outer
porous cylinder and the inner solid cylinder) is transient. Its dynamics is due to
the vortex shedding in the wake of the outer ﬂow. In Fig. 2 the velocity inside the
air gap is compared to the velocity in the wake. The inner ﬂow velocity is orders of
magnitude smaller than the outer ﬂow, but exhibits the same periodic behavior,
as can be seen from the ﬁgure’s left-hand part. It can also be seen that only
the low shedding frequency is pronouncedly present in the inner ﬂow, whereas
higher frequencies are ﬁltered out. The right-hand part of the graph conﬁrms
that the frequency of the ﬂow inside the air gap is locked to the frequency of
vortex shedding in the outer ﬂow.
Fig. 3 (left) shows the tangential velocity component along the air gap centerline. The velocity is presented as time averaged quantity, together with three
instantaneous time realizations. The latter were taken at instances corresponding to the maximal, intermediate and minimal value of the velocity at Θ = 45◦ ,
respectively. The inset ﬁgure is a simpliﬁed representation of the periodic inner
ﬂow behavior from Fig. 2, with the three time realizations indicated by black
dots. The velocity distribution in the air gap at diﬀerent time instances conﬁrms
its periodic nature. The time averaged velocity proﬁle is in good agreement with
our experimental data obtained by Laser Doppler Anemometry [1].

A Multi-scale Numerical Study of the Flow, Heat, and Mass Transfer

641

Fig. 3. Dimensionless, tangential velocity component at the air gap centerline (left)
and local Nu number (right) both as a function of angle

Fig. 3 (right-hand part) presents the Nusselt number, which is a dimensionless
measure of heat transfer from the solid cylinder surface to the air, as a function
of angle. The time averaged quantity is compared to the instantaneous ones
gathered at two diﬀerent time instances. The Nusselt number distribution shows
that the highest heat ﬂux to the solid cylinder occurs in the vicinity of the front
stagnation point, as expected. The heat transfer is strongly correlated to the
radial velocity component, with high heat transfer at locations were there is a
high inward air velocity.
3.2

Micro-scale DNS

For the virtual textile, simulations for varied Re = vµ2rf were conducted, where
rf is ﬁber radius. Note that here v is the velocity in the vicinity of the textile,
which is orders of magnitude smaller than the free stream velocity. Furthermore,
at ﬁxed Re, simulations were conducted for a range of textile porosities , deﬁned
as the ratio of the open frontal area to the total frontal area of the textile. When
the textile is considered to be a 2-D square array of cylinders of radius rf , at a
mutual half distance δ, then is given by
√
δ2
δ
√
=
(1)
or
=
2
rf
1−
(rf + δ)
In the left-hand part of Fig. 4, the pressure gradient ∇P through one speciﬁc
textile as a function of Re is presented. Numerical results are compared to the
unpublished experimental data obtained at the Prins Maurits Laboratory of the
Netherlands Organization for Applied Scientiﬁc Research (TNO). It is clearly
seen that for two decades of Re the pressure gradient through the textile depends
linearly on Re, in agreement with Darcy’s law, which assumes that the pressure
drop is due to viscous eﬀects only. Inertia eﬀects become important for larger
values of Re, and a super-linear dependence of the pressure gradient on Re is
observed.

642

M.P. Sobera et al.

6

-1

10

10

Present simulation
Eq. 3
Eq. 2

∇P [ Pma ]

-2

10
5

k
rf 2

10

-3

10

4

10

Experiment
Present simulation
Linear ﬁt
-1

0

10

10

1

10

-4

10

-2

10

-1

10

Re

Fig. 4. Computed pressure gradient versus Re (left) and dimensionless permeability as
a function of textile porosity (right)

The right-hand part of Fig. 4 presents the hydraulic permeability k, which is
a measure of the ﬂuid conductance in a porous layer, as a function of porosity. It
is related to the pressure gradient by Darcy’s law ∇P = µ kv . Based on a simple
analysis combining Stokes ﬂow and mass continuity, Clague et al. [8] proposed
the following scaling estimate for the hydraulic permeability of an inﬁnite square
array of cylinders:
k = const · δ 2

or

k
= const ·
√ 2
rf 2
(1 − )

(2)

This result was obtained using v as the characteristic scale for the velocity
through the array. This is reasonable for large porosities, but for low porosities
it is more appropriate to use v as velocity scale. This leads to:
k = const · δ 2

or

2
k
=
const
·
√ 2
rf 2
(1 − )

(3)

By ﬁtting the constant in Eq. 3, we found good agreement to our numerical data,
as can be seen in the right-hand side of Fig. 4. The small deviation for → 0 is
to be expected, since friction is becoming important here. It is clear that Eq. 3,
which resembles to the Kozeny-Carmen equation for ﬂow through a packed bed
of particles, represents a better scaling estimate than Eq. 2.
3.3

Meso-scale RANS

Ultimately, we wish to develop an engineering model of NBC protective clothing
at the full body macro scale [9], based on lumped parameter descriptions of the
textile and on RANS modeling of the air ﬂow. Earlier [1] we performed such
simulations at the meso-scale (see Fig. 1), focusing on the ﬂow in the air gap

A Multi-scale Numerical Study of the Flow, Heat, and Mass Transfer

643

Fig. 5. Tangential velocity component at the air gap centerline (left) and local Nu
distribution (right)

and on heat and mass transfer from the ﬂowing air to the inner cylinder surface.
In the present paper we validate these results against novel meso-scale DNS
data. As shown in [1], for the studied cases there is a one-to-one correspondence
between the Nusselt number for heat transfer and the Sherwood number Sh for
mass transfer. Because of this similarity, only results for heat transfer will be
presented here.
In the left hand side of Fig. 5 the dimensionless tangential velocity component
in the air gap is presented as a function of angle. The velocity distribution
obtained from RANS is compared to velocity proﬁle obtained from DNS after
time averaging (shown earlier in Fig. 3) and to our experimental LDA data. The
overall performance of the RANS model is satisfactory. The maximum velocity
is well predicted, a slight under prediction occurs for 90◦ < Θ < 270◦ .
The right-hand side of Fig. 5 presents a comparison between time averaged
Nu numbers obtained from DNS and RANS computations. In the vicinity of the
front stagnation point (−90◦ < Θ < 90◦ ), where heat transfer is largest and most
critical, the agreement is very good. In the downstream region, 90◦ < Θ < 270◦ ,
where the ﬂow in the gap is unsteady due to the vortex shedding in the outer ﬂow,
the steady-state simpliﬁcation of RANS leads to signiﬁcant over-predictions of
the heat transfer. Nevertheless, averaging the Nu number over all angles, gives
a satisfactory agreement between DNS ( Nu = 18) and RANS ( Nu = 20)
results.
From the above comparisons, we conclude that the RANS model performs
suﬃciently accurate for engineering purposes, particularly when we focus on
global (non-local) analyses of heat and mass transfer. We used this model to
study the inﬂuence of the free-stream air velocity, the hydraulic permeability
and thickness of the porous layer, and the distance between the inner and outer
cylinder on the average Nu number at the inner cylinder surface. Simulations
were carried out for typical values of the porous layer permeability, expressed
in dimensionless form as DaIc = 4Rkp ·rf , and the dimensionless air gap thickness
Ig. Based on the results from 2-D RANS simulations, an empirical correlation,
that can be used as an engineering tool, was proposed and reported in [1].

644

4

M.P. Sobera et al.

Conclusions

The large diﬀerences of scale between the phenomena of interest necessitate a
multi-scale approach for modeling the performance of NBC protective clothing.
In our attempts to ultimately develop a computational model for the design
and evaluation of NBC protective clothing at the full body macro scale, we
performed various studies of ﬂow, heat and mass transfer at micro and meso
scales. Direct Numerical Simulations at meso-scale of the turbulent ﬂow around
a sheathed cylinder (mimicking a clothed limb) showed that, for the free ﬂow
velocities of interest, the ﬂow underneath the clothing is laminar and periodic,
with a frequency locked to that of the vortex shedding. For the range of clothing
permeabilities of interest, the velocity of the ﬂow through the clothing was found
to be orders of magnitude smaller than the free stream velocity. Direct Numerical
Simulations at micro-scale of the laminar ﬂow around the textile ﬁbers showed
that, for the range of air velocities and textile porosities of interest, the pressure
drop over the textile can be accurately described by Darcy’s law. A simple scaling
rule was proposed for the hydraulic permeability as a function of porosity and
ﬁber thickness. The above ﬁndings from micro and meso scale DNS validate
the simpliﬁcations that were made in a RANS type engineering model. From
a comparison between meso scale DNS and RANS simulations, it is concluded
that the RANS models has shortcomings in accurately predicting local Nusselt
and Sherwood numbers, but performs satisfactorily accurate in predicting global
heat and mass transfer. The model is now ready to be used for macro-scale full
body studies.

References
1. Sobera, M., Kleijn, C., Brasser, P., van den Akker, H.: Convective heat and mass
transfer to a cylinder sheathed by a porous layer. AIChE Journal 49 (2003)
2. Zdravkovich, M.: Flow around circular cylinders. Oxford University Press, (1997)
3. Norberg, C.: Efects of Reynolds number and low-intensity freestream turbulence
on the fow around a circular cylinder. TR 87/2, Department of Applied Thermodynamics and Fluid Mechanics, Chalmer University of Technology, Sweden (1987)
4. Ong, L., Wallace, J.: The velocity ﬁeld of the turbulent very near wake of a circular
cylinder. Exp. Fluids 20 (1996) 441–453
5. Breuer, M.: Large eddy simulation of the subcritical ﬂow past a circular cylinder:
numerical and modeling aspects. Int. J. Numer. Meth. Fluids 28 (1998) 1281–1302
6. Ma, X., Karmanos, G.S., Karniadakis, G.: Dynamics and low-dimensionality of a
turbulent near wake. J. Fluid Mech. 410 (2000) 29–65
7. Tremblay, F.: Direct and large-eddy simulation of ﬂow around a circular cylinder
at subcritical Reynolds numbers. PhD thesis, Munich University of Technology,
Germany (2001)
8. Clague, D., Kandhai, B., Zhang, R., Sloot, P.: Hydraulic permeability of
(un)bounded media using lattice boltzman method. Physical Review E 61 (2000)
616–625
9. Barry, J., Hill, R., Brasser, P., Sobera, M., Kleijn, C., Gibson, P.: Computational
ﬂuid dynamics modeling of fabric systems for intelligent garment design. MRS
Bulletin 28 (2003) 568–573

