Do Colors Affect Our Recognition Memory for Haptic
Rough Surfaces?
Zhaowu Luo and Atsumi Imamiya
Department of Computer Science and Media Engineering, University of Yamamashi,
Takeda 4-3-11, Kofu, Yamanashi Prefecture, 400-8511, Japan
{luozhwu,imamiya}@hci.media.yamanashi.ac.jp

Abstract. Haptic (tactile) interaction is a promising approach to be used for
human computer interfaces. But how various kinds of haptic effects are learned
and memorized, and what factors might influence user performance, remain
unanswered. Little is known about the recognition memory for haptic
information. The authors used a recognition memory paradigm to study the
influence of color information on recognition memory for haptic rough
surfaces. Participants’ performance is less confident at exposure duration of 2s
than at other three durations. The performance shows little difference as long as
rough surfaces are presented and queried in the same color. However,
Experiment 2 revealed that the influence of colors on haptic memory is
sensitive to color presentation and query conditions. Our results can be used as
guidelines for haptic interfaces for selecting colors.

1 Introduction
Current mainstream human-computer interaction (HCI) is visual-information-centered
[1]: information displayed on computer screens accounts for an extremely large
proportion of that available to users.
Among new interaction modes feasible from a technical perspective, haptic
interaction (i.e., forces transmitted back to human hand or fingers in a way that
mimics the sensation of touching real objects, using specialized systems) is a
promising one. Compared with visual and auditory interaction, it has a unique bidirectional nature. As we touch and manipulate objects, we simultaneously change
their state and receive information about them [2].
For more than 50 years, the influence of verbal (for example, spatial language) or
visual (for example, color) information on memory performance has been studied.
The effect of spatial language on recognition memory for spatial scenes was studied
[3], finding that spatial language influences the encoding and memory of spatial
relation presented visually in pictures. In another study, the color’s contribution to
recognition memory for natural scenes was investigated [4], finding that colors
enhance an individual’s visual recognition memory.
Most studies to date have been concentrated on memory for visual and/or verbal
information ([5], [6]), using visual or verbal information as the to-be-remembered
material in recognition memory tests, although there are few exceptions in olfactory
([7], [8]) and haptic memory ([9], [10]). But to our big surprise, less or little is known
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3038, pp. 897–904, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

898

Z. Luo and A. Imamiya

about the influence of colors on the recognition memory for haptic information (for
example, roughness), considering that neural correlates of both encoding and retrieval
vary with the to-be-remembered material ([11]).
On the other hand, how haptic effects are learned, memorized and later used for
interaction with computers is a rather complex process. Identifying factors making
significant contribution to the process is important. Through a haptic interface
designed for virtual reality applications, such as remote surgery, users usually can
both see and feel objects within a single workspace. In such cases, the color of objects
may be changed from one view to another, as the operation procedure proceeds. Can
we intentionally select certain color for the objects within each view in such a way
that the user’s performance can be strengthened, thus raising the efficiency of haptic
interfaces and reducing the users’ workload?
To answer this question, we conducted a series of recognition memory experiments
in which participant’s haptic recognition memory for rough surfaces was tested. In
our experiment task, both the processing of colors and haptic memory systems of the
brain are involved. Experimental apparatus, colors and computer-generated rough
surfaces used for experiments are described in Section 2, followed by two
experiments and a discussion of the results in Section 3. Finally, conclusions are
drawn in Section 4.

2 General Method
2.1 Experiment Apparatus
The hardware setup, as shown in Figure 1, consists of a PHANToM (Model: Premium
EW) from SenseAble Technologies, a dual Pentium III PC operating on the Windows
2000 Professional platform, and a wireless liquid crystal stereo shutter eyewear
(Model: CrystalEye 3) from StereoGraphics. This model of PHANToM has a maximum stiffness of around 1100N s /m and a workspace of 19.5cm × 27.0cm × 37.5cm.
The shutter eyewear was used to enable participants to see the 3D experimental
environment.

z=Asin(2πx(t)/L)+A

d(t)
z=0
Fig. 1. The hardware setup for
experiments

z

nW
(x(t), y(t), z(t))

Fig. 2. An illustration of the textured surface and
its associated variables

x

Do Colors Affect Our Recognition Memory for Haptic Rough Surfaces?

899

2.2 Stimuli
2.2.1 Colors
In order to investigate colors’ influence on recognition memory for rough surfaces,
we need to create a condition in which color information can be reduced to the
minimum so that participants’ performance in colored conditions can be compared
with it. We use RGB values of (0.3, 0.3, 0.31) to paint all rough surfaces for this
condition, considering the fact that RGB values of the default background of a scene
created by Reachin API are RGB(0.3, 0.3, 0.3). The resultant visual effect is that
surfaces almost integrate with the background of the experimental environment, with
their profiles being marginally discernible. But the color information available is
reduced to the minimum.
In addition to the (almost) gray values of RGB(0.3, 0.3,0.31) simulating Black and
White (B&W) images being viewed in other studies, three types of colors are used as
visual stimuli, and namely: RGB(1, 0, 0) for Red, RGB(1, 1, 0 ) for Yellow and
RGB(0, 1, 0) for Green. The colors are fully (100%) saturated.
2.2.2 Haptic Rough (Textured) Surface
In order to create a touchable, rough surface, used is a one-dimensional sinusoidal
grating superimposed on an underlying box. The sinusoidal grating is described by
z=Asin(2πx(t)/L)+A, where A and L are the amplitude and the spatial wavelength,
respectively (see Figure 2).
We use the first method F1(t) in Choi’ s study [12] for texture rendering. The force
F(t) generated can be calculated as follows:
0,

z(t)<0

d(t) =
z(t) –Asin(2πx(t)/L) –A, z(t)≥0
F(t) = Kd(t)nW,
where K is the stiffness of the surface, nW is the normal vector of the surface of the
underlying box, (x(t), y(t), z(t)) are the coordinates of the stylus at time t, d(t) is the
penetration depth of the stylus into the textured surface at time t.
For all the experiments described in this paper, amplitude A is fixed at 0.4mm.
Since our PHANToM has a fairly larger value of stiffness K than that of Choi’s [12],
it is fixed at 450 Newton seconds/meter. To create six different levels of roughness in
the query phase (described in Section 3), the six wavelengths Li (L1, L2, L3, L4, L5
and L6) used are 1.0, 2.0, 4.0, 8.0, 16.0 and 32.0mm, respectively. They are divided
into two groups, and namely: L1, L2, L3 for one group, and L4, L5, L6 for the other
group.

3 Experiments
In the experiments, there are two phases, and namely: presentation phase and query
phase. In the presentation phase, participants are asked to explore three rough target
surfaces (either L1, L2, L3 or L4, L5, L6, in randomized order) successively, with a
3-second interval between successive explorations. In the query phase immediately

900

Z. Luo and A. Imamiya

following it, the three rough target surfaces are randomly mixed with another three
rough non-target surfaces (either L4, L5, L6 or L1, L2, L3). Participants are then
asked to explore the resultant, randomly-positioned, six rough surfaces and give an
answer as to whether they have explored each of them in the presentation phase,
setting the push button to the right of each surface to either “Yes” or “No”.
Figure 3 shows the display layout for the presentation phase. In it there are one big
box (rough surface) and seven push buttons. The surface is such that when it is
explored continuously, three kinds of roughness can be felt successively, with each
being presented for an exposure duration of 8 seconds, with a 3-second interval
(changed from a rough surface to a smooth one) between the successive presentations.
After three kinds of roughness are presented, the surface remains smooth forever, and
the query phase will be entered.

Fig. 3. Display layout for presentation phase

Fig. 4. Display layout for query phase

In query phase (see Figure 4 for the display layout), three target and three nontarget surfaces are randomly mixed together. Participants are asked to explore each of
the six surfaces and indicate whether he or she has explored it in the presentation
phase by giving a “Yes” or “No” response. Twenty participants, 12 males and 8
females, aged from 18 to 38, took part in Experiments 1 and 2. All participants had
normal or corrected-to-normal visual acuity and normal color vision.
3.1 Experiment 1: Exposure Duration
In Experiment 1, the rough surfaces are presented and queried in the same color
condition, and namely: they are presented and queried in either (1) Gray (AA); (2)
Green (GG); (3) Red (RR); or (4) Yellow (YY). Four experiments are conducted,
each for one condition. Each of the three rough target surfaces (L1, L2, L3 or L4, L5,
L6) is presented for either 2s, 4s, 8s, or 16s, with a 3-second interval between
successive presentations. Twenty participants took part in Experiment 1, and they
were randomly divided into two groups of 10 persons each to counterbalance the
performance.
RESULTS: The results for Experiment 1 are shown in Figures 5 and 6.
The mean hit rate, and the mean value of the d’, averaged across 20 participants
and the 4 conditions are plotted (y-axis) against exposure duration of the rough
surfaces during the presentation phase (x-axis), respectively. Here, and in all the
following data figures, the error bars plotted correspond to plus or minus one standard
error.

Do Colors Affect Our Recognition Memory for Haptic Rough Surfaces?

901

1.0

Hit rate

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
2s

4s

8s

16s

Exposure time

Fig. 5. Hit rate as a function of exposure duration of the surfaces in presentation phase

Value of d-prime

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
2s

4s

8s

16s

Exposure time

Fig. 6. Value of d’ as a function of exposure duration in the presentation phase

DISCUSSION: As Figure 5 shows, the performance in terms of averaged hit rate
did not change very much as the exposure duration is varied. The effect of exposure
duration is typical for transfer to short-term memory: it appears to be relatively
insensitive to speed of presentation [13]. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) in terms of
hit rate did not show significant differences between exposure durations, between
paired conditions (paired combination among AA, GG, RR and YY), or between GG,
RR, YY combined and AA. In other words, the performance changes little as long as
surfaces are presented and queried in the same color. Participants’ performance is less
confident at exposure duration of 2s than at 4s, 8s and 16s.
3.2 Experiment 2: Presentation and Query Conditions
The results of experiment 3 in [5] revealed that (recognition) performance for visual
images worsened when they were presented in color and tested in black and white, or
vice versa. Therefore, we set up the following six conditions in Experiment 2: (1) AG:
rough surfaces presented in gray, but queried in Green; (2) AR: those presented in
gray, but queried in Red; (3) AY: those presented in gray, but queried in Yellow; (4)
GA: those presented in Green, but queried in gray; (5) RA: those presented in Red,
but queried in gray; (4) YA: those presented in Yellow, but queried in gray. Exposure
time for each of three rough surfaces in Experiment 2 is set as 8s. The same twenty
participants took part in Experiment 2.
RESULTS: Analysis of data in Experiment 2 also included the data for AA
condition at an exposure time of 8s in Experiment 1. Since there is no significant
difference in false alarm rate between paired presentation and query conditions, only
hit rate is analyzed. The results are shown in the (a), (b), (c) and (d) of Figure 7.

902

Z. Luo and A. Imamiya

Hit rate

1.0
0.5
0.0
AA

AG

AR

AY

GA

RA

YA

Presentation and query conditions

Hit rate

(a)

0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50

Query:
Gray
Yellow

Presentation: Gray

Yellow

(b)
Query:

Hit rate

0.80

Gray

0.70

Green

0.60

0.50
Presentation:

Gray

Green

(c)

Query:

Hit rate

0.80
0.70

Gray

0.60

Red

0.50
Presentation: Gray

Red

(d)

Fig. 7. Results of Experiment 2. (a) Hit rate for presentation and query conditions. (b), (c) and
(d): the x-axis plots whether rough surfaces were presented in gray or colors (green, red or
yellow); the y-axis plots the hit rate for surfaces queried in gray or colors (green, red or
yellow).

DISCUSSION: Our experimental task involves two processes: a learning process
in presentation process, and a retrieval process in the query process. We control the
color available to learning and retrieval systems, because neuroimaging studies
revealed a possible involvement of visual cortex in haptic processing ([14], [15]).

Do Colors Affect Our Recognition Memory for Haptic Rough Surfaces?

903

From Experiment 2, we found that participants’ performance is worse for (1) rough
surfaces presented in gray and queried in Yellow than those presented and queried in
gray; and (2) those presented in Yellow and queried in gray than those presented and
queried in Yellow, as shown in Figure 7(b). This finding is similar to that of the
Experiment 3 in [4]. However, we found that participants’ performance is slightly
better for (3) rough surfaces presented in gray and queried in Red than for those
presented and queried in gray, and (4) those presented in Red and queried in gray than
those present and queried in Red, as shown in Figure 7(d).
The result for Green is different. When rough surfaces are presented in gray and
queried in Green, or when they are presented and queried in Green, the performance
is worse than when they are presented and queried in gray, than when they are
presented in Green and queried in gray, respectively, as shown in Figure 7(c).
Our results are in part in line with one theory according to which the probability of
recall of an item is a direct function of the similarity between the recall situation and
the original learning environment [16], [17]. But the cases for RA, GR and YR color
presentation and query conditions in our experiment did not result in lower hit rate.
The performance patterns are also what the encoding specificity principle predicts
[18]. But colors’ influence on haptic memory seems to be much more complex and
versatile.

4 Conclusions
A recognition memory paradigm was used to study the influence of colors (Green,
Yellow and Red) on recognition memory for haptic rough surfaces based on two
experiments. Participants’ performance is less confident at exposure duration of 2s
than at other 3 durations. The performance shows little difference as long as rough
surfaces are presented and queried in the same color.
Experiment 2 revealed that the influence of colors on haptic memory is sensitive to
presentation and query conditions: RA condition results in significantly better
performance than GA condition. The former could be used to improve user
performance, whereas the latter should not be used in haptic interfaces whenever
possible. Our results can be used as guidelines for haptic interface design for selecting
colors.
Acknowledgements. We would like to thank Professors XiaoYang Mao, Kenji
Ozawa, Ryutaro Ohbuchi and Kentaro Go of Yamanashi University for helpful
discussions and comments. We are very grateful for Dr. Li Jing, of the National
University of Singapore, who supported us with the statistical analysis of our
experiment data.
This research was supported in part by the Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science, by the Telecommunications Advancement Organization of Japan, and by the
Research Institute of Electrical Communication of Tohoku University awarded to
A.Imamiya.

904

Z. Luo and A. Imamiya

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.

Luo, Z., Imamiya, A.: How do colors influence the haptic perception of textured surfaces?
Univ Access Inf. Soc. 2(2) (2003) 160-172
Salisbury, J. K.: Making graphics physically tangible. Commun ACM. 42(8) (1999) 75-81
Feist, M.I., Gentner, D.: An influence of spatial language on recognition memory for
spatial scenes. Proc. of the Twenty-Third Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society, London, UK, (2001) 279-284
Wichmann, F.A., Sharpe, L.T., Gegenfurtner, K.R.: The contributions of color to
recognition memory for natural scenes. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition. 28(3) (2002) 509-520
Gegenfurtner, K.R., Rieger, J.: Sensory and cognitive contributions of color to the
recognition of natural scenes. Current Biology, 10 (2000) 805–808
Miller, G.A.: The magical number seven, plus or minus two: some limits on our capacity
for processing information. The Psychological Review, 63 (1956) 81-97
Dade, L.A., Jones-Gotman, M., Zatorre, R.J., Evans, A.C.: Human brain function during
order encoding and recognition. A PET activation study, Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 855 (1998)
572-574
Morrot, G.: The color of ordors. Brain and Language, 79(2) (2001) 309-320
Bonda, E., Petrides, M., Evans, A.: Neural systems for tactual memories. J. Neurophysiol.
75 (1996) 1730-1737
Lepage, M., Randal, A., Tulving, E.: Transperceptual encoding and retrieval processes in
memory: a PET study of visual and haptic objects. NeuroImage, 14 (2001) 572-584
Kelley, W.M., Miezin, F.M., McDermott, K.B., et al.: Hemispheric specialization in
human dorsal frontal cortex and medial temporal lobe for verbal and nonverbal memory
encoding. Neuron, 20 (1998) 927-936
Choi, S., Tan, H.Z.: A parameter space for perceptually stable haptic texture rendering.
Proceedings of the Fifth PHANToM User Group (PUG) Workshop, Aspen, Colorado,
(2000) 31-34
Wilson, R.A. Keil R.C. (Ed.): The MIT encyclopedia of the cognitive science. Cambridge,
Massachusetts, London, England, The MIT Press (1999)
Deibert, E., Kraut, M., Krement, S., Hart, J. J.: Neural pathways in tactile objection
recognition. Neurology, 52 (1999) 1413-1417
Zangaladze, A., Epstein, C. M., Grafton, S. T., Sathian, K.: Involvement of visual cortex in
tactile discrimination of orientation. Nature, 401 (1999) 587-590
Hollingworth, H. L.: Psychology: its fact and principles. New York, Applet (1928)
Melton, A.W. Implications of short-term memory for a general theory of memory. Journal
of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 2 (1963) 1-21
Tulving, E., Thomson, D.M.: Encoding specificity and retrieval processes in episodic
memory. Psychological Review, 80(5), (1973) 352-373

