A Performance Analysis of Movement Patterns
Corina Sas1 , Gregory O’Hare1 , and Ronan Reilly2
1

2

University College Dublin, Belﬁeld, Dublin 4, Ireland
National University of Ireland, Maynooth, Co. Kildare, Ireland

Abstract. This study investigates the diﬀerences in movement patterns
followed by users navigating within a virtual environment. The analysis
has been carried out between two groups of users, identiﬁed on the basis
of their performance on a search task. Results indicate signiﬁcant diﬀerences between eﬃcient and ineﬃcient navigators’ trajectories. They are
related to rotational, translational and localised-landmarks behaviour.
These ﬁndings are discussed in the light of theoretical outcomes provided by environmental psychology.

1

Introduction

An understanding of how people explore an indoor virtual space can provide not
only theoretical contributions but can also be harnessed within practical applications. Designing ﬂexible Virtual Environments (VEs) which are able to adapt
themselves in order to support user navigation is one of the most promising
application ﬁelds. Designing adaptive VEs for navigation support necessitates
sensitivity to diﬀering types of users. Such adaptive VEs should be able to discriminate between diﬀerent groups of users, who require diﬀerent accommodations. These groups of users diﬀer not only in their performance on spatial tasks,
but also in their spatial behaviour. Another signiﬁcant aspect in the design of
adaptive VEs for navigation support is the identiﬁcation of ways to accommodate individual diﬀerences in navigational patterns.
This paper focuses on the analysis of users’ spatial behaviour, as reﬂected in
their trajectory paths. Movement paths allow an online and unobtrusive identiﬁcation of user groups. Trajectory classiﬁcation oﬀers potential in performing
such kinds of identiﬁcation [6]. The analysis of movement paths also allows the
implicit extraction of navigational patterns embedded in trajectory paths.

2

Study Design

The experiments have been carried out within a desktop VE [3], which due
to its tractable characteristics permitted us to record the users’ positions and
headings at each moment in time. Adopting a physical world metaphor the VE
consists of a virtual multi-story building where each one of the levels contains
three rooms. Its projection has a rectangular shape of 16×27 virtual metres.
The ECHOES environment comprises a virtual multi-story building, each one of
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3038, pp. 954–961, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

A Performance Analysis of Movement Patterns

Fig. 1. Virtual Training Room

955

Fig. 2. Virtual Library

the levels containing several rooms: conference room, training room (Figure 1),
library (Figure 2), lobby etc.
There is no predeﬁned set of paths, such as halls or corridors which would
limit the user choice of movements. The users can move freely in the space,
freedom limited only by the walls and objects located within the spatial layout.
Users can navigate in terms of moving forwards, backwards or rotating, through
the use of the directional keys. They merely use the mouse for selecting a new
ﬂoor on the panel located in the virtual lift.
The study involved three phases: familiarisation, exploration and performance measurement. Initially, users were allowed to become accustomed with
the VE and to learn movement control. After this, they were asked to perform
an exploration task. The exploration task within the virtual building lasts for
approximately 25 minutes. After the completion of this task, during which participants acquired (implicitly) spatial knowledge related to the VE, they were
tested. Users were placed on the third level and asked to ﬁnd a particular room
located on the ground ﬂoor of the virtual building (the library). The time needed
to accomplish this task acted as an indicator of the level of spatial knowledge acquired within the VE: the shorter the search time, the better the spatial knowledge [5]. According to the time required for the search task, users have been
identiﬁed as low spatial users, when they needed signiﬁcantly longer time to ﬁnd
the library (Mean = 49 seconds), or high spatial users who found the library
straight away (Mean = 7 seconds). Within this paper, the terms of low versus
high spatial users are related to this particular outcome and they also capture
the dichotomy between poor versus good or ineﬃcient versus eﬃcient navigators.
The sample consisted of 32 students from the Department of Computer Science in University College Dublin and volunteers were paid for their participation.
The following sections focus on aspects supporting diﬀerentiation between
eﬃcient and ineﬃcient navigators’ trajectories. They are related to rotational,
translational and localised-landmarks user behaviour during navigation.
2.1

Rotational Behaviour

Given the signiﬁcance of rotations along a movement path, we analysed these in
order to identify diﬀerences which discriminate eﬃcient from ineﬃcient spatial

956

C. Sas, G. O’Hare, and R. Reilly

P3

θ3

θ2

θ1
P2

P1
Fig. 3. Observation Angle

behaviour. Each action performed by the user is either a rotation or a translation. Rotations receive increased attention, since they represent those joints,
where trajectory segments are articulated at diﬀerent angles. The location where
rotation is performed and the rotation angle provide valuable information about
the user’s orientation and user’s intentions.
Each angle performed at a particular location, possibly consisting of one
or more successive rotations, has been computed and averaged for each user.
This angle we entitle observation angle since it allows the user to observe the
environment through the increased view ﬁeld it facilitates. Figure 3 presents a
sample of user’s behaviour, where P1 , P2 and P3 represent three consecutive
positions in time, while θ1 , θ2 and θ3 represent there consecutive changes of
heading, carried out at location P2 .
The observation angle was computed as follows:
k

|θi | ,

Observation angle =

(1)

i=1

where k is the number of successive rotations (in our example k = 3).
A t-test suggests signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the values of these angles
corresponding to rotations performed by eﬃcient versus ineﬃcient users. Thus,
low spatial users perform signiﬁcantly higher changes of heading (Mean above
65◦ ) compared to high spatial users (Mean below 45◦ ) (t(12) = 1.92, p < 0.05).
When the sign of the rotation angle has been also considered, another angle
indicator was obtained. It represents the angle between two adjacent segments of
trajectory which suggests a change of direction between two translations. Such
an angle is referred to as moving angle and diﬀers from the previous indicator
when users change the rotation direction within a set of consecutive rotations.
Such a moving angle between consecutive translations performed at diﬀerent
headings is equal or smaller than the observation angle. Figure 4 presents the

A Performance Analysis of Movement Patterns

957

P3
θ4
θ3

θ2

θ1
P2

P1
Fig. 4. Moving Angle

same sample of user’s behaviour as that depicted in Figure 3, where the moving
angle is the angle θ4 .
Findings suggest that low spatial users performed signiﬁcantly higher changes
of heading (Mean above 50◦ ) when measured as moving angles, compared to high
spatial users (Mean below 35◦ ) (t(12) = 1.83, p < 0.05). Looking at the distribution of these angles, it appeared that low spatial users performed signiﬁcantly
more rotations higher than 90◦ (61.2%), compared to high spatial users (38.8%),
(continuity correction: χ2 (1) = 20.71, p < 0.05).
The analysis of spatial behaviour with respect to the number of rotations
and translations within the entire set of trajectories, revealed another interesting
ﬁnding. On average per trajectory, high spatial users performed a signiﬁcantly
higher number of rotations (Mean = 12.07) than low spatial users (Mean =
10.36), (t(11178) = 10.98, p < 0.001). When this analysis was restricted to
the numbers of successive rotational steps performed between two translations,
it appeared that high spatial users performed signiﬁcantly less such kinds of
consecutive rotations (Mean = 2.23), compared to low spatial users (Mean =
3.01), (t(10947) = 9.93, p < 0.001). Such successive rotational steps compose a
larger change of heading performed in a given location.
2.2

Translational Behaviour

High spatial users performed also signiﬁcantly less consecutive translations
(Mean = 1.60) than low spatial users (Mean = 1.80), (t(11514) = 3.92, p <
0.001). High spatial users performed also signiﬁcantly more translations per trajectory (Mean = 11.97) compared to low spatial users (Mean = 10.26), (t(11192)
= 10.90, p < 0.001). In addition, the length of each straight line segment, namely
the distance covered through consecutive translations, was measured along each
trajectory. Such segments have been obtained as a result of consecutive translations performed by the user. A t-test indicated signiﬁcant diﬀerences with respect

958

C. Sas, G. O’Hare, and R. Reilly

to the average length of the straight line segments between high spatial users
(Mean = 2.94) and low spatial users (Mean = 3.82) (t(12) = 2.49, p < 0.05).
2.3

Behaviour Around Landmarks

An important aspect related to translations refers to behaviour around landmarks. Are there any diﬀerences in the way eﬃcient and ineﬃcient navigators
visit or revisit landmarks, in the way they navigate along a given landmark, or to
what distance from the landmarks of interest they navigate? These are the kind
of questions that this section tries to answer. Without being statistically significant, low spatial users visit less landmarks (Mean = 11.25) then high spatial
users (mean = 16.27) (t(12) = 1.50, p > 0.05).
An important outcome suggests that low spatial users revisited signiﬁcantly
more time the same landmarks (Mean = 6.53), as opposed to high spatial users
(Mean = 3.60), (t(12) = 2.95, p < 0.05). Without reaching signiﬁcance, other
ﬁndings suggest that high spatial users visited more rooms (Mean = 9) than
low spatial users (Mean = 6.93). Findings also indicate that high spatial users
move along the nearest landmarks, signiﬁcantly longer (Mean = 20.88 events),
compared to low spatial users (Mean = 14.31 events) (t(12) = 1.97, p < 0.05).
In doing so it seems that such landmarks act as some form of attractor. T -test
analysis indicates that low spatial users move along the landmarks of interest
at signiﬁcantly longer distances (Mean = 1.92), compared to high spatial users
(Mean = 1.68), (t(12) = 1.95, p < 0.05). This implies that the search performed
by high spatial users is more systematic, focusing thoroughly on one landmark
at the time. Once a particular landmark acts as an attractor and a complete
search has been performed in its vicinity, the need for revisiting it decreases
signiﬁcantly.
There is no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between trajectories performed by high versus low spatial users in terms of the trajectory length. Given this result, it would
be interesting to investigating whether the same relationship holds with respect
to the area covered by high and low spatial users.

3

Discussion

Results of this study suggest that the poor trajectories are characterised by more
turns at sharp angles, more changes of direction and signiﬁcantly more straight
line segments. The key outcome of this study is that compared to ineﬃcient spatial behaviour, the eﬃcient spatial behaviour can be interpreted as an example of
the Minimum Energy Principle. The minimum energy principle expresses itself
through those procedural and strategic rules which enable users to achieve the
goals with a minimum investment of resources, both temporal and cognitive [7].
The eﬃciency of spatial behaviour performed by high spatial users is reﬂected
also in the fact that these users try to grasp the entire picture, rather than
focusing on its details. Thus, they visit each level of the building, usually in
a systematic manner, then they visit more rooms and within the rooms, more

A Performance Analysis of Movement Patterns

959

landmarks than low spatial users. These users are interested in acquiring a larger
and more synthetic view of the virtual building, rather than an analytic one.
Such a top down approach in exploring the virtual building is complemented by
a thorough search in the vicinity of each landmark of interest.
In addition, the way in which high spatial users search around landmarks
diﬀers from that employed by low spatial users. The same holistic approach
employed at a macro level can be identiﬁed: high spatial users perform a thorough
search around the landmarks which are considered of interest. They perform
signiﬁcantly more translations and rotations around these landmarks, at shorter
distances and accordingly, they revisit these landmarks less.
Spatial orientation refers to users’ knowledge of position and orientation
within the VE [1,2]. Through their behaviour, high spatial users succeeded
in maintaining a better spatial orientation. Spatial orientation refers to users’
knowledge of position and orientation within the VE [1,2]. High spatial users
usually maintain the same main direction or steady orientation, only smoothly
altered through small turns. They avoid both long straight movements and large
changes of direction, thus maintaining the course of movement.
On the other hand, trajectories performed by low spatial users contain more
changes of directions of great angles. These users change their direction not only
more often but also more drastically, with serious negative impact on the spatial
orientation.
The rotational behaviour of low spatial users presents several major limitations. These users rotate more often at angles greater than 90◦ , for both observing and changing the movement orientation. They perform signiﬁcantly more
consecutive rotations which dramatically increase the risk of disorientation.
Findings suggest that high spatial users carry out signiﬁcantly more rotations and translations along a trajectory (on average 12 as opposed to 10), but
signiﬁcantly less such consecutive events (on average 2 rotations as opposed to
3). The actions of high spatial users seem to be more frequent, evenly distributed
in time, and much smaller (both in changing the heading and changing the location). This is an important outcome which explains how the eﬃcient navigators
are more successful in maintaining their orientation and subsequently acquire
better spatial knowledge. Within Table 1 we have codiﬁed a set of rules which
may eﬀectively be used to diﬀerentiate between eﬃcient navigators and ineﬃcient navigators within VEs.

4

Conclusions

This paper investigates individual diﬀerences in navigating in VEs. Findings
indicate that there are individual diﬀerences in navigational patterns, which are
related to performance on spatial tasks, or in other words with users’ spatial
abilities.
Eﬃcient navigators maintain the movement direction and avoid sharp angles.
Low spatial users signiﬁcantly violate the Minimum Energy Principle which ad-

960

C. Sas, G. O’Hare, and R. Reilly
Table 1. Low Level Navigational Rules
Eﬃcient Rules

Ineﬃcient Rules
Rotations
More small rotations
Fewer small rotations
Fewer great rotations
More great rotations (sharp angles)
Fewer changes of heading (> 90◦ )
More changes of heading (> 90◦ )
More rotations on average
Fewer rotations on average
per trajectory (12)
per trajectory (10)
Fewer successive rotations
More successive rotations
in average per trajectory (2)
in average per trajectory (3)
Observational angle
Small changes of heading (< 45◦ )
High changes of heading (> 65◦ )
Moving angle
Small changes of heading (< 35◦ )
High changes of heading (> 50◦ )
Translations
More translations in average
Fewer translations in
per trajectory (12)
average per trajectory (10)
Fewer successive translations
More successive translations
in average per trajectory (1.6)
in average per trajectory (1.8)
Shorter segments covered by consecutive Longer segments covered by consecutive
translations (3 virtual metres)
translations (4 virtual metres)
Behaviour around landmarks
More rooms visited (9)
Fewer rooms visited (7)
More landmarks visited (16)
Fewer landmarks visited (11)
More movements near landmarks
Fewer movements near landmarks
of interest (20 events)
of interest (14 events)
Closer moves to the landmarks of
Farther moves from the landmarks of
interest (1.5 virtual metres)
interest (2 virtual metres)

vocates the reduction of needless expenditure of energy. They are ineﬃcient and
their frequent changes of direction increase the risk of disorientation.
Apart from oﬀering a better understanding of spatial behaviour performed
within VEs, in terms of individual diﬀerences in spatial knowledge acquisition,
the study ﬁndings have a signiﬁcant potential for practical applications. They
can be used for elaborating design principles for building adaptive VEs, capable of providing real-time navigation support for low spatial users. This can be
achieved through enabling low spatial users’ access of the eﬃcient navigational
rules, governing behaviour of high spatial users. Thus, diﬀerentiating between efﬁcient and ineﬃcient spatial behaviours and their underlying strategies could be
exploited through applications dedicated to improve spatial skills, such as adaptive VEs. On-going work is encapsulating such rules in the form of an intelligent
navigational support agent, based upon a Belief Desire Intention (BDI) model.
Such an agent, upon receipt of various observations from a listener agent, updates its set of beliefs (i.e. Belief(User, fewer small rotations)). Based upon such
beliefs and combinations thereof the agent may adopt commitments to provide

A Performance Analysis of Movement Patterns

961

support for the navigational process. Examples of such may include degradation
of the responsiveness of the mouse or movement keys, introduction of directional
cues, or indeed the provision of an embodied navigation assistant in the form of
an avatar within the VE [4].

References
1. Bowman, D., Davis, E., Badre, A., Hodges, L.: Maintaining spatial orientation
during travel in an immersive virtual environment. Presence: Teleoperators and
Virtual Environments 8(6) (1999) 618–631
2. Bowman, D.A.: Interaction Techniques for Common Tasks in Immersive Virtual
Environments. PhD Thesis, Department of Computer Science, Georgia Institute of
Technology (1999)
3. O’Hare, G.M.P., Sewell, K., Murphy, A. and Delahunty, T.: An agent based approach
to managing collaborative work within both a virtual environment and virtual community. In: Proceedings of the Workshop on Intelligent Agents for Computer Supported Co-Operative Work: Technologies & Risks (2000)
4. Sas, C., O’Hare, G., Reilly, R.G.: Virtual environment trajectory analysis: A basis for navigational assistance and scene adaptivity. Future Generation Computer
Systems. Special Issue on “Interaction and Visualisation Techniques for Problem
Solving Environments”(2004) in press.
5. Sas, C., O’Hare, G.M.P.: Presence and individual diﬀerences in virtual environment:
Usability study. In Sharp, H., Chalk, P., LePeuple, J., Rosbottom, J. (eds) Proceedings of 16th British HCI Conference volume 2, 50–53, London British Computer
Society (2002)
6. Sas, C., O’Hare, G.M.P., Reilly, R.G.: On-line trajectory classiﬁcation. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 2659, 1035–1044, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, (2003)
7. Warnett, L., McGonigle, B.: Unsupervised navigation using an economy principle.
In Prince, C.G., Demiris, Y., Marom, Y., Kozima, H., Balkenius, C. (eds) in Proceedings of the Second International Workshop on Epigenetic Robotics: Modeling
Cognitive Development in Robotic Systems (2002)

