Effect of Heterogeneity on Formation of Shear Zones
in Granular Bodies
Jacek Tejchman
Civil Engineering Department, Gdansk University of Technology,
80-952 Gdansk, Poland
tejchmk@pg.gda.pl

Abstract. Heterogeneity of granular materials triggers shear zone formation. In
the paper, the FE-analysis of the effect of heterogeneity on the formation of a
spontaneous shear zone inside of granular material during a plane strain compression test is presented. The numerical calculations are performed with a finite element method on the basis of a hypoplastic constitutive law extended by
polar quantities: rotations, curvatures, couple stresses and a mean grain diameter used as a characteristic length. The heterogeneity in the granular body is assumed in the form of spots with a different initial void ratio. The spots are single and distributed randomly or stochastically.

1 Introduction
Localization of deformation in narrow shear zones is a fundamental phenomenon of
granular material behaviour. Since shear localization is a precursor of failure of soils,
it has to be taken into account when modelling granular materials. Therefore, the
constitutive law has to include a characteristic length to describe the thickness of
shear zones and a spacing between them. The experimental results show that the
thickness of shear zones depends on many different factors as: pressure level, void
ratio, direction of deformation, specimen size, mean grain diameter, grain roughness,
grain hardness, surface roughness and stiffness of the surrounding structure in contact
with a granular body. In addition, the distribution of microscopic inhomogeneities
inherently present in granular materials and triggering shear localization seems to be
an influential factor [1]-[3]. Thus, while modeling shear localization it is of major
importance to use a constitutive model taking all influential factors into account.
The intention of the paper was to show the effect of the distribution of heterogeneity on the formation of shear localization during a plane strain compression test with
dry cohesionless sand specimen. The FE-calculations were performed with a polar
hypoplastic constitutive model [4]-[6]. In this model, a characteristic length is directly
related to the mean grain diameter of the granulate.

M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3037, pp. 626–629, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

Effect of Heterogeneity on Formation of Shear Zones in Granular Bodies

627

2 Constitutive Law and FE-Input Data
The polar hypoplastic constitutive model [4]-[6] can reproduce essential features of
granular bodies during shear localization depending on the void ratio, pressure level,
direction of the deformation and curvature rate, mean grain diameter and grain
roughness. The material parameters can be found by means of standard element tests
and simple index tests. They are correlated with grain properties, i.e. they can be
estimated from granulometric properties encompassing grain size distribution curve,
shape, angularity and hardness of grains. The FE-analyses were carried out with the
following material constants (for so-called Karlsruhe sand): ei0=1.3, ed0=0.51, ec0=0.82,
φc=30o, hs=190 MPa, n=0.5, α=0.3, d50=0.5 mm, ac=a1-1 [4].
The FE-calculations of plane strain compression tests were performed with a sand
specimen which was ho=10 cm high and b=2 cm wide (length l=1.0 m).
A quasi-static deformation in sand was initiated through a constant vertical
displacement increment prescribed at nodes along the upper edge of the specimen. The
boundary conditions of the sand specimen were no shear stress and couple stress at the
top and bottom. To preserve the stability of the specimen against the sliding along the
bottom boundary, the node in the middle of the bottom was kept fixed.
To obtain a shear zone inside the granular specimen, single weaker and stronger
spots and spots distributed randomly or stochastically were assumed. The single spots
were inserted into the specimen in the form of a weaker finite element (with a higher
initial void ratio) or a stronger finite element (with a lower initial void ratio). The
location and the distance of imperfect elements varied.
The effect of a distribution of the initial void ratio eo in the entire specimen was
also investigated. In the first case, the initial void ratio eo was randomly distributed
(by means of a random generator) in such a way that the initial void ratio was
increased in every element layer by the value a×r, where a is a constant (e.g. 0.0001,
0.05) and r is a random number between 0 and 1.
In addition, the initial void ratio was distributed stochastically with an exponential
frequency function proposed by Shahinpoor [3], [7]:

3 FE-Results
The effect of the spacing of weaker elements in the dense specimen is demonstrated in
Fig.1. Three weak elements (e0=0.90) are located uniformly along the left side of the
specimen at distance of about 25 mm. At the beginning, two shear zones always emerge
expanding outward from each weaker element. Afterwards and up to the end, only one
shear zone dominates (starting from the lowest weaker spot). It forms intensively
between u/h0=2.25% and u/h0=2.84%. The remaining shear zones become passive at the
beginning of intense shearing in the dominated shear zone i.e. at u/h0=2.25%. If the
weaker elements are very close to each other, the shear zone forms at the same place. In
contrast to FE-calculations of simple shearing of an infinite granular layer by Shi and
Chang [8], the thickness of the shear zone does not grow and is the same (independently
of the spacing of weak spots).

628

J. Tejchman

a)

b)

c)

Fig. 1. Evolution of modulus of the deformation rate d in 3 weaker elements (a), deformed FEmesh with the distribution of Cosserat rotation ωc at u/h0=2.5% (b) and Cosserat rotation ωc
and void ratio e at u/h0=10% (c)

9

9
a
b

P/(σcbl)

6

6
c

3

0

3

0

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0
0.10

u/h0

b)

c)

Fig. 2. FE-results: load-displacement curves and deformed FE-mesh with a distribution of
void ratio at residual state (exponential frequency distribution of the initial void ratio):
−

a)

−

−

−

e0 =0.55, b) e0 =0.60 an d c) e0 =0.65 ( e0 - mean void ratio)

Effect of Heterogeneity on Formation of Shear Zones in Granular Bodies

629

The FE-results with a stochastic distribution of the initial void ratio in dense
specimen (with a different mean void ratio) are shown in Fig.2.
As in the case of a random distribution of the initial void ratio, the shear zone can
propagate in different parts of the granular specimen. The thickness of the shear zone
slightly increases with increasing mean void ratio. Thus, this increase is significantly
smaller as compared to the calculations with a random distribution of the initial void
ratio (since the rate of softening is different in both cases).

4 Conclusions
Each single imperfection (weaker and stronger spot) induces shear zones at the beginning
of loading independently of the initial density of the specimen. Thus, multiple shear
zones appear which are not well developed.
The dominant single shear zone starts to form intensively in the dense specimen
slightly before the peak state. It is well developed after the peak state.
The dominant shear zone is connected to a weaker spot but not to a stronger one.
The spacing of single imperfections does not influence the thickness of the shear
zone. However, it influences the direction of propagation.
The distribution of the initial void ratio strongly influences the location of the shear
zone and its propagation direction. The shear zone can appear in different parts of the
dense specimen.
The results with a random distribution of the initial void ratio are similar as those
with a stochastic distribution using an exponential frequency function.

References
1. Hobbs, B. E., Ord, A.: Numerical simulation of shear band formation in frictional-dilational
materials. Ingenieur-Archiv 59 (1989) 209-220
2. Tejchman, J., Wu, W.: Numerical study on shear band patterning in a Cosserat continuum.
Acta Mechanica 99 (1993) 61-74
3. Nübel, K., Karcher, C.: FE simulations of granular material with a given frequency of
distribution of voids as initial condition. Granular Matter 1, 3 (1998) 105-112
4. Tejchman, J., Herle, I., Wehr, J.: FE-studies on the influence of initial void ratio, pressure level
and mean grain diameter on shear localisation. Int. J. Num. Anal. Meth. Geomech. 23 (1999)
2045-2074
5. Tejchman, J., Gudehus, G.: Shearing of a narrow granular strip with polar quantities. Int. J.
Num. and Anal. Methods in Geomechanics 25 (2001) 1-18.
6. Tejchman, J.: Patterns of shear zones in granular materials within a polar hypoplastic
continuum. Acta Mechanica 155, 1-2 (2002) 71-95
7 Shahinpoor, M.: Statistical mechanical considerations on storing bulk solids. Bulk Solid
Handling 1, 1 (1981) 31-36
8 Shi, Q., Chang, C. S.: Numerical analysis for the effect of heterogeneity on shear band
formation. Proc. 16th ASCE Eng. Mech. Conf., Seattle USA (2003) 1-11

