Lotka-Volterra Model of Macro-Evolution on
Dynamical Networks
Fran¸cois Coppex1 , Michel Droz1 , and Adam Lipowski1,2
1

2

Institut de Physique Th´eorique, Universit´e de Gen`eve,
quai E. Ansermet 24, 1211 Gen`eve 4, Switzerland,
Faculty of Physics, A. Mickiewicz University, 61-614 Pozna´
n, Poland

Abstract. We study a model of a multi-species ecosystem described by
Lotka-Volterra-like equations. Interactions among species form a network
whose evolution is determined by the dynamics of the model. Numerical
simulations show power-law distribution of intervals between extinctions,
but only for ecosystems with suﬃcient variability of species and with
networks of connectivity above certain threshold that is very close to
the percolation threshold of the network. Eﬀects of slow environmental
changes on extinction dynamics are also examined.

1

Introduction

Lotka-Volterra models of interacting species have a well established role in population ecology [1]. Being inspired by an oscillatory behavior in some preypredator systems, they are typically used to model populations on time scale
shorter than lifetime of describing species. It means that long-term properties
of ecosystems (macro-evolution) are usually not captured within such an approach. On the other hand, models used to describe macro-evolution very often
use a dynamics that operates at the level of species rather than individuals. Such
coarse-grained models usually refers to the notion of ﬁtness of a species that is
not commonly accepted [2]. Recently, there has been some attempts to study
macro-evolution using models equipped with dynamics that operates at the level of individuals [3,4,5]. Taking into account that Lotka-Volterra models are
relatively successful in describing many aspects of population dynamics it would
be desirable to apply such an approach also to macro-evolution. Some time
ago Abramson introduced a discrete version of Lotka-Volterrra ecosystem [6]
and studied certain characteristics of extinctions. His model is an example of a
one-dimensional food chain with N (∼ 100) trophic levels and a single species
occupying a given trophic level. Since in realistic food webs N ∼ 4 − 6 with
typically many species belonging to a given trophic level [7,8], these are highly nonrealistic assumptions. Nevertheless, extinction dynamics in Abramson’s
model shows some features that are characteristic to Earth biosystem.
In the present paper we introduce a Lotka-Volterra model that describes a
simpliﬁed ecosystem of N species of predators and one species of preys. Our
model can be thus considered as a simple food web model with only two trophic
levels. Competition between predator species is described by a certain random
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3039, pp. 742–749, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

Lotka-Volterra Model of Macro-Evolution on Dynamical Networks

743

network [9] of interactions whose evolution is coupled with dynamics of the model. Namely, when a certain species becomes extinct (i.e., its density falls below a
certain threshold) it is replaced by new species with a newly created set of interactions with some of existing species. Despite obvious simpliﬁcations the model
exhibits some properties that are typical to more complicated ecosystems, as for
example power-law distributions of intervals between extinctions. Within our
model we can also examine how robust this power-law distribution is. We ﬁnd
that under certain conditions, as for example very sparse interactions between
species, or too strong dominance of a small group of species, these power-law
characteristics disappear and the model is driven into a regime where extinctions have exponential distributions or where there are no extinctions and the
ecosystem enters a steady state. In our opinion, such regimes might be relevant
when a restricted (either in space or time) evolution of an ecosystem or its part
is studied. Interestingly, a threshold value of connectivity that separates powerlaw extinctions and steady state is very close to the percolation threshold of the
random network of inter-species interactions.
One of the important results coming from applying statistical physics models
to biological evolution is that avalanches of extinctions do not require external
factors to trigger them, but might be a natural consequence of the dynamics of
an ecosystem. As a result, these external factors, as e.g., climate changes, solar
activity or impact of a big meteorite, are very often neglected in such studies [10].
But such factors certainly aﬀect the ecosystem and there is a good evidence of
it [11]. One possibility to take external factor(s) into account in our model is to
modify a growth rate of prey. modify a growth rate of prey. Since dynamics of the
model is nonlinear, such a change might have more dramatic consequences than
merely a change of densities of species. And indeed we noticed that dynamics
of extinctions is strongly dependent on the growth rate. It turns out, that in
our model abundance of preys leads to a larger frequency of extinctions, and in
periods of hunger there are less extinctions. This is clearly due to nonlinearity
of the dynamics. Larger growth rate increases the density of preys that in turn
increases densities of predators. With increased densities, dynamics becomes
more competitive and extinctions become more frequent. Such a periodically
modulated growth rate leaves some traces also in the probability distribution of
extinctions. It might be intersting to notice that paleontological data also show
some traces of periodic events, but their proper understanding is still missing [11,
12]

2

The Model and Numerical Calculations

We study a Lotka-Volterra ecosystem that consists of N species of predators
with densities ρi (i = 1, 2, . . . , N ) who are all feeding on one species of preys
with density ρ0 . We assume that each predator species i is characterized by a
parameter ki (0 < ki < 1) that enters evolution equations of the model through
death and growth terms
ρ˙0 = g(t)ρ0 (1 − ρ0 ) −

ρ0
N

N

f (ki )ρi
i=1

(1)

744

F. Coppex, M. Droz, and A. Lipowski

ρ˙i = −ρi (1 − ρ0 ) + f (ki )ρi ρ0

1−

ki ρi +

j

kj ρj

ki +

j

kj

,

(2)

where i = 1, 2, . . . , N . In our model we assume that species interact mainly
through environmental capacity terms (the last term in Eq. (2)). Namely, the
growth rate of a given species i is reduced not only due to its density but also due
to weighted (with the factor k) densities of a group of randomly selected neighbor
species. In Eq. (2) summation over these neighbouring species is denoted by ( ).
Approximately, we might interpret the coeﬃcient ki as the size of organisms of
i-th species – the bigger they are the stronger their role in the environmental
capacity term. We also assume that the growth rate of preys is corrected by
the environmental capacity term and due to external factors might be a slowly
varying function of time. In principle, external factors might aﬀect also other
terms of model (1)-(2), but for simplicity we restrict its inﬂuence only to the
growth rate of preys. Functions g(t) and f (k) will be speciﬁed later.
Diﬀerential equations (1)-(2) are solved using Runge-Kutta fourth-order method. Each time a density of a certain species drops below a threshold value which
we ﬁx as ε = 10−7 we consider such a species as extinct [13]. Such species is then
replaced by a new species with a randomly assigned density (from the interval
(0,1)), the coeﬃcient k (0 < k < 1) that is randomly drawn from the distribution
p(k), and a new set of neighbors (all links of the ’old’ species are removed). With
such rules the model rather describes N niches, and we assume that a time to
create a species that will occupy a niche is relatively short comparing to the
typical lifetime of species [14].
We assume that a newly created species makes z links with randomly selected
neighbors. Links are not directional so a newly created species will also enter the
evolution equation of species it is neighbouring. If the extinct species would be
chosen randomly the network of interactions would have been a random graph.
However, it is the dynamics (1)-(2) that determines which species are extinct.
Thus, extinct species are not selected randomly and the resulting network is in
general not a random graph.

3

Results

In the following we describe numerical results obtained for some particular cases
of model (1)-(2).
3.1

Intervals between Extinctions

Various paleontological data suggest that dynamics of extinctions has some
power-law distributions of sizes or durations [11]. In our model we measured
time intervals t between successive extinctions. In this calculations we used a
constant growth term of preys g(t) ≡ 1. We examined two cases: (i) model I:
f (ki ) ≡ 1 and (ii) model II: f (ki ) = ki . Unless speciﬁed otherwise we select ki
randomly with a homogeneous distribution on the interval (0,1) (p(k) = 1). Our
results are shown in Fig. 1. In the simplest case, model I with z = 2 and ki ≡ 1

Lotka-Volterra Model of Macro-Evolution on Dynamical Networks

745

(i.e., all species during the evolution have identical ki ) we obtain exponentially
decaying distribution of intervals between extinctions P (t). Such a decay is also
seen for model I (z=4) with linear distribution of ki namely p(k) = 2k. We expect that such a behavior appears when a distribution of ki in the ecosystem is
relatively narrow and shifted toward unity. Such an eﬀect might be due to the
small width of distribution p(k) (i.e., a distribution from which we draw ki ) or
might be dynamically generated as in model II. In this case even though ki are
chosen from a homogeneous distribution, the dynamics favours large ki species
(due to their larger growth rate) and they dominate the ecosystem. When the
distribution of ki in the ecosystem is more uniform (model I with p(k) = 1) our
simulations suggest that P (t) decays as a power law. Let us notice, however, that
a power-law behavior is seen only on approximately one decade and we cannot
exclude that on a larger time scale a diﬀerent (perhaps exponential) behavior
appears as was already observed in some other macroevolutionary models [3].
Let us also notice that for model I with p(k) = 12 k −1/2 the power-law distribution P (t) seems to decay as t−2 , i.e., with the exponent consistent with some
paleontological data [11] as well as with predictions of some other models [4].

Fig. 1. Probability distribution of intervals between successive extinctions P (t) calculated for some particular cases of model (1)-(2) for N = 100. Inset shows the same
data but plotted on a lin-log scale

746

F. Coppex, M. Droz, and A. Lipowski

However, a power-law decay of P (t) is seen only for suﬃciently large z. When
z is too small, we observed that the ecosystem enters the steady state where all
ρi are positive and there are no extinctions. This is probably due to the fact
that the competition among predators is too weak (or rather too sparse). To
examine the transition between this two regimes in more detail we measured the
averaged time between extinctions τ and the results are seen in Fig. 2. One can
see that τ diverges around z ∼ 1.8 [15]. Such a value of the threshold parameter
suggests that this transition might be related with the percolation transition
in our network of interspecies interactions. To examine such a possibility we
measured the average size of the largest cluster of connected links in the network
R (normalized by the number of species N ) and the results are shown in Fig. 2.
Vanishing of this quantity locates the percolation transition [16]. One can see
that the percolation transition takes place at a larger value namely around z ∼
2.0. Our results suggest that these two transitions take place at diﬀerent values
of z. However the analysis of ﬁnite size eﬀects especially in the estimation of
τ is rather diﬃcult and we cannot exclude that these two transitions actually
overlap, as might be suggested by their proximity. Such a result would show that
a dynamical regime of an ecosystem is determined by the geometrical structure
of its interactions.

Fig. 2. The inverse average time between extinctions τ −1 and the percolation probability R as a function of z. Plotted results are based on calculations for N = 100, 200,
300 and 400 and extrapolation N → ∞

3.2

Eﬀect of a Modulated Growth Rate

Now we examine the role of a modulated in time growth rate of preys. Such
a modulation is supposed to mimic the inﬂuence of an external factor like a

Lotka-Volterra Model of Macro-Evolution on Dynamical Networks

747

change of a climate. One of the questions that one can ask in this context is
how such a change aﬀects the extinction dynamics. We studied model I with
p(k) = 1. The growth rate of preys we chose as g(t) = 1 + Asin( 2πt
T ), where A
and T are parameters. A typical behavior in case of model I with such a growth
rate is shown in Fig. 3. One can see that increased growth rate increases the

Fig. 3. A time evolution of the density of preys ρ0 , average density of predators
N
ρa = N1
, and the number of extinctions M (divided by 20) in the time interval
i=1
3
∆t = 10 for the model I with N = 100 and z = 4. A rescaled modulated growth rate
(g(t) − 1)/10 = 0.09sin( 2πt
) (T = 105 ) is also shown
T

density of preys ρ0 that increases the density of predators. However, it increases
also the frequency of extinctions. Such a behavior, namely increased extinction
rate during abundance of food, might at ﬁrst sight look as counterintuitive. This
eﬀect is related with the form of environmental capacity terms in in the growth
rate in Eq. 2, namely 1 − (ki ρi + j kj ρj )/(ki + j kj ). Such term certainly has
a larger variability for increased density of predators ρi , and for some species
(depending on the distribution of links, coeﬃcients ki and densities) it causes
faster extinction. Let us also notice that since period of modulation T is quite
large, there is no retardation eﬀect between density of preys and predators. We
observed such retardation for smaller values of T (∼ 1000).
Modulated growth rate of prays aﬀects also the probability distribution of
intervals between extinctions P (t) as shown in Fig. 4. One can see that period
of modulation T is imprinted in P (t). Let us notice that certain paleontological
data do show some signs of periodicity but its origin still remains unclear [12,
11].
It is known that slowly changing ecosystems sometimes undergo catastrophic
shifts [17]. As a result, the ecosystem switches to a contrasting alternative stable
state. It would be interesting to examine whether multi-species ecosystems, as

748

F. Coppex, M. Droz, and A. Lipowski

described by our model (1)-(2), might also exist in such alternative states. If
so, one can ask whether for example structure of the network of interspecies
interactions or extinction dynamics are the same in such states.

Fig. 4. Probability distribution of intervals between successive extinctions P (t) calculated for model I with modulated growth rate (N = 100)

4

Conclusions

In the present paper we studied extinction dynamics of a Lotka-Volterra model
of a two-level food web. In our model N species of predators feed on a single
species of preys. Competition between predators, that is speciﬁed by a certain
network of interactions, leads to their extinction and replacement by new species.
Distribution of intervals between successive extinctions in some cases has powerlaw tails and thus resembles extinction pattern of the real ecosystem. However,
when the network of interactions between predators is too sparse the ecosystem
enters the steady state. We have shown that such a change of behavior might
be related with a percolation transition of the network. We also examined an
inﬂuence of external factors on the evolution of the ecosystem. More speciﬁcally,
we studied the evolution of our model in case when the growth rate of preys is
changing periodically in time. It turns out that such a modulation substantially
changes the frequency of extinctions. Counterintuitively, periods with abundance
of preys have higher frequency of extinctions than periods with lesser amount of
preys.
It would be desirable to examine some extensions of our model. For example
one can introduce additional trophic levels or other forms of interspecies interactions. One can also examine a variable number of species that would allow

Lotka-Volterra Model of Macro-Evolution on Dynamical Networks

749

to create new species using certain mutation mechanism rather than assuming
that they appear as soon as a niche becomes empty. Another possibility that
is outside the scope of majority of macro-evolutionary models, and that will be
discussed in the forthcoming paper [18], is to examine emergent properties of
species.
Acknowledgement. This work was partially supported by the Swiss National
Science Foundation.

References
1. J. D. Murray, Mathematical Biology, (Springer, 1989). J. Hofbauer and K. Sigmund
The Theory of Evolution and Dynamical Systems, (Cambridge University Press,
1988).
2. P. Bak and K. Sneppen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 4083 (1993). B. Drossel,
Adv. Phys. 50, 209 (2001).
3. D. Chowdhury, D. Stauﬀer, and A. Kunvar, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 068101 (2003).
4. P. A. Rikvold and R. K. P. Zia, Phys. Rev. E 68, 031913 (2003).
5. M. Hall, K. Christensen, S. A. di Collobiano, and H. J. Jensen, Phys. Rev. E 66,
011904 (2002).
6. G. Abramson, Phys. Rev. E 55, 785 (1997).
7. B. Drossel and A. J. McKane, e-print: nlin.AO/0202034. D. Chowdhury and
D. Stauﬀer, e-print: q-bio.PE/0311002.
8. C. Quince, P. G. Higgs, and A. J. McKane, in Biological Evolution and Statistical
Physics, eds. M. L¨
assig and A. Vallerian (Springer Verlag, Berlin-Heidelberg 2002).
9. R. Albert and A. -L. Barab´
asi, Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 47 (2002).
10. One of the few macroevolutionary models that takes into account external factors
was studied by Roberts and Newman (B. W. Roberts and M. E. J. Newman,
J. Theor. Biol. 180, 39 (1996)). This model, however, is a variant of Bak-Sneppen
model with dynamics operating at the level of species.
11. M. E. J. Newman and R. G. O. Palmer, e-print: adap-org/9908002.
12. D. M. Raup and J. J. Sepkoski, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 81, 801 (1984).
13. Statistical properties of extinctions that we study in this paper are not aﬀected by
the precise value of the ε as soon as it has a small value (ε
1).
14. The fact that we remove a species as soon as its density drops below ε might suggest
some similarity with Bak-Sneppen (BS) model. Let us notice, however, that in BS
model at each time step a species is removed with the lowest ﬁtness. In our model
it is the dynamics that determines intervals between extinctions. Morevoer, in our
model dynamical variables are densities of species, that in principle are measurable
quantities, and not ﬁtness.
15. For noninteger z (i.e., the number of links of newly created species) we used the
following procedure: with probability z − [z] we created [z] + 1 links and with
probability 1 + [z] − z we created [z] links. On average such a recipe produces z
links.
16. D. Stauﬀer and A. Aharony, Introduction to Percolation Theory (Taylor & Francis,
London 1982).
17. M. Scheﬀer, S. Carpenter, J. A. Foley, C. Folks, and B. Walker, Nature 413, 591
(2001).
18. F. Coppex, M. Droz, and A. Lipowski, in preparation.

