Collaborative Web Browsing Based on Ontology
Learning from Bookmarks
Jason J. Jung, Young-Hoon Yu, and Geun-Sik Jo
Intelligent E-Commerce Systems Laboratory,
School of Computer Engineering, Inha University,
253 Yonghyun-dong, Incheon, Korea 402-751
j2jung@intelligent.pe.kr, yhyu@eslab.inha.ac.kr, gsjo@inha.ac.kr

Abstract. This paper proposes the collaborative web browsing system
sharing knowledge with other users. We have speciﬁcally focused on user
interests extracted from bookmarks. A simple URL based-bookmark is
provided with structural information by the conceptualization of the ontology. Furthermore, ontology learning based on a hierarchical clustering
method can be applied to handle dynamic changes in bookmarks. As a
result of our experiments, with respect to recall, about 53.1% of the total
time was saved during collaborative browsing for seeking the equivalent
set of information, as compared with single web browsing.

1

Introduction

Recently, in order to search relevant information, navigating in this overwhelming
web environment is a lonely and time-consuming task [1]. There have been many
kinds of studies to handle this problem such as the personal assistant agent
[2]. Collaborative web browsing is an approach whereby users share knowledge
with other like-minded neighbors while searching information on the web. When
communicating with the others, we can have many kinds of experiences and
gain knowledge such as which searching method is more useful and which steps
they needed in order to search a certain piece of information. The representative
collaborative browsing systems are Let’s Browse [5], ARIADNE [6], WebWatcher
[3], and BISAgent [4].
Recognizing what a user is interested in is very important in collaborative web
browsing when querying relevant information from other users and helping with
searching tasks. This paper proposes the extended application of a BISAgent,
which is a bookmark-sharing agent system based on a modiﬁed TF-IDF scheme
without considering user preference. According to the GVU’s survey, nowadays
there is no doubt that the number of bookmarks has increased more than ever.
This means that the set of bookmarks in a user’s folder can be considered to be
enough to infer user interests [10]. Due to the lack of semantic information from
simple URL-based bookmarks, we are focusing on a way of conceptualizing them
by referring to ontology. When the structural information for users’ bookmarks
is provided, not only the precision but also the reliability of the extraction of
user preferences can be improved.
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3038, pp. 513–520, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

514

2

J.J. Jung, Y.-H. Yu, and G.-S. Jo

Ontology Learning from Bookmarks

An ontology is a speciﬁcation of a conceptualization, which plays a role in enriching semantic or structural information [7]. In addition, a bookmark means
URL information about a web site that a user wants to remember and visit
again during web browsing. We try to analyze not only his bookmarks but also
semantic information that each bookmark implies. Thereby, ontology is applied
to conceptualize the simple URL-based bookmarks, and more importantly, hierarchical clustering is exploited to learn these conceptualized bookmarks, as
shown in Fig. 1.

User
Interest Map

Set of
Bookmark

ONTOLOGY

Set of
Conceptualized
Bookmark

Hierarchical
Clustering

Fig. 1. Hierarchical Clustering of bookmarks

Ontology learning has four main phases which are import, extract, prune,
and reﬁne [9]. We are focusing on extracting semantic information from bookmarks based on hierarchical clustering, which is the process of organizing tree
structures of objects into groups whose members are similar in some way [8].
The tree of hierarchical clusters can be produced either bottom-up, by starting with individual objects and grouping the most similar ones or top-down,
whereby one starts with all the objects and divides them into groups [9]. When
clustering conceptualized bookmarks, the top-down algorithm is more suitable
than the bottom-up, because directory path information is already assigned to
the bookmarks during conceptualization step.
Instead of ontology, the well-organized web directory services such as Yahoo
and Cora can be utilized. In practice, however, these directory services have
some drawbacks we have to consider as follows.
– The multi-attributes of a bookmark. A bookmark can be involved in
more than one concept. As shown in Fig. 2 (1), a bookmark can be included
in not only a concept named as A but also a concept B.
– The complicated relationships between concepts. The semantic relationships between concepts can be classiﬁed to
• Redundancy between semantically identical concepts
• Subordination between semantically dependent concepts.
In Fig. 2 (1), the concept A is a subconcept of the root, but the concept A
can be redundantly linked as subconcept of the concept P. Moreover, the
concept C can be a subconcept of more than a concept like P, as shown in
Fig. 2 (2).

Collaborative Web Browsing Based on Ontology Learning from Bookmarks

A
B

P

B

515

P
P

A

C
(1)

(2)

Fig. 2. (1) The multi-attribute of bookmarks; (2) The subordinate relationship between
two concepts

When considering inﬂuence propagation between concepts, we deﬁne notations for semantic analysis dealing with problems caused by web directories. Let
the user Ui have the set of bookmarks Bi as follows:
Bi = bi1 , bi2 , ..., bim

(1)

where m is the total number of bookmarks. To conceptualize Bi , each bookmark
in this set is categorized with the corresponding concepts represented as the
directory path. Therefore, the set of conceptualized bookmarks Ci is
CBi = cbi1 , cbi2 , ..., cbin
CRBi = crbi1 , crbi2 , ..., crbia
Ci = CBi + CRBi
where n is the total number of concepts including the bookmarks in Bi and a
is the number of additional concepts subordinately related with CBi . Generally,
due to the drawbacks of web directories, n becomes larger than m. Here we
mention the step for conceptualizing bookmarks by referring to web directories
as follows:
Function Conceptualization (User)
var
counter1, counter2: integer; b: set_bookmark[];
cb, crb: set_conceptualized_bookmark[];
begin
b := Bookmark(User); counter1 := 1;
repeat
cb := cb + Concept(b[counter1]);
repeat
counter2 := 1;
if ((isLinked(Concept(b[counter1]))) = TRUE) then
crb := crb + Linked(Concept(b[counter1]));
until counter2 = size(b[counter1])
counter1 := counter1 + 1;

516

J.J. Jung, Y.-H. Yu, and G.-S. Jo

until counter1 = size(b)
return (cb, crb);
end.
The functions Bookmark and Concept return the set of bookmarks of an input
user and the set of concepts matched with an input bookmark by looking up
the ontology, respectively. The function Linked retrieves the additional concepts
related with the input concept. After the function isLinked checks if the input
parameter is connected from more than one parent concept on the ontology.

3

Extracting User Interests from Conceptualized
Bookmarks

In order to extract user interests, the interest map (i-Map) of each user is established and DOI’s (Degree Of Interest) of the corresponding concepts on the
i-Map are measured, according to the following axioms:
Axiom 1. The initial DOI of a concept is the number of times that this concept
is matched with the set of bookmarks through the function Conceptualization.
The larger DOI of a concept means that the corresponding user is more interested
in this concept. This means that this number of times is in linear proportion to
user preference for that concept.
The Number of Matched Times of Concepts ∝ DOI(Ci )
Axiom 2. The DOI of a concept is propagated from its subconcepts using this
inﬂuence propagation:
P ropagate[DOI(Ci )] = (logk (DOI(Ci ) + 1))/N

(2)

where N is the number of total subconcepts of a concept and k is given by
k = V ariance(DOI(subc(Ci ))) + bias = σ 2 + bias

(3)

where subc(Ci ) is the set of subconcepts of Ci .
– The dispersion of DOI. As the number of subconcepts of a parent is increased,
each of them has less inﬂuence on its parent concepts.
– The distance between concepts. The closer concepts are more tightly related
with each other. In other words, the inﬂuence propagation is exponentially
increasing, as the distance between concepts becomes closer.
Axiom 3. The DOI of a concept is measured from the propagations of all subconcepts and all concepts have inﬂuence on the root node.
DOI(Ci ) =

[P ropagate(DOI(subc(Ci )j )) × DOI(subc(Ci )j )]
j

(4)

Collaborative Web Browsing Based on Ontology Learning from Bookmarks

517

C1
C2
C5

C3
C6

C4
C7

C8

C9

Fig. 3. An example of the conceptualized bookmarks of a user

Axiom 4. Concepts whose DOI’s are over the predeﬁned threshold value after
normalization ﬁnally represent user interests.
In Fig. 3, as an example, the black squares indicate the bookmarks of a user,
Ui , and assign the initial states, as shown in the following equations:
DOI(c4 ) = 1, DOI(c5 ) = 3, DOI(c6 ) = 0,
DOI(c7 ) = 1, DOI(c8 ) = 1, DOI(c9 ) = 1
According to the inﬂuence propagation equations, all DOI’s of other concepts
can be computed. The DOI’s of c2 and c4 are as follows:
2

DOI(c2 ) =

propagate[DOI(ck )] × DOI(ck ) = 1.11
k−1

DOI(c4 ) = 1 + (log2 2/3 × 1) × 3 = 2.0
The mean of all DOI’s is 1.44 and the DOI of every concept is assigned after
normalization. If the threshold value is 0.2, only c4 and c5 are extracted as the
most interested concepts for the user. In Fig. 4, the tree represents the user’s
i-Map. Each user is given an i-Map, and every time he inserts a bookmark, this
i-Map is updated.

4

Collaborative Web Browsing with Recommendation

Generally, in computer supported cooperative work (CSCW), a common distinction is made between the temporal and spatial nature of activities. Activities are
either co-located or remote and either synchronous or asynchronous [11]. The
collaborative web browsing system proposed in this paper is remote and asynchronous because this system is based on a web environment and information
about what a participant is interested in extracted from his set of bookmarks
and ontology. While browsing to search information, users can be recommended
from the facilitator in the following two ways:

518

J.J. Jung, Y.-H. Yu, and G.-S. Jo

C1
C2
C4
C5
Fig. 4. An i-Map representing the high ranked concepts

– By querying speciﬁc information for the facilitator. After the information
about a particular concept is requested, the facilitator can determine who
has the maximum DOI for that concept by scanning his yellow pages.
– By broadcasting new bookmarks of like-minded users from the facilitator.
Every time a user inserts a new bookmark, this fact, after conceptualization,
is sent to the facilitator. Thereby, users can obtain information related to
the common concepts in their own i-Map from neighbors.
As shown in Fig. 5, the whole system consists of a facilitator located between the users and the client-side web browser which communicates with the
facilitator.

FACILITATOR

Client

User
Web
Browser

Query
Generator

List of
Users

User
User

Fig. 5. The whole system architecture

Most importantly, the facilitator must create yellow pages where all users
can register themselves. Then, every bookmarking activity can be automatically
transmitted to the facilitator.

5

Experimentation

We made up a hierarchical tree structure as a test bed for “Home > Science >
Computer Science >” from Yahoo. This tree consisted of about 1300 categories
and the maximum depth was eight. For gathering bookmarks, 30 users explored

Collaborative Web Browsing Based on Ontology Learning from Bookmarks

519

Yahoo directory pages during for 28 days. Every time users visit a web site related with their own interests, they stored URL information in their bookmark
repositories. Finally 2718 bookmarks were collected. In order to evaluate this
collaborative web browsing based on extracting user interests, we adopted the
measurements recall and precision. After all of the bookmark sets of the users
were reset, these users began to gather bookmarks again after getting the system’s recommendations according to their own preferences. During this time,
users were being recommended information retrieved from Yahoo based on their
interests as extracted up to that moment. As a result, with information recommendations, 80% of the total bookmarks were collected in only 3.8 days, thereby
53.1% of the total time spent previously was saved.
The precision was measured by the rate of the inserted bookmarks among
the recommended information set. In other words, this was the measurement for
the accuracy of predictability. As time passed, the user preferences were changed
according to the inserted bookmarks. At the beginning, the precision was especially low because the user preferences were not yet set up. While user interests
were being extracted during the ﬁrst 6 days, the precision of recommended information quickly tracked to that of the testing data.
For the rest of the experiment time, the precisionmaintained the same level
as that of the testing data because the user interests had already been extracted.

6

Conclusion and Future Work

This paper proposes that bookmarks are the most important evidence to support
the extraction of user interests. In order to make up for the structural information, simple URL-based bookmarks were conceptualized by ontology. Then, by
establishing an i-Map of each user and DOI of the concepts on that map, we made
it much easier to generate queries for relevant information and to share bookmarks among users. We have implemented a collaborative web browsing system
sharing conceptualized bookmarks. Based on the information recommendation
of this system, we saved about 53% of the searching time as compared with
single web browsing. Moreover, a beginner in a certain ﬁeld can be helped by
ﬁnding out valuable hidden information from experts.
As future work, we are considering the privacy problem associated with sharing personal information such as user interests. The visualizing of an i-Map is
also the next target of this research in order to increase users’ intuition recognizing their own preferences quantitatively regarding locations.
Acknowledgement. This work was supported by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation(KOSEF) through the Northeast Asia e-Logistics Research
Center at University of Incheon.

520

J.J. Jung, Y.-H. Yu, and G.-S. Jo

References
1. Maes, P.: Agents that Reduce Work and Information Overload. Comm. of ACM
37(7) (1994) 31–40
2. Lieberman, H.: Letizia: An Agent That Assists Web Browsing. Proc. of the 4th
Int. J. Conf. on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (1995) 924–929
3. Armstrong, R., Freitag, T., Mitchell, T.: WebWatcher: A Learning Apprentice for
the World Wide Web. AAAI Spring Sym. on Information Gathering from Heterogeneous, Distributed Environments (1997) 6–12
4. Jung, J.J., Yoon, J.-S., Jo, G.-S.: BISAgent: Collaborative Web Browsing through
Sharing of Bookmark Information. Proc. of IIP 2000, 16th IFIP World Computer
Congress (2000)
5. Lieberman, H., van Dyke, N., Vivacqua, A.: Let’s Browse: A Collaborative Web
Browsing Agent. Proc. of Int. Conf. on Intelligent User Interfaces (1999) 65–68
6. Twidale, M., Nichols, D.: Collaborative Browsing and Visualization of the Search
Process. Electronic library and visual information research (1996) 51–60
7. Gruber, T.R.: A translation approach to portable ontologies. Knowledge Acquisition 5(2)(1993) 199–220
8. Kaufman, L., Rousseeuw, P.: Finding Groups in Data: An Introduction to Cluster
Analysis. John Wiley (1990)
9. Maedche, A.: Ontology Learning for the Semantic Web. Kluwer Academic Publishers (2002)
10. Jung, J.J., Jo, G.-S.: Extracting User Interests from Bookmarks on the Web. Proc.
of the 7th Paciﬁc-Asia Conf. on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (2003)
203–208
11. Rodden, T.: A survey of CSCW systems. Interacting with Computers, 3(3) (1991)
319–354

