Efficient Immunization Algorithm for Peer-to-Peer
Networks
Hao Chen, Hai Jin, Jianhua Sun, and Zongfen Han
Cluster and Grid Computing Lab
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430074, China
{haochen,hjin,jhsun,zfhan}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract. In this paper, we present a detail study about the immunization of
viruses in Peer-to-Peer networks with power-law degree distributions. By comparing two different immunization strategies, we conclude that it is efficient to
immunize the highly connected nodes in order to eradicate viruses from the network. Furthermore, we propose an efficient updating algorithm of global virus
database according to the degree-based immunization strategy.

1

Introduction

Recently, a large proportion of research effort has been devoted to the study and modeling
of a wide range of natural systems that can be regarded as networks, focusing on large
scale statistical properties of networks other than single small networks. Some reviews on
complex networks can be found [6]. From biology to social science to computer science,
systems such as the Internet [5], the World-Wide-Web [2], social communities and
biological networks can be represented as graphs, where nodes represent individuals and
links represent interactions among them. Like these complex networks, one important
characteristic of P2P networks is that they often show high degree of tolerance against
random failures, while they are vulnerable under intentional attacks [3]. Such property
has motivated us to carry out a study about the virus spreading phenomenon and some
hacker’s behaviors in P2P networks from a topological point of view. In our study, we
choose Gnutella as our testbed. The main contributions of this paper are: first, an optimal
immunization strategy is given; second, we propose an efficient information updating
algorithm for P2P networks based on the immunization strategy.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the immunization
model of P2P networks. In Section 3, we propose an information updating algorithm
for P2P networks. In Section 4, we give our conclusions and point some directions for
future work.

2

Immunization Model of P2P Networks

2.1

Modeling Immunization of P2P Network

One widely used model of virus spreading is called SIS (susceptible-infectivesusceptible) model [4]. This model assumes that the nodes in the network can be in
This paper is supported by National Science Foundation of China under grant 60273076.
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3036, pp. 623–626, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

624

H. Chen et al.

two states: susceptible (one node is healthy but could be infected by others), infective
(one node has the virus, and can spread it to others). Each susceptible node is infected
with rate ν if it is connected to one or more infected nodes. At the same time, an infected
node is cured with rate δ, defining an effective spreading rate λ = ν/δ for the virus.
A widely used theoretical model for power-law networks [3] is the Barabasi and
Albert (BA) model [1]. In the following, we will use the BA model to deduce a theoretical
framework of the prevalence of virus, and then compare with the real data obtained from
Gnutella network [3].
In order to take into account the different connectivity of all the nodes, we denote
the density of infected nodes with degree k by ρk (t), where the parameter t indicates
the time, and the average density of all infected nodes in the network by ρ = Σk p(k)ρk .
According to the results in [7], we have the following equation:
ρ

2e−1/mλ
.
1 − e−1/mλ

(1)

The ρ is the stationary density of all infected nodes after time evolution of the
stochastic cycle of SIS model.
2.2

Immunization Strategies of P2P Networks

The power-law networks exhibit different behaviors under random failures and intentional attacks [3], from which two intuitive immunization strategies are randomized and
degree-based immunizations. In the randomized immunization strategy, a proportion of
nodes randomly chosen in the network are immunized. Accordingly, in the degree-based
strategy, nodes are chosen for immunization if their degrees are greater than a predefined
value.
In the randomized case, for a fixed spreading rate λ, defining the fraction of immunized nodes in the network as f , we can get the effective spreading rate λ(1 − f ), and
substituting it into equation (1) we obtain
ρf =

2e−1/mλ(1−f )
.
1 − e−1/mλ(1−f )

(2)

Evidently, in the case of degree-based immunization, we can not use equation (2)
to deduce an explicit formula as in the randomized case, but we will use simulations to
compare the difference between the theoretical BA model and the real data of Gnutella
network.
Our simulations are performed with a fixed spreading rate λ = 0.15, the smallest
node degree m = 3 and the number of nodes N = 34206 the same as the real data
of the topology collected from Gnutella network [3]. Initially we infect a proportion
of healthy nodes in the network, and iterate the rules of SIS model. In Fig.1 (a), we
plot the simulation results of degree-based immunization for BA network (line) and
Gnutella network (square-line). With the increasing of f , ρf decays much faster in
Gnutella network than in BA model, and the linear regression from the largest values
of f yields the estimated thresholds fc
0.03 in Gnutella network, fc
0.2 in BA
network. The value of fc in Gnutella network indicates that the Gnutella network is

Efficient Immunization Algorithm for Peer-to-Peer Networks

625

Fig. 1. Results for randomized and degree-based immunization measured by the density of infected
nodes ρf as a function of the fraction of immunized nodes f.

very sensitive to the degree-based immunization, and the immunization of just a very
small fraction (3%) of nodes will eradicate the spreading of virus. On the other hand,
in Fig.1 (b), the simulation results of randomized immunization are plotted for Gnutella
Network (square-line), which is in good agreement with the theoretical prediction (line)
by equation (2), except for a larger value of fc 0.7 compared with the value fc 0.64
of BA network.

3

Efficient Immunization Algorithm for P2P Networks

Based on the analysis of immunization strategies, we use high degree nodes to transfer
immunization information (when an intrusion or a virus is detected) to other nodes. First,
we formulate the highest degree kmax in the network as a function of the network size.
k
−np2k [1]. For BA
Given a specific degree distribution pk , as stated in [6], we have dp
dk
2 −3
model, the probability distribution of degree is pk = 2m k . Substituting it into above
equation, we have kmax
2m2 n/3. For simplicity, suppose that the degrees of the
nodes in the transferring sequence, through which we update immunization information,
are all approximate to kmax , then the number of steps needed to transfer the information
in the network of size n is s = n/kmax
3n/2m2 .
We perform simulations of the real data of Gnutella network with a power-law
exponent γ = 2.0 [3], and compare the simulation results with the theoretical prediction
of BA network . The number of nodes range from N = 103 to N = 104 . Fig.2 shows
that the algorithm of transferring update information based on high degrees in Gnutella
network is as efficient as the prediction of the theoretical BA model. We need only s = 11
steps to update all high degree nodes in Gnutella network with N = 1000 nodes, and
s = 36 steps in Gnutella network with same number of nodes.

4

Conclusions

In this paper, based on the simple SIS model, we analyze the influence of virus spreading
on P2P networks with two different immunization strategies, namely randomized and

626

H. Chen et al.

Fig. 2. The number of steps s needed to transfer information through high degree nodes as a
function of the network size N .

degree-based immunization, and performe theoretical modeling and real data simulations. The results show that the degree-based strategy is more efficient than the randomized strategy, which also motivate us to design an effective immunization information
transferring algorithm.

References
1. A. L. Barabasi and R. Albert, "Emergence of scaling in random networks", Science, Vol.286,
pp.509, 1999.
2. A. Broder, R. Kumar, F. Maghoul, P. Raghavan, and R. Stata, "Graph structure in the web",
Computer Networks, Vol.33, pp.309-320, 2000.
3. H. Chen, H. Jin, and J. H. Sun, "Analysis of Large-Scale Topological Properties for Peerto-Peer Networks", Proceedings of International Symposium on Cluster Computing and the
Grid, 2004.
4. O. Diekmann and J. A. P. Heesterbeek, Mathematical epidemiology of infectious diseases:
model building, analysis and interpretation, JohnWiley & Sons, New York, 2000.
5. M. Faloutsos, P. Faloutos, and C. Faloutsos, "On Power-law Relationships of the Internet
Topology", Computer Communications Review, Vol.29, pp.251-262, 1999.
6. M. E. J. Newman, "The structure and function of complex networks", SIAM Review, Vol.45,
pp.167-256, 2003.
7. R. P. Satorras and A. Vespignani, "Epidemic Spreading in Scale-Free Networks", Phys. Rev.
Lett, Vol.86, pp.3200-3203, 2001.

