Route Optimization Technique to Support Multicast
in Mobile Networks*
1

1

2

1

Kiyong Park , Sunyong Han , Bok-gyu Joo , Keecheon Kim , and Jinpyo Hong

3

1

Kon-kuk University,
Hongik University,
3
Hankuk University of Foreign Studies,
Seoul, Korea
kypark@cclab.konkuk.ac.kr, {syhan,kckim}@konkuk.ac.kr,
bkjoo@hongik.ac.kr, jphong@hufs.ac.kr
2

Abstract. The technology called Network Mobility (NEMO) is proposed
recently by IETF to support the network mobility. Meanwhile, as the needs of
group communications increase in the internet, supporting multicast services
became a challenging issue on NEMO as on Mobile IP. This paper explores
issues and problems of providing multicast service on mobile networks and
presents a route optimization technique along with an architecture that enables
optimal and efficient multicast service on NEMO environments.

1 Introduction
Since IETF proposed Mobile IP technology [1] as a technique to provide host
mobility, many research works have been made to support host mobility in wireless
environments. Nowadays, people want to enjoy surfing the internet even in the
moving vehicles such as buses and planes, even if their equipments do not support
mobility. Meanwhile, the importance of group communications has been recognized
in various applications such as remote lectures, on-line games, etc. This is true even in
wireless and mobile environments.
IETF recently proposed a new architecture called Network Mobility(NEMO) basic
support architecture in order to answer the requirements for network mobility [2][3].
In early Mobile-IP(MIP) technologies, basic architectures such as MIP-BT, MIP-RS
[7] and Multicast Proxy Server [8], were suggested to provide multicast service for
mobile hosts. Because the NEMO basic support architecture is based on Mobile IP, it
inherits from Mobile IP the same fundamental problems such as route optimization
problem [9], tunnel convergence problem, mass of multicast problem, when it is used
to support multicast for mobile networks. Therefore, we have to reinvestigate
multicast support mechanism suitable for NEMO environments.
In this paper, we propose new schemes for supporting multicast on NEMO, by
extending the functions of mobile router and adding new parts of router advertisement
messages in MIPv6 network. We adopted Prefix Delegation mechanism suggested for
route optimization in MIPv6 in order to provide route optimization on multicasting.
*

This research is supported by University IT Research Center Project.

M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3038, pp. 1185–1192, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

1186

K. Park et al.

For seamless multicast service even when a mobile network changes its location,
we extended mobile router functions to manage the creation and coordination of
dynamic tunneling with other multicast routers. Our approach provides an efficient
and optimal multicasting and will become a fundamental architecture for supporting
multicast on NEMO.

2 Related Researches
2.1 Network Mobility (NEMO) Basic Support Architecture
To support network mobility, some basic requirements are to be satisfied [4] on
existing networks. Those requirements are session continuity, connectivity,
reachability, and nested mobility support. Most of the requirements are met by
employing a mobile router(MR), which is in charge of its own network mobility.
Because the MR acts not only as a mobile node(MN) but also as a router, it provides a
route path to on-link nodes in its network and guarantees network connectivity to the
internet. To support those requirements basically in NEMO basic support architecture,
bi-directional tunneling is necessary between the MR and its Home Agent (HA) so
that on-link nodes in the MR’s network can be reachable in the internet
A Correspondent Node (CN) may not know where the target node is placed at the
first time during communication after a mobile network finished its movement.
Therefore, the HA must find out the location of the node and forward data to it. The
location information of the node with which the CN wants to communicate, however,
does not exist in the binding list of the HA. This is because the node didn’t make any
registration request message for movement notification. In spite of that, the HA can
find out the location information of the MR containing the node, because the MR
makes a registration request process to the HA when it moves. So the HA tunnels to
MR’s CoA and the MR forward the data from the HA to the nodes in its network.
2.2 MIP-BT (Bi-directional Tunneling) and MIP-RS (Remote Subscription)
In MIP-BT, a mobile node in a foreign network receives multicast data packets from
the mobility agent in the home network by bi-directional tunneling. This approach
assumes that the home agent has multicast router functions or there is a multicast
router in the home network. The home agent intercepts multicast packets that the
mobile node used to receiving, encapsulates and transmits them to the mobility agent
in the foreign network (called ‘foreign agent’). When the foreign agent receives these
packets, it decapsulates them and sends to the local network. In MIP-RS, when a
mobile node moves to a new network, it sends IGMP messages to the local network in
order to rejoin the multicast group [6], so that it can receive multicast data packets
from the local multicast router of the foreign network.
The major advantage of MIP-BT approach is it can minimize data packets loss and
there is no delay caused by reconstructing a multicast route tree. The major advantage
of MIP-RS approach is that the mobile node is served directly by the local multicast
router, so that multicast data packet route is optimized

Route Optimization Technique to Support Multicast in Mobile Networks

1187

2.3 Prefix Delegation (PD) Mechanism for Route Optimization on NEMO
NEMO basic support architecture preserves session continuity by employing bidirectional tunnel between a MR and its HA. This scheme is reasonable only for a
small-scale mobile network because MR has to encapsulate and decapsulate all
packets for its MNs.
The purpose of PD mechanism [5] is to enable MNs behind the MR to perform
Mobile IPv6 route optimization. In this mechanism, every MNs under a mobile
network is allocated native routable internet address as its CoA from the network
prefixes in Route Advertisement (RA) messages. That means a MR does not advertise
the home network prefixes but newly-acquired network prefixes from the active
router (AR)’s RA message. This process is repeated recursively on nested mobile
networks, and eventually all MNs and MRs under the AR can be native routable.
2.4 Summary of Current Problems
Because NEMO basic support architecture has inherited Mobile IP and related
techniques, many serious problems in supporting multicast in Mobile IP still exist in
NEMO. Major problems are tunnel convergence problem, mass of multicast problem,
and route optimization problem. Furthermore, because NEMO basic support is using
bi-directional tunnel, multicasting on NEMO has the serious weakness called the
pinball route problem [10], which can be classified into a route optimization problem.
If MIP-BT is adopted on NEMO, the tunnel convergence problem occurs and it
gives much overhead not only on MRs but also on AR because they must process
many tunnels, while the problem gives load only to AR or mobility agent on Mobile
IP. Furthermore, the more networks are nested, the more damages occur in the entire
mobile network. If MIP-RS is adopted on NEMO, MNs in the mobile network can not
join a multicast group, because they don’t know where multicast routers are located.
Moreover, their IGMP [6] messages cannot be routed to a multicast router, because
their IGMP messages may not be routed by the MR’s upper router for each different
mobile network prefixes.

3 Architecture
3.1 Basic Concepts
Firstly, we must handle the multicast support on a mobile network itself, otherwise no
MNs in mobile network are sure of the reception of multicast data. Furthermore, lots
of tunnels will generate network congestions in the mobile network and its
ascendants. This problem, called tunnel convergence and mass of multicast problem,
cannot be solved until the mobile network has a multicast router or the MR has
multicast router functions. Even though there is a multicast router in the mobile
network or MR has multicast router functions, we still encounter another problem that
the MR or multicast router cannot have multicast route tree statically with any fixed
multicast router because of network mobility.

1188

K. Park et al.

For above reasons, we assume that in our architecture, multicast router functions
are built in the MR, and the MR and the AR must be in charge of notifying default
multicast router (DmR) information to its descendant MRs to create multicast route
tree. This DmR Information is an internet address of a fixed multicast router in the
internet. The information can be set manually for AR and dynamically in run time for
MR.
In NEMO basic support architecture, bi-directional tunnel is used for a MR to
communicate with its home network. But it causes a serious problem of route
optimization, called the pinball route problem. It happens again in the case of
multicasting whenever a mobile network is nested. To overcome this weakness, we
adopt the Prefix Delegation mechanism. It achieves route optimization of tunnel
between a MR and a multicast router. That is, multicast tunnels in our architecture are
made from the internet address of multicast router directly to MR’s CoA.
In addition, when a MR receives a RA message it must be able to distinguish the
source of the message, whether it is from the AR or an upper MR. We use a
specialized bit, named ‘M’, in the RA message. If the ‘M’ bit is checked, the RA
message is from an upper MR and the network is nested. We designated for ‘M’ bit
one of five reserved bits in RA message format.
3.2 Operation Overview
Fig. 1 shows how network components interact in NEMO for multicasting and how
the tunnels are established to each router.

Fig. 1. Operation Flow

When a mobile network acts for the first time, the MR in the network must
establish a multicast tunnel with its upper multicast router. To do that, the cases are
either the MR find a multicast router by itself, or upper routers(the AR or upper MR)
must inform the MR of DmR information. For the former case, if there is no local
multicast router, MR cannot find one by itself, and it cannot provide multicast service
on its network. For the latter case, if the MR gets DmR information, it will make a
multicast tunnel to the DmR and provide successful multicasting. Therefore, in our
architecture, we assume that upper routers add DmR information in RA message, and

Route Optimization Technique to Support Multicast in Mobile Networks

1189

a MR receiving the information must process it. If upper routers send RA message
with no DmR information, the MR must understand there is no multicast service
under the router and does nothing.
Once a MR gets the information about DmR from RA message, it will establish a
tunnel using its new CoA for multicast route tree construction. If the MR is attached
under an AR directly, it will receive a RA message with ‘M’ bit not checked; then the
MR must establish a tunnel to the DmR specified in RA message. On the other hand,
if the mobile network is nested under another mobile network, the MR will receive a
RA message with ‘M’ bit set. In this case the (nested) MR has to make a tunnel to its
upper MR, because the DmR information with ‘M’ bit set in RA message means that
upper MR provides multicast service.
Once the MR establishes a multicast tunnel, it changes old DmR information to
newly-acquired one. The new DmR is used for its own RA message, and will be used
later when the mobile network moves. We will explain about this later in detail. At
this point, all IGMP messages from MNs are handled properly by MR and MNs will
receive multicast data.
When a mobile network that has a multicast tunnel moves away, its multicast
tunnel using the MR’s previous CoA is of no use. Thus, after the MR finishes its
registration request process, it has to establish a multicast tunnel to its DmR again
using its new CoA and destroy previous one. There is no tree reconstruction cost or
delay for this, because the DmR already has provided the multicast group it joined.
After that, the MR starts finding a DmR in the new network by examining RA
messages for new DmR information. As stated above, if the MR is attached under an
AR, it establishes another multicast tunnel with new DmR; if it is nested it establishes
a tunnel with upper MR. Once a new multicast tunnel is established, the previous
tunnel with old DmR is destroyed.
Here, we presented a mechanism to provide optimal routing for multicast data in
mobile environments. Multicast packets from sender will be routed optimally to the
designated MR because of PD mechanism; they will be routed efficiently because of
using an appropriate multicast router. The transition is seamless because, when a
mobile network changes its location, the MR keeps an old tunnel to the previous DmR
until a better tunnel is established. Our approach provides a basic multicast support
mechanism on NEMO environments.
3.3 Extensions
We extended each part of components in mobile network to support multicasting.
Firstly, because the DmR information and ‘M’ bit must be specified in RA message,
we extended some of the RA message format and stated those below
(1) Default Multicast Router Information Field
– Extended part of Valid Options field to store DmR address information
(2) RA Message Bit, named ‘M’
– One of the reserved bits in RA message
– Because the AR may notice the DmR information to its nodes using the RA
message, the AR must be extended like below
(1) Default Multicast Router(DmR) Information Configuration
– AR may have DmR information in its configure file

1190

K. Park et al.

–

AR must add DmR information on DmR field of RA message, only if it has the
configure
The most important part of the extension is the functions of the MR, because it is in
charge of the mobility. Many parts to extend in our architecture are in it. We stated
those below.
(1) Default Multicast Router Information Process
– MR must be able to detect ‘M’ bit in RA message
– MR must be able to examine DmR Information field in RA message and
advertise it on its own network
(2) Multicast Router Functions
(3) Multicast Tunnel Establishment
– MR must be able to establish multicast tunnel with multicast router specified in
DmR Information Field
– After handoff, if RA message has ‘M’ bit, the MR must re-establish multicast
tunnel with its upper MR
– If a MR gets the two multicast tunnels, it must destroy DmR’s as soon as it
receives multicast data from upper MR
(4) Prefix Delegation Mechanism for Route Optimization
– A MR must set its CoA using PD mechanism when it is nested
3.4 Characteristics
As presented in the previous sections, our mechanism eliminates the complexities of
multicast data flows on NEMO environments. Specifically, in our method,
A. There is no Pinball Route problem of multicast data
B. There is no bi-directional tunnel for multicast data between MR and its HA
C. Once a MR has provided multicast service in home network, it can
permanently provide multicast service till it is shut down
D. MRs in mobile networks have native route path for multicast data
E. Our mechanism minimizes multicast tree reconstruction delay
However, if nested MR supports multicast service and upper MR does not,
multicast service is possible for descendants of nested MR.

4 Performance Evaluation
We compared cost variables of providing multicast among MIP-BT, MIP-RS, nativerouted multicast, and our mechanism. Parameters needed to compute cost variables
are stated below:
L1 : mean time of latency between nested MRs under the designated mobile
network
L2 : mean time of latency between a AR and its DmR
L3 : mean time of latency between a AR and all HA that their MR is nested under
the AR
L4 : mean time of latency between all home networks that one of their MR is
nested under the designated AR

Route Optimization Technique to Support Multicast in Mobile Networks

1191

m : multicast packets between CN and on-link node in the designated mobile
network
n : nesting level of MR counting from AR
r : total number of nodes joining a multicast group in a designated mobile
network
s : mean time for multicast tree reconstruction
α : cost constant for latency rate under AR’s network
β : cost constant for latency rate outside of AR’s network.
ω : weight constant for processing a tunnel in a router
θ : cost constant for multicast tree reconstruction per second
We assumed an environment where a mobile router is moving deeper from root
router AR in the designated network. And then, we can write down cost values (1),
(2), (3) and (4)
Adopting Native Route Path = (αL2 + βn L1 ) m

(1)

MIP-BT on NEMO basic support = (αL4 n + L3 + L1 n αβ+ n ω) r m

(2)

MIP-RS on NEMO basic support = (αL4 n + L3 + L1 n αβ+ n ω) m + θs

(3)

our architecture = (αL3 + βn L1) m

(4)

We assume that α is 0.2 and β is 2, because α is the value of the local network and
the local network latency may be closer to 0. And we assume that ω is 50 and m is 10.
With these variables, we can draw a graph of fig 2. Note that (1) cannot occur on
NEMO basic support architecture, because of the Pinball Route problem; L1 ~ L4 are
generated by supposing that L4 > L3 > L2 >= L1. In Conclusion, Fig. 2 shows our
architecture is the most efficient mechanism in multicasting on mobile network.

70000

Cost Evaluation

60000
50000

eu
la40000
Vt
so30000
C

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

20000
10000
0

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
Fig. 2. Cost Evaluation Graph

Nested Count

1192

K. Park et al.

5 Conclusion
In this paper, we examined and analyzed problems of providing multicast service on
NEMO basic support architecture, and proposed new one that provides efficient and
optimized route path for multicasting in NEMO. With our architecture, we achieved
optimal routing for multicasting by adopting PD mechanism; efficient multicasting by
using DmR; and seamless multicasting by keeping an old tunnel to the previous DmR
as needed while a mobile network changes its location.
We extended some functions of MR and AR in order to support this. Because this
extension is based on the Mobile IP and the IPv6 standards in terms of the functions
and protocols, it does not result in much modification or loads to the network
components. We also developed a cost analytic model to evaluate the performance of
our approach. It showed much lower total cost for on-link nodes in a mobile network,
compared to other techniques such as MIP-BT and MIP-RS on NEMO basic support
architecture.
Since our approach provides optimal and efficient multicast service and solves the
pinball route problem in mobile networks environments, this architecture can become
a basic multicast support mechanism on NEMO environments.

References
1.

D. Johnson, C. Perkins, J. Arkko, Mobility Support in IPv6, Internet Draft, <draft-ietfmobileip-ipv6-24.txt>, Jun 2003.
2. Thierry Ernst, Network Mobility Support Goals and Requirements, Internet Draft, <draftietf-nemo-requirements-01.txt>, May 2003.
3. Thierry Earnst, Hong-You Lach, Network Mobility Support Terminology, Internet Draft, <
draft-ietf-nemo-terminology-00.txt>, May 2003.
4. Vijay Devarapalli, Ryuji Wakikawa, NEMO Basic Support Protocol, Internet Draft, <
draft-ietf-nemo-basic-support-01.txt>, Sep, 2003.
5. Kyeong-Jin Lee, J H Jeong, Route Optimization for Mobile Nodes in Mobile Network
based on Prefix Delegation, Internet Draft, <draft-leekj-nemo-ro-pd-00.txt>, Jun 2003.
6. W. Fenne, Internet Group Management Protocol, version 2, RFC2236.
7. V. Chikarmane et al, Multicast Support for Mobile Hosts Using Mobile IP: Design Issues
and Proposed Architecture, ACM/Baltzer Mobile Networks and Applications, vol 3, no 4,
pp 365-379, January 1999.
8. Hee-Sook Shin, Young-Joo Suh, and Dong-Hee Kwon, Multicast Routing Protocol by
Multicast Agent in Mobile Networks, Proceedings of the Proceedings of the 2000
International Conference on Parallel Processing, pp 271-278.
9. Kuang-Hwei Chi, Chien-Chao Tseng and Ting-Lu Huang, A Framework for Mobile
Multicast using Dynamic Multicast Route, The computer journal, vol 42, no 6, 1999.
10. Thubert, P., and Molteni, M., Taxonomy of Route Optimization Models in the NEMO
Context, Internet Draft: draft-thubert-nemo-ro-taxonomy-00, Oct 2002

