Real-Time Face Recognition by the PCA
(Principal Component Analysis) with Color
Images
Jin Ok Kim1 , Sung Jin Seo2 , and Chin Hyun Chung2
1

2

Faculty of Multimedia, Daegu Haany University,
290, Yugok-dong,Gyeongsan-si, Gyeongsangbuk-do, 712-715, KOREA
bit@dhu.ac.kr
Department of Information and Control Engineering, Kwangwoon University,
447-1, Wolgye-dong, Nowon-gu, Seoul, 139-701, KOREA
chung@kw.ac.kr
Abstract. The face recognition by a CCD camera has the merit of being
linked with other recognition systems such as an iris recognition to implement a multimodal recognition system. This paper is concerned with
a new approach to face recognition that is automatically distinguished
from moving pictures. Based on the research about recognition of color
image by a CCD camera, we ﬁrst ﬁnd the proper value of color images
in order to distinguish the tone of skin from other parts of face. Then,
we look for the skin color among the regions of skin color converting
RGB into Y , Cb, Cr to ﬁnd skin parts of face. This new method can be
applied to real-time biometric systems. We have developed the approach
to face recognition with eigenface, focusing on the eﬀects of eigenface to
represent human face under several environment conditions.

1

Introduction

Face recognition is used to identify one or more persons from still images or a
video image sequence of a scene by comparing input images with faces stored
in a database. The application of face recognition technology can be categorized
into two main parts: law enforcement application and commercial application.
Face recognition technology is primarily used in law enforcement applications,
especially mug shot albums and video surveillance. The commercial applications
range over static matching of photographs on credit cards, ATM cards, passports,
driver’s licenses, and photo IDs to real-time matching with still images or video
image sequences for access control. Each presents diﬀerent constraints in terms
of processing requirement.
This paper presents new technology that recognizes a face and automatically
distinguishes it from moving pictures. Since diﬃcult problems in recognizing
color image by a CCD camera were handled in the prior research to make face
region less sensitive [1]. We ﬁnd out the proper value of color images in order
to distinguish the tone of skin from other parts of face [2]. We look for the skin
color among the regions of skin color converting RGB into Y , Cb, Cr and deﬁne
the skin color by using Y , Cb, Cr to ﬁnd skin parts [3] [4].
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3036, pp. 687–690, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

688

2

J.O. Kim, S.J. Seo, and C.H. Chung

Face Detection and Face Recognition

In this section, we present a process of implementing face recognition and posing
important factors. Lighting and angle of a pose have an eﬀect on face detection.
Particularly, it is hard to ﬁnd the face color and face shape by an eﬀect of lighting
[5] [6]. Since most signiﬁcant elements in facial detection can be changed by the
angle of face, eyes and mouth, we should deﬁne the face’s angle to obtain some
necessary data within the signiﬁcant elements.

Cam era (Sony XC711)

MILL A/D
Metor II

Convert c olor spac e:RGB
to HSI Y Cb Cr

Gaussian Sm oothing and
Blury

Skin c olor Detec tion

Skin c olor Boundary
Detec tion

T hreshold by skin c olor
Boundary and Eye/Mouth

Eye/ Mouth Detec tion

Verifying/W eighting
Eyes- Center point

Fig. 1. Face detection algorithm

The proper value of color images is needed to distinguish the tone of skin from
other parts of face [2] [7]. Moreover, we make sure that detection of the necessary
facial part is done by using one of masks among 3 × 3, 5 × 5 or dynamic size. The
detection of the characteristic color value is done with Gaussian distribution.
After the face is detected, the rectangle area is extracted.
Color space taken by a CCD camera should be converted from RGB to HSI
and Y , Cb, Cr to get speciﬁc ranges of H, S, Cb and Cr [8].
Figure 2 is about procedure of skin color detection.

Real-Time Face Recognition by the PCA (Principal Component Analysis)

(a) Original image

(b) Skin color
image

689

(c)
Processed
color image

Fig. 2. Detection of skin regions

(a) From face image set

(b) From eigenface

(c) After test
image

Fig. 3. Face detection

3

Experimental Results

The region of skin color on face can be detected by experiments. Specially, we
tried to search out the face, eyes and mouth by using division of Cb, Y , Cr
and RGB of skin color. Through the binarization, we found out the signiﬁcant
elements from the face region.
Since the face could be calculated and displayed numerically, we could distinguish the face. With deﬁnition of the region of width or center value of the
eyes, we could distinguish the data when a face shows front pose.
Based on the result that error rate of detection decreases and recognition
rates increases, we could process the real-time recognition with the data.
We carried out the experiment for the facial recognition with 16 images. We
deﬁned the eigenface as eight eigenvectors from each corresponding eigenvalue.

690

J.O. Kim, S.J. Seo, and C.H. Chung

To decrease the rate of error, we use front facial region that includes the
signiﬁcant elements tested in Section 2. Fig. 3(b) shows the eigenface and Fig.
3(c) shows that we process the facial recognition from the test images

4

Conclusion

We proposed a face detection algorithm for color image captured by a CCD
camera by using a skin-tone color model and features. Using the distance and
width of signiﬁcant elements like eyes and mouth, we could easily detect whether
an object on monitor is an human or a picture. If face information captured
several times is compared to the images in DB, we could recognize who he/she
is. So, we could decrease the recognition error rate. Our method ﬁrst corrects
the color that automatically estimates the white reference pixel. We search Y ,
Cb, Cr skin color space. Our method detects skin region over the entire image
and then generates face candidates based on the spatial arrangement of the skin
patch. Our algorithm reconstructs eyes, mouth, and boundary map to verify the
face candidates. And we designed the face recognition system through the PCA.
The system shows the exact recognition results for the 16 persons. However,
we found some errors after changes to the diﬀerent poses and backgrounds. To
decrease this errors, we use the DB of the captured images. Finally, we could
decrease the errors and make the system stable.
Acknowledgements. The present Research has been conducted by the Research Grant of Kwangwoon University in 2004.

References
1. Hjelmas, E., Low, B.K.: Face detection: A survey. Computer Vision and Image
Understanding 83 (2001) 236–274
2. Yang, J., Waibel, A.: A real-time face tracker. Proc. Third Workshop Application
of Computer Vision (1996) 142–147
3. Donato, G., Bartlett, M.S., Hager, J.C., Ekman, P., Sejnowski, T.J.: Classﬁying
facial actions. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 21
(2000) 974–989
4. Kjeldsen, R., Kender, J.: Finding skin and guesture recognition. In: Proc. 2nd Int’l
Conf. on Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition. (1996) 312–317
5. Yang, M., Kriegman, D.J., Ahuja, N.: Detecting faces in images: A survey. IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 24 (2002) 34–58
6. Crow, I., Tock, Bennett, A.: Finding face features. In: Proc.Second European Conf.,
Computer Vision (1992) 92–96
7. Mckenna, S., Gong, S., Raja, Y.: Modelling facial colour and indentily with gaussian
mixtures. Pattern Recognition 31 (1998) 1883–1892
8. Wang, Y., Osterman, J., Zhang, Y.Q.: Video processing and communications. Probability and Random Processes with applications to Signal Processing (2002) 24–25

