Application of Brain Emotional Learning Based
Intelligent Controller (BELBIC)
to Active Queue Management
Mahdi Jalili-Kharaajoo
Young Researchers Club, Azad University, Tehran, Iran
mahdijalili@ece.ut.ac.ir

Abstract. In this paper, Brain Emotional Learning Based Intelligent controller
(BELBIC) is applied to Active Queue management (AQM). This type of
controller is insensitive to noise and variance of the parameters, thus it is
suitable to time varying network systems. Simulation results show the robust
performance of BELBIC against the disturbance.

1 Introduction
Active Queue Management (AQM), as one class of packet dropping/marking
mechanism in the router queue, has been recently proposed to support the end-to-end
congestion control in the Internet [1-3]. AQM highlights the tradeoff between delay
and throughput. By keeping the average queue size small, AQM will have the ability
to provide greater capacity to accommodate nature-occurring burst without dropping
packets, at the same time, reduce the delays seen by flow, this is very particularly
important for real-time interactive applications.
Modeling emotions has attracted much attention in recent years, both in cognitive
psychology and design of artificial systems [4]. Far from being a negative factor in
decision making, emotions have shown to be a strong faculty for making fast
satisficing decisions. In this paper, we will adapt a computational model based on the
limbic system in the mammalian brain for control engineering applications. We
applied the proposed controller (termed BELBIC) [5] for AQM. Our results
demonstrate excellent control action, disturbance handling and system parameter
robustness for BELBIC.

2 TCP Flow Control Model
In [6,7], a nonlinear dynamic model for TCP flow control has been developed based
on fluid-flow theory. The state space description of this model can be as follows [1]
 dx 1
 dt = x 2

 dx 2 = − a ( t ) x − a ( t ) x − b ( t ) + F ( t )
1
1
2
2
 dt

a1 min ≤ a1 ≤ a1 max , a 2 min ≤ a 2 ≤ a 2 max ,0 < bmin ≤ b ≤ b max

M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3037, pp. 662–665, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

(1)

(2)

Application of Brain Emotional Learning Based Intelligent Controller (BELBIC)

663

where
a1 (t ) =

T (t ) + T2 (t )
K (t )
1
, a 2 (t ) = 1
, b(t ) =
T1 (t )T2 (t )
T1 (t )T2 (t )
T1 (t )T2 (t )

(3)

T (t ) + T2 (t ) d
1
F (t ) = 2 q o + 1
qo +
qo
T1 (t )T2 (t ) dt
T1 (t )T2 (t )
dt
d2

For the purpose of the design of intelligent controller, the varying scope of
parameters in TCP/AQM system is assumed as following
N (t ) : 1 − 300,Tp = 0.02 sec, qo : 0 − 300 packets, C (t ) : 1250 − 7500 packet / sec

Therefore,
a2 min = 3.8501, a2max = 1250, a1min = 0.015, a1max = 60000, bmin = 2604.2, bmax = 28125000.

3 Brain Emotional Learning Based Intelligent Controller
(BELBIC)
The model of BELBIC is illustrated in Fig. 1 [5]. BELBIC is essentially an action
generation mechanism based on sensory inputs and emotional cues. In general, these
can be vector valued, although in the benchmark discussed in this paper for the sake
of illustration, one sensory input and one emotional signal (stress) have been
considered. The emotional learning occurs mainly in amygdala. The learning rule of
amygdala is
∆Ga = k1. max (0, EC − A)

(4)

where Ga is the gain in amygdala connection, k1 is the learning step in amygdala and
EC and A are the values of emotional cue function and amygdala output at each time.

Fig. 1. The abstract structure of BELBIC

Similarly, the learning rule in orbitofrontal cortex is

(5)
∆Go = k2 .( MO − EC )
where Go is the gain in orbitofrontal connection, k2 is the learning step in
orbitofrontal cortex and MO is the output of the whole model, where it can be
calculated as
MO = A − O
(6)
in which, O represents the output of orbitofrontal cortex. In fact, by receiving the
sensory input S , the model calculates the internal signals of amygdala and
orbitofrontal cortex by the relations

664

M. Jalili-Kharaajoo
A = Ga .S , O = Go .S

(7)
Since amygdala does not have the capability to unlearn any emotional response
that it ever learned, inhibition of any inappropriate response is the duty of
orbitofrontal cortex. Controllers based on emotional learning have shown very good
robustness and uncertainty handling properties [4,5], while being simple and easily
implementable.
The structure of the control circuit we implemented in our study is illustrated in
Fig. 2. The functions we used in emotional cue and sensory input blocks are
.

EC = W1.e + W2 .CO ,

SI = W3 .PO + W4 . PO

(8)
where EC , CO , SI and PO are emotional cue, controller output, sensory input and
plant output and the W1 through W4 are the gains must tuned for designing a
satisfactory controller.

Fig. 2. Control system configuration using

Fig. 3. Queue evaluation (BELBIC)

Fig. 5. Queue evaluation (FTP+UDP)

4

Fig. 4. Queue evaluation (FTP+HTTP)

Fig. 6. Queue evaluation using BELBIC

Simulation Results

The network topology used for simulation is a FTP+UDP+HTTP network, which has
been described in details in [1]. We introduced short-lived HTTP flows and non-

Application of Brain Emotional Learning Based Intelligent Controller (BELBIC)

665

responsive UDP services into the router in order to generate a more realistic scenario,
because it is very important for a perfect AQM scheme to achieve full bandwidth
utilization in the presence of noise and disturbance introduced by these flows [1].
In the first study, we will use the most general FTP network configuration to
testify whether the BELBIC controller can reach the goals of AQM, and freely control
the queue length to stabilize at the arbitrary expected value. Let the expected queue
length equal to 75 packets, the instantaneous queue length is depicted in Fig. 3. After
a very short regulating process, the queue settles down its stable operating point. RED
algorithm is unable to accurately control the queue length to the desired value. The
queue length varies with network loads.
For FTP+HTTP configuration the evaluation of queue size is shown in Fig. 4
using BELBIC and classical PI controller. As it can be seen, BELBIC has better
performance than that of PI one. This comparison is done for FTP+UDP in Fig. 5.
Obviously, PI controller is very sensitive to this disturbance, while BELBIC operates
in a relatively stable state. The queue fluctuation increases with introducing the UDP
flows, but the variance is too much smaller comparing with PI one.
Finally, we evaluate the integrated performance of BELBIC using one relatively
real scenario, i.e., the number of active flows is changeable, which has 270 FTP
flows, 400 HTTP connections and 30 UDP flows (Fig. 6).

5 Conclusion
In this paper, BELBIC wad applied to active queue management. BELBIC is
insensitive to system dynamic parameters and is capable of being against disturbance
and noise, which is very suitable for the mutable network environment. BELBIC was
very responsive, stable and robust, especially for the small reference queue system,
but its performance was inferior when active TCP sessions were relatively small.

References
1. Jalili-Kharaajoo, M., Application of robust fuzzy second order sliding mode control to
active queue management, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 2957, pp.109-119, 2004.
2. Barden, B. et al., Recommendation on queue management and congestion avoidance in the
internet, REC2309, April 1998.
3. Firoiu, V. and Borden, M., A study of active queue management for congestion control,
Proc. INFOCOM, March 2000.
4. J. Moren, C. Balkenius, A Computational Model of Emotional Learning in The Amygdala,
th
From Animals to Animals: Proc. 6 Int. conf. Simulation of adaptive behavior, Cambridge,
MA, 2000.
5. Lucas, C. and Shahmirzadi, D., Introducing Brain Emotional Learning Based Intelligent
Controller (BELBIC), to appear in Intelligent Automation and Soft Computing, 2004.
6. Misra, V., Gong, W.B. and Towsley, D., Fluid-based analysis of network of AQM routers
supporting TCP flows with an application to RED, Proc. ACM/SIGCOMM, 2000.
7. Hollot, C., Misra, V., Towsley, D. and Gong, W.B., On designing improved controllers for
AQM routers supporting TCP flows, Proc. INFOCOM, 2001.

