Improved Face Detection Algorithm in Mobile
Environment
Sang-Burm Rhee and Yong-Hwan Lee
Dept. of Elect. & Com. Eng., Dankook Univ., Korea
sang107@dku.edu

Abstract. In this paper we propose a new algorithm to be able to implement fast and accurate search for the characteristic points in a face
by scanning with Mobile Camera Phone (MCP). The algorithm transforms the RGB color space to the YUV (i.e.,use a matrixed combination of Red, Green and Blue to reduce the amount of information in
the signal.), and detects the face color reducing the inﬂuence of brightness by Min-max normalization and histogram equalization. Experimental results show that this algorithm has more accurately than previous
method.

1

Introduction

Many researches to apply the face recognition to mobile systems such as mobile
phones, and PDA have been proceeding in accordance with the mobile computing
environment is rapidly advanced. The combination of the face recognition and
the mobile system could be applicable to security checking for criminals and
visual communication. We transmit an image from the mobile camera to a server
using a PDA or a MCP, and then recognize the face by processing of the image
transmitted [1][2]. The face recognition has been generally approached with the
pattern recognition to use image halftoning or edge in a static image as its
features. Kanade [3][4] provided a method that automatically recognizes faces
using static features including face components such as the contour, the eye,
the nose and the mouth. This method resulted in reliable face recognition at
pictures containing face. But it is useful exclusively for the curves to have few
parameters, and it requires long computation time and a lot of calculations and
spaces, and the accuracy of the detection depends on the size to quantize the
parameter spaces.

2

Authentication of the Face Entered with a MCP

Skin Color Detection using YUV: RGB values of pixels in the image are
transformed to YUV color spaces by equation(1) in order to detect a face from
the image entered with a MCP, the illumination calibration with Min-Max Normalization is prerequisite during the pre-processing for the accurate face detection. Histogram equalization enhances the performance of the image which
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3036, pp. 683–686, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

684

S.-B. Rhee and Y.-H. Lee

brightness is secund into the one direction can be used for the intensity equalization. After reducing the illumination impact by applying min-max normalization
and histogram equalization to the brightness component in Y component, we
transform YUV values to RGB form.
 


R
1.164 1.596
0
Y − 16
 G   1.164 −0.391 0.813   U − 128 
(1)
B
1.164
0
2.018
V − 128
The skin color is extracted by using the skin color model. It is the skin color
extraction image at the image processed with the Min-max normalization. We
deﬁned light brightness as the optimized light of the skin color extraction in the
skin color model. Deﬁning both quite dark and bright images to the suitable
light one by histogram equalization allows to extract the skin color regardless
of light brightness.
Detection of Characteristic Points: For preventing errors from occurring when dark illumination is exposed or colors similar to pupil color are
distributed, characteristic points in a face should be clearly expressed unlikely
the skin color in order to ﬁnd characteristic points such as the nose and the
mouth in a face. we let the distance between both eyes L, and deﬁne L for a
distance to lower as much as L from the middle position between two eyes, and
then would see a lot of features for the nose at the L . The lip range is searched
by using colors the lib has, by starting from L with these feature.
Face Authentication using Support Vector Machine(SVM): SVM
mainly distinguishes objects as two categories. Learning samples consist of N
objects, and let’s express the vector xi , comprising of p variables for the ith
object, and yi for the category classiﬁed already, corresponding to the xi . We
assume that there are two categories for yi , either +1 or −1. We consider a
separable hyperplane for the positioning N objects, consisting of two categories,
into a p-dimensional space. In this case, it is useful for the case that a hyperplane
is not deterministic. let’s consider two parallel hyperplanes as below.
H1 : y = w x + b = 1, H2 : y = w x + b = −1

(2)

At this time, the hyperplanes H1 and H2 in equation(2) pass through the
object nearest to the category +1 and category −1 respectively at the separating hyperplane. Therefore, the margin between H1 and H2 is 2/||w||. So, the
optimization problem for this case can be expressed as follow.
M ax

2
ww
) subject to yi (w xi + b) ≥ 1
(orM in
ww
2

(3)

Inducing Lagrange by introduction of non-negative Lagrange coeﬃcient may
cause the optimization problem, called Primal problem. Applying KKT condition
into this problem with any object i which αi > 0, we can obtain the equation
(4).In the optimal solution, object with αi > 0 is support vector, placed on H1
or H2 , otherwise, αi = 0.

Improved Face Detection Algorithm in Mobile Environment
N

w=

αi yi xi ,
i=1

b=

1 − yi w xi
yi

685

(4)

Face Authentication: In order to authenticate a face using SVM, data
learning process is needed. we assigned +1 and −1 as reference values for the case
of being matched between faces and not being matched respectively, by analyzing
the face group in the database and the face in images entered. We normalized
SVM learning data to 80×80 size, and entered the images created by quantization
by 3 bits from the normalized images into the input images for SVM. In the SVM
learning process, we assigned +1 and −1 as the reference values for the case of
being matched between faces and not being matched respectively, letting SVM
to be learned.

Fig. 1. An experimental process
Table 1. Comparison of searching time in a face

686

S.-B. Rhee and Y.-H. Lee
Table 2. Comparison of Authentication ratio

3

Experimental Environment and Result

To estimate the proposed method, we assume a system model for the face detection. In experiment environment, we use machines with running Windows XP
Professional operation system, SCH-V300 Handset and BizCardReader 600c as
input device, and implement with MS Visual C++ 6.0 using QCIF(320 × 240)
image size.
In Fig.1, we illustrated the experimental process for detecting the characteristic points in a face from the image entered with a MCP. Pre-processed with
Min-max normalization and histogram equalization for the accurate detection
given in 1). With this result, extracted the skin color(2)), and then detected the
face range (3)). After this, we detected the eye range, the lip range, the nose
range( 5), 6),and 7), respectively) and ﬁnally detected the characteristic points
in a face(8)). As shown in table 1 and table 2, we compared proposed method
with the previous method in terms of detection rate and authentication ratio for
faces. The proposed method shows the fastest speed at the face search and the
most accurate authentication ratio.

4

Conclusions

In this paper we utilized skin color detection to be able to extract the face region
from color images of MCP, and settled the problems such as skin color deﬁnition
and illumination, pointed out to the disadvantages included in the skin color
detection. For the illumination problem, we established an alternative method
using min-max normalization and histogram equalization for the illumination
brightness, and used a statistical method with RGB values produced from two
hundred data for the former problem.

References
1. Benjamin Miller, ”Vital signs of identity”, IEEE Spectrum pp,20-30, 1998.
2. D. Sanger, Y. Mlyake, ”Algorithm for Face Extraction Based on Lip Detection,” J.
of Imaging Science and Technology, Vol.41, No.1, 1997.
3. B. Moghaddam, Was. Wahid, ”Beyond Eigen Faces: Probabilistic Matching for Face
Recognition,” Prof. of IEEE ICAFGR’98, 1998.
4. T.Kandade, ”Computer Recognition of Human faces,” Birkhauser Verlag, 1997

