Proper Noun Learning from Unannotated Corpora
for Information Extraction1
Seung-Shik Kang
School of Computer Science, Kookmin University & AITrc, Seoul 136-702, Korea
sskang@kookmin.ac.kr, http://nlp.kookmin.ac.kr/~sskang

Abstract. Named entity (NE) tagged corpus is an important resource for the
learning of extraction patterns in information extraction system. We constructed Korean NE tagged corpus for economy, accident, and travel domain.
As a semi-automatic approach to construct NE tagged corpus, a pattern learning
method has been explored to extract personal names automatically from the raw
corpus. Our NE tagging system has been trained for unannotated corpora to
collect NE extraction patterns. Pattern extraction starts from a small set of
proper names and NE extraction patterns are generated semi-automatically.
Extracted patterns are used to automatically identify proper nouns from the
text.

1 Introduction
Information retrieval system tends to extract too many search results for a given
query. Manual selection of extracting useful information from search engines is a
tedious work. Information extraction (IE) system automatically extracts predefined
types of information from the extremely large set of information sources[1,2,3]. The
target of discovering the knowledge in IE system is to find out meaningful named
entities. Named entities are proper nouns that are extracted by IE system and they are
the subjects of 5W1H. Typical named entities are person names, location names,
organization names, product names, and numeric expressions like time, date, money,
percent, and so on. So, the core function of the IE system is to identify the named
entities and extract the predefined subject from the context of the text.
Information extraction started from the named entity contest of MUC and IREX
workshop on Japanese text[4,5]. The major topics of the conferences are named entity
extraction and coreference resolution on the specific domain. The basic language
resources in IE system development are annotated corpora, language analyzer, and
cue word dictionary. We constructed Korean NE tagged corpus on economy, accident, and travel domain. While constructing the corpus, we tried to automatically
identify named entities from the text without using the lexicon or cue word dictionary. We trained our system on unannotated corpus to generate NE extraction templates, starting from the small set of proper names.

1

This work was supported by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF)
through the Advanced Information Technology Research Center (AITrc).

M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3036, pp. 670–674, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

Proper Noun Learning from Unannotated Corpora for Information Extraction

671

2 Corpus Construction and Annotation
We collected a raw corpus and defined a named entity tagset for the construction of
named entity tagged corpus. Raw corpus of Korean articles has been collected from
newspaper articles and webpages. They are 3,000 articles of news on economy,
travel, social events, and seminars. Manual NE tagging is performed through (1)
initially by automatic tagging system, (2) manual tagging of untagged entities using
tagging tool, and (3) manual cross checking. NE tagset is based on the tagsets of
MUC and IREX. Tagset classes of named entities are proper nouns and numeric expressions that are valuable for information extraction. Proper nouns are divided into
specific classes and artifacts are divided into title and description. Numeric expressions are date, time, money, percent, and quantity. In addition, phone and address are
added to numeric expressions. Named entity tags are (1) proper nouns(PERSON,
LOCATION, ORGANIZATION, TITLE, DESCRIPTION, URL), (2) numeric expressions(DATE, TIME, MONEY, PERCENT, QUANTITY, PHONE, ADDRESS),
(3) ambiguity, and (4) reference(referent and its antecedent relationship).
Constructing tagged corpus is a laborious work with high cost. For tagging efficiency, we developed NE/CO(Named Entity & Coreference) tagging tool. It provides
a good tagging environment by marking a named entity block and selecting a tag in a
graphic user interface. Fig. 1 shows an example of NE/CO tagging. The tagging tool
provides a pre-tagging function that pre-tagged named entities are automatically
tagged as a named entity. It minimizes the tagging errors and increases the accuracy.
In addition, it has a statistical report generation function that generates a named entity
list with its frequency counts. It also helps to find mis-tagged entities merely by
checking the entities with low frequency.

Fig. 1. NE/CO tagging workbench

672

S.-S. Kang

3 Learning Extraction Patterns from Unannotated Corpora
There are two approaches in IE systems: knowledge engineering and automatically
trainable approaches. Knowledge engineering technique is characterized as manually
encoding extraction patterns. Knowledge engineers examine the corpus and write
extract patterns. It requires lots of labors and the skill of a knowledge engineer affects
on the performance of IE system. Automatically trainable approach needs an annotated corpus. Annotations are targeted to particular function like named entity recognition or coreference resolution. Once a suitable training corpus is constructed, the
learning system automatically acquires extraction patterns from the corpus. In supervised learning system, the supervisor interacts with the learning system by indicating
that the automatically acquired patterns are correct or not.
NE tagging system needs extraction patterns to identify named entities in the text.
There are two tagging methods of manual construction and automatic construction.
Manually constructed pattern is accurate and the performance of IE system is better
than that of IE systems that are using automatically constructed patterns. Manual
construction needs a continuous tuning with high cost. So, automatic construction is
applied to get candidate patterns. Our NE tagging system has been trained for unannotated corpora to get NE extraction patterns that are included in the corpora. Extracting patterns start from a small set of proper names and NE extraction patterns are
generated semi-automatically. Those extracted patterns are applied to automatically
identify proper nouns when we construct NE tagged corpus.
The first step of the learning process of pattern templates is an identification of
proper nouns that are given as an initial set of seeds. For each named entity that is
given in the initial NE set, NE extraction patterns are automatically generated from
the raw corpus. NE patterns are a sequence of part-of-speech or cue word. New patterns are mined from the corpus for the seed nouns in initial NE set, and they are
added to the pattern set. So, extraction pattern set is expanded by repeating the learning process, and newly found proper nouns are added to the seed set. The pattern
extraction process is repeated until no more patterns are added, or it stops after a predetermined number of iterations.
Pattern creation module adopts a model that is used in NE chunking/tagging and
considers precedent or subsequent morphemes as contextual information. The template pattern consists only of a noun or a verb and others are not considered. When
we generate a new pattern, named entity is marked as PERSON and the cue word is a
morpheme. NE extraction of person names starts from the identification of named
entities in the text that matches one of the extraction patterns. If a pattern is matched,
then it is marked as a named entity. For the annotation of proper nouns, NE tagging
system annotates proper nouns in the corpus by using NE extraction patterns. Named
entity is described as a single word in the extraction pattern and multi-word proper
nouns are combined into a noun phrase by NP chunking.
… Today
adverb

President Kim … Æ
noun PERSON

<null : President : PERSON>
extraction pattern

Proper Noun Learning from Unannotated Corpora for Information Extraction

673

4 The Experiment
We performed an experiment for the automatic recognition of Korean person names.
Test documents in this experiment are randomly selected from the raw corpus. Some
person names that are found frequently in test corpus are given as an initial set of
proper names. Experimentation has been performed for 2, 10, 20 person names as a
seed name set, respectively. For the seed names, we run NE pattern extractor iteratively and the seed name set is expanded. The system runs until no more new names
are added to the seed set. We automatically removed a pattern that has no information
on both sides of the seed name and the patterns with common nouns. Table 1 shows
the precision rates by the number of iterations. The precision ratio is 93%~94% for
each experiment and the recall ratio is different according to the instances of the initial names. As a result, we found that NE pattern types depend on the document categories, and person names that are identified by NE patterns are also domaindependent. When we set the initial seed set as politicians like ‘Kim Dae-Jung’ and
‘Clinton’, the system found most of the politically related person names, but it does
not found the names of artists or novelist. Therefore, seed names should be given
carefully that cover various categories of the documents.
Table 1. Precision of named entity extraction
no. seeds
iteration

5

10

20

1
2
3
4

0.935
0.965
0.967
0.967

0.939
0.938
0.926
N/A

0.938
0.947
0.946
N/A

5 Conclusion
We have constructed an NE tagged corpus for 3,000 articles of economy, accident,
and travel domain. As a semi-automatic construction of the corpus, we applied automatic annotation of NE tags by using a proper noun learning technique of extracting
person names from the raw corpus. NE extraction patterns are automatically collected
from unannotated corpus, starting from a small set of seed names and expanding
extraction patterns by iteration method. Our automatic tagging system will be extended to extracting common proper nouns regardless of the area.

References
1. Appelt, D. E. and David J. Israel, “Introduction to Information Extraction Technology”, A
Tutorial Prepared for IJCAI-99, 1999.
2. Cardie, C., “Empirical Methods in Information Extraction”, AAAI-97, pp.65-79, 1997.

674

S.-S. Kang

3. Riloff, E, “Information Extraction as a Stepping Stone toward Story Understanding”, In
Computational Models of Reading and Understanding, Ashwin Ram and Kenneth Moorman, eds., MIT Press, 1999.
th
4. MUC, Proc. of 7 Message Understanding Conference(MUC-7), MUC, 1998.
5. Sekine, S., and Y. Eriguchi, “Japanese Named Entity Extraction Evaluation - Analysis of
Results”, the 18th International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING'2000),
pp.1106-1110, 2000.

