Computer Generated Patient Plans Based on Patterns
of Care
Ole Martin Winnem
NTNU, SINTEF, S.P. Andersensvei 15b, Trondheim, Norway
Ole.M.Winnem@sintef.no

Abstract. This article presents a method to create patient plans from Patterns of
Care (PoC). PoC’s are either developed based on Clinical Guidelines or as
suggested in this article, based on generalized patient plans. The PoC’s are then
the basis for generating patient plans. The patient plan generation is a two step
process where the first step is based on knowledge intensive case based
reasoning and identifies the PoC to be used. The second step adapts the PoC to
a patient plan. The way this approach uses PoC’s and measured patient
information to generate plans is a promising way of provide best practice and to
reduce the work required by the medical experts.

1 Introduction
The medical community has so far been concentrating on developing Clinical
Guidelines (CG) for manual use. Since these CG’s has been developed for human
interpretation and adaptation, they are not machine-interpretable. In order to create
human supported automated processes, the CG’s must be instantiated and structured.
In our approach we introduce some context in the adaptation of the CG’s in order to
fit a specific guideline to a given care model. The care model we are using as example
is based on a WHO care model [1, 2] for treatment and care of chronic conditions,
where patient plans are becoming more and more important.
In general patient plans are developed based on the experience of the medical
expert and with no interaction with other professions. Reasons for this are the lack of
tools to support a collaborative approach and the organisational model used. This
article identifies components that are needed to improve the creation of patient plans
and suggest a model that link the identified components together.

2 The Clinical Guidelines – Structure and Content
Clinical guidelines are normally presented in a text document with minimal structure.
They have been developed in order to help physicians in performing their work in a
unified way – following best practise, but as generic that adaptation to situation and
care model is needed. Below is a figure of a typical Clinical Guideline. The figure
shows a Clinical Guideline with chapters. These chapters are the only structure that is
introduced and the content is based on descriptive text that is easy to understand for

M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3039, pp. 1126–1132, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

Computer Generated Patient Plans Based on Patterns of Care

1127

the expert, but is difficult to understand without the context presented and to other
possible caregivers.

Fig. 1. Example of Clinical Guideline1

Several approaches have been tried out in order to make Clinical Guidelines
computer interpretable [3]. One of the approaches is Asbru [4], which is a framework
for representing time-oriented Clinical Guidelines based on XML. Transforming a
textual Clinical Guideline into a Asbru syntax can be performed by using a tool called
Degel [5]. Degel is a two step method to transfer Clinical Guidelines into Asbru
syntax. The first step creates a semi-structured representation and is performed by
1

The CG is copied from the web-page: www.nelmh.org

1128

O.M. Winnem

medical experts. This semi-structured representation is not possible for a computer to
understand, but the second step that is performed by a knowledge engineer with
medical domain knowledge which adapts it into a structured guideline represented in
XML. Asbru is developed with focus on representing time constraints. This makes
Asbru an alternative to the Creek [6] representation we are adapting. Creek is a
semantic network representation with focus on representing general knowledge in
combination with case specific information. We have chosen to use this because of its
descriptive power and easy access to adapt it to our needs.
Common to these solutions are that they are only in limited use and that it costs a
lot to build up them and to update and support them. Anyway we believe that it is an
advantage to use case specific information and case based methods to identify the
PoC to use, due to a simple and easy to understand way of updating the systems
knowledge.

3 Structure of PoC
The PoC structure is defined in order to make it easy to include the information into a
knowledge model and at the same time be expressive enough to capture all the vital
information from a CG. In order to find this simplified structure we have studied
CG’s in order to identify generic structures. Generic structures alone are not enough
and we have identified structures specific to diagnose and care model. Below is a part
of a generic structure of the PoC. The structure shows how the PoC is built up, using
XML. The most important part of this structure is the plan part that is used to create a
specific plan for the patient. It contains information about all activities that should be
created for the selected PoC. The activities have commonalities, but also differences.
Typically, medication activities have information describing the ATC-Code and
volume, which are parameters that are not useful for a nurse visit activity. In a nurse
visit the human tasks describing what is needed to be performed and how this should
be done following best practice is much more relevant.
The second important part is the structure that is matched to the patient diagnose
and measurements. This part is used in order to select the PoC to be used for creating
the patient plan. It is the major diagnostic parameters set by the medical expert. These
are used in combination with the measurements that have been performed. Examples
of diagnostic parameters are the ICPC or ICD10 code and parameters describing how
sever the situation is. Examples of measured parameters are PEV or blood pressure
used in the diagnostic process for a COPD or asthma patient. Further the structure
contains a pointer to which CG it represents and eventually what level of the CG it is
related to. It also includes general information about the purpose and care model it is
related to.
The XML structure is used to build up a computer model that makes it possible to
evaluate which PoC to use and how to adapt it into patient plans. The XML structure
should be easy to understand both for human and computer, which makes it difficult
to develop. The suggested structure will be further developed in order to fit new needs
that are experienced during the test and evaluation period.

Computer Generated Patient Plans Based on Patterns of Care

1129

Fig. 2. An XML diagram of PoC

4 Creating PoC
At the moment the process of creating PoC from CG is based on a manual process
with technology support. Our initial thoughts have been to design a semi-automated
tool which gives knowledge support to the medical expert creating PoC based on CG.
But because of the structure of CG’s (created with textual structure to be easy to read
for humans – not machines), we find it promising to start in the other end.
The similarity between PoC and a detailed patient plan makes it promising to study
the possibility to create PoC from patient plans. This requires that the patient plans
have been evaluated and controlled that they follow related clinical guideline. So far

1130

O.M. Winnem

we have not gained experience with this method, but the results using this approach
will be published as soon as the solution has been tested. The process suggested is a
tree step process as follow:
1. Identify representative patient plans
2. Generate PoC from the identified patient plans
3. Evaluate and verify the resulting PoC according to related CG.
In the first step a team of experts identifies detailed plans that represent the
diversity of the treatment for the selected CG. These plans are then categorized and
made available for the induction algorithm that creates a generic plan or Patterns of
Care. Before using this newly created PoC, it should be evaluated up against related
CG. This is a manual process where the expert panel can edit the PoC in order to fit it
to the CG.

5 Knowledge Model and Resources
The knowledge model in the system is based on a semantic network model describing
all terms in the system and their relations to each other. This semantic network is
combined with a case based retrieval system that uses the semantic model to explain
the similarity between previous used plans and the new current problem to be solved.
The knowledge representation system is an adapted and extended version of CREEK
[6, 7]. The explanation power is based on the product of all relations needed to
explain how one term relates to another.
Other resources in the system are database resources related to plans for the care
givers and patient constraints. The database resources are relational databases
available to select consultation time with needed care providers. The most important
care provider within advanced homecare is the home care unit [1]. This unit is the
centre of the care provision for advanced homecare and it is the unit with the largest
number of constraints. The needs of the patient are also most related to this resource
unit. The patient constraints are related to medication, measurements, travel
information, nutrition, patient knowledge level and available local caregivers (patient
relatives), where the medication constraints are related to CAVE and mismatch
between medications. Measurement constraints are related to problems regarding time
of measurement and measurement dependability of medication.

6 Generating Patient Plans
The creation of patient plans from PoC contains two sequential steps. The first step is
related to selection of PoC and the second is related to adapting the selected PoC to
the available resources.
The selection of PoC is the most knowledge intensive and difficult task. Diagnose
and available measurements give the input information which is mapped to available
PoCs in order to select the most promising PoC. The selection of PoC is based on the
CREEK [6, 7] retrieval engine which is able to match both quantitative and explain

Computer Generated Patient Plans Based on Patterns of Care

1131

qualitative information and in this way it is much suited to match input information
about the patient with the information represented in the PoCs.
Adapting the selected PoC to a patient plan is an optimisation problem which
includes among others the constraints described in chapter 5. At the moment the
optimisation in the system is only based on selecting the nearest resource and adding
activity to the plan based on a sequential approach where the PoC is evaluated starting
on the first activity.

PoC

Specific experiences

PoC selection

Patient information

Statistical data &
bayesian networks

Plan apapter

EoC based EPR
including detailed
patient plans

Patient Care Plan Generator

Domain model
including:
- standards
- coding as ICPC
- knowledge model

Resources
- GP plan
- homecare unit
- patient constraints
Data and control flow

Fig. 3. The figure shows the two processes related to the Patient Care Plan Generator. The two
processes uses different kind of information and knowledge sources in order to create patient
plans

7 Conclusions and Further Work
This article has described a method for generating patient plans based on predefined
Patterns of Care. This is an approach that will shorten the time used to develop plans
for the treatment and care of chronic patients. Since the approach is based on
structured clinical guidelines, it is reason to believe that the method will help giving
the patient unified care according to best practice. In order to make this approach
viable it is needed to have access to patient data and care giver resources. Access to
these data sources are under development in Norway and the first projects where
patient plans have been shared between caregivers at different level and profession
have given promising results in 2003.

1132

O.M. Winnem

The design has not been tested in a laboratory or real world environment. This
should be done in order to make further conclusions. The system will be further
developed in order to make it possible to test the real use of PoC as standard for
patient plan generation. At the end a large scale trial should be performed in order to
make the final conclusions.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.

5.
6.
7.

Winnem, O.M., Walderhaug, S. Distributed, role based, guideline based decision
support. in eHealth in Common Europe. 2002. Krakow: Springer.
WHO, Innovative care for chronic conditions. 2002, World Health Organization: Geneva.
p. 61.
van Bemmel, J.H., Musen, M.A., Handbook of Medical Informatics. 1997: Springer. 621.
Shahar, Y., Miksch, S. & Johnson, P., The Asgaard Project: A Task-Specific Framework
for the Application and Critiquing of Time-Oriented Clinical Guidelines. Artificial
Intelligence in Medicine, 1998. 14: p. 29-51.
Shahar, Y., Young, O., Shalom, E., Moskovitch, D., Boaz, D. and Galperin, M. A Hybrid
Framework for Representation and use of Clnical Guidelines. in AMIA. 2002.
Winnem, O.M., Integrating knowledge- and symbol level modelling - THE CREEST
WORKBENCH, in IDI. 1996, NTNU: Trondheim. p. 134.
Aamodt, A.P., E, Case-Based Reasoning: Foundational Issues, Methodological
Variations and System Approaches. AICom - Artificial Intelligence Communications.
Vol. 7:1. 1994: IOS Press. 39-59.

