CSE without Math? A First Course in Modeling
and Simulation
Wolfgang Wiechert
Department of Simulation, Faculty of Mechanical Engineering,
University of Siegen, Germany
wiechert@simtec.mb.uni-siegen.de,
http://www.simtec.mb.uni-siegen.de

Abstract. There are several good reasons to accompany a course in
computational science and engineering from the very beginning with a
general lecture on modeling and simulation. On the other hand ﬁrst year
undergraduate students only have elementary knowledge on mathematics
and natural sciences. Consequently, a ﬁrst lecture must be conceived
that requires only basic mathematical and physical skills. The course
on ‘Foundations of Modeling and Simulation’ given at the university of
Siegen fulﬁlls this requirements. It is the ﬁrst in a series of 7 lectures on
‘Modeling and Simulation’ which later on will go much deeper into the
technical details. Basic didactic considerations, examples and experiences
from the ﬁrst course are presented. In particular an extensive example
of a fairground looping swing is discussed.

1

Introduction

No course in computational
science and engineering (CSE)
or in modeling and simulation
(M&S) can be given without a
substantial amount of mathematical contents. For that reason teaching CSE without mathematics seems to be a contradiction. However, there are
some good reasons to start education in CSE with an introductory course in which mathematical subjects have been stronFig. 1. General steps in a simulation project
gly reduced:
Virtual and real world: Simulation projects require a close cooperation of
researchers from diﬀerent disciplines. The steps that frequently are the most
critical for the success of a simulation project are project deﬁnition, model validation and communication of the results (cf. Fig. 1). These are exactly those
steps where the virtual world meets reality. To sensitize the students for the
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3039, pp. 1249–1256, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

1250

W. Wiechert

problems arising at this interface they should be led to their ﬁrst practical simulation project as quickly as possible. In particular the aspect of communication
in multi disciplinary teams, the speciﬁcation of the right project goals and a
reasonable balance between algorithmic performance and overall time to deliver
the results must be taught.
Multi disciplinarity: Due to its multi disciplinary nature CSE covers a wide
range of methods from mathematics and computer science to the applications
in the natural sciences and engineering. For a student it is hard to survey all
this diﬀerent subjects, their connections and interdependencies. Consequently,
the students need to learn very early how to integrate subjects from diﬀerent
disciplines in the focus of a certain application problem. Thus example projects
which require little in depth knowledge of mathematics, computer science and
natural sciences should accompany a CSE course from the very beginning.
Heterogeneous audience: There are only a few universities were a complete
CSE program with undergraduate and graduate courses is established. A good
alternative is to establish CSE as a specialization in classical study programs
like engineering, mathematics or physics or to establish a graduate course which
can be attended with diﬀerent prerequisites. In each case it is a big problem
to integrate all the students with their diﬀerent origins and to synchronize their
knowledge in the basic disciplines. In this situation a ﬁrst course on M&S should
introduce into the subject without relying on advanced skills in mathematics,
computer science and physics. Accompanying simulation projects will give the
students the opportunity to proﬁt from their diﬀerent skills.
CSE in practice: Not only at the university but also in industry CSE methods have become an important part of research and development processes.
Project managers in industry know that simulation is a potential tool to understand complex systems, to evaluate experiments, to build virtual prototypes or
to judge the potential economic beneﬁt of a development. On the other hand this
creates a need for a basic M&S education even for non CSE specialists. Group
leaders and managers should at least be able to judge under which conditions
simulation may be a useful tool, what the basic problems are and what the costs
of a simulation project will be.

2
2.1

Simulation Courses at the University of Siegen
Diﬀerent Prerequisites in a Heterogeneous Audience

The Department of Simulation at the University of Siegen is a part of the engineering faculties (mechanical and electrical engineering, computer science).
The lectures on M&S are attended by students with quite diﬀerent preconditions taking part in diﬀerent study programs:
1. M&S can be chosen as an optional course for all students of electrical and
mechanic engineering. Both have basic mathematical skills from undergraduate courses and also a good knowledge of the physics of mechanical and
electrical systems. On the other hand engineers are typically less trained in
computer science and programming.

CSE without Math?

1251

2. These prerequisites are quite diﬀerent for the computer science students.
Although they also have several mathematical lectures in the undergraduate
courses they are usually not familiar with the basics of analysis, numerical
algorithms and diﬀerential equations. Moreover, it requires a high eﬀort for
them to understand the laws of physics.
3. Lectures on M&S are a mandatory part of the Siegen international graduate
course in mechatronics. M&S is scheduled in the third semester of the mechatronics course and thus these students already have good knowledge of
programming and control engineering.
4. A combination of engineering and economics can be studied at Siegen. It
is quite probable that these students in their future industrial career will
have to decide on the initiation of simulation projects from an economical
viewpoint. However they have only very restricted mathematical skills from
the undergraduate courses whereas their knowledge of physics is suﬃcient.
5. Finally, it is also possible for the students from other departments to participate in the courses. However only physicists and mathematicians with
basic physics courses have good preconditions for a course on M&S. Only
very engaged students with less preconditions are able to follow the lecture.
2.2

Lectures

The lectures on M&S are currently attended by about 50 students per semester.
The course has been broken down to a series of 7 short half semester lectures
with four hours per week. Part of the lectures is directly done in the computer
laboratory. The courses have already been described in more detail in [2]. From
these 7 lectures the diﬀerent students can choose those units that best ﬁt their
requirements and skills. In each case the ﬁrst course on M&S is mandatory. This
ﬁrst part is also the subject of the present contribution. Whereas the lectures
2-6 are more advanced with respect to the mathematical and computer science
demands the ﬁrst one is really a CSE course with (almost) no mathematics.
The Siegen courses on M&S are embedded in the activities of the FOMAAS
research center. Founded in 1992 it is concerned with CSE with a special emphasis on the optimization of complex systems. More details about FOMAAS can
be taken from [4,3]. Under the auspices of FOMAAS several other lectures can
be chosen by the students which complement the basic CSE education. They are
dealing for example with ﬁnite elements, computational ﬂuid dynamics, electro
magnetic ﬁeld computation, optimization or distributed software systems.

3
3.1

A First Course in Modeling and Simulation
Goals

The course on ‘Foundations of M&S’ has the following goals:
1. To present an overview of the applications of M&S in academia and industry
and to explain the diﬀerent aims and preconditions of simulation projects.

1252

W. Wiechert

2. To establish a ﬁrst understanding on the general course of a simulation
project (see Fig. 1). In particular a rough impression of the ﬁnancial and
manpower eﬀorts of a simulation project is given.
3. An overview on the major methods and tools to carry out continuous time
simulations based on ordinary diﬀerential equations is given. In particular
the students get a survey on some commercially available simulation tools.
4. The basic principles of stochastic simulation are presented. The diﬀerence
between stochastic and deterministic simulation with respect to accuracy
and computing time is emphasized.
5. A general introduction into discrete event simulation which is usually combined with stochastics is given and a survey of major tools is done.
3.2

How Much Math Is Required?

With respect to the mathematical prerequisites some compromises must be made
in a ﬁrst course because only two hours in this semester are available:
1. The numerical solution of ODEs is introduced with the Euler algorithm
which is easy to understand for the whole audience. Although no specialist
will use this algorithm in practice it can well be used to explain many basic
problems of numerical ODE solution like accuracy, step size control or instability. More details on the numerical ODE solution are postponed to the
second part of the lecture which gives an in depth treatment of this topic.
Instead, the preconﬁgured ODE solvers from MATLAB and SIMULINK are
used to demonstrate that they are superior to the Euler method and that it
is worthwhile to develop specialized algorithms for certain problems.
2. Although this is a major part of any CSE program no introduction to spatially distributed systems and PDE solution is given. The reason is that
even a basic introduction to this domain will take a whole courses’ time.
Nevertheless, if more time is available then some basics on PDEs can be
integrated into the course. The emphasis here should be on a prototypical
solution algorithm like ﬁnite diﬀerences and a discussion of the computational complexity that is associated with PDE problems. Then a commercial
ﬁnite element tool like FEMLAB could be used to demonstrate the basic
steps in the solution of a PDE problem. In fact this is done in the third part
of the lectures at the University of Siegen. More details on these subjects
are given in the acompanying lectures (see Section 2.2).
3. Typically, students from the engineering departments have little knowledge
of probability theory and statistics. Because this is required for stochastic
simulation a ‘survival kit’ in probability and statistics is integrated in the
course. This kit contains a basic knowledge of distributions, statistical estimates and tests. The emphasis is not on a broad coverage of topics but on
some fundamental results concerning the precision and convergence behavior
of stochastic algorithms.
4. What integrators are for ODE solution that are random number generators
for stochastic simulation. However, only the basic congruence generator is

CSE without Math?

1253

presented as a prototype for more advanced modern generators. The basic
problems of pseudo random numbers are shortly discussed. Finally, the most
basic methods for the generation of non uniform distributions (transformation, rejection) are presented.

4

The Looping Swing: An Instructive Example

As a basic example of a complete simulation project
the looping swing is now discussed in more detail.
This example requires only little preliminary knowledge from mathematics and physics. It is an important part of the ﬁrst course on M&S and takes
about ten hours including two hours of computer
exercises. It must be pointed out that this example
does not reduce a simulation project just to the process of solving a given diﬀerential equation system
with numerical methods (this is just one of many
steps in Fig. 1) but tries to show the course of a simulation project in a realistic application context.
The typical steps of a simulation project as shown
in Fig. 1 are discussed in the lecture. The following
remarks concentrate on the educational and didactic aspects of the looping swing example:
Project speciﬁcation: The project goal is to ﬁnd
out if it possible to construct a fairground swing
that can be driven around the top in a 360o loop
(Fig. 2). In order to make such an apparatus proﬁtable for the operator it should not take too much
time until the ﬁrst looping is managed by an average
person. Moreover, for economic reasons the operator must know a suitable initial swing velocity that
is required to keep the total swinging time within
a reasonable limit. From an educational viewpoint
it is very important to emphasize that an operator of a fairground swing is typically not an academically skilled person and thus the communication Fig. 2. Modeling of the loowith this client will be rather diﬃcult for a com- ping swing: From the real
putational scientist. This should give an impression system to the mathematical
to the students of how important the initial project model
speciﬁcation is for the overall progress.
Mathematical modeling: By common deﬁnition simulation must always been
based on a mathematical model of the system under investigation. Modeling
is usually subdivided into a ﬁrst step of building an idealized physical representation of the real system and a second step of generating the mathematical
equations from this system. As pointed out in [2] these two steps should be

1254

W. Wiechert

sharply separated in a lecture. In the running example one major educational
goal is to demonstrate the dependency of model complexity on the aim of the
simulation project. In this case it is not necessary to predict the dynamics of
the looping swing with a high precision. For this reason a very simple representation of the complex system can be used. After a thorough discussion the
whole system is reduced to a mathematical pendulum with a time dependent
length. Here the important concept of the scope of a mathematical model can
be clearly demonstrated. Due to the very simple model (Fig. 2) only the radial
movements of the person in the swing are taken into account while tangential
movements are neglected. This means that the model is not able to describe the
acceleration of the swing starting with an initial angle of zero and zero velocity.
Having drawn a picture of the idealized physical model the generation of the
mathematical equations is straight forward from the law of angular momentum
(Fig. 2).
Implementation: To implement a simulator on a very basic level the Euler
method is quickly introduced by deriving it from a diﬀerential quotient approximation of the time derivative. The well-known deﬁciencies of this primitive ODE
solver are rather an advantage in a ﬁrst course on simulation than a disadvantage
because the shortcomings of the Euler method will immediately turn out in the
next steps of the project. In the next unit of the lecture which is concerned with
tools for continuous time simulation the Euler method is compared with other
integrators contained in the MATLAB and SIMULINK packages. This in turn
motivates to learn more about numerical algorithms in the subsequent lectures.
Data acquisition: It is frequently disregarded that the acquisition of data to
parameterize a model can be one of the most time consuming parts of a simulation project in practice. This can be illustrated even with the simple swing
model. It is discussed how empirical data, material constants, separate calculations, data sheets of component manufactures, parameters from comparable
systems, interviews with the operator, or experiments can be used as data sources in the present example.
Veriﬁcation: The term veriﬁcation means to prove the correctness of the simulator implementation relative to the idealized physical model. In the example the
plausibility of the model is tested by doing extensive parameter and initial value
variation studies. In each case it is checked if the model behaves in the expected
way. Because the mathematical pendulum can be approximated for small angles
by a linear model an analytical solution is available. This solution can also be
taken to check the correctness of the implementation.
Validation: The term model validation means to prove the correct representation of the real system by the simulation with respect to the accuracy requirements and the experimental frame given in the project speciﬁcation. Model
validation is another very critical step in a simulation project which is closely
related to the very fundamentals of natural science [7]. Two aspects of model
validation are considered in the example. The ﬁrst aspect is the friction model

CSE without Math?

1255

contained in the system equations. By comparing
diﬀerent friction models (constant, linear, quadratic, mixed) it turns out that there is a diﬀerence
but this diﬀerence is not important for the problem
solution. Thus a linear friction model can be safely
assumed although it might not exactly represent the
reality. The friction coeﬃcient must be chosen with
a reasonable order of magnitude. The second aspect
of validation is the estimation of model parameters
which could not be obtained from available data.
Two methods to estimate the linear friction coeﬃcient from experiments are shortly discussed which
are the direct usage of the analytical solution or general parameter ﬁtting procedure.
Problem solution: In reality swings are accelerated by the same mechanism that is used in iceskating to perform a pirouette. To increase the rotational velocity the center of mass has to be moved closer to the center of rotation. Unlike in iceskating this cannot be continuously done in a looping swing. However, the swing length can be increased without an eﬀect on the rotational energy
at the turning points of the swing. This is also the
recipe to build up a control strategy for the looping
swing. Interestingly, this strategy is not that easy to
implement because further restrictions due to human limitations like smoothness and bounded accelerations must be recognized. Moreover, the control
strategy should account for the ‘sportiveness’ of the
swing driver. A parametrized analytical control function is constructed based on piecewise scaled trigonometric functions. Simulation experiments can
now be carried out to solve the original problem. It
turns out that a well trained driver is able to achieve
a looping after 15 swings.
Result presentation: The presentation of the results of a simulation study is another very important step in practice because they must be communicated to a customer who may not be familiar
with the basics of simulation. Thus it is very important which graphical visualisation is used to de- Fig. 3. Diﬀerent visual remonstrate the results. To this end several diﬀerent presentations of the simulavisualizations for the dynamics of the looping swing tion results
are introduced and compared with respect to their
possible audience (Fig. 3). Clearly, the virtual rea-

1256

W. Wiechert

lity representation (bottom) is totally ‘oversized’ because this is essentially a
2-dimensional system. Nevertheless it will be the most convincing visualisation
for an operator of a fairground swing.
Application: In both academic and industrial applications simulation projects
have the tendency to be never ﬁnished because once the results have been presented and applied to the real system new problems will arise. In the case of the
boat swing this might be the problem of how to safely ﬁx the swing driver to the
swing body. In many situations it may be the case that some important details
of the real system have been disregarded. In the present example it may be the
case that the swing representation by the mathematical pendulum is too much
simpliﬁed and a more detailed physical pendulum model has to be taken.

5

Experiences

In the ﬁrst years of the introductory course on the ‘Foundations of M&S’ about
100 students with very diﬀerent scientiﬁc backgrounds have attended it. The
chosen mathematical contents are well accepted and – as the ﬁrst exams and
project works show – can be applied by the students in practice. By conception
the students have the opportunity to choose any other course of the series M&S
2-7 afterwards. In fact many students with a sound mathematical background
(like the mechatronics students) participate in 3-4 courses while the others rather
choose one of the more practical courses like ‘M&S 7: Simulation tools’. The
Siegen concept of a modular education in computational science for students
from diﬀerent disciplines will be extended and more institutionalized in the next
years by installing CSE as a specialization that can be chosen in diﬀerent courses
like engineering, computer science or mathematics.

References
1. W. Wiechert, Lecture Notes on Modeling and Simulation,
http://www.simtec.mb.uni-siegen.de.
2. W. Wiechert, W., The Role of Modeling in Computational Science Education. Future Generation Computer Systems, 2003, pp.1363-1374.
3. FOMAAS (Forschungszentrum f¨
ur Multidisziplin¨
are Analysen und Angewandte Systemoptimierung): University of Siegen, http://www.fomaas.uni-siegen.de.
4. W. Wiechert, W. Becker, H.A. Eschenauer, B. Freisleben, M. Grauer, D. Hartmann,
H.-J. Reinhardt, and G. Thierauf, eds. FOMAAS Status-Report 2000-2002. 2002.
ISBN 3-9807356-3-x
5. W. Wiechert, Eine Checkliste f¨
ur den Aufbau einer Simulationstechnik Vorlesung,
in: K. Panreck, F. D¨
orrscheid, 15. Symposium Simulationstechnik, Paderborn, SCS
Publishing House, 2001, pp. 151-156.
6. B.F. Gore, The Child’s Swing. Journal of Physics, 1970. 38: p. 378-379.
7. W. Wiechert, R. Takors, Validation of metabolic models: Concepts, tools, and problems, in: H.V. Westerhoﬀ, B.N. Kholodenko (Eds.), Metabolic Engineering in a
Post Genomic Era, Horizon Scientiﬁc Press, 2003.

