A Note on Dynamic Data Driven Wildfire Modeling
1

1

1

1

1

2

J. Mandel , M. Chen , L.P. Franca , C. Johns , A. Puhalskii , J.L. Coen ,
3
4
4
5
C.C. Douglas , R. Kremens , A. Vodacek , and W. Zhao
1

2

University of Colorado Denver, Denver, CO 80217-3364, USA
National Center for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, CO 80307-3000, USA
3
University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40506-0045, USA
4
Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, NY 14623-5603, USA
5
Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843-1112, USA

Abstract. A proposed system for real-time modeling of wildfires is described.
The system involves numerical weather and fire prediction, automated data
acquisition from Internet sources, and input from aerial photographs and
sensors. The system will be controlled by a non-Gaussian ensemble filter
capable of assimilating out-of-order data. The computational model will run on
remote supercomputers, with visualization on PDAs in the field connected to
the Internet via a satellite.

1 Introduction
Today, there exists virtually no capability to predict the spread of wildfires. In 2000
alone (the worst fire season in over 50 years), over 90,000 wildfires cost an estimated
$10 billion in suppression and lost resources. Current field tools for diagnosing expected fire behavior are simple algorithms that can be run on simple pocket calculators.
Researchers and fire managers alike envision a future when they can rely on complex
simulations of the interactions of fire, weather, and fuel, driven by remote sensing
data of fire location and land surface properties. And get the results as easy to
understand animations on a small laptop or PDA, have the computer incorporate all
information as soon as it becomes available, and assess the likelihood of possible
scenarios. This is how computers work in the imagination of sci-fi movie directors.
This project is to build a prototype as the first step to make it a reality.
This note is based on [24], where further details can be found.

2 Overview of the Proposed System
The objective of this project is to develop a prototype hardware and software system
to integrate available information related to a wildfire in progress, and to provide a
numerical prediction of the wildfire in a visual form, including tools to predict the
outcome of firefighting strategies. The proposed system will have the following main
components:
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3038, pp. 725–731, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

726

J. Mandel et al.

•
•

Numerical coupled atmosphere/fire model
Data acquisition (measurements)
o From Internet: maps (GIS), aggregated fire information, weather
o Field information: aerial photos, sensors
• Visualization and user interface
• Dynamic Data Assimilation control module
• Guaranteed secure communication infrastructure
The numerical model accepts data in a mesh format. The Dynamic Data
Assimilation control module will call the numerical model to execute multiple
simulations, extract data from the state of the numerical model to be compared with
the measurements and modify the state of the numerical model to match the measurements. The visualization and user interface module will display the results of the
simulation and support user input to control alternative firefighting scenarios.
The numerical model will run on one or more remote supercomputers, while the
visualization and user interface will run on PDAs in the field. Software agents and
search engines will provide internet data, while networked sensors and cameras in
airplanes will provide the field data. The field internet connection will be
implemented using a local wireless network, bridged to the internet by a consumergrade cheap broadband satellite connection and satellite data phones.

3 Weather and Fire Model
NCAR’s coupled atmosphere-fire model is described in detail in [9, 12, 13, 14]. A 3D
atmospheric prediction model [7, 8, 10, 11] has been coupled with an empirical fire
spread model [1, 2, 29, 30] such that the heat fluxes from the fire feed back to the
atmosphere to produce fire winds, while the atmospheric winds drive the fire
propagation. This wildfire simulation model can thus represent the complex
interactions between a fire and local weather.
The existing numerical model is a legacy FORTRAN code that took a quarter of
century and substantial scientific expertise to develop. We are proceeding in these
steps: encapsulate execution of one time step as a subroutine; define and enforce
software interfaces; upgrade the fire model from empirical to differential equations
based; and speed up the model using techniques such as OpenMP and multigrid.
The overall system will run many instances of the model simultaneously; we
expect that each instance of the model will run on a single CPU or an SMP node.
Our next step up from an empirical model of fire propagation is a model based on a
reaction-convection-diffusion equation describing simplified fire physics with additional stochastic terms, which also model spotting (secondary fires started by flying
embers). For related models, see [4, 16, 22]. There are two coupled equation: one for
the temperature, derived from the balance of heat fluxes, and one equation for the rate
of consumption of the fuel. The temperature influences the burn rate, which in turn
determines the term for the heat flux generated by the burning in the equation for the
temperature. Added stochastic terms are a noise expressing the uncertainties of the
model, and flight of burning embers, modeled by replacing (with a certain probability,
dependent on the temperature and the wind) the temperature a point by the temperature at another randomly selected point.

A Note on Dynamic Data Driven Wildfire Modeling

727

Anticipated developments of the fire model include several species of fuel to
model different types of fire (grass, brush, crown fire), spotting terms with delay to
account for the time it takes for the fire started by the flying embers to become visible
on the computational grid scale, and of course coupling with the NCAR atmosphere
model.

4 Data Acquisition
Maps, sometimes including fuel information, are available from GIS files maintained
by public agencies as well as private companies. We are working on translating the
GIS format files into meshed data suitable for input into the model. Raw as well as
assimilated weather data are readily available from numerous sources on the Internet,
including NOAAPORT broadcast, MesoWest weather stations, and the Rapid Update
Cycle (RUC) weather system by NOAA. Aggregated fire information is available
from the GeoMAC project at USGS. The challenge here is to develop intelligent
converters of the information, which can deal with the constantly changing nature of
Internet sites.
Thermal and near infrared images obtained from a manned or unmanned airborne
platform is perhaps one of the best means of tracking the advance of wildland fires
[28, 32]. Infrared radiation will pass through smoke relatively unattenuated, thus
providing a signal of the exact fire location.
To obtain the geographic coordinates for the ground locations of individual pixels
in an image that may correspond to the fire front or hotspot, the location and the
direction that the camera was pointing at the time of image capture can be obtained by
a combination of GPS readings for aircraft position and 3-axis inertial measurement
unit data to determine the pointing direction of the camera. Terrain induced distortion
can be corrected by parallax measurements on overlapping stereo images, or from
given knowledge of the terrain and the camera pointing direction and altitude [25].
While topographic maps exist for much of the U.S., one very promising data set for
the U.S. and much of the rest of the world is from the Shuttle Radar Topography
Mission [27].
Networked, autonomous environmental detectors may be placed in the vicinity of a
fire for point measurements of fire and weather information [21]. For geolocation, the
units can either be built with a GPS capability or a less expensive approach is to plan
for a GPS position to be taken at the exact location of the deployment using an
external GPS unit and uploading the position data to the detector memory.

5 Dynamic Data Assimilation
An important feature of DDDAS is that the model is running all the time and it
incorporates new data as soon as it arrives. Also, in this application, uncertainty is
dominant because important processes are not modeled, there are measurement and
other errors in the data, the system is heavily nonlinear and ill-posed, and there are
multiple possible outcomes. This type of problem is a natural candidate for sequential
Bayesian filtering (sequential because the data is incorporated sequentially as it

728

J. Mandel et al.

arrives rather than all at once). The state of the system at any time period is
represented by a collection of physical variables and parameters of interest, usually at
mesh points. To be able to inject data arriving out of sequence, we will work with the
time-state vector x, which will contain snapshots of system states at different points in
time. The knowledge of the time-state of the system is represented in the model as a
probability density function p(x). The model will represent the probability distribution
using an ensemble of time-state vectors x1 ,…, xn . Thus, the number of the system
states maintained by the model will be equal to the number of time snapshots saved
for updating out of order data multiplied by the ensemble size, a product that will
easily reach the thousands. Each of these system states will be advanced in time via
separate simulations and substantial parallel supercomputing power will be required.
Sequential filtering consists of successive updating of the model state using data
via Bayes theorem. The current state of the model is called the prior or the forecast
f
probability density p (x). The arriving data consists of measurements y along with an
information how the measured quantities are derived from the system state x, and
information about the distribution of measurement errors. That is, the additional
information provided by the data to the model is represented by the vector y and a
conditional probability density function p(y|x). The update is incorporated into the
model using the Bayes theorem, resulting in the posterior or analysis probability
density
p a ( x) =

p( y | x) p f ( x)
f
∫ p( y | ξ ) p (ξ )d ξ

,

(1)

which then becomes the new state of the model. The model states continue advancing
in time, with a corresponding advancement of the probability density, until new data
arrives. The system states for times within the time stamps of the data are system
estimation. The system states beyond the time stamp of the data constitute a
prediction. Note that advancing the model in time and injecting the data into the
model is decoupled.
Clearly, the crucial question is how the probability distributions are represented in
the model. The simplest case is to assume normal distributions for the states x and the
conditional distributions p(y|x) and that the observations y depend linearly upon the
states. These assumptions give the well-known Kalman filter formulas [20]. In
particular, the posterior is also normal with the mean equal to the solution x a of the
least squares problem

min
{( x a − x f )T Σ−1 ( x a − x f ) + ( y − Hx a )T R −1 ( y − Hx a )} .
a

(2)

x

Ensemble Kalman filters [17, 18, 19, 31] represent a normal distribution by a
sample, which avoids manipulation of covariance matrix Σ , replacing it with sample
covariance estimate. Thus, the ensemble approach is particularly useful in problems
where the state vector x or the observation vector y are large. However, existing
methods do not support out of order data, because they operate on only one time
snapshot, and extensions of ensemble filters to the time-state model described here
have to be worked out. Further, if the time evolution function f is nonlinear or the
observation matrix H in (2) is replaced by a nonlinear function, the probability

A Note on Dynamic Data Driven Wildfire Modeling

729

distribution p(x) is not expected to be normal. Particle filters [3, 15] can approximate
any probability distribution, not only normal, by a sample of vectors x1 ,…, xn , with
corresponding weights w1 ,… , wn ; then approximately x ~ D , where the probability
of any event ω is calculated by
D (ω ) =

∑w .

xi ∈ω

i

(3)

Time-state models have been used in processing out-of-order data by particle
filters [23]. But the approximation (3) is rather crude and, consequently, particle
filters generally require large samples, which is not practical in our application. For
this reason, we are investigating data assimilation by ensemble filters based on
Gaussian mixtures [5, 6], where the probability distributions are approximated by a
weighted mixture of normal distributions, such as
x ~ N ( µi , Σi ) with probability pi .

(4)

To assimilate data that depends on system state in a highly nonlinear way, such as fire
perimeters from aerial photographs, one of the options we are investigating is
replacing the least squares problem (2) by the nonlinear optimization problem
min
{( x a − x f )T Σ−1 ( x a − x f ) + ( y − h( x a ))T R −1 ( y − h( x a ))} ,
a

(5)

x

which may have multiple local minima. Alternatively, we consider updating the
model state by minimizing some probabilities that the solution is off by more than a
given amount, e.g.,
min
{P(¬ | x a − x f |< ε x ∨ ¬ |y − h( x a ) |< ε y )} ,
a

(6)

x

where the inequalities are understood term by term, and ε x , ε y are vectors of
tolerances. This type of threshold estimates, related to Bahadur efficiency [26], could
be quite important in fire problems, because of the nature of fires. Unlike in the case
when the distribution of x is normal, here a least squares estimate may say little about
whether or not the ignition temperature in a given region has been reached.
The Dynamic Data Assimilation module needs also to steer the data acquisition. In
terms of the Bayesian update, one method of steering would be to select the
measurements to minimize the variance of the posterior distribution. In the linear
Gaussian case, this becomes an optimization problem for the observation matrix H
under the constraints of what measurements can be made.
Finally, guaranteed secure communication [33] delivers messages within a preset
delay with a given probability close to one. This means that loss of data or loss of
communication with ensemble members could be, in principle, handled as a part of
the stochastic framework, and the Dynamic Data Assimilation module should take
advantage of that.
Acknowledgments. This research has been supported in part by the National Science
Foundation under grants ACI-0325314, ACI-0324989, ACI-0324988, ACI-0324876,
and ACI-0324910.

730

J. Mandel et al.

References
1.

2.

3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

Albini, F. A.: PROGRAM BURNUP: A simulation model of the burningof large woody
natural fuels. Final Report on Research Grant INT-92754-GR by U.S.F.S. to Montana
State Univ., Mechanical Engineering Dept. (1994)
Anderson, H.: Aids to determining fuel models for estimating fire behavior. USDA Forest
Service, Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Report INT-122 (1982)
Arulampalam, M., Maskell, S., Gordon, N., Clapp, T.: A tutorial on particle filters for
online nonlinear/non-Gaussian Bayesian tracking, IEEE Transactions on Signal
Processing, 50 (2002) 174-188
Asensio, M. I., Ferragut, L.: On a wildland fire model with radiation, Int. J. Numer. Meth.
Engrg, 54 (2002) 137-157
Bengtsson, T., Snyder, C., Nychka, D.: A nonlinear filter that extends to high dimensional
systems. J. of Geophys. Res. - Atmosphere, in review (2003)
Chen , R., Liu, J. S.: Mixture Kalman filters, J. of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B,
62 (2000) 493-508
Clark, T. L.: A small-scale dynamic model using a terrain-following coordinate transformation, J. of Comp. Phys., 24 (1977) 186-215
Clark, T. L.: Numerical simulations with a three-dimensional cloud model: lateral
boundary condition experiments and multi-cellular severe storm simulations, J. Atmos.
Sci., 36 (1979) 2191-2215
Clark, T. L., Coen, J., Latham, D.: Description of a coupled atmosphere-fire model, Intl. J.
Wildland Fire, 13, in print (2004)
Clark, T. L., Hall, W. D.: Multi-domain simulations of the time dependent Navier- Stokes
equations: Benchmark error analysis of some nesting procedures, J. of Comp. Phys., 92
(1991) 456-481
Clark, T. L., Hall, W. D.: On the design of smooth, conservative vertical grids for interactive grid nesting with stretching, J. Appl. Meteor., 35 (1996) 1040-1046
Clark, T. L., Jenkins, M. A., Coen, J., Packham, D.: A coupled atmospheric-fire model:
Convective feedback on fire line dynamics, J. Appl. Meteor, 35 (1996) 875-901
Clark, T. L., Jenkins, M. A., Coen, J., Packham, D.: A coupled atmospheric-fire model:
Convective Froude number and dynamic fingering, Intl. J. of Wildland Fire, 6 (1996) 177190
Coen, J. L., Clark, T. L., Latham, D.: Coupled atmosphere-fire model simulations in
various fuel types in complex terrain, in 4th. Symp. Fire and Forest Meteor. Amer.
Meteor. Soc., Reno, Nov. 13-15 (2001) 39-42
Doucet, A., Freitas, N. de, Gordon, N. (ed.): Sequential Monte Carlo in Practice, Springer.
Dupuy, J. L. and Larini, M. (1999). Fire spread through a porous forest fuel bed: A
radiative and convective model including fire-induced flow effects, Intl. J. of Wildland
Fire, 9 (2001) 155-172.
Evensen, G.: Sequential data assimilation with nonlinear quasi-geostrophic model using
Monte Carlo methods to forecast error statistics, J. Geophys. Res.,99 (C5) (1994) 143-162
Evensen, G.: The ensemble Kalman filter: Theoretical formulation and practical implementtation. http://www.nersc.no/geir (2003)
Houtekamer, P., Mitchell, H. L.: Data assimilation using an ensemble Kalman filter
technique, Monthly Weather Review, 126 (1998) 796-811
Jazwinski, A. H.: Stochastic processes and filtering theory, Academic Press, New York
(1970)
Kremens, R., Faulring, J., Gallagher, A.,Seema, A., Vodacek, A.: Autonomous fielddeployable wildland fire sensors, Intl. J. of Wildland Fire, 12 (2003) 237-244
Linn, R. Reisner, J.,Colman, J., Winterkamp, J.: Studying wildfire behavior using
FIRETEC, Int. J. of Wildland Fire, 11 (2002) 233-246

A Note on Dynamic Data Driven Wildfire Modeling

731

23. Mallick, M., Kirubarajan, T., Arulampalam, S.: Out-of-sequence measurement processing
for tracking ground target using particle filters, in Aerospace Conference Proceedings, vol.
4, IEEE (2002) 4-1809-4-1818
24. Mandel, J., Chen, M., Franca, L.P., Johns, C., Puhalskii, A., Coen, J.L., Douglas, C.C.,
Kremens, R., Vodacek, A., Zhao, W.: Dynamic data driven wildfire modeling, F. Darema
(ed.), Dynamic Data Driven Applications Systems, Klumer Academic Publishers (2004)
25. Mostafa, M., Hutton, J., Lithopoulos, E.: Covariance propagation in GPS/IMU - directly
georeferenced frame imagery, in Proceedings of the Asian Conference on Remote Sensing
2000, Taipei, Center for Space; Remote Sensing Research, National Central University and
Chinese Taipei Society of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing (2000)
26. Puhalskii, A., Spokoiny, V.: On large-deviation efficiency in statistical inference,
Bernoulli, 4 (1998) 203-272
27. Rabus, B. Eineder, M. Roth, A., Bamler, R.: The shuttle radar topography mission - a new
class of digital elevation models acquired by spaceborne radar, Photogrammetric
Engineering and Remote Sensing, 57 (2003) 241-262
28. Radke, L. R., Clark, T.L., Coen, J. L., Walther, C., Lockwood, R. N., Riggin, P., Brass, J.,
Higgans, R.: The wildfire experiment (WiFE): Observations with airborne remote sensors,
Canadian J. Remote Sensing, 26 (2000) 406-417
29. Richards, G. D.: The properties of elliptical wildfire growth for time dependent fuel and
meteorological conditions, Combust. Sci. and Tech., 95 (1994) 357-383
30. Rothermel, R. C.: A mathematical model for predicting fire spread in wildland fires.
USDA Forest Service Research Paper INT-115 (1972)
31. Tippett, M. K., Anderson, J. L., Bishop, C. H., Hamill, T. M., Whitaker, J. S.: Ensemble
square root filters, Monthly Weather Review, 131 (2003) 1485-1490
32. Vodacek, A., Kremens, R. L., Fordham, A. J., VanGorden, S. C., Luisi, D., Schott, J. R.:
Remote optical detection of biomass burning using a potassium emission signature, Intl. J.
of Remote Sensing, 13 (2002) 2721-2726
33. Zhao, W.: Challenges in design and implementation of middlewares for real-time systems,
J. of Real-Time Systems, 20 (2001) 1-2

