Computer Algebra Manipulations in Astronomy
Tamara Ivanova
Institute of Applied Astronomy
191187, St.Petersburg, Russia
itv@quasar.ipa.nw.ru

Abstract. The specialized Poisson Series Processors (PSPs) are proposed. They are a typical software for the implementation of analytical
algorithms of celestial mechanics. The PSPs are designed for manipulating long Poisson (polynomial-trigonometric) and echeloned series with
the rational, ﬂoating-point or arbitrary length (inﬁnite precision) coeﬃcients and with unlimited number of power and angular variables. The
Keplerian processor and analytical generator of special celestial mechanics functions based on the PSPs are also developed.

1

Introduction

The main objects of celestial mechanics are so-called Poisson series, i.e., the
polynomial-trigonometric series of the form:
S=

Ci,j xi

sin
cos

(jy) ,

(1)

x = (x1 , . . . , xn ), y = (y1 , . . . , ym ), i = (i1 , . . . , in ), j = (j1 , . . . , jm ).
Here x and y are vectors of polynomial and trigonometric variables, respectively.
The summation is performed over all integer values of indices i and j. Coeﬃcients
Ci,j may be represented as rational, ﬂoating-point, arbitrary length or complex
numbers. The last form of coeﬃcients corresponds to the exponential Poisson
series:
√
S=
Ci,j xi exp −1 (jy).
(2)
The systems of operations on the series of this kind are known as Poisson processors. These specialized processors turn out to be very eﬀective in performing
the symbolic operations with series even of hundreds of thousand terms characteristic of high-accuracy analytical theories of celestial mechanics. Though
in general they are constructed for the purpose of solving celestial mechanics
problems they may be used equally well in other ﬁelds such as theoretical mechanics, physics, etc. Poisson processors have been developed in many centres
of celestial mechanics. The brief review of them and their applications to solve
the celestial mechanics problems are given by Brumberg (Brumberg, 1995). As
a rule they are diﬀerent in the representation of coeﬃcients, in the number of
power and trigonometric variables, in the range of associated indices of these
variables, in storage techniques for the Poisson series, etc. Some of them allow
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3039, pp. 388–393, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

Computer Algebra Manipulations in Astronomy

389

manipulation of a wider class of objects than the Poisson series, for instance,
so-called echeloned series (very long polynomial-trigonometric series with literal
frequencies):
Ki,j

S=

xi

sin
cos

Nk

j = (j1 , . . . , jm ),

q (ν,k)

,

(3)

ν=1

k=1

x = (x1 , . . . , xn ),

γ (ν,k) ω

Ci,j,k

(jy)

y = (y1 , . . . , ym ),

ω = (ω1 , . . . , ωm ),

i = (i1 , . . . , in ),
(ν,k)

γ (ν,k) = (γ1

(ν,k)
, . . . , γm
).

Each term of this series is characterized by the set of power x, angular y and
frequency ω variables with associated multi-indices i, j and γ (ν,k) together with
the quantities q (ν,k) , respectively. The coeﬃcients Ci,j,k are rational, ﬂoatingpoint or arbitrary length numbers. The exponents q (ν,k) are integers. The ﬁrst
summation is again performed here over all integer values of indices i and j. The
values of Ki,j and Nk are directly obtained as a result of symbolic operations on
the series.
In this case the trigonometric variables yr are represented by the linear functions of an argument t with the literal values of the frequencies w:
yr = wr t + yr(0) ,

r = (1, . . . , m).

(4)

The Echeloned Poisson Series Processor EPSP (Ivanova, 2001) is designed
for manipulating the echeloned series. This processor is developed on the basis
of the Poisson series processor PSP (Ivanova, 1995). PSP is intended directly for
operating on the Poisson series themselves, that is, the polynomial-trigonometric
series where the frequencies are taken into account numerically in diﬀerentiating
and integrating with respect to argument t. The echeloned series processor allows
to solve a wider class of problems as compared with the Poisson series processor.
This is a case, for instance, of analytical Lunar theory where one has to handle
the divisors in symbolic form. From the user’s point of view both processors are
similar, except that the list of basic operations of EPSP includes the operations
of the total diﬀerentiation and integration with respect to time in the analytical
form relatively to the frequencies. It leads to more complex storage schemes in
the echeloned series processor.

2

Basic Characteristics of PSPs

The most important characteristics of PSPs are as follows:
• PSPs are written in standard FORTRAN-77 language.
• PSPs have no restrictions on the number of power, angular and frequency
variables and on the ranges of changing of associated indices to be prescribed
by user for any speciﬁc problem. For comparison, processor ESP (Rom, 1971)
deals with the echeloned series of 12 polynomial, six trigonometric and three
frequency variables.

390

T. Ivanova

• Every term of the series is characterized by the analytical order of smallness
N calculated by formula
n

il Wl ,

N=

(5)

l=1

where Wl is the weight function of the polynomial variable with number l, il is
the corresponding index. The analytical order of smallness is a very important
characteristic because the power variables are as a rule the small parameters
resulting in the possibility of restricting the series by the terms with the total
order of the power variables not more than some prescribed value.
• All mathematical operations with the series are formal. The criterion for rejecting a term is based on its smallness determined by the analytical order of
the term, the numerical estimation of its coeﬃcient and the admissible values
of the indices.
• PSPs allow the user to write his/her own procedures without any diﬃculty.
It is especially easy to perform the identical operations on every term of the
series due to the availability of special scanning procedures executing a given
action on each term of series.
• The hierarchical architecture of PSPs allow rather easily the adaptation of
the system on diﬀerent computers and the modiﬁcation of it for the objects
slightly diﬀerent from the standard Poisson series (for instance, for manipulating the exponents instead of the trigonometric functions or for changing
the type of coeﬃcients) or in the case of using diﬀerent storage techniques for
series. The hierarchical principle involves the subdivision of all system procedures into three levels. The procedures of the lowest level realize the operations
on coeﬃcients of terms and their indices. The subroutines of the middle level
realize the operations on individual terms of the series and depend on speciﬁc
representation of Poisson series in computer memory. Finally, the analytical
operations on the series are realized by the highest level procedures taking into
account only general mathematical structure of objects.
• The list of basic operations of PSPs includes the standard arithmetic operations with the series, the partial diﬀerentiation and integration with respect
to polynomial and trigonometric variables, the total diﬀerentiation and integration with respect to time, raising to any integer, rational or real exponent,
binomial and Taylor expansion up to some prescribed order, substitution of
the series in place of any set of the power and trigonometric variables, fast
evaluation of the series for numerical values of any variables, conversion of the
series, diﬀerent sortings and selections, etc. PSPs enable the realization of the
input and output of the series in any format or unformatted mode and typing
them in natural mathematical form.
All algorithms of the operations with the series imply the standard lexicographic order of the input series and do not alter it in the resulting series.

Computer Algebra Manipulations in Astronomy

3

391

Storage Schemes of PSPs

The storage area consists of two or three global arrays which keep the series
terms, their coeﬃcients and divisors or factors for the EPSP. The memory for
coeﬃcients is represented by the standard one-dimensional array where rational, ﬂoating-point and complex coeﬃcients are located consecutively taking into
account their length depending on their type. Two other arrays for keeping the
series, divisors and factors and ﬁrst array for arbitrary length coeﬃcients use
the one-way linked list structure for dynamical memory allocation (Figure 1)
permitting the application of an algorithm for quick searching and inserting of
terms into series.

✲ node 2

node 1

✲ ···

✲ node L

0

Fig. 1. Structure of the one-way linked list memory allocation for the series, the divisors
and the arbitrary length coeﬃcients of L nodes.

The series consists of a passport and a sequence of its terms connected in
circular chain with one link (Figure 2). The series passport contains its general
characteristics: the number of terms in the series (N ) and the link on its last
term (LAST ).

Series passport
N

LAST

❄
node 1

✲

node 2

✛

node N

✲ ···

✲ node N -1

Fig. 2. Structure of a series

✛

392

T. Ivanova

The node is an elementary structure unit. It includes the main characteristics
of the separate term of a series (Figure 3):
Array of the coeﬃcients
±the link on the next node
the link on the coeﬃcient
−→ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
the link on the divisors
– .......................
.......................
analytical order of smallness
the packed power indices
.......................
............................
.......................
............................
.......................
.......................
the packed trigonometrical
indices
.......................
............................
.......................
............................
.......................

↓
+link on the next node
−→ . . . −link on the next node
the power index
the power index
the packed freq. indices
the packed frequence indices
Fig. 3. Structure of a node.

∗ the link on the next node;
∗ the name of the trigonometric function deﬁned by the sign ‘+’ for a cosine
term and the sign ‘−’ for a sine term assigned to the above-mentioned link;
∗ the link on the beginning of the coeﬃcient;
∗ the link on the beginning of the symbolic divisors or factors. If this link is
equal to zero it means that this node does not contain any divisors;
∗ analytical order of smallness;
∗ the packed power and trigonometric indices.
Each term of the symbolic divisors or factors includes:
∗ the link on the next node;
∗ a ﬂag assigned to the link and expressed by signs ‘+’ or ‘−’. It indicates whether
the divisors are ﬁnished or not for the given node;
∗ an exponent index for one divisor. It can be positive or negative;
∗ the packed frequency indices.
In the case of rational coeﬃcients, the double precision ﬂoating-point numbers for correct operations on integer numbers are used. If a numerator or a
denominator of rational coeﬃcient falls outside the limits of maximum permissible number then they are transformed automatically to ﬂoating-point coeﬃcients
and the processor continues its work. If the coeﬃcients are of arbitrary length
then they are represented in the form like to divisors (Figure 4).

Computer Algebra Manipulations in Astronomy

393

+link on the next node
=⇒ . . . −link on the next node
numerator of rational number
numerator of rational number
denominator of rational number
denominator of rational number
Fig. 4. Structure of an arbitrary length coeﬃcient.

Each term of the coeﬃcient of arbitrary length includes:
∗ the link on the next node;
∗ a ﬂag assigned to the link and expressed by signs ‘+’ or ‘−’. It indicates whether
the coeﬃcient is ﬁnished or not for the given node;
∗ numerator of rational number;
∗ denominator of rational number.
The packed indices are able to occupy an arbitrary number of computer
integer words dependent on the number of indices, the value of their range and
the length of the computer integer word. All the operations performed on the
nodes deal with the standard form of nodes. It means that the ﬁrst trigonometric
or frequency index not being zero, must be positive.

4

Conclusion

The Keplerian processor and analytical generator of special celestial mechanics
functions based on PSPs are also proposed. They may be regarded as an illustration of the practical application of the processors. These systems are designed
for implementing the expansions of the most important mathematical functions
of celestial mechanics such as Legendre and Gegenbauer polynomials, Bessel and
spherical functions, etc., for constructing the expansions of the elliptic motion
functions of the unperturbed two-body problem and the expansions of the typical
celestial mechanics functions such as Hansen coeﬃcients, Newcomb operators,
Kaula inclination functions and their generalizations, etc. The software of this
sort is necessary to produce analytical solutions of various celestial mechanics
problems.
PSPs are available on request in electronic form from itv@quasar.ipa.nw.ru.

References
1. Brumberg, V. A.: 1995, Analytical Techniques of Celestial Mechanics, Springer,
Heidelberg.
2. Ivanova, T. V.: 1995, PSP: A New Poisson Series Processor, in: S. Ferraz-Mello,
B. Morando and J.-E. Arlot (eds), Proceedings of the 172nd Sympozium of the
International Astronomical Union, Dynamics, Ephemerides and Astrometry of the
Solar System, Paris, France. Kluwer Academic Publishers.
3. Ivanova, T. V.: 2001, A New Echeloned Series Processor (EPSP), Celest. Mech.
and Dyn. Astron., 80, Kluwer, 167–176.
4. Rom, A.: 1971, Echeloned Series Processor (ESP), Celest. Mech., 3, 331–345.

