Mathematical Model of Gas Transport in Anisotropic
Porous Electrode of the PEM Fuel Cell
Eugeniusz Kurgan and Paweł Schmidt
AGH University of Science and Technology, Department of Electrical Engineering,
al. Mickiewicza 30, 30-059 Krakow, Poland,
{kurgan,pschmidt}@agh.edu.pl

Abstract. In this paper a gas mixture model is developed to study anisotropic
hydrogen and water vapour flow in anode of the PEM fuel cell. Dependence of
the distribution of concentrations and fluxes of the of gas components in anisotropic porous layer is investigated. First full partial differential equations describing mass transport for permeability and diffusivity tensors based on
Darcy’s and Fick’s laws are developed. Next this set of nonlinear equations together with appropriate nonlinear boundary conditions using finite element
method was solved. At the end an illustrative example is given.

1 Introduction
The Proton Exchange Membrane (PEM) fuel cell consists of two gas diffusion layers
(GDL) separated by PEM. Between each GDL and PEM thin platinum catalyst layer
is located. Numerical simulation of all aspects of GDL performance is very important
from practical point of view because, most of the working parameters is very difficult
to measure. This is caused mainly by small physical dimensions of single cell. Typical cell electrodes are made of carbon fibre paper, consists of single carbon fibres.
Because of this, GDL diffusion and convection coefficients are not constant numbers
but tensor values.
One of the first publication on simulation of the PEM fuel cell based on the fluid
flow approach, started after publication [1]. In this publication authors described
equations governing gas distribution in one dimension in different regions of membrane-electrode assembly, the transport of mass species inside GDL and electrochemical reactions. We decouple GDL from the rest of the assembly by appropriate
boundary conditions, occurring in the gas channel and on the catalyst layer.
Anisotropic properties of the GDL were investigated by many authors, but few
publications with numerical models of anisotropic fuel cell were presented. In [2]
authors simulate gas distribution in anisotropic porous electrodes but they do not
show full equations which flow fields should fulfil. In this article authors present full
equations describing gas distribution in anode of the PEM fuel cell and extend results
presented in [2] to the full anisotropic case, where anisotropic properties of the material are described by full permeability and diffusivity tensors. At the end some illustrative example is given.

M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3037, pp. 244–251, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

Mathematical Model of Gas Transport in Anisotropic Porous Electrode

245

2 Numerical Model of the Anisotropic Electrode
At the Fig. 1 cross section of the anode of the PEM fuel cell is shown. Gas mixture is
supplied by the inlet flow channel and distributed to the electrochemical reaction sites
by the anisotropic porous layer. At the PEM electrolyte boundary, where very thin
+
catalyst layer is present, hydrogen molecules H2 are split into hydrogen ions H and
free electrons in electrochemical reaction. The hydrogen ions flow farther in direction
of the cathode and electrons flow back to the interdigitated graphite plate, where
graphite is carrying them out to the external load. Through the polymer electrolyte
from the cathodic side to the anode-electrolyte boundary, water molecules are transported. In this publication we assume that temperature of the fuel cell is high enough
for all this water to evaporate. Thus, it is further assumed that water occurs only as a
vapour.
H+

H2O
PEM

IV

e-

III
H2O
I

y

H2

III

CO2

GDL
II

graphite plate

Pt catalyst

H

(L/2,H)

I

flow channel graphite plate
LC
L

x

Fig. 1. Cross section of the PEM anode together with geometrical dimensions.

For practical reasons the hydrogen is obtained from hydrocarbons after catalytic reforming process. As a result in the gas mixture, with which cell is supplied, carbon
dioxide is present. It is an inert gas but influences distribution of hydrogen and water
vapour distribution, it should be taken into account during calculations.
Mass transport of the reactant gases obeys two fundamental laws, namely Darcy’s
and Fick’s laws. The first law defines convection flow which is proportional to the
pressure difference and the second diffusion flow which depends on concentration
gradients. Both laws are correct for homogeneous and isotropic mediums, described
by constant coefficients.

3 Mathematical Model of the Anisotropic Porous Layer
The overall flow of the gas mixture N = CU is governed by the mass conservation
law which in our case can be written in the form

∇(CU ) = 0

(1)

246

E. Kurgan and P. Schmidt

where U is a gas molar average velocity and C is a gas mixture concentration. It is a
sum of the concentration of all three species: C = C1 + C2 + C3, where C1 is concentration of hydrogen, C2 is concentration of water vapour and C3 is concentration of carbon dioxide. We assume further that CO2 concentration is a fixed part of the mixture
concentration C, and is equal (1 – γr)C. Molar average velocity is described by
Darcy’s law:
U=−

1

ε0µ

K ∇P

(2)

where K is a permeability tensor given by a matrix
k
K =  11
 k21

k12 
k22 

(3)

Ideal gas law relates pressure with the gas mixture concentration C

P = CRT

(4)

Taking into account above relation and defining convection matrix Γ as

γ 12  RT
γ
Γ =  11
K
=
γ 21 γ 22  ε p µ

(5)

the Darcy’s Law can be formulated for the anisotropic case as

 ∂C 
 
γ
γ
U x 
 11
12  ∂x
U  = − 
  ∂C 
γ 21 γ 22   
 y
 ∂y 

(6)

Introducing (6) into (1) we get the first partial differential equations governing the
process of mass transport in the electrode

− γ 11

∂  ∂C 
∂  ∂C 
∂  ∂C 
∂  ∂C 
 − γ 21  C
=0
C
 − γ 12  C
 − γ 22  C
∂x  ∂x 
∂y  ∂x 
∂x  ∂y 
∂y  ∂y 

(7)

Also hydrogen flux N1 = C1U1 has to fulfil mass conservation law:
∇N1 = 0

(8)

Hydrogen flux consists of two parts: convective flux C1U and diffusive flux J1:
N1 = C1U + J1

Convective flux is related with concentration gradients by Fick’s law:

(9)

Mathematical Model of Gas Transport in Anisotropic Porous Electrode

J1 = − CD∇x1

247

(10)

where tensor D is given by matrix
d
D =  11
 d 21

d12 
d 22 

(11)

Thus Fick’s law for anisotropic case has following form:

 J1x 
 d11
 J  = −C 
 d 21
 1y 

 ∂x1 
d12   ∂x 
 
d 22   ∂x1 
 ∂y 
 

(12)

Introducing equations (6) and (12) into (8) we get and eliminating C1 by introducing
C1=x1C we get second partial differential equation describing mass transport in anode
of the PEM fuel cell:

∂  ∂x1 
∂  ∂x 
∂  ∂x 
∂  ∂x 
− d12  C 1  − d 21  C 1  − d 22  C 1  −
C


∂x  ∂x 
∂x  ∂y 
∂y  ∂x 
∂y  ∂y 
 ∂x ∂C
∂x ∂C
∂x ∂C
∂x ∂C 
−C  γ 11 1
+ γ 12 1
+ γ 21 1
+ γ 22 1
=0
∂x ∂x
∂x ∂y
∂y ∂x
∂y ∂y 

− d11

(13)

Equations (7) and (13) form complete set of equation in total mixture concentration C
and molar fraction of hydrogen x1 variables.

4 Boundary Conditions
Equations (7) and (13) have to fulfil adequate boundary conditions. Each of them
needs different types of Dirichlet’s and Neuman’s conditions for four dinstinct
boundary sections.

Section I – Graphite Plate
Along this part of boundary graphite plate contacts with carbon fibre material and
throughout this section can be no flux of any species. Because fluxes of all species at
this boundary section are parallel to the boundary surface, the fluxes entering the
graphite plate are equal zero.
∂x1
=0
∂n

and

∂C
=0
∂n

(14)

248

E. Kurgan and P. Schmidt

Section II –Inlet Flow Channel
On this part of the boundary fibrous carbon material contacts with flow channel and
reactant species enter the anode. This results following Dirichlet’s conditions:
C = Cg and x1 = x1g

(15)

where Cg is given molar concentration of mixture and x1g given molar fraction of
hydrogen in inlet channel.
Section III – Left and Right Sides of the Calculation Domain
We assume that solution is periodic with respect to the calculation variables, and thus
all fluxes are directed parallel to the y axis. This causes that boundary conditions in
this section are the same as for section I.
Section IV – Platinum Catalyst Layer
Gas diffusion layer contacts with catalytic material along this part of the boundary.
Here hydrogen atoms lose their electrons during electrochemical reaction. Those
electrons flow back to graphite plate and next through external circuitry to the cathode. Hydrogen ions flow further through proton membrane. Here hydrogen flux
crossing boundary is proportional to its molar concentration difference on both sides
of boundary. We assume that electrochemical reaction efficiency is equal 100% and
no hydrogen atoms enter proton membrane. Thus

N1 ⋅ n = N1n = rH ( C1 − C1out ) = rH ( C1 − 0 ) = rH C1

(16)

where the mass transfer coefficient rH models electrochemical reaction which takes
place in catalyst layer. It relates hydrogen flux with its molar concentration and can
be determined from averaged current density flowing throughout catalytic region.
The water in fuel cell is produced on the cathode side of the membrane and its majority is transported from this region to cathodic gas channel. However, some part of
water diffuses throughout membrane to anode, crosses anodic catalytic layer and
enters anode. This flux of water vapour is strictly related to hydrogen flux flowing in
opposite direction, because from every two hydrogen atoms one water molecule is
produced. This relation between hydrogen flux and water vapour flux is established
by return coefficient ν which determines direction and magnitude water vapour flux
N2:
N 2 ⋅ n = (ν − 1) N1 ⋅ n = (ν − 1) rh Cx1

(17)

Equations (16) and (17) are starting points for derivation Neuman’s boundary conditions on catalyst layer for molar mixture concentration C and molar hydrogen fraction
x1. From (16) we get:
x1γ 21

∂x
∂x
∂C
∂C
+ x1γ 22
+ d 21 1 + d 22 1 = −rh x1
∂x
∂y
∂x
∂y

(18)

Mathematical Model of Gas Transport in Anisotropic Porous Electrode

249

Carrying out the same manipulations as for hydrogen from (17) we get relation between partial normal derivative for hydrogen and mixture concentration

(γ r − x1 ) γ 21

∂x
∂x
∂C
∂C
+ ( γ r − x1 ) γ 22
− d 21 1 − d 22 1 = − (ν − 1) rh x1
∂x
∂y
∂x
∂y

(19)

It is reasonable to assume that fluxes on this boundary enter catalyst layer perpendicularly and that no tangential fluxes are present. This means that partial derivatives
of all calculation variables in directions tangential to the boundary are equal zero,
thus, after simplification and solving system of equations, we get Neuman’s boundary
conditions for C and x1 variables:

νr x
∂C
=− h 1
∂y
γ r γ 22

and

∂x1 rh x1 (ν x1 − γ r )
=
∂y
d 22γ r

(20)

5 An Illustrative Example
The geometry of numerical example are defined in fig.1.Numerical values was presented in [3] and will not be repeated here.
Let us assume further that main axes of anisotropy overlap with geometrical coordinates. This results in following form of anisotropy for convective and diffusive matrixes
χ
Γ = Γ g
0

0
χ d
and D = D 
1 
0

0
1

(21)

Let us further assume that both anisotropic ratios are equal χg = χd = χ. For this
simplified assumptions equations (7) and (13) will take following form:
χ

χ

∂  ∂C  ∂  ∂C 
=0
C
 + C
∂x  ∂x  ∂y  ∂y 

∂  ∂x1  ∂  ∂x1  C Γ  ∂x1 ∂C ∂x1 ∂C 
C
+ C
+
+
χ
=0
∂x  ∂x  ∂y  ∂y  D  ∂x ∂x ∂y ∂y 

(22)

(23)

For anisotropic ratio χ = 1 the above equations reduce to the usual equations for
isotropic and homogeneous case [4]. The above set of mutually coupled and nonlinear
equations was solved in two dimensions by finite element method.
The dependencies between fluxes of species and anisotropy ratio were investigated during the calculations. The calculations were carried out at point (L/2,H) in the
middle of top domain boundary, across the GDL at y=H/2. In the fig. 2 and 3 the total
flux of the hydrogen is shown for two highly different anisotropy ratios. We can see
differences between directions of the fluxes caused by difference in anisotropic ratio
of carbon fibres assumed for each calculation. In the figures 4 and 5 dependence

250

E. Kurgan and P. Schmidt

between anisotropic ratio and diffusion flux of hydrogen is shown. For anisotropy
ratio χ = 1, the numerical results are consistent with general equations [5].

y

y
x

x

Fig. 2. Total flux of hydrogen N1 for aniso- Fig. 3. Total flux of hydrogen N1 for anisotropic ratio χ = 0.2.
tropic ratio χ = 1.8.
0.7996

3.0

0.7992

2.0

x1

J1dif ´ 1e-8

2.5

1.5

0.7988
1.0
0.5
0.4

0.7984
0.8

c

1.2

1.6

0.4

Fig. 4. Dependence between diffusion modulus of the flux of hydrogen J1diff and anisotropic ratio χ at point, placed on middle point
of the catalytic layer (L/2, H).

0.8

c

1.2

1.6

Fig. 5. Dependence between molar fraction of
hydrogen x1 and anisotropic ratio χ at calculation point, placed on middle point of the
catalytic layer (L/2, H).

3.5

3.0

Eerr [%]

2.5
A

2.0

1.5
B

1.0
0

4

8
12
3
DoF x 10

16

20

Fig. 6. Dependency between DoF and Eerr coefficient for normal components of the water
vapour flux N2 (A) and hydrogen flux N1 (B).

In Fig. 4, dependence of modulus of the hydrogen diffusion flux is presented. In the
middle of catalytic layer for χ < 1 less hydrogen reaches middle parts of the cathodeelectrolyte boundary. This means that distribution of hydrogen on the catalyst layer is
more uniform. This in turn results in greater effectiveness of the electrochemical
reaction of the splitting hydrogen molecules into hydrogen ions and electrons, what

Mathematical Model of Gas Transport in Anisotropic Porous Electrode

251

gives greater electric cell performance. It is obvious that there exists an optimal value
of the anisotropic ratio for which electrochemical reaction effectiveness on this electrode attains maximal value. To calculate this optimal value of χ one has to use any
optimization method. In this publication this problem will be not further considered.
Convergence of the solution of the problem was investigated by analysing dependence between error coefficient Eerr defined by (24) and degrees of freedom (DoF)
of discretized form of problem equations. Analyse was done for normal component of
fluxes of each gas component N1 and N2. Results of this investigation are shown in
fig. 6. We can see, that increasing of DoF decreases percentage error coefficient, what
means, that problem is convergent.
Eerr =

v∫ N

i

⋅ dl

L

v∫ N

i

⋅ n ⋅ dl

100%

(24)

L

where i = 1 or 2.

6 Conclusions
In this paper we present a mathematical model of multicomponent gas transport in the
GDL, which includes the full anisotropy of porous material. We assumed that anisotropy tensors for both convective and diffusive fluxes for hydrogen and water vapour
are equal each to other. Generally it is not the case. Further work should be carried to
take into account pressure as the third independent variable, and to include physical
aspects of anisotropic coefficients and their mutual relation.
Acknowledgement. This work was supported by the AGH University of Science and
Technology, under grant 11.11.120.183.

References
1. Bernardi D.M., Verbrugge , M.W.: Mathematical model of a gas diffusion electrode
bonded to a polymer electrode, J. Electrochem. Soc. vol. 139, no 9 (1992) 2477−2490
2. Stockie J., Promislow K., Wetton B.: A finite volume method for multicomponent gas
transport in a porous fuel cell electrode, Int. J. Numer. Methods in Fluids, vol. 41 (2003)
577 – 599.
3. Promislow K., Stockie J.: Adiabatic relaxation of convective-diffusive gas transport in
porous fuel cell electrode, SIAM J. Appl. Math, vol. 62, no 1 (2001) 180 – 205
4. Kurgan E., Schmidt P.: Transport of Gas Components in the Cathode of PEM Fuel Cell,
Sixth Int. Conference on Advanced Methods in the Theory of Electrical Engineering, Pilsen, Czech Republic, (2003) 5 – 10.
5. Kurgan E., Schmidt P.: Time Dependence of Species Concentrations in Cathode of The
PEM Fuel Cell, The Second Polish-Slovenian Joint Seminar on Computational and Applied Electromagnetics, Kraków, (2003) 27 – 30

