An Energy Efficient Broadcasting for Mobile Devices
Using a Cache Scheme*
Kook-Hee Han¹, Jai-Hoon Kim¹, Young-Bae Ko², and Won-Sik Yoon²
¹Graduate School of Information and Communication,
²College of Information Technology,
Ajou University
{justuniq, jaikim, youngko, wsyoon}@ajou.ac.kr

Abstract. Broadcasting mechanisms have been widely used to transfer
information to a large number of clients. Most of the broadcast schemes try to
minimize the average “access time”. In this paper, we present a broadcasting
mechanism which uses a cache to reduce not only access time but also energy
consumption. There is a trade-off between energy saving by accessing data in
cache and energy consumption by receiving broadcast data to update cache.
Therefore, we determine the optimal size of cache to minimize energy
consumption according to information access patterns and update
characteristics.

1 Introduction
Transferring the information of common interest to mobile users is an important issue
in personal wireless communications such as stock trading systems, weather
information systems, and parking information systems. In these systems, broadcast
mechanisms can be efficiently used, in which a broadcast server (e.g., satellite and
base station) transfers the information of common interest to a large number of mobile
users. An asymmetric environment is common in such systems. The downstream
communication capacity (from server to clients) is much greater than the upstream
capacity (from clients to server) [1]. Many schemes [1,2,3] have been proposed to
broadcast information efficiently to a large number of users, and their main purpose is
to minimize the average "access time" for the information needed. The access time is
the time amount required for a client to wait for information that the client needs.
Mobile devices being used in personal wireless communications such as PDA,
Palmtops, etc. are powered by small batteries without directly connecting to fixed
power sources. Many hardware and software schemes are proposed and implemented
to overcome such a power constraint. As one of the solutions, the index-based
organization of data transmitted over wireless channels is proposed to reduce power
*

This work was supported by grant no. R05-2003-000-10607-0 and R01-2003-00-0794-0
from Korea Science and Engineering Foundation, by ITA Professorship for Visiting Faculty
Positions in Korea (International Joint Research Project) from Ministry of Information and
Communication in Korea, by Korea Research Foundation Grant (KRF-2003-003-D00375),
and by University IT Research Center Project.

M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3036, pp. 598–601, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

An Energy Efficient Broadcasting for Mobile Devices Using a Cache Scheme

599

consumption. Clients are interested in obtaining the individual data items from the
broadcast[4,5]. If a directory index has information when a specific data item is
transferred in the broadcast, then each client needs listening the channel in active
mode selectively to obtain the required data, while in doze mode during the rest time
to reduce energy consumption.
In this paper, we present a new index-based broadcasting mechanism using cache
to reduce energy consumption. There is a trade-off between energy saving by
accessing data in cache and energy consumption caused by cache memory itself and
frequent cache update through broadcast. We propose an algorithm to decide the
optimal size of cache to minimize energy consumption of mobile device in broadcast
networks.

2 Index-Based Broadcast Using Cache Scheme
In general, a mobile node consumes much of its energy during data communication
(e.g., broadcast). Table 1 shows the difference of energy dissipation between data
access via wireless link and data access from cache memory [6,7]. In cache
mechanisms, a mobile node holds data units which are most likely to be used in the
future. It can certainly reduce energy consumption as well as access time.
Table 1. Per bit of energy cost

When data in server is changed, data broadcast is needed to update cache data. In
some situations, data update occurs very frequently, and it can cause increased energy
consumption in mobile node to receive update data. Thus, there is a trade-off between
energy saving by using cache instead of receiving data via wireless link and increased
energy consumption caused by frequent broadcast for data update. We need to
determine the optimal size of cache that minimizes energy consumption. We assume
that popularity of data usage (locality of data access) follows zipfian distribution
[8,9].
Equation (1) belong represents an expected power consumption (Pbroadcast) to receive
broadcast data not in the cache of mobile device. K1 represents energy consumption to
access one data unit not in the cache using broadcast, where c is the cache size.
In Equation (2), K2 represents energy consumption to access one unit of data in
cache. Remind that, as shown in Table 1, when the mobile node holds needed data in
the cache, it consumes much energy. Of course, cache update requires additional
energy consumption as shown in Equation (3). In Equations (2) and (3), T denotes an
average update interval of cache. Now in Equation (4), Ptotal represents overall
expected energy consumption when mobile device uses c units of cache. We can
measure total energy consumption Ptotal as the sum of Pbroadcst, Pcache and Pupdate.

600

K.-H. Han et al.

Pbroadcast = K1 ×

n

∑

x = c +1

c

Pcache = K 2 × ∑
x =1

Pupdate =

(1)

1
xθ

(2)

1
xθ

(3)

K1
×c
T

Total energy consumption(nJ)

c
 n 1 c
1
Ptotal = Pbroadcast + Pcache + Pupdate = K1  ∑ θ +  + K 2 ∑ θ
x
T
x
x =1
 x = c +1


450000

Broadcast

400000

Cache

350000

Update

300000

Total

(4)

250000
200000
150000
100000
50000
0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Size of cache

Fig. 1. Energy consumption in mobile node (when, T=10, θ=2)

Consequently, we find the optimal size of cache that minimizes total energy
consumption for the broadcast scheme with cache.
Fig. 1 shows the overall energy consumption from broadcast, cache, and cache
update, respectively, to access total 1024 bytes per period T. As shown in Fig. 1,
mobile node consumes the least energy when 2 units of cache are used by mobile
device in the system parameters (T=10, θ=2).
The result can be changed by differentiating update rate and the distribution of data
access popularity θ. Therefore, it is needed to reflect data update rate and data
popularity to select the optimal size of cache. As shown in Fig. 2 and 3, the amount of
energy consumption increases as the update rate (1/T) and data popularity (θ)
decreases.
In Fig. 2, we observe energy consumption as the size of cache increases for
different cache update rates. Cache update rate (1/T) represents how often cache
update occurs on average. As shown in Fig. 2, energy consumption increases as the
cache is frequently updated. Since each cache update needs additional energy
consumption to receive broadcast data.
Fig. 3 shows energy consumption for different popularity (θ) of data access. As a
result, energy consumption decreases as the data request popularity increases by
accessing most of data in the cache.

An Energy Efficient Broadcasting for Mobile Devices Using a Cache Scheme

Fig. 2. Energy consumption in mobile node
(when θ=2)

601

Fig. 3. Comparison of energy consumption
(when T=10)

3 Conclusion
This paper presents energy saving broadcast using cache. We found that the optimal
size of cache exists to minimize energy consumption. Concentration on specific data
access, and data updating rate are important factor to decide the size of cache. We can
decide the size of cache to minimize energy consumption for each system parameters.

References
1. S. Hameed and N. H. Vaidya, “Efficient Algorithms for Scheduling Data Broadcast,”
ACM/Baltzer Wireless Networks (WINET), May 1999.
2. T. Imielinski, S. Viswanathan, and B. R. Badrinath, “Data on Air: Organization and
Access,” IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, Vol. 9, No. 3, May/June
1997.
3. S. Acharya, M. Franklin, and S. Zdonik, “Dissemination-based data delivery using
broadcast disks,” IEEE Personal Communication, pp. 50-60, December 1995.
4. J. Dukes-Schlossberg, Y. Lee, N. Lehrer, “IIDS: Intellegent Information Dissemination
Server,” Proc. of IEEE MILCOM ’97, Vol. 2, pp. 635-9.
5. R. Jain and J. Werth, “Airdisks and airRAID : Modeling and scheduling periodic wireless
data broadcast (extended abstract),” Tech. Rep. DIMACS Tech. Report 95-11, Rutgers
University, May 1995.
6. W. R. Heinzelman, A. Chandrakasan, H. Balakrishnan, “Energy-efficient communication
protocol for wireless microsensor networks,” Hawaii International Conference on Systems
Sciences, 2000.
7. Mobile DRAM memory specification, http://www.sec.co.kr
8. John L. Casti, “Five More Golden Rules: Knots, Codes, Chaos, and Other Great Theories of
20th-Century Mathematics,” John Wiley & Sons Inc, 2000.
9. Zipf Curves and Website Popularity, http://www.useit.com

