Consistency of Global Checkpoints Based on
Characteristics of Communication Events in
Multimedia Applications
Masakazu Ono and Hiroaki Higaki
Department of Computers and Systems Engineering, Tokyo Denki University
Hatoyama-cho Ishizaka, Hiki, Saitama, 350–0394, Japan
{masa, hig}@higlab.k.dendai.ac.jp

Abstract. In order achieving fault-tolerant network systems,
checkpoint-recovery has been researched and many protocols have
been designed. A global checkpoint taken by the protocols have to be
consistent. For conventionalnetworks, a global checkpoint is deﬁned to
be consistent if there is no inconsistent message in any communication channel [1]. For multimedia communication networks, there are
additional requirements for time-constrained failure-free execution and
large-size message transmissions where lost of a part of the message
is acceptable. In addition, based on not characteristics of data of a
message but characteristics of communication events for the message,
restrictions of a consistent global checkpoint are determined. This
reﬂects deterministic and non-deterministic property of the usage of
communication buﬀers in layered system model. This paper proposes
novel criteria, for global checkpoints in multimedia communication
networks.

1

Multimedia Networks

In a multimedia network, it takes longer time to transmit and receive a message.
Here, the following four pseudo events are deﬁned for a multimedia message m
transmitted through a communication channel pi , pj ; sb(m), se(m), rb(m) and
re(m) for start and end of sending m in pi and start and end of receiving m in
pj , respectively. In addition, m is decomposed into a sequence pa1 , . . . , pal of
multiple packets for transmission. Here, s(pak ) is a packet sending event and
r (pak ) is a packet receipt event for a packet pak . A communication event in a
multimedia network is characterized by when data of a transmitted packet is
determined and when data of a received packet is accepted by an application.
Packet sending events are classiﬁed into bulky and stream ones. Data of a
packet sent at a bulky packet sending event is determined at beginning of sending
event of a multimedia message. Here, the following properties are held:
– If s(pa) for m is bulky, e → s(pa) iﬀ e ⇒ sb(m) where → and ⇒ represent
causal precedence and temporal precedence between two events, respectively.
– If s(pa) for ∃pa ∈ m is bulky, s(pa ) for ∀pa ∈ m is bulky.
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3036, pp. 691–694, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

692

M. Ono and H. Higaki

On the other hand, data of a packet pa sent at a stream packet sending event
is determined just at this event. Here, the following properties are held:
– If s(pa) for m is stream, e → s(pa) iﬀ e ⇒ s(pa).
– If s(pa) for ∃pa ∈ m is stream, s(pa ) for ∀pa ∈ m is stream.
Same as a packet sending event, packet receipt events, are also classiﬁed
into bulky and stream ones. Data of a packet received at a bulky packet receipt
event is accepted at ending of receipt event of a multimedia message. Here, the
following properties are held:
– If r(pa) for m is bulky, r(pa) → e iﬀ re(m) ⇒ e.
– If r(pa) for ∃pa ∈ m is bulky, r(pa ) for ∀pa ∈ m is bulky.
On the other hand, data of a packet received at a stream packet sending event
is accepted just at this event. Here, the following properties are held:
– If r(pa) for m is stream, r(pa) → e iﬀ r(pa) ⇒ e.
– If r(pa) for ∃pa ∈ m is stream, r(pa ) for ∀pa ∈ m is stream.
For a message m with conventional data, s(m) and r (m) are atomic. Here,
each ci in pi is taken only when no other event occurs in pi . However, a multimedia message is so larger that it takes longer time to transmit and receive the
message. Thus, if pi is required to take ci during a communication event, it has
to wait until an end of the event. Hence, timeliness requirement in a checkpoint
protocol is not satisﬁed and communication overhead in recovery is increased.
Therefore, ci should be taken immediately when pi is required to take it even
during a communication event. That is, pi sending m = pa1 , . . . , pal takes ci
between s(pas ) and s(pas+1 ) and pj receiving m takes cj between r (par ) and
r (par+1 ). In addition, part of a multimedia message may be lost in a communication channel for an application. Such an application requires not to retransmit
lost packets in recovery but to transmit packets with shorter transmission delay. Hence, an overhead for taking a checkpoint during failure-free execution is
required to be reduced.

2

Consistency in Multimedia Networks

Global consistency Gc denotes degree of consistency for a global checkpoint
CV = {c1 , . . . , cn }. In a conventional network, Gc is deﬁned as follows:
Gc =

1
0

no inconsistent message.
otherwise.

(1)

In a multimedia network, a local checkpoint is taken even during a communication event and it is acceptable to lose part of a multimedia message. Hence, a
domain of Gc is a closed interval [0, 1] instead of a discrete set {0, 1}.
2.1

Message Consistency

Message consistency. Mc uij is degree of consistency for a set {ci , cj } of local
checkpoints and a multimedia message mu through a communication channel
pi , pj . Here, we deﬁne an inconsistent multimedia message.

Consistency of Global Checkpoints

693

[Inconsistent multimedia message.] mu is inconsistent iﬀ mu is a lost or an
orphan multimedia message. mu is a lost multimedia message iﬀ se(mu ) occurs
before ci in pi and r b(mu ) occurs after cj in pj . mu is an orphan multimedia
message iﬀ sb(mu ) occurs after ci in pi and r b(mu ) occurs before cj in pj . ✷
[Consistency for inconsistent multimedia message.] M cuij = 0 for an inconsistent multimedia message mu . ✷
Next, inconsistent packets are introduced due to checkpoints during a communication event.

Fig. 1. Lost packet (a) and Orphan packet (b).

[Lost and orphan packets.] Suppose that ci and cj are between s(pa s ) and
s(pa s+1 ) and between r(pa r ) and r(pa r+1 ) for mu = pa1 , . . . , pal , respectively.
pak is a lost packet iﬀ s(pak ) occurs before ci in pi and r(pak ) occurs after cj
in pj . pak is an orphan packet iﬀ s(pak ) occurs after ci in pi and r (pak ) occurs
before cj in pj .✷
If s = r, there is no lost and orphan packet. Hence, Mc uij = 1.
If s > r, {pa r+1 , . . . , pa s } is a set of lost packets. These packets are not
retransmitted after recovery. Lost packets in a conventional network are restored
by logging them in failure-free execution. However, in a multimedia network,
less overhead in failure-free execution is required since applications require timeconstrained execution. In addition, even if part of a multimedia message is lost in
recovery, an application accepts the message. The less packets are lost, the higher
message consistency is achieved. A multimedia message is usually compressed
for transmission. Thus, value of packets for a message is not unique. Therefore,
message consistency depends on total value of lost packets as follows:
∂M cuij
< 0 where l -value=
∂l -value

v alue(pak ).

(2)

lost packets pak

Here, a domain of Mc uij is an open interval (0, 1).
If s < r, {pa s+1 , . . . , pa r } is a set of orphan packets. An orphan multimedia
message might not be retransmitted after recovery. However, orphan packets are
surely retransmitted since ci and cj are taken during transmission and receipt
of mu and the data of mu being carried by a sequence pa1 , . . . , pal of packets
is not changed even after recovery. Hence, message consistency does not depend
on orphan packets.

694

M. Ono and H. Higaki

[Message consistency] Let v alue(mu ) be total value of all packets in mu .
M cuij = 0
M cuij
∂M cuij
∂l -value
2.2

if l-value = value(mu ).

=1

if l-value = 0.

<0

otherwise. ✷

(3)

Channel Consistency

Channel Consistency. Ccij is calculated by M cuij for every message mu through
pi , pj . For compatibility with (1), if message consistency for every message
through pi , pj is 1, channel consistency is also 1. On the other hand, if message
consistency for at least one message through pi , pj is 0, channel consistency is
also 0. In addition, channel consistency monotonically increases for consistency
of messages through pi , pj .
[Channel consistency.] Let Mij be a set of messages through pi , pj .

2.3

Ccij = 1

if ∀mu ∈ Mij M cuij = 1.

Ccij = 0
∂Ccij
>0
∀mu ∈ Mij ,
∂M cuij

if ∃mu ∈ Mij M cuij = 0.

(4)

otherwise. ✷

Global Consistency

Gc is calculated by Ccij for every communication channel pi , pj . For compatibility with (1), if channel consistency for every channel is 1, global consistency is
also 1. On the other hand, if consistency for at least one communication channel
is 0, global consistency is also 0. In addition, channel consistency monotonically
increases for consistency of the communication channels.
[Global consistency.]

3

Gc = 1

if ∀ pi , pj

C cij = 1.

Gc = 0
∂Gc
>0
∀ pi , pj ,
∂C cij

if ∃ pi , pj

C cij = 0.

(5)

otherwise. ✷

Conclusion

This paper has proposed a novel criteria for consistency of a global checkpoint
in multimedia network systems. The authors will design QoS-based checkpoint
protocols based on the criteria.

References
1. Chandy, K.M. and Lamport, L., “Distributed Snapshots: Determining Global
States of Distributed Systems,” ACM Trans. on Computer Systems, Vol. 3, No. 1,
pp. 63–75 (1985).

