How Gene Survival Depends on Their Length
Natalia Polak1 , Joanna Banaszak1 , Pawel Mackiewicz1 ,
Malgorzata Dudkiewicz1 , Maria Kowalczuk1 , Dorota Mackiewicz1 ,
Kamila Smolarczyk1 , Aleksandra Nowicka1 , Miroslaw R. Dudek2 , and
Stanislaw Cebrat1
1

Department of Genomics, Institute of Genetics and Microbiology, University of
Wroclaw,
ul. Przybyszewskiego 63/77, PL-54148 Wroclaw, Poland
{malgosia, pamac, nowicka, kowal, dorota, polak, smolar,
cebrat}@microb.uni.wroc.pl
http://smORFland.microb.uni.wroc.pl
2
Institute of Physics, University of Zielona G´
ora, ul. A. Szafrana 4a,
PL-65516 Zielona G´
ora, Poland
mdudek@proton.if.uz.zgora.pl

Abstract. Gene survival depends on the mutational pressure acting on
the gene sequences and selection pressure for the function of the gene
products. While the probability of the occurrence of mutations inside
genes depends roughly linearly on their length, the probability of elimination of their function does not grow linearly with the length because
of the intragenic suppression eﬀect. Furthermore, the probability of redeﬁnition of the stop and start codons is independent of the gene length
while shortening of gene sequences by generating stop codons inside gene
sequences depends on gene length.

1

Introduction

One of many diﬀerent mechanisms introducing mutations into genomes are single
nucleotide substitutions which happen during DNA replication. There are four
diﬀerent kinds of nucleotides Adenine (A), Thymine (T), Guanine (G), and Cytosine (C) and substitution of one of them by any of the three others are random
but highly biased. Some nucleotides are more often substituted than others and
the substituting nucleotides are also unevenly ”chosen” [1]. Thus, for each of
the twelve possible kinds of nucleotide substitutions a speciﬁc probability of the
event can be experimentally estimated and put into the ”matrix of substitutions”
(Tab. 1) [2].
The most stable genes should be built of the most stable nucleotides. On the
other hand, the selection for gene function demands rather speciﬁc composition
of the gene products which restricts not only the nucleotide composition of genes
but, which is more important, the proper length of the coding sequence. A substitution inside the coding sequence can exert very diﬀerent eﬀects on the amino
To whom all correspondence should be sent.
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3039, pp. 694–699, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

How Gene Survival

695

Table 1. Frequencies of substitutions in the leading strand of the B. burgdorferi genome (nucleotide in a column is substituted by a nucleotide in a row). All substitution
frequencies between diﬀerent nucleotides sum up to 1

A
T
G
C

A
0.300
0.066
0.164
0.070

T
0.103
0.480
0.116
0.261

G
C
0.023
0.067
0.035
0.035
0.149
0.015
0.047
0.073

acid sequence of its product. There are silent mutations which do not change the
sense of the coding sequence, some substitutions change one amino acid in the
gene product for another one though very similar, but some substitutions can
change the properties of the coded amino acid signiﬁcantly and such substitutions are potentially dangerous - they can lead to the nonfunctional gene product.
The other dangerous point mutations are substitutions which eliminate the start
or stop codons. These codons are responsible for initiation and termination of
the protein synthesis, respectively (there is one start codon in the universal genetic code - ATG, and three stop codons: TAA, TAG, TGA). While elimination
of the stop causes additional elongation of the coding sequence, elimination of
the start could shorten it. Furthermore, start and stop codons could be generated inside the coding sequence. In that case, generation of stops is dangerous
because it shortens the length of the gene product. The eﬀect of generation of
a start codon can be considered as another amino acid substitution, since the
start codon inside the gene codes for methionine (ATG in the universal code).
In this paper we analyze, using the Monte Carlo methods, the stability of the
real genes of diﬀerent length found in the Borrelia burgdorferi genome under the
mutational pressure experimentally described for this genome.

2

Material and Methods

Simulations have been performed on 850 genes taken from the B. burgdorferi
genome [3], whose sequence and annotations were downloaded from GenBank
(ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov). The gene sequences were subjected to the replicationassociated mutational pressure (RAMP) described by the matrix of nucleotide
substitution frequencies - Table 1 [2]. Since in this genome the RAMP is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent for the two diﬀerently replicating DNA strands: leading and
lagging [4], we have applied two diﬀerent matrices respectively for the genes located on these strands. The matrix describing RAMP of the lagging strand is the
mirror reﬂection of the RAMP for the leading DNA strand. In one Monte Carlo
Step (MCS) each nucleotide of the gene sequence was drawn with a probability
pmut = 0.001 then substituted by another nucleotide with the probability described by the corresponding parameter in the substitution matrix. We have applied
two kinds of selection for gene survival: selection for the amino acid composition and selection for start and stop codons. After each round of mutations, we

696

N. Polak et al.

translated the nucleotide sequences into the amino acid sequences and compared
the resulting composition of the proteins with the original one. For each gene we
calculated the selection parameter T for the amino acid composition as follows:
20

T =

|fi (0) − fi (t)|,

(1)

i=1

where: fi (0) is a fraction of a given amino-acid in the original sequence (before
mutations) and fi (t) is a fraction of a given amino acid in the sequence after
mutations in t MCS. If T was below the assumed threshold, the gene stayed
mutated and went to the next round of mutations (the next MC step). If T
trespassed the threshold - the gene was ”killed” and replaced by its allele from
the second genomic sequence, originally identical, simulated parallely.
We have applied three variants of selection for start and stop codons. Gene
was killed when: (i) its start codon was substituted by a non-start codon, (ii) its
stop codon was substituted by a non-stop codon, (iii) a stop codon was generated
inside the gene sequence. In B. burgdorferi genes ATG, TTG, GTG are used as
start codons and TAA, TAG, TGA - as stop codons. We have assumed that
substitutions between these start codons and between these stop codons are
neutral. After each MCS the number of gene replacements (the number of killed
genes) was counted. All simulations were performed for 1000 Monte Carlo steps,
repeated 10 times and averaged.

3

Results and Discussion

In the ﬁrst simulations we have assumed that genes are ”killed” only because
of changes in the amino acid composition of their products. The results of the
simulations done for the whole set of genes from the B. burgdorferi genome are
shown in Fig. 1.
It is obvious that the number of mutations which hit the genes roughly linearly
depends on their length. If the assumed tolerance is very low - even one substituted amino acid can eliminate the gene, the intragenic suppressions (complementation of mutation by consecutive substitutions) are very rare and are slightly
more probable for longer genes. That is why in such conditions the probability of elimination of genes depends almost linearly on their length only slightly
decreasing with length (Fig. 1a). When increasing the tolerance, the probability
of intragenic suppression grows (that could be compared with the buﬀer capacity) and the probability of killing the gene decreases (Fig. 1b-d). The longer
genes can deal with the mutational pressure more successfully than shorter ones.
However, one can suspect that the eﬀect of higher sensitivity of shorter genes
is caused by the biased nucleotide composition of the short and long genes. To
eliminate this eﬀect, we have constructed artiﬁcial genes composed of diﬀerent
numbers of repetitions of the same unit being the coding sequence of one short
B. burgdorferi gene. The observed eﬀect was similar to that for the real set of
genes though much more regular because the eﬀect of nucleotide composition of
diﬀerent genes has been eliminated (Fig. 2).

How Gene Survival

697

Fig. 1. Elimination of genes from B. burgdorferi genome by the selection pressure
on their global amino acid composition. In all four cases the genes were under their
speciﬁc mutational pressure but under diﬀerent strength of selection pressure - diﬀerent
threshold T : a) T = 0.01; b) T = 0.1; c) T = 0.25; d) T = 0.33

Fig. 2. Elimination of virtual genes of diﬀerent length by the selection pressure on
their global amino acid composition. All sequences - virtual genes - were produced by
repeating diﬀerent number of times one coding sequence of 31 codons long (deprived
start and stop codons). These sequences were under their speciﬁc mutational but under
diﬀerent strength of selection pressure - diﬀerent threshold T : a) T = 0.01; b) T = 0.25

698

N. Polak et al.

Fig. 3. Killing eﬀect of the stop codon generation inside the coding sequences. Any
other mechanisms of selections were switched oﬀ

In the next simulations we have eliminated genes when their start codon
was substituted by a non-start codon. Since each gene has one start codon, it
is obvious that the rate of gene elimination did not depend on the gene size
(results not shown). A similar eﬀect was observed for the elimination of stops.
Elimination of the stop does not necessarily lead to the gene elimination because
these mutations elongate the gene products. We have found that the frequency
of stop codons usage in the B. burgdorferi genes corresponds almost exactly to
the usage counted from the nucleotide composition of DNA in the equilibrium
with the mutational pressure. This suggests that it is the mutational pressure
which structures the nucleotide composition of stop codons and there is no selection pressure on speciﬁc stops usage. More dangerous for the gene function
could be the shortening of the coding sequences by generation of stop codons
inside the genes. Simulations of this eﬀect have shown that the killing eﬀect depended strongly on the length of the genes (Fig.3). Analytical calculations of the
probability of generation of the stop codons inside genes (normalized per length
unit) have shown that the generation of stops is not correlated with the gene
length (Fig. 4). These results suggest that the selection pressure for the longer
genes has not resulted in the decreasing the probability of generating stops - or
the longer genes do not avoid codons which could be mutated to the stop codons
with higher probability.

4

Conclusions

Simulations of the relationships between the genes’ length and their survival
have shown that while the short genes and the long ones are equally sensitive for
killing by elimination the stop or start codons, the killing eﬀect by amino acid
substitutions seems to be relatively stronger for shorter genes, because of the
lower probability of intragenic suppression. This eﬀect can be compensated by

How Gene Survival

699

Fig. 4. Relationship between probability of the stop codon generation in genes of B.
burgdorferi and their length. For each codon the probability of transformation into the
stop codon were counted according to the matrix of nucleotide substitution. Then, for
each gene the probabilities were weighted by the fractions of codons and summed

the eﬀect of stops generation, which can not be suppressed by other intragenic
mutations and the longer genes are more susceptible to such mutations. Since
the eﬀect of the mutations at the borders of the coding sequences concerns
also mutations at the border of introns and exons in the eukaryotic genes, it
seems that the price which these genes have to pay for increasing the probability
of defects has to be compensated by other proﬁts from using this risky and
complicated coding strategy.
Acknowledgements. The work was done in the program COST Action P10
and supported by the grant number 1016/S/IMi/03. M.K. was supported by the
Foundation for Polish Science.

References
1. Frank, A.C., Lobry, J.R., Asymmetric substitution patterns: a review of possible
underlying mutational or selective mechanisms. Gene 238 (1999) 65–77
2. Kowalczuk, M., Mackiewicz, P., Mackiewicz, D., Nowicka, A., Dudkiewicz, M.,
Dudek, M.R., Cebrat, S.: High correlation between the turnover of nucleotides
under mutational pressure and the DNA composition. BMC Evol. Biol. 1 (2001)
(1):13
3. Fraser, C.M., Casjens, S., Huang, W.M., Sutton, G.G., Clayton, R., Lathigra, R.,
White, O., Ketchum, K.A., Dodson, R., Hickey, E.K. et al.: Genomic sequence of
a Lyme disease spirochaete, Borrelia burgdorferi. Nature 390 (1997) 580–586
4. Mackiewicz, P., Kowalczuk, M., Mackiewicz, D., Nowicka, A., Dudkiewicz, M.,
Laszkiewicz, A., Dudek, M.R., Cebrat, S.: Replication associated mutational pressure generating long-range correlation in DNA. Physica A 314 (2002) 646–654

