Forwarding Based Data Parallel Handoﬀ
for Real-Time QoS in Mobile IPv6 Networks
Hye Yeon Jeong, Jongha Lim, Jung Deok Park, and Hyunseung Choo
Networking Lab., School of Information and Communication Engineering
Sungkyunkwan University 440-746, KOREA +82-31-290-7145
choo@ece.skku.ac.kr

Abstract. Many RSVP based handover schemes in MIPv4 were studied
in the literature. However, the buﬀering overhead is unavoidable for the
latency to optimize the route in new path establishment. Even though
the data forwarding based schemes minimize the data loss and provide
faster handoﬀ, there are still some overheads when forwarding them and
limitation on MIPv4. In this paper we propose a novel handoﬀ scheme
in MIPv6 based on forwarding which balances route traﬃc and reduces
the overhead. The comprehensive performance evaluation shows that the
disruption time and the signaling overhead are signiﬁcantly reduced up
to about 62% and 73%, respectively. Furthermore, it is able to transmit
data with minimum latency and guarantee the fast and secure seamless
services.

1

Introduction

RSVP based hand over schemes in Mobile IP ver. 4 (MIPv4) to provide faster
services with QoS have been studied[2]. However, the buﬀering overhead is unavoidable during the latency to optimize the route in path establishment on the
movement of the mobile node(MN). If the MN moves frequently in a certain area
like cell border, zigzag makes the signiﬁcant overhead. Besides, there are some
disruption time needed in the new path establishment which is not preferable
for the seamless services. There are many researches to reduce the MIP handoﬀ
latency in the literature[1-3].
We brieﬂy discuss low latency handoﬀ scheme with Neighbor Casting[2], the
two path handoﬀ scheme[2], and optimized handoﬀ scheme[3] as related works.
We observe the data loss caused by the disruption time and the bandwidth
overhead due to RSVP channel. Even though the data forwarding based low latency handoﬀ scheme[2] minimizes the data loss and provides the faster handoﬀ
between old foreign agent(old FA) and new one(new FA), there are some overheads when forwarding data. It also has a limitation due to based on MIPv4.
The motivation of our works is based on them.
In this paper we propose a novel handoﬀ scheme in MIPv6 for the faster and
more reliable services. This scheme minimizes the possible latency occurred in
This paper was supported in parts by Brain Korea 21 and University ITRC project.
Dr. H. Choo is the corresponding author.
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3038, pp. 266–273, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

Forwarding Based Data Parallel Handoﬀ for Real-Time QoS

267

the route optimization based on forwarding, load-balances in routers involved,
and thus reduces the overhead. This scheme performs in parallel the data forwarding and the route optimization. The performance evaluation shows that
the disruption time and the signaling overhead are signiﬁcantly reduced up to
about 62% and 73%, respectively. Furthermore, it is able to transmit data with
minimum latency and guarantee the fast and secure seamless services.

2

Related Works

The Low Latency Scheme: To minimize the latency of handoﬀ, the low latency scheme which uses the data forwarding between the new FA and the old
FA is presented in [2]. The low latency scheme is built upon MIPv4 and data
forwarding procedure. First, Neighbor FA discovery mechanism means how FAs
discover their neighbor FAs dynamically and forward data in mobile networking
environment. Each FA knows its neighbor FAs by MNs since the MNs move
around and eventually from neighbor FAs. That is, the MN keeps the address of
the old FA and transmits this information to the new FA whenever it hands over
from a FA to another one. Each FA maintains a table for its neighbor agents.
The MN sends the registration message which includes the information for the
old FA to the new one. Then the new FA recognizes the old FA as its neighbor
agent and sends a neighbor FA Notiﬁcation Message to the old FA. Therefore,
the old FA is informed of the new FA and updates its neighbor FA table. The
handoﬀ mechanism is based on the L2 handoﬀ including Neighbor FA discovery.
When the MN moves from the old FA to the new one, the old FA is notiﬁed from
the new FA by Neighbor FA discovery mechanism. If CN sends the data, the old
FA can start forwarding the data to the new FA. Therefore, the MN receives the
data shortly after L2 handoﬀ without establishing a new path between the old
FA and the new one when it hands over.
The Two Path Scheme: In MIPv4, incoming packets from CN are received
by the MN through the HA. As a result, it takes too much time to support realtime traﬃc ﬂows with guaranteed QoS. However, the two path scheme is available
to support large-scale mobility with faster handoﬀ. This mechanism requires new
procedures and signaling messages. When the MN moves into a new subnetwork,
the MN’s new CoA is sent to both the HA and the CN. And then, the CN which
receives the MN’s new CoA sends a PATH message to the MN to establish a
new mobile path. Since the mobile path which is a direct RSVP path does not
depend on forwarded packets from the HA, it is more eﬃcient, however, incoming
packets may be lost or arrived out of sequence.
Therefore, this scheme alternately uses the home path, i.e., from the CN
through the HA to the MN. Since the MN maintains a connection with the HA,
it is able to establish Home path whenever needed. When this approach uses the
home path, it ensures correct and ordered forwarding of incoming packets, and
reduces the packet loss.
Optimized Smooth Handoﬀ Scheme: In [3], it proposes several methods
to alleviate triangle routing and to reduce data loss. First, to reduce data loss

268

H.Y. Jeong et al.

during a handoﬀ, it presents a buﬀering scheme at the FAs and smooth handoﬀ
scheme. The FA buﬀers any data packets forwarded to a MN. When a handoﬀ
occurs, the MN includes a handover request in its registration, and the new FA
in turn requests the old FA handoﬀ the buﬀered packets to the new location. To
reduce duplicates, the MN buﬀers the identiﬁcation and source address ﬁelds in
the IP headers of packets. It receives and includes them in the buﬀer handoﬀ
request so that the old FA does not need to transmit those packets which have
already been received by the MN. Also, Smooth handoﬀ uses binding update
to reduce packet loss during a handoﬀ. Including FA buﬀering mechanism, it
decapsulates the tunnelled packets and delivers them directly to the MN.
Second, hierarchical FA management reduces the administrative overhead of
frequent local handoﬀs, using an extension of the Mobile IP registration process
so security can be maintained. The FAs in a domain are organized into a hierarchical tree to handle local movements of the MNs within the domain. Meanwhile,
when a packet for the MN arrives at its home network, the HA tunnels it to the
root of the FA hierarchy. When an FA receives such a tunnelled packet, it retunnels the packet to its next lower-level FA. Finally the lowest-level FA delivers
it directly to the MN. When a handoﬀ occurs, the MN compares the new vector
of CoA with the old one. It chooses the lowest-level FA that appears in both
vectors, and sends a Regional Registration Request to that FA. Any higher-level
agent need not be informed of this movement since the other end of it forwarding
tunnel still points to the current location of the MH.

3

The Proposed Scheme

In the new forwarding based data parallel handoﬀ technique, the CN has the
option of using two diﬀerent paths to reach the MN. The ﬁrst path is called
the R.new path, which is a direct path to any new location of the MN. Since
the R.new path does not depend on the packet from HA, it is the more eﬃcient
and preferred path to use. However, while the MN is moving to a new location,
incoming packet may be lost. Therefore we have to maintain the R.old path, i.e.
from the CN to the R.old to the MN, to ensure uniform and fast forwarding of
incoming packets, and to reduce the packet latency and the disruption.
The new technique requires a new procedure and signaling messages to coordinate the use of the paths. These are illustrated in ﬁgures 1, 2 and 3. We
describe each operation along with the ﬁgure as shown below:
Step 1. Fig. 1 (1-1, 1-2): The MN located at R.old is communicating through
an existing session with the CN. When the MN moves into a new subnetwork
of R.new, the MN’s new CoA, the handoﬀ notiﬁcation, is sent to both the
R.new and the R.old. Step 2. Fig. 1 (2-1, 2-2, 2-3): When the R.old receives
the MN’s new CoA, it begins to forward the data packet to the R.new. And
R.old’s new path request message is sent to the CN. When R.new receives the
MN’s new CoA, R.new sends the CoA to the HA to register MN’s new location
(binding update). Step 3. Fig. 2 (3): When the CN receives the R.old’s new
path request, the CN sends a new path establishment message to the R.new to

Forwarding Based Data Parallel Handoﬀ for Real-Time QoS
Correspondent
Node(CN)

269

Correspondent
Node(CN)

Home
Agent
ROUTER

Home
Agent
ROUTER

ROUTER

ROUTER

(2-3)

(5)

(2-2)
(7)

Data Traffic

(6)

(3)

Signaling Traffic(wired)
Signaling Traffic(wireless)

(2-1)

Movement trace

Signaling Traffic(wired)

NEW ROUTER (4)

AP

(1-1)

Data Fwd

AP

Data Fwd OLD ROUTER

Signaling Traffic(wireless)

NEW
ROUTER

Previous location of MN

Current location of MN

Data Traffic

OLD
ROUTER

AP

MN

Data packet

(1-2)
MN

MN

AP

MN

Fig. 2. After route establishment

Fig. 1. Before route establishment
MN

R.new

R.old

HA

CN

(1-1)Handoff notify

(1-2)Handoff notify

(2-2)New path req.
(2-3)Binding Update

(2-1)Data fwd.
(3)New path
establishment
(5) Tear old path
req.

(4)New path ack.
(6)Terminate fwd.

(7)DATA packet

Fig. 3. Message ﬂow of the proposed scheme

establish a new optimized path. Step 4. Fig. 2 (4): If the R.new path attempt
is successful, the R.new sends new path acknowledgement message to R.old.
Step 5. Fig. 2 (5): When the R.old receives acknowledgement message from
R.new, R.old sends the request for tear down of the old path to CN. Step 6.
Fig. 2 (6): When this happens, the CN stops sending data packets to the R.old
and R.old explicitly tears down the forwarding path to R.new after it sends the
ﬁnal data packet to R.new. Step 7. Fig. 2 (7): When the CN switches to the
R.new path from the R.old path, the new path can be used. The R.new buﬀers
incoming packets for the MN from the CN until the forwarding path is destroyed.
In the design of this scheme, we apply the following approaches. Mobile IPv6
compatibility: Mobile IPv6 is the proposed by IETF, and this scheme is designed
to be compatible with it. Resource preallocation: the handoﬀ process requests

270

H.Y. Jeong et al.

a resource preallocation to guarantee that MNs obtain the requested resources
right away after they enter the new cell/network. Buﬀering: To avoid data loss
and unordered packets, the R.new is instructed to buﬀer packets for the incoming MN. Forwarding to an adjacent router: When a MN handoﬀs to adjacent
router, its packets can be forwarded to the R.new by the R.old. Less location
update only with HA: It is a frequent case that a MN moves to another networks
or cells. This scheme does not make frequent HA updates when a handoﬀ is
performed. It contacts the HA for the update of the information for the careof address. Triangular message exchange: It has to exchange messages for the
smooth handoﬀ. When a router sends a message to next router, it utilizes a next
path resource to complete the message exchange.
This scheme introduces the disruption time while the R.old , R.new, and
the CN exchange messages. Such problems are ignored for wired networks since
wired links are much more reliable and the disruption time is short in duration.
In wireless network, we assume that routers have MN’s location table. They
perform fast forwarding to the MN by sending MN’s location packets each other.
In the next section, we describe a framework to measure the disruption time and
total overhead use for the new technique.

4

Performance Evaluation

Signaling Time: The time to send a message over one hop, M , can be calculated as M = α + β + γ, where α is the transmission time, β is the propagation time, and γ is the processing time. The transmission time, α, is computed by b/B, where b is the size of the control message in bits, and B is the
bit rate of the link on which the message is sent. B has two kinds of values
which are for wired links and for wireless ones. The propagation time, β, has
two kinds, too. Suppose that the processing time, γ, always has a ﬁxed value
when the message is sent. The signaling time which is the total time needed
to transmit and process the messages between router i and j is computed by
Ti,j = Tsig × Di,j , where Tsig is the signaling time over one hop and Di,j is
the node distance between router i and j. Tsig is computed as following. Wired
1+p
1+q
link(TRSV P = M × 1−p
) and wireless link(TRSV P = M × 1−q
) where q is the
probability of wireless link failure. As mentioned, Di,j is the number of hops
and computed by Di,j = NRi ,Rj = NRi ,Rjoin + NRjoin ,Rj . NRi ,Rj is the number
of hops from Ri to Rj and Rjoin is the router placed at MAP(merged access
point). The number of hops over routers on which the signaling passes are calculated by summing these two values. The RSVP signaling time is computed by
Ti,j = TRSV P × Di,j , where TRSV P is the time to perform RSVP signaling over
1+p
1+q
one hop. Wired link(TRSV P = M × 1−p
) and wireless link(TRSV P = M × 1−q
),
here p is the probability of resource assignment failure on RSVP. When the resource failure occurs, the RSVP signaling is assumed to be repeated until either
a session is successfully established, or the MN moves to a new router location.
Disruption Time and Total Signaling cost: The disruption time is to
measure the time that a node cannot get packets. The shorter this time, the

Forwarding Based Data Parallel Handoﬀ for Real-Time QoS

271

Merged Access Point
for R8 and R9

Merged Access Point

R1-16

for R4 and R5

R1-8

Merged Access Point

R9-16

for R2 and R3

R1-4

R12

R1

R2

R5-8

R34

R3

R56

R4

R5

R6

R9-12

CN
R78

R7

R8

R910

R9

R10

R13-16

R1112

R11

R12

R1314

R1516

R13 R14

R15 R16

HA

MN

Fig. 4. Hierarchical router conﬁguration

better the performance. The proposed scheme does not get data when the MN
receives forwarded data through New.FA from Old.FA while data forwarding
occurs. This time is computed by the previous two equations(Ti,j ). Namely,
if the disruption time is short, we can say that data ﬂow is continuously and
performance is good.
Signaling overhead is due to sending and receiving signaling from neighbor
FA and increases in proportion to the time sending signaling. It is proportional
to generated signal in one cell. Then if signaling overhead is larger, the resource
use rate becomes larger. Accordingly small signaling overhead is more eﬃcient.
Consider the case that each signal source generates UDP packets at constant
signal rate c continuously. Then the amount of generated signal during a handoﬀ of mobile node is n · τ · c bytes. n is the number of neighboring FAs which MN
sends signal. (Suppose that each cell is hexagonal form.) In our paper signal is
transferred one cell which MN moves, then n is 1. τ is the total signaling period
during which all signaling and forwarding processes ﬁnish for receiving datas by
the new path over one handoﬀ process. The time which takes the parallel process is included in total signaling period. This is because we need to calculate
all signaling time for the entire signaling process. The total amount of generated
signal from a cell for a unit time period is n · τ · c · λ where λ is the handoﬀ rate.
And the total amount of signal sent by the sources to the MNs in the cell for the
same unit time period is m · c where m is the total number of active MNs in the
cell. The handoﬀ rate, λ, is computed by λ = ρvL
π where λ is the handoﬀ rate or
cell boundary crossing rate(1/sec), ρ is the active MN density in 1m2 (1/m2 ), v
is the MN moving speed(m/sec), and L is the cell perimeter(m). The signaling
overhead ratio is deﬁned as the number of bytes generated from a cell divided by
ρvLnτ
cλ
nλτ
total number of bytes sent by the source, i.e. ξ = nτ
mc = m = πm . Denoting
r as the cell radius for a hexagonal cell scenario and L = 6r. ρ is computed
m
by ρ = cellarea
= 3√m3 2 . λ is computed based on previous two equations(λ,
2

r

4mv
√
We can substitute this values
ρ), and we get the following. λ = ρvL
π =
3rπ
4vmτ
to ξ, then get the result below. ξ = √3rπ where τ is the total signaling pe-

272

H.Y. Jeong et al.
Table 1. Performance parameters

SystemP arameters
Wireless propagation time, β1
Wired propagation time, β2
Signaling processing time, γ
RSVP processing time, γRSV P

V alues
Packet size, S
50Bytes
Probability of link failure, q
0.5
2msec
0.5
0.5msec Probability of resource denial, p
Wireless bit rate, B1
144Kbps
0.05msec
155Mbps
Wired bit rate, B2
0.5msec

riod. This is the sum of the time taken for signaling processes included parallel
signaling process based on Figure 3. τ 1 = time handof f notif y(step1 − 1) +
time path req(step2 − 2) + time path establish(step3) + time path ack(step4) +
time stop transf er(step5) + time stop f wd(step6) where we disregard handoﬀ
latency for handoﬀ process. τ 1 is the time which takes fundamental signaling process. With mentioned above the MN notiﬁes handoﬀ to R.new, then R.new begins
binding updates. This parallel processes are generated signaling in handoﬀ. So
it must be contained in signaling time. τ 2 = time handof f notif y(step1 − 2) +
time binding update(step2−3). Total signaling time is the sum of above two time
periods. τ = τ 1 + τ 2. This is computed based on the ﬁrst two equations(Ti,j ).
We use 200m-radius hexagonal cell topology and assume that the mobile speed
is ﬁxed at 5m/sec.
Numerical Results: Figure 5 shows the comparison of the proposed scheme
with the related ones[1, 2] with respect to the disruption time based on Table 1
and Figure 4. This results are computed based on the ﬁrst two equations(Ti,j ). As
Figure 5, disruption time for the two path scheme is greater than other schemes
applying forwarding. This is due to the character of forwarding method which it
is possible to get data while the new path is established. The proposed scheme
has better performance than the low latency scheme using forwarding. For each
MN location, the disruption time for the proposed scheme is in average 53% and
3% smaller than [1] and [2], respectively.

p

Disruption Time

Total Signaling Overhead Ratio

70

0.004

Low Latency Scheme

Proposed Scheme
Low Latency Scheme

Proposed Scheme

50

Tw o Path Scheme

0.003

Two Path Scheme

40

Ratio

Time (msec)

60

30
20

0.002

0.001

10
0

0

0

5
10
Number of Hops

Fig. 5. The disruption time

15

0

5
10
Number of Hops

Fig. 6. Total signaling overhead

15

Forwarding Based Data Parallel Handoﬀ for Real-Time QoS

273

Figure 6 is the graph which shows the comparison of the proposed scheme
with [1, 2] with respect to the total signaling overhead. As in Figure 6, the proposed scheme has the best performance compared with the previous schemes.
The signaling overhead of the low latency scheme based on MIPv4 is computed
only for the signaling related to the forwarding, hence it has a ﬁxed value. However the proposed scheme and the two path scheme are aﬀected by the time for
path establishment from CN to R.New, so signaling traﬃc is changed according
to the model. Therefore results of two schemes have similar trends. In Figure
6, total signaling overhead for the proposed scheme is in average 48% and 59%
smaller than the two path scheme and the low latency scheme, respectively.

5

Conclusion

In this paper, we propose the new handoﬀ scheme with guaranteed QoS which
data transmission is faster and data loss is smaller than previous ones. Basically it
receives data fast using data forwarding and makes the new path from the corresponding node to the new router while forwarding data. The proposed scheme is
eﬃcient in terms of the disruption time and total signaling overhead as discussed
in performance evaluation and oﬀers services of more improved quality in mobile
communication environment which the real-time transmission is very important.

References
1. J. McNair, I.F. Akyldiz, and M.D. Bender, “Handoﬀs for Real-Time Traﬃc in Mobile
IP Version 6 Networks,” IEEE GLOBECOM, vol. 6, pp. 3463-3467, 2001.
2. E. Shin, H.-Y. Wei, Y. Chang, and R.D. Gitlin, “Low Latency Handoﬀ for Wireless
IP QOS with Neighbor Casting,” IEEE ICC, vol.5, pp. 3245-3249, 2002.
3. C.E. Perkins and K.-Y. Wang, “Optimized Smooth Handoﬀs in Mobile IP,” IEEE
ISCC, pp. 340-346, 1999.
4. C.E. Perkins, “Mobile networking in the Internet,” ACM/Baltzer Mobile Networks
and Applications (MONET) Journal, vol. 3, pp. 319-334, 1998.
5. J. McNair, I.F. Akyldiz, and M.D. Bender, ”An Inter-System Handoﬀ Technique
for the IMT-2000 System,” IEEE INFOCOM, vol. 1, pp. 208-216, 2000.
6. I.F. Akyldiz, J. McNair, J.S.M. Ho, H. Uzunalioglu, and W. Wang, “Mobility management in next generation wireless systems,” IEEE, vol. 87, no. 8, pp. 1347-1384,
1999.
7. I. Okajima, N. Umeda, and Y. Yamao, “Architecture and mobile IPv6 extensions
supporting mobile networks in mobile communications,” IEEE VTC, vol. 4, pp.
2533-2537, 2001.
8. W.-T. Chen and L.-C. Huang, “RSVP mobility support: a signaling protocol for
integrated services Internet with mobile hosts,” IEEE INFOCOM, vol. 3, pp. 12831292, 2000.

