Multi-level Protection Building for Virus
Protection Infrastructure
Si-Choon Noh1 , Dong Chun Lee2 , and Kuinam J. Kim1
1

Dept. of Information Security, Kyonggi Univ., Korea
nsc1@kt.co.kr
2
Dept. Computer Science, Howon Univ., Korea

Abstract. This paper proposes an improved multi-level virus protection
infrastructure as a measure for correcting these weaknesses. Improved
virus protection infrastructure ﬁlters unnecessary mail at the gateway
stage to reduce the load on Server. As a numerical result, number of
transmission accumulation decreases due to the reduction in the CPU
load on the virus wall and increase in virus treatment rate.

1

Introduction

Computer virus is becoming increasingly sophisticated on a technical level. The
base of the recommended virus protection strategy dictates that changed protection infrastructure is required to eﬀectively address changed attack pattern [5].
Virus infection is inﬁltrated to local drive through ﬂoppy drive, email, Internet
downloads, and various types of macro-enabled application. Moreover, HTTP
based Web traﬃc, FTP based ﬁle transmission, and synchronized PDA data are
received to this place [1]. Application of scanning in letters, stored in mail box,
is diﬃcult, and virus infection takes place in any case whether forwarding, opening, replying or using ﬁle [4]. Malignant code that inﬁltrated the target system
through all types of routes begins to act as the same time when the user activates the operation. Proliferated worm virus continues to infect the inside while
increasing the outbound traﬃc dramatically, which in turn increases session on
the gateway level[2], [3].
The dualized protection method that is divided into server and PC, which does
not have the function to block the virus that circulates in the network since it
restricts the protection zone to the Server and PC. Characteristics of network
traﬃc diﬀers by the type of TCP/IP service, and single method based treatment
by using one vaccine does not eﬀectively block diverse inﬁltrations.

2

Multi-level Virus Protection Infrastructure

Multi-level virus infrastructure is applied on the network infrastructure, trafﬁc route, protection zone, gateway area protection method, server protection
method, anti-virus software conﬁguration.
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3036, pp. 631–634, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

632

S.-C. Noh, D.C. Lee, and K.J. Kim

Protection Infrastructure Re-conﬁguration: Gateway area and internal
network virus wall area for the Web and email traﬃc ﬁltering are added on to the
structure, layered into three stages, from the exit point to the ﬁrewall, server and
client areas to conﬁgure the defense layer consisting of ﬁve stages. The reason
for SMPT gateway installation is that email protection gateway is re-set as the
representative route for the inﬂux of many emails in order to block virus before
entering the intranet. Virus wall at the internal network is the function that
blocks the internal circulation of the virus that is already inﬁltrated, and sets
the new protection layer.
Traﬃc Route Re-setting: Network Traﬃc is divided into two channels
by the type of channel, and the protection infra structure is made into stages
accordingly. The traﬃc routes that are classiﬁed are internal intranet area and
DMZ area. The internal intranet area ranges from the external contact point to
the end user, and it is Exterior Router − > Web switch − > Firewall − > Web
switch − > Interior Router − > Servers − > Client. DMZ area ranges from the
external contact point to all types of server areas that are accommodated within
the DMZ, and it is Exterior Router − > Web switch − > Firewall − > Web
switch − > DMZ− > Servers. Re-set traﬃc route is normal traﬃc circulation
route and it is also virus inﬁltration route.
Execution of Gateway Level Protection: There are mail gate, and web
gate / internet proxy at gateway level. In order to protect data from virus infection, it is necessary to execute before virus reaches to the core information on
the network, and it should be executed, targeting Web traﬃc and SMTP traﬃc.
Virus ﬁltering checks whether infected with virus or not at the packet unit level,
and deletes if found whereas contents ﬁltering is the function that blocks when
a speciﬁc keyword is found in the email title and main body. Email ﬁltering is
the function that restricts the permitted size of email. And ﬁle ﬁltering is the
function that blocks by checking speciﬁcally attached ﬁle name or extension in
advance. Spam ﬁltering is the function that blocks the mail that is dispatched
continuously [5]. SMTP Scanner executes scanning at a point where incoming,
outgoing, email and attachment pass through email gateway. It protects ﬁle by
mobilizing server based solution at the SMTP email server unit.
Execution of Virus Protection Against Internal Network Circulation:
Vaccine for client blocks virus in PC, but it cannot inspect the mail’s attachment
ﬁle that is latent in server. When server’s DB is infected, immensely adverse results face the overall network. Compared to many individual client protections
that are placed widely, server unit protection is more eﬀective and powerful.
Blocking virus that circulates in the intranet requires separate installation of
virus wall system at the foregoing part of the local ﬁle server or scanning with
software embedded method on each server.
Virus Protection Zone Expansion: Shared folder is a form of database that
is provided by the groupware exchange server to enable network user to share
information and data. Groupware protection should enable real-time inspection
of shared folder. Groupware (MS Exchange) provides NNTP to ensure relatively

Multi-level Protection Building for Virus Protection Infrastructure

633

easy use of newsgroup, and real-time virus protection should be made possible
for virus infection ﬁle when it comes to newsgroup.

Fig. 1. Improved Protection Infrastructure

Fig.1 shows improved protection infrastructure. Infrastructure is transformed
into ﬁve-stage blocking from two or three-stage blocking. And ﬁltering and protection are executed for the entire server at the gateway level, and internet
traﬃc route ensures diﬀerentiated protection by dividing into three, that is,
SMTP, Web, and other traﬃc. Protection against virus that circulates in the
network is conducted by collocating virus wall at the entry/exit point of local
ﬁle server, and real-time protection network is conﬁgured for the client level, the
infrastructure of gateway.

3

Performance Analysis

Gateway protection and virus blocking performance on the mail system are selected for measurement. Virus wall system for testing, used in this measurement,
is E3500 system, and the software used is the virus wall of the Secureworks. Total
throughput time increased to 2 ∼ 3% level after the installation of the Gateway
virus wall. All types of powerful ﬁltering functions ﬁltered 30 ∼ 40% unnecessary mail among the total number of mails. When Sobig virus spills out 3,000
mails per hours, gateway Virus wall ﬁlters them ﬁrst. Inﬂux of malignant code
is blocked by executing virus inspection by transmitted inﬂux mail at the gateway ﬁrst, and the mail, ﬁltered once, is searched again by attachment ﬁle name,
title, main body, and form of ﬁltering to block abnormal mail from the network
transmission process. Instead, it is stored for a speciﬁc period of time to enable
re-dispatch of false positive mail that is normal mail classiﬁed as spam is enabled.
Mail virus wall CPU load increased momentarily up to a maximum of 100% due

634

S.-C. Noh, D.C. Lee, and K.J. Kim

to virus, which causes process processing delay and email transmission delay, but
virus wall load stabilized at fewer than 60% on the improved structure due to
virus blocking. When virus increased drastically, 10% of contaminated mail that
could not be treated was transmitted to mail server, but this ﬁgure decreased to
3% after structure improvement. During the aggravation of virus wall load, the
number of mails on standby for transmission reached up to 56,000 per day, but
this number decreased considerably during the reduction of virus wall load.
Table 1. Comparison of Performance Analysis

4

Conclusion

This paper conducted research into improved eﬀective model from the infrastructure conﬁguration aspect. In order to ensure eﬀective virus blocking, this
paper emphasizes that a comprehensive approach through infrastructure improvement and combination of scanning tool is the only measure for preparing
against today’s environment of virus inﬁltration. The proposed method is a measure developed at a time when a permanent technological solution to virus is yet
to be developed.

References
1. J. Hruska, ”Computer Virus and Anti-virus Warfare” Ellis Horwood, 19962
2. P.Denning, ”Computer under Attack Intruders, Worms, and Virus”, AddisonWesley, 1998
3. F.Cohen, ”A short Course on Computer Viruses”. ASP Press, 1990
4. F.Cohen.” Computer Viruses. PhD thesis”, University of Southern California, 1996.
5. Rainer Link, ”Server-based Virus-protection on Unix/Linux”, University of applied
science Frut wangen, 2003.

