On Direct Comparing of Medical Guidelines
with Electronic Health Record
ˇ
Jana Zv´
arov´
a, Arnoˇst Vesel´
y, Petr Hanzliˇcek, Josef Spidlen,
and
David Buchtela
European Center for Medical Informatics, Statistics and Epidemiology, Institute of
Computer Science AS CR, Pod Vod´
arenskou vˇeˇz´ı 2, Praha 8, The Czech Republic
zvarova@euromise.cz

Abstract. Electronic Health Record (EHR) systems are now being developed in many places. The EuroMISE Center has developed a system
of the Multimedia Distributed Electronic Health Record (MUDR) that
provides universal structure for collecting data and multimedia objects.
Moreover, a method to compare data items on the input of EHR system
with medical guidelines has been developed. Therefore it is possible to
reveal if the input data item, that represents patient diagnosis or proposed patient treatment, contradicts with medical guidelines or not. The
method on direct comparing of medical guidelines with EHR has been tested in hospital information system settings and in settings of the remote
GP oﬃce.

1

Introduction

The motivation to use electronic data storage in medicine is based on the obvious
drawback of the paper medical record including illegible handwriting, poor organization of documents, missing data and ambiguous data. Current developments
in electronic health records focus on advanced features, including strategies for
data entry and retrieval, multiple views and transparent integration of diverse
information sources of diﬀerent platforms [1], [2]. Moreover, the availability of an
EHR (Electronic Health Record) is a must for using advanced decision support
in medicine and health care, including medical guideline support. The European
project I4C of the 4th Framework Programme (1996–1998) was carried out for
the further advancement of cardiac care [3]. It focused on clinical applications
and its main goals were to integrate access to data wherever stored, to support
evidence-based care by remote electronic consultation and peer review and to
record more comprehensively and more consistently patient data, images, videos
and bio-signals. With the support of the I4C project the multimedia Open Record for Care (ORCA) was developed. It integrates structured patient data entry
including history, medication, symptoms and more with multimedia objects as
ECG, angiography or laboratory data.
The research was partially supported with the project LN00B107 Ministry of Education CR.
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3039, pp. 1133–1139, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

1134

J. Zv´
arov´
a et al.

Based on the experience gathered in the EU projects, especially TripleC [4]
and MGT [5], [6] the EuroMISE Centre has been focused on speciﬁc tasks of
EHR, Electronic Formalized Medical Guidelines (EFMG), data mining, decision
support and knowledge based systems and on the practical application of new developments in the Czech healthcare environment. There is running development
of EHR named MUDR (MUltimedia Distributed electronic health Record), see
e.g. [7], [8]. The universal architecture of MUDR EHR provides a ﬂexible platform for storage of medical data of any type and MUDR EHR takes into account
obligatory standards for Czech health care providers. Moreover, since the EHR
serves as a tool for data collection, decision support programs can use its data
for automatic generation of alerts, reminders and suggestions when standards
of care (e.g. based on medical guidelines) are not achieved. The development
of EFMG and the task on making them available for physicians using Internet,
especially with the simultaneous use of EHR is desirable.

2

MUDR Architecture

The MUDR EHR is based on a three-layer architecture with a data layer, an
application layer and a user interface. This decomposition enables separating
diﬀerent system modules to small functional parts, which makes the system more
ﬂexible. In our system we deﬁne the global architecture with communication
interfaces based predominately on XML and HTTP. We also deﬁne an interface
for connecting medical guidelines formalized in the form of dynamic libraries.
These libraries extend the capabilities of the MUDR EHR.
MUDRII architecture extends the basic three-layer architecture. The communication between the MUDR DB Server and the MUDR Application Layer
Service uses the MUDR DB Connection Module, which enables implementing
the data layer on various database platforms. The application layer chooses the
right module for the database currently used. Using this scheme, the application
layer communicates transparently with the data layer using always the identical
interface.
The main diﬀerence lies in the application layer interface, used to provide
the functionality of the application layer. The application layer integrates communication modules to communicate with diﬀerent client types. The main communication module is called MUDR WS. This module provides objects using
the MUDR .NET Remoting API (MUDRNRAPI). Using .NET Remoting, the
remote call of methods of the shared objects is possible. This functionality is utilized by another application layer component called MUDR Web Service. This
web service makes the MUDR Web Service Application Interface (MUDRWSAPI) accessible to common clients. A typical general practitioner (GP) uses a
PC on his table to work with the MUDR EHR remotely. The communication is
enabled by the HTTP Server installed on the application server. The commands
and parameters are encoded using the SOAP standard.
For the eventual usage of MUDR thin clients in the form of HTML and WAP
browsers we use a MUDR WS Proxy Service. This service is implemented as a

On Direct Comparing of Medical Guidelines

1135

Common Gateway Interface (CGI) program; it provides classical HTML or WAP
pages to thin clients and appears in the role of a classical MUDR Web Service
client at the other side.

3

Electronic Formalized Medical Guidelines

Many medical guidelines were elaborated to improve quality of medical care and
to achieve standardization of treatment. Usually, the ﬁrst version of medical guidelines is worked out by a group of medical experts in a free text. For computer
implementation and processing it is necessary to have medical guidelines explicitly structured and developed in an electronic form. A lot of modeling means
were suggested for this purpose. The most important and nowadays mostly used
is the GLIF (Guideline Interchange Format) model. The GLIF model is a result
of collaboration among Columbia University, Harvard University, McGill University and Stanford University. Version 2.0 of GLIF (GLIF2) was published in
1998 [9].
The main goal of GLIF was to enable sharing of electronic formalized medical
guidelines (EFMG) among health institutions and across computer applications.
GLIF speciﬁes an object-oriented model for guidelines representation and syntax
for guidelines utilization in software systems as well as for their transport. GLIF
guidelines are mostly given as a ﬂowchart representing a temporarily ordered
sequence of steps. Diﬀerent types of steps in the ﬂowchart represent clinical
actions and decisions [9], [10]. To enhance usability of GLIF, new version GLIF3
was worked out. GLIF3 builds upon the framework set by GLIF2, but augments
it by introducing several new constructs and extending GLIF2 constructs to
allow a more formal deﬁnition of decision criteria and patient data [11]. The
GLIF model gives process-oriented view of guidelines. The model consists of a
set of classes for guideline entities, attributes of these classes and data types
for attribute values. Instances of classes (objects) have only attributes and no
methods.
A particular guidelines encoded in GLIF are an instance of a general guideline model. It could be represented in a form of oriented graph. The nodes of
the graph are guideline steps and edges represents continuation from one step
to the other one. Guideline steps are action step, decision step, branch and synchronization steps and patient state step. Action steps specify clinical actions
that are to be performed. It can be an application of some therapy, carrying
out some examination or measurement etc. Action step also may name subguidelines, which provide greater detail for the action. Decision steps are used
for conditional branching. There are two kinds of decision steps: case step and
choice step. Case step is used, when branching is determined by evaluation of
deﬁned logical criteria based on data items. Choice step is used when the decision cannot be precisely speciﬁed in guidelines themselves and decision should be
made by the user. Branch and synchronization steps enable concurrency in the
model. Guideline steps that follow branch step could be performed concurrently.
Branches with root in branch step eventually converge in synchronization step.

1136

J. Zv´
arov´
a et al.

In this step all branches are synchronized. It means, that actions, that follow
the synchronization step, could not be performed, unless all actions, following
branch step and preceding the synchronization step, are ﬁnished. Patient state
step characterizes patient’s clinical state.
Guideline model can be equivalently expressed also in a language form. Syntax for guideline describing language is a part of guideline model speciﬁcation. In
language form encoded guidelines consist of a sequence of guideline steps. Some
attributes of a guideline step contain next guideline steps. It enables sequential
representation of graph structure in the guideline describing language.
Action steps of medical guidelines specify diﬀerent kinds of physician actions:
– An action could mean to carry out some examination or some laboratory
measurement. The gained results we will call medical guideline examination
data.
– An action could promote some treatment or application of some therapy.
Such actions we will call medical guideline actions.
Patient state steps of medical guidelines specify patient states, for example
diagnosis or risk group. We will call them medical guideline states. Suppose
that it is possible to establish relation between medical guidelines examination
data, medical guideline actions and medical guideline states on the one side
and input data of EHR on the other side. Suppose further that a translation
table could express this relationship. EHR input data correspond to the medical
guideline examination data or medical guideline actions. EHR input data, which
correspond to the medical guideline states we call patient states.
What means, that some patient state or physician action at the input of EHR
contradicts the medical guidelines? We suggest deﬁning this contradiction in the
following way. If some patient state or physician action at the input of EHR has
its counterpart in medical guidelines and all occurrences of its counterpart in the
medical guideline model are according to the content of EHR database unreachable, then this patient state or physician action contradicts medical guidelines.

4

General Views on Comparing of Medical Guidelines
with EHR

EHR systems are now being developed in many ways in many places. EHR
system enables to store all relevant data about patient in a structured way and
facilitates their further computer processing [13]. The main part of each EHR are
medical observations, laboratory results, stated diagnoses, medical treatments
etc. The main purpose of EHR system is to store and retrieve data in userfriendly dialogue with physician. Advanced EHR systems should also utilize
medical knowledge and provide following facilities.
Checking facility. We check if values of input data are in accordance with
medical knowledge. Usually the system veriﬁes if the input value is inside deﬁned
interval.

On Direct Comparing of Medical Guidelines

1137

Reminder facility. If a stated diagnosis or a chosen treatment is not in agreement with common medical knowledge, the system warns the user and suggests
more probable diagnosis or more appropriate action.
Decision support facility. Based on EHR data the system supports decisionmaking activities of a physician.
Automatic checking of input data should be an integrated part of each electronic health record (EHR) system. EHR system should analyze input data and
warn the user if he inputs data item which is out of interval of possible values or
if he inputs data item, which suggests some decision or medical action, that contradicts common medical knowledge. For implementing this task, EHR system
usually uses set of logical if - then rules. These rules could be extracted from
text form of medical guidelines. The other possibility is to compare input data
and medical guidelines directly using electronic medical guidelines. A method
for direct comparing of EHR and medical guidelines was proposed in [12].
We will concentrate on the reminder function of the EHR system. The usual
way how to design reminder system is to design a set of rules, based on medical
knowledge. These rules are then during user-EHR interaction checked against
input data. The main problem is how to ﬁnd out these rules. Usually they are
to be built up by a team of experts and knowledge engineers. The methods of
their elaboration can be similar to those used in building expert systems. When
medical guidelines are at our disposal, the rules can be extracted from them.
But is it necessary to follow this way? Perhaps it could be possible to compare
data at the input of EHR system with medical guidelines directly.
EHR system can realize the reminder function itself or reminder function
can be realized by a Stand-Alone Reminder System (SARS). The collaboration
between EHR system and SARS could be described as follows:
– When user puts into EHR system a patient state or a physician action, EHR
system sends an activation message to SARS. The part of the message must
be the patient state or the physician action.
– SARS translates the patient state or the physical action into a medical guideline state or medical guideline activity according to the translation table.
– SARS, according to the guideline model, determines supports of all occurrences of medical guideline states or medical guidelines actions.
– SARS translates all EHR input data into medical guideline examinations
according to the translation table.
SARS ﬁnds out if user follows electronic medical guideline. If not, it sends a
warning message.

5

Conclusion

The advantages of proposed method of comparing medical guidelines and EHR
using EFMG are the following.
General applicability. System based on proposed method can work with arbitrary guidelines. Only at ﬁrst the guidelines must be transformed into GLIF

1138

J. Zv´
arov´
a et al.

graph model and then the model must be encoded into guideline describing language. The transformation of free text guidelines into GLIF model or some similar structured and precisely deﬁned formal model should be accomplish anyway,
because only in this way one can be certain, that guidelines are unambiguous and
non-contradictory. The encoding of GLIF graph model into guideline describing
language is then straightforward as each algorithm coding.
Facilitation of changes in the system. When some part of guidelines is
changed, it is not necessary to correct the set of rules used for checking of input
data. What is suﬃcient to do is making corresponding change in guideline model.
Support of distributed computing. The EHR system can be running at
one site and the system for comparing input data with guidelines at another
site. The system based on the proposed method could be even more distributed.
EFMG could be accessible for example on a server at department with medical
experts, who worked out guidelines and are responsible for their maintenance
and updating. The system for comparing EHR data and a medical guideline can
be at another site and it could download EFMG from authorized site whenever
necessary. In this case arises problem with translation table. Who should build
and maintain it? The simplest solution could be sharing the same vocabulary.
EHR system site could at the beginning inform comparing site which standard
medical vocabulary, as SNOMED for example, is used. The ﬁrst experience with
comparing EHR data and EFMG on hypertension treatment has been gathered
in both information system settings and in settings of the remote GP oﬃce.

References
ˇ
1. Zv´
arov´
a J., Hanzl´ıˇcek P., Spidlen
J.: Electronic Health Record in Cardiology: Pilot
Application in the Czech Republic. In: MIST2002 Proceedings, Taiwan, John Wiley
& Sons (2002) 10–13
2. Iakovidis I.: Towards Personal Health Record: Current Situation, Obstacles and
Trends in Implementation of Electronic Healthcare Record in Europe. Int. J. Med.
Inform. 52 (1998) 105–115
3. Pierik F. H., Ginneken A. M., Timmers T., Stam H., Weber R. F.: Restructuring
Routinely Collected Patient Data: ORCA Applied to Andrology. In: Bemmel J.
H., McCray A. T. (eds.): Yearbook of Medical Informatics 98, Health Informatics
and the Internet, Schattauer, Stuttgart (1998) 257–263
4. Pˇrib´ık, V., Gr¨
unfeldov´
a, H., Hanzl´ıˇcek P., Peleˇska, J. and Zv´
arov´
a J.:, Czech National Data Standards Implementations in ORCA Electronic Patient Record in
Cardiology. In: Hasman A., Blobel B., Dudeck J., Engelbrecht R., Gell G., Prokosch H.U. (eds.) Medical Infobahn for Europe, IOS Press, Amsterdam (2000)
652–655
ˇ ıha, A., Z´ıka, T., Zv´
5. Sv´
atek, V., R´
arov´
a J., Jirouˇsek, R., Zdr´
ahal, Z.: Informal,
Formal and Operational Modelling of Medical Guidelines. In: Proceedings 4th
JCKBSE , IOS Press, Amsterdam (2000) 87–92
6. Zv´
arov´
a J., Peleˇska, J., Hanzl´ıˇcek P. and Zv´
ara, K.: Enhanced Care of Hypertensive
Patients Using Internet. Technology and Health Care 6, Vol. 9, IOS Press (2001),
487–488

On Direct Comparing of Medical Guidelines

1139

7. Hanzl´ıˇcek P.: Development of Universal Electronic Health Record in Cardiology.
In: Surjan G., Engelbrecht R., McNair P. (eds.) Health Data in the Information
Society, IOS Press, Amsterdam (2002) 356–360
ˇ
ˇ ıha, A., Zv´
8. Spidlen
J., Hanzl´ıˇcek P., R´
arov´
a J.: Flexible Information Storage in
MUDRII EHR. Proceeding of the IJM EuroMISE 2004 (submitted)
9. Ohno-Machado L., Gennari, J. H., Murphy S.,N., Jain N.,L., Tu S., W., Oliver D.,
et al.: The GuideLine Interchange Format: A model for representing guidelines,
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 5 (1998) 357–372
10. Boxwala A., A., Greenes R.,A., Debel S., R.: Architecture for Multipurpose Guideline Execution Engine, Proc. AMIA Symp. (1999) 701-705.
11. Peleg M., Boxwala A.,A., et al.: GLIF3: The Evolution of Guideline Representation
Format, In: http:/smi-web.stanford.edu/projects/intermed-web/guidelines (2000)
12. Vesel´
y A., Zv´
arov´
a J., Peleˇska, J., Buchtela D., Anger Z.: Medical Guidelines Presentation and Comparing with Electronic Health Record. Proceeding of the IJM
EuroMISE 2004 (submitted)
ˇ ıha, A., Sv´
13. R´
atek, V., Nˇemec P., Zv´
arov´
a J.: Medical Guideline as Prior Knowledge
in Electronic Healthcare Record Mining. In: Zanasi A., Brebbia C. A., Ebecken N.
F. F. E., Melli P. (eds.): Data Mining III, WIT Press (2002) 809-818

