Single Trial Discrimination between Right and Left Hand
Movement-Related EEG Activity*
Sunyoung Cho1, Jung Ae Kim2, Dong-Uk Hwang2, and Seung Kee Han1,2
1

Basic Science Research Institute, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju, Korea,
sycho@chungbuk.ac.kr
2
Department of Physics, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju, Korea,

Abstract. We propose an EEG-based discrimination method for the right/left
hand movement in a single trial. The EEG was recorded during the voluntary
movement and imagination of the hand movement. We made a feature vector
for every second that represents the characteristics to reflect the process of the
right/left movement. It was composed of the ERD, ERS patterns of the mu and
beta rhythm and the coefficients of the autoregressive model best fitting for the
data of the given period. Linear discrimination of their distributions in the vector space classified the right/left hand movement-related EEG activity efficiently.

1 Introduction
The ongoing EEG (electroencephalogram) signals are including useful information to
reflect the neuronal processing for the specific mental and/or physical functions. There
is a plenty of evidence indicating the frequency-specific changes of EEG may correlate to the sensory, motor and cognitive processing [1, 2, 3]. With high temporal
resolution and a low cost, EEG is widely used in assessing brain processes. This EEG
signals could be applied for the communication between the brain and an electronic
system like a computer – a Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) [4].
The EEG changes reflecting the human intention related the limb movements or the
imagination of the movements have been researched extensively and applied to BCI
[5, 6]. During the preparation or imagination of the movements, the EEG signals show
frequency-specific changes time-locked to the event. These event-related changes
consist of decrease or increase of the power in given frequency bands, which might be
due to decrease or increase in synchronous activities of the underlying neuronal
populations. These are called event-related desynchronization (ERD) and eventrelated synchronization (ERS) respectively [7].

* This work was supported by Korean Research Foundation, KRF 2002-075-H0007 to S.Y.
Cho, and a grant(M103KV010011 03K2201 01130) from Brain Research Center of the
21st Century Frontier Research Program funded by the Ministry of Science and Technology of Republic of Korea to S.K. Han.
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3036, pp. 255–262, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

256

S. Cho et al.

In this study, the EEG signals were recorded during the performance and imagination of the hand movement and analyzed to generate feature vectors for every second
EEG data. A feature vector was composed of the ERD, ERS patterns of the mu and
beta rhythm and the coefficients of the autoregressive model best fitting for the data of
the given period. Linear discrimination of their distribution in the vector space divided
the right and left hand movement efficiently.

2 Method
2.1 EEG Data Acquisition

Power

Thirty-five subjects aged 19 to 25 years participated in the study. All subjects were
right-handed and free of neurological disorders. The EEG was recorded from the
whole scalp with 32 Ag/AgCl electrodes placed according to the international 10-20
system (Neuroscan amplifier, sampling rate 1000Hz, bandwidth filtering 1.5~100Hz).
Three kinds of experimental paradigms were used; self-paced hand movement in
which subjects push a button with the index finger on their own pace in 12-18 s intervals, tone-triggered hand movement in which subjects perform the movements after
the presentation of tone (1kHz, duration 100ms), and tone-trigger imagination of
hand movement in which subjects were instructed to imagine performing the movement after the tone stimulation. The EEG was recorded continuously to be selected
12s epoch in each trial, time-locked with the movement-onset or tone stimulation.

Freq.

Fig. 1. Examples of 1sec power spectra from EEG data of C3, Cz, and C4 recorded during premovement reference period (center line), movement period (lower line), and post-movement
period (upper line) while tone-triggered left hand movement. The frequency ranges displaying
significant power decrease or increase are marked with a pair of vertical solid lines of 11~14Hz
( µ ) and a pair of dash-dot lines of 16~22Hz ( β )

Single Trial Discrimination

257

2.2 Power Spectrum and ERD/ERS Computation
To select the most reactive frequency components to reveal the ERD/ERS patterns
related to the hand movement, the power spectra for three periods were compared. For
the data from C3, Cz, and C4 electrodes, the power spectra of 1-s pre-movement period as a reference, 1-s movement period around the movement onset, and 1-s postmovement period after movement offset were calculated. Examples from a subject are
presented in Fig. 1. In these examples, similar to the formal studies [8, 9], they
showed different in the frequency band between 11-14Hz (mu) and 16-22 Hz (beta).
The ERD/ERS time curves were calculated for the selected frequency bands. This
procedure involved band pass filtering, squaring of amplitude to obtain power values,
averaging of power over all trials, normalizing, and computing of percentages with
respect to the reference interval.

ERD / ERS(%) = ( Psegment − Preference) / Preference × 100

2.3 Coefficients of Autoregressive Model

We adopted the coefficients of the autoregressive model as useful indices to discriminate right/left hand movement. In each trial, the EEG signals for 12-s epoch were
divided into 1-s window segments with 500ms overlap. The coefficients of the autoregressive model best fitting for the data of each segment were calculated using the
following model, in which delay time d=5, and mode order k=6.

x n = a1 x n − d + a 2 x n − 2 d + ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ + a k x n − kd
Fig. 2 illustrates the time curve of the one coefficient (a1) piled up across all trials.
They showed the different patterns for the right/left directions (the left hand movement in this figure) and time locked to the movement onset and offset. Therefore,
these coefficients were included in our feature vector.

Fig. 2. The change of a coefficient of the autoregressive model in each trial while tonetriggered left hand movement. The x axis indicates the time (msec) from the movement onset,
and y axis indicates the trial number

258

S. Cho et al.

S

ref
L

S

D

S

ref
R

Fig. 3. Schematic diagram of the distribution of feature vectors in a vector space. If dark and
thin circles represent the feature vectors of right and left movement, two rectangles
( s Lref , s Rref ) indicate the middle points of each group. The center point D (t ) is an average of
two rectangles. The value of d(t) is inner product of ( s (t ) - D (t ) ) and ( s Lref (t ) - D (t ) ), which is
qualifying the position of the vector compared to the middle point of one group, s Lref (t ) in this
equation. If d(t) is positive value, therefore, it means the vector is included in the group. If
negative, the vector is included in the other group

2.4 Feature Vector and Liner Discrimination

The feature vectors were composed with the characteristics proven to be useful for the
right/left discrimination in our analysis. We made feature vectors for every 1-s window segments using the EEG signals from C3 and C4 sites. A feature vector includes
6 coefficients of autoregressive model for C3, 6 coefficients for C4, and the ratios of
the power change in mu and beta bands for C3 and C4 (that is, ERD/ERS ratio in the
period). To compare across trials, the values were standardized in each trial to the
reference period of the formal 6 s before the tone onset.
S (t ) =
( a1C 3 , a 2C 3 , … , a 6C 3 , a1C 4 , a 2C 4 , … , a 6C 4 , PhiC−3α , PβC 3 , PhiC−4α , PβC 4 )
x =

x −

x

ref

σ ( x ) re f

Feature vectors of every window segments were projected to the vector space (16
dimensions in this case) for their distributions to be discriminated linearly. Fig 3 explained the definition of d(t), quantified the position of each vector in the vector
space.
S

ref
L / R

(t ) =

D (t ) = ( S

ef
L

L / R

∑

(t ) + S

ref
R

1
N

S

> 0

if d

< 0 →

→

Right
Lelf

(t )

( t )) / 2

d ( t ) = ( S ( t ) − D ( t )) ⋅ ( S
if d

L / R

ref
R

( t ) − D ( t ))

Single Trial Discrimination

259

Fig. 4. Grand average time courses of β rhythm in C3 (dash-dot line) Cz (thin line), and C4
(solid line) while tone-triggered movement of left (left box) and right (right box) hand. The x
axis indicates the time (msec) from the onset of the tone (the vertical bar). The y axis indicates
the percentage of the relative power change, to show ERD and ERS specifically dominant in
the contralateral somatomotor area

3 Results
Fig. 4 displays the grand average ERD/ERS time courses of the beta band activity
from C3, Cz, and C4 data. For each side movement, it is seen that the post-movement
power increases (ERS) are larger in the contralateral hemisphere than the ipsilateral
hemisphere. In case of the mu band, a prominent ERD was found in the contralateral
hemisphere, followed by ERS.

Fig. 5. The time course of d(t) value of the feature vector while tone-triggered movement of
left (left box) and right (right box) hand. The x axis indicates the time (msec) from the movement onset, and y axis indicates the trial number

260

S. Cho et al.

Fig. 6. Histogram of d(t) value of the feature vector while tone-triggered movement of left
(solid line) and right (dot line) hand. The x axis indicates the value of d(t) and the y axis indicates the number of the feature vectors that have the value. In this subject, the recognition rates
of left and right are 91% and 87%

Fig. 5 illustrates the time curve of the d(t) value piled up across all trials. They are
changed consistently after movement onset by the right/left movement across the trials. We made a histogram accumulated by the value of d(t) for every right/left trials in
each subject. As shown in Fig. 6, the distributions for the right and left movement
could be discriminated well. Table 1 presents the recognition ratios for right/left
movement using the linear discrimination of the feature vectors for 6 subjects.
Table 1. The recognition rate while tone-triggered hand movement
subject

Left(%)

Right(%)

Total(%)

HMA

82.0

68.0

75.0

JJH

81.0

76.5

78.7

CSY

75.5

66.5

71.0

KSM

91.0

80.0

85.5

JWR

71.5

79.3

75.5

PMJ

72.0

80.0

76.0

Total

78.8

75.1

77.1

4 Discussion
For the application to the BCI system, it is necessary that the EEG features related to
the human intent were analyzed with the EEG signals in a single trial. The present
study determined the features that could reveal the intention and performance of the
right/left hand movement and proposed the discrimination method using the features
in a single trial.

Single Trial Discrimination

261

xRout

xLout
Fig. 7. The performance of the artificial neural network using the units of the feature vector as
input nodes while tone-triggered hand movement. We set two output nodes for right and left,
indicated in the y and x axis. Two kinds of test data set were applied to generate recognition
rate 87% and 93%

As units of our feature vector, we used the single-trail ERD/ERS patterns that were
well known as grand averaged ones. And the coefficients of the autoregressive model
were used as other units, which showed consistent time-course changes across the
trials and differences in the right/left movement.
We further tried to use an artificial neural network for the discrimination of the
right/left movement. The units of our feature vectors after the movement onset in each
trial were used as the value of the input nodes (multi-layered perception model, input
node 80, one-layer hidden node 10, output node 2, and learning rule: feed-forward
backpropagation). The preliminary result showed a similar recognition rate with the
linear discrimination method (Fig. 7).

References
1. Bastiaansen, M.C.M., Bocker, K.B.E., Brunia, C.H.M., Munch, J.C., Spekreijse, H.: Eventrelated desynchronization during anticipatory attention for an upcoming stimulus: a comparative EEG/EMG study. Clin. Neurophysiol. 112 (2001) 393-403
2. Leocani, L., Toro, C., Zhuang, P., Gerlff, C. Hallett, M.: Event-related desynchronization in
reaction time paradigms: a comparison with event-related potential and cortical excitability,
Clin. Neurophysiol. 112 (2001) 923-930
3. Singer, W.: Synchronization of cortical activity and its putative role in informstion processing and learning, Annual Review of physiology 55 (1993) 349-374
4. Wolpaw, J. R., Birbaumer, N., McFarland, D.J., Pfurtscheller, G., Vaughan, T.M.: Braincomputer interfaces for communication and control, Clin. Neurophysiol. 113 (2002) 767791
5. Pfurtscheller, G., Neuper, C., Guger, C., Harkam, W., Ramoser, H., Schlögl, A.,Obermaier,
B., Pregenzer, M.: Current Trends in Graz Brain–Computer Interface (BCI) Research, IEEE
Trans. Rehabil. Engineering 8 (2000) 216-219

262

S. Cho et al.

6. Babiloni, F., Cincotti, F., Bianchi, L., Pirri, G., Millan, J.R., Mourin, O.J., Salinari, S.,
Marciani, M.G.: Recognition of imagined hand movements with low resolution surface
Laplacian and linear classifiers, Medical Engineering & Physics 23 (2001) 323–328
7. Pfurtscheller, G., Lopes da Silva, F.H.: Event-related EEG/MEG synchronization and desynchronization : basic principles, Clin. Neurophysiol. 110 (1999) 1942-1857
8. Stancak, A.J., Riml, A., Pfurtscheller, G.: The effects of external load an movement-related
changes of the sensorimotor EEG rhythms, Elec. and Clin. Neurophysiol. 102 (1997) 495504
9. Stancak, A., Pfurtscheller,G.: Event-related desynchronisation of central beta-rhythms during brisk and slow self-paced finger movements of dominant and nondominant hand, Cognitive Brain Research 4 (1996) 171–183

