Computational Engineering and Science
Program at the University of Utah
Carleton DeTar3 , Aaron L. Fogelson2 , Chris R. Johnson1 ,
Christopher A. Sikorski1 , and Thanh Truong4
1

School of Computing, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA,
{crj, sikorski}@cs.utah.edu,
http://www.cs.utah.edu/{∼crj,∼sikorski}
2
Department of Mathematics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA,
fogelson@math.utah.edu,
http://www.math.utah.edu/∼fogelson
3
Department of Physics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA,
detar@physics.utah.edu,
http://www.physics.utah.edu/∼detar
4
Department of Chemistry, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA,
truong@chemistry.utah.edu,
http://www.chem.utah.edu/faculty/truong/index.html
Abstract. We summarize the Computational Engineering and Science
program at the University of Utah. Program requirements as well as related research areas are outlined. To obtain the MS degree in CES, a
student must complete courses and present original research in scientiﬁc
computing, scientiﬁc visualization, mathematical modeling, and the case
studies in CES. The outlined research areas include scientiﬁc visualization, computational combustion, computational physics, computational
chemistry, mathematical and computational biology, and computational
medicine.

1

Computational Engineering and Science Program

The grand computational challenges in engineering and science require for their
resolution a new scientiﬁc approach. As one report points out, “The use of modern computers in scientiﬁc and engineering research and development over the
last three decades has led to the inescapable conclusion that a third branch of
scientiﬁc methodology has been created. It is now widely acknowledged that,
along with traditional experimental and theoretical methodologies, advanced
work in all areas of science and technology has come to rely critically on the
computational approach.” This methodology represents a new intellectual paradigm for scientiﬁc exploration and visualization of scientiﬁc phenomena. It
permits a new approach to the solution of problems that were previously inaccessible.
At present, too few researchers have the training and expertise necessary to
utilize fully the opportunities presented by this new methodology; more importantly, traditional educational programs do not adequately prepare students to
take advantage of these opportunities.
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3039, pp. 1202–1209, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

Computational Engineering and Science Program

1203

Too often we have highly trained computer scientists whose knowledge about
engineering and sciences is at the college sophomore, or lower, level. Traditional
educational programs in each of these areas stop at the sophomore level — or
earlier — in the other area. Also, education tends to be ad hoc, on the job and
self-taught.
This situation has arisen because the proper utilization of the new methodology requires expertise and skills in several areas that are considered disparate in
traditional educational programs. The obvious remedy is to create new programs
that do provide integrated training in the relevant areas of science, mathematics,
technology, and algorithms. The obvious obstacles are territorial nature of established academic units, entrenched academic curricula, and a lack of resources.
At the University of Utah the School of Computing (located in the College
of Engineering), with the Departments of Mathematics and Physics (located in
the College of Science) have established a graduate program that we consider
a ﬁrst step towards the modernization of the University’s curriculum in what
we call “Computational Engineering and Science” (CES). Our goal is to provide
a mechanism by which a graduate student can obtain integrated expertise and
skills in all areas that are required for the solution of a particular problem via
the computational methodology.
We have recently created an M.S. CES degree program. If the M.S. CES
program is successfel, we will consider expanding the program to a Ph.D. in
CES. Our program is designed mostly for students in the Colleges of Engineering,
Mines, and Science. However, in principle any graduate student at the University
can participate.
To obtain the MS degree in CES, a student must complete courses and present
original thesis research (for the thesis option) in each of the following areas:
I. Introduction to Scientiﬁc Computing
II. Advanced Scientiﬁc Computation
III. Scientiﬁc Visualization
IV. Mathematical Modeling
V. Case Studies in CES
VI. Elective course
VII. Seminar in Computational Engineering and Science
Of the above items, only V and VII are truly new requirements. Numerical
Analysis has been taught in our departments for several years. Mathematical
modeling has been spread over a large number of courses in the current Mathematics curriculum; the new course has been designed particularly for the CES
program and has replaced one or more other courses in the students’ load. The
situation in regard to courses I and III in the Computer Science curriculum is
very similar.
All courses are designed for ﬁrst- or second-year science and engineering
graduate students who have a knowledge of basic mathematics and computing
skills. The most innovative aspect of our CES program is course V., Case Studies
in CES. This course consists of presentations by science and engineering faculty
from various departments around the campus. These faculty, all active in computationally intensive research, introduce students to their own work over intervals

1204

C. DeTar et al.

of, typically, three weeks. The course provides students with a reasonably deep
understanding of both the underlying science and engineering principles involved
in the various projects and the practical issues confronting the researchers. It
also provide a meeting place for faculty and graduate students engaged in CES
activities in various departments throughout campus. In the CES seminar (VII)
students are required to report on their own CES activities to their peers.
This approach, then, will serve the students by at once focusing their activities and bringing together in one place several essential components of CES
that were previously spread over a larger and less clearly deﬁned part of the
existing curriculum. In addition, the program will help students learn to work
with researchers in other disciplines and to understand how expertise in another
ﬁeld can help propel their own research forward.
The program is administered by a director and a “steering committee” consisting of two members each from the Departments of Mathematics, Physics and
the School of Computing. The committee is advised by a board of faculty active
in CES research.
We have already graduated 6 MS students and currently have 21 students
participating in the program. We believe that the program will grow to about
30 students by Fall 2004. Our graduates continue their careers in national laboratories, university research laboratories, and technology companies.

2

Computational Engineering and Science Research

The University of Utah has a rich pool of faculty who are active in the various
areas involved in CES. These include ﬁelds such as computational ﬂuid dynamics, physics and chemistry, earthquake simulation, computational medicine,
pharmacy, biology, computational combustion, materials science, climate modeling, genetics, scientiﬁc visualization and numerical techniques. A few examples
of some of the current research in these areas follow.
2.1

Scientiﬁc Visualization

Common to many of the computational science application areas is the need
to visualize model geometry and simulation results. The School of Computing
at the University of Utah has been a pioneer and leader in computer graphics
and scientiﬁc visualization research and education. Some of the ﬁrst scientiﬁc
visualizations were invented and displayed here, such as the use of color for ﬁnite
element analysis and the use of geometrical visualizations of molecules. Utah is
home to the Scientiﬁc Computing and Imaging (SCI) Institute [1]. SCI Institute
researchers have innovated several new techniques to eﬀectively visualize largescale computational ﬁelds [2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9].
2.2

Computational Chemistry

Prof. Thanh N. Truong from the Department of Chemistry is leading major efforts in collaborations with Dr. Julio Facelli from the University of Utah Center

Computational Engineering and Science Program

1205

for High Performance Computing, Prof. Thom Cheatham from the Medicinal
Chemistry Department, Prof. Chuck Wight also from the Chemistry Department, and Prof. James Lewis from Brigham Young University to develop an
integrated extendable web-based simulation environment called Computational
Science and Engineering On-line (CSEO). A number of graduate students from
our CES program are involved in this project. CSEO allows computational scientists to perform research using state-of-the-art tools, querying data from personal
or public databases, discuss results with colleagues or attend a workshop, and
access resources beyond those available locally from a web browser. CSEO will
provide a problem-solving environment for integrating diﬀerent ﬁelds of computational science and engineering, thus facilitating inter-disciplinary research and
particularly multi-scale simulations of complex scientiﬁc problems. Currently,
CSEO supports an integrated environment for multi-scale modeling of complex
reacting systems. Speciﬁcally, it allows results from fundamental quantum chemistry simulations to be used to calculate thermodynamic and kinetic properties
of a chemical reaction, which subsequently are used in the simulation of a combustion reactor. A unique feature of CSEO is in its framework that allows data
to ﬂow from one application to another in a transparent manner. Eﬀorts to extend the CSEO environment to computational biology and materials science are
also being made. CSEO can be accessed at http://cseo.net.
2.3

Computational Combustion

The Center for the Simulation of Accidental Fires and Explosions (CSAFE) (www.csafe.utah.edu), now in its 7th year, was created at the
University of Utah through the Department of Energy’s ASCI Program
(www.llnl.gov/asci/alliances). C-SAFE focuses on creating a software based simulation system that can accurately simulate the complex interactions between
large ﬁres and structures within the ﬁre, especially structures containing explosive materials. This system is designed to eﬀectively use the computational
resources available at the National Laboratories which include supercomputers
consisting of 1000’s of processors [10]. To produce accurate simulations of the
chemistry and engineering physics involved, the software requires a combination
of fully coupled non-linear solvers, optimization, computational steering, and
visualization, along with validation with experimental data [11].
To create such a system, the combined talents of a highly skilled multidisciplinary team are required. Faculty, post-docs, staﬀ members, and students from
Chemistry, Chemical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, and the School of
Computing have worked together to produce this software. When it is completed, the software will provide a valuable means of improving and validating the
safety of structures and explosive materials when exposed to large ﬁres [12].
2.4

Mathematical and Computational Biology

The Mathematics Department at the University of Utah is home to one of the
world’s largest and most active research groups in Mathematical Biology. The

1206

C. DeTar et al.

work in this group centers on understanding the biological mechanisms that regulate the dynamics of important physiological, biochemical, biophysical, and
ecological interactions. A major focus of research, lead by Aaron Fogelson, is
in using mathematics and computation to understand how the complex biochemical and biophysical components, especially the ﬂuid dynamics, of platelet
aggregation and coagulation interact in hemostasis (normal blood clotting) and
thrombosis (pathological blood clotting within blood vessels). This fascinating
area has tremendous practical importance because thrombosis is the immediate
cause of most heart attacks and strokes. Because the models of clotting are
very complex (they involve ﬂuid dynamics, ﬂuid-structure interactions, chemical kinetics, chemical and mass transport), they pose substantial computational
challenges, and have required the development of novel numerical methods and
software to meet these challenges. This software has been and is being applied
to a wide range of biological problems in which ﬂuid ﬂow plays an important
role. A second major research area, led by James Keener, involves modeling and
three-dimensional computation of electrical waves in cardiac muscle. The goal
is to understand normal signal propagation and the coupling between the electrical stimuli and cardiac muscle contraction, to understand the mechanisms
underlying the onset of pathological arrythmias, and to understand at the cellular and tissue level how deﬁbrillation works so as to help optimize deﬁbrillation
strategies. Some of the other work in the group includes studies of information
processing in the primary visual cortex, models of territoriality in interacting
animal populations, and studies of invasion of ecosystems by new species.
2.5

Computational Medicine

An interdisciplinary team of nationally recognized research centers at Utah involving the Cardiovascular Research and Training Institute (CVRTI), the Scientiﬁc Computing and Imaging (SCI) Institute, the Center for Advanced Medical
Technology (CAMT), and the Neurosurgery Department are working together
to tackle large-scale computational problems in medicine.
Every year, approximately 500,000 people die suddenly because of abnormalities in their hearts’ electrical system (cardiac arrhythmias) and/or from
coronary artery disease. While external deﬁbrillation units have been in use for
some time, their use is limited because it takes such a short time for a heart
attack victim to die from insuﬃcient oxygen to the brain. Lately, research has
been initiated to ﬁnd a practical way of implanting electrodes within the body
to deﬁbrillate a person automatically upon onset of cardiac ﬁbrillation. Because
of the complex geometry and inhomogeneous nature of the human thorax and
the lack of sophisticated thorax models, most past design work on deﬁbrillation
devices has relied on animal studies. We have constructed a large-scale model of
the human thorax, the Utah Torso Model [13,14,15], for simulating both the endogenous ﬁelds of the heart and applied current sources (deﬁbrillation devices).
Using these computer models, We are also able to simulate the multitude of electrode conﬁgurations, electrode sizes, and magnitudes of deﬁbrillation shocks.
Given the large number of possible external and internal electrode sites, magnitudes, and conﬁgurations, it is a daunting problem to computationally test

Computational Engineering and Science Program

1207

and verify various conﬁgurations. For each new conﬁguration tested, geometries,
mesh discretization levels, and a number of other parameters must be changed.
Excitation currents in the brain produce an electrical ﬁeld that can be detected as small voltages on the scalp. By measuring changes in the patterns
of the scalp’s electrical activity, physicians can detect some forms of neurological disorders. Electroencephalograms, EEGs, measure these voltages; however,
they provide physicians with only a snapshot of brain activity. These glimpses
help doctors spot disorders but are sometimes insuﬃcient for diagnosing them.
For the latter, doctors turn to other techniques; in rare cases, to investigative
surgery.
Such is the case with some forms of epilepsy. To determine whether a patient
who is not responding to medication has an operable form of the disorder, known
as temporal lobe epilepsy, neurosurgeons use an inverse procedure to identify
whether the abnormal electrical activity is highly localized (thus operable) or
diﬀused over the entire brain [16,17].
To solve these two bioelectric ﬁeld problems in medicine, we have created
two problem solving environments, SCIRun and BioPSE [18,19,20].
Using SCIRun and BioPSE, scientists and engineers are able to design internal deﬁbrillation devices and source models for the epileptic foci, place them
directly into the computer model, and automatically change parameters (size,
shape and number of electrodes) and source terms (position and magnitude of
voltage and current sources) as well as the mesh discretization level needed for
an accurate numerical solution. Furthermore, engineers can use the interactive
visualization capabilities to visually gauge the eﬀectiveness of their designs and
simulations in terms of distribution of electrical current ﬂow and density maps
of current distribution.
2.6

Computational Physics

Several computational science opportunities are oﬀered by the Physics Department. Students can gain experience in computational physics on platforms ranging from small Beowulf clusters to supercomputers at the national laboratories
to the most powerful, special-purpose computers available in the world.
Experimental High Energy Astrophysics. The High Resolution Fly’s Eye
and the High Energy Gamma Ray research groups collect terabytes of observational data that require processing on high performance parallel computers.
Monte Carlo simulations of detector performance and of theories also require intensive computation. The goal of this research is to understand the origins and
production mechanisms of the mysterious, energetic particles. Professors Pierre
Sokolsky, David Kieda, Paolo Gondolo, Charles Jui, Kai Martens, and Wayne
Springer participate in this work.
Computational Astrophysics. Computer simulations allow us to experiment
with the Universe at large. For example, by varying the amount of dark matter
in a simulated galaxy, and then comparing it to real, observed galaxies, we can

1208

C. DeTar et al.

place constraints on the nature of dark matter. Ben Bromley has run simulations
to study the eﬀects of dark matter in colliding galaxies. With Scott Kenyon,
Bromley is also working on models for the formation of rocky planets like Earth.
Key issues include how rocky planets form, and whether they are common around
other stars like our Sun. Recently, Bromley has joined Richard Price in simulating
the collision between two black holes. Colliding black holes produce gravity waves
which be will detectable by observatories (e.g., LIGO and LISA) in the near
future. Only with computer models will we be able to accurately interpret the
gravity wave data.
Solving the Strong Interactions. Large scale ab initio simulations of quantum chromodynamics, the theory of interacting quarks and gluons, have proven
to be an indispensible guide to our understanding of the masses and structure
of the light elementary particles, the decays of heavy mesons, and the cooling of
the quark-gluon plasma, which existed in the early universe. Professor Carleton
DeTar is carrying out this work.
2.7

Future Directions

The ﬁeld of Computational Engineering and Science holds rich possibilities for
future development. The computational paradigm has taken hold in nearly every
area in science and engineering. Its use is also becoming more common in many
ﬁelds outside of science and engineering, such as the social sciences, architecture,
business, and history. Its success hinges on researchers’ ability and willingness
to transcend traditional disciplinary barriers and share expertise and experience
with a large group of colleagues who may have been perceived previously as
working in unrelated ﬁelds. Such boundary-crossing enriches researchers’ work
by providing new computational opportunities and insights. Building the interdisciplinary spirit will enable the solution of problems that were previously
inaccessible. At the University of Utah, we are excited by such prospects and
have taken the ﬁrst step in initiating a mechanism to educate the next generation
of scientists and engineers. One concrete future step we are taking is the creation
of a Ph.D. degree in Computing that will have a Scientiﬁc Computing track. We
hope to start admitting students into the new Ph.D. Computing degree program
in Fall 2004.
For more information on our CES program visit www.ces.utah.edu or contact
Christopher Sikorski (sikorski@cs.utah.edu).

References
1. Scientiﬁc Computing and Imaging Institute; http://www.sci.utah.edu/.
2. Y. Livnat and C.D. Hansen. View dependent isosurface extraction. In IEEE
Visualization ‘98, pages 175–180. IEEE Computer Society, October 1998.
3. Y. Livnat, S.G. Parker, and C.R. Johnson. Fast isosurface extraction methods for
large image data sets. In A.N. Bankman, editor, Handbook of Medical Imaging,
pages 731–745. Academic Press, San Diego, CA, 2000.

Computational Engineering and Science Program

1209

4. G.L. Kindlmann and D.M. Weinstein. Hue-balls and lit-tensors for direct volume
rendering of diﬀusion tensor ﬁelds. In Proceedings of the IEEE Visualization 99,
pages 183–189, 1999.
5. G.L. Kindlmann and D.M. Weinstein. Strategies for direct volume rendering of diffusion tensor ﬁelds. IEEE Trans. Visualization and Computer Graphics, 6(2):124–
138, 2000.
6. C.R. Johnson and A.R. Sanderson. A next step: Visualizing errors and uncertainty.
IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, 23(5):6–10, September/October 2003.
7. J. Kniss, G. Kindlmann, and C. Hansen. Multidimensional transfer functions for
interactive volume rendering. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and ComputerGraphics, 8(3):270–285, 2002.
8. D. Breen and R. Whitaker. A level-set approach to 3d shape metamorphosis. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and ComputerGraphics, 7(2):173–192, 2001.
9. C.R. Johnson, Y. Livnat, L. Zhukov, D. Hart, and G. Kindlmann. Computational
ﬁeld visualization. In B. Engquist and W. Schmid, editors, Mathematics Unlimited
– 2001 and Beyond, volume 2, pages 605–630. Springer-Verlag, 2001.
10. J.D. de St. Germain, J. McCorquodale, S.G. Parker, and C.R. Johnson. Uintah:
A massively parallel problem solving environment. In Ninth IEEE International
Symposium on High Performance andDistributed Computing, pages 33–41. IEEE,
Piscataway, NJ, Nov 2000.
11. R. Rawat, S.G. Parker, P.J. Smith, and C.R. Johnson. Parallelization and integration of ﬁre simulations in the uintah pse. In Proceedings of the Tenth SIAM
Conference on Parallel Processing for Scientiﬁc Computing, March 12-14 2001.
12. T.C. Henderson, P.A. McMurtry, P.J. Smith, G.A. Voth, C.A. Wight, and D.W.
Pershing. Simulating accidental ﬁres and explosions. IEEE Computational Science
and Engineering, 2:64–76, 2000.
13. C.R. Johnson, R.S. MacLeod, and P.R. Ershler. A computer model for the study of
electrical current ﬂow in the human thorax. Computers in Biology and Medicine,
22(3):305–323, 1992.
14. C.R. Johnson, R.S. MacLeod, and M.A. Matheson. Computational medicine: Bioelectric ﬁeld problems. IEEE COMPUTER, pages 59–67, October 1993.
15. R.S. MacLeod, C.R. Johnson, and M.A. Matheson. Visualization of cardiac bioelectricity — a case study. In IEEE Visualization ‘92, pages 411–418, 1992.
16. D.M. Weinstein, L. Zhukov, and C.R. Johnson. Lead-ﬁeld bases for EEG source
imaging. Annals of Biomedical Engineering, 28:1–7, 2000.
17. D. Weinstein, P. Krysl, and C. Johnson. The bioPSE inverse EEG modeling
pipeline. In ISGG 7th International Conference on Numerical Grid Generation
in Computation Field Simulations, pages 1091–1100, Mississippi State University,
2000. The International Society of Grid Generation.
18. SCIRun: A Scientiﬁc Computing Problem Solving Environment. Scientiﬁc Computing and Imaging Institute (SCI), http://software.sci.utah.edu/scirun.html, 2002.
19. BioPSE: Problem Solving Environment for modeling, simulation, and visualization of bioelectric ﬁelds. Scientiﬁc Computing and Imaging Institute (SCI),
http://software.sci.utah.edu/biopse.html, 2002.
20. C.R. Johnson, S. Parker, D. Weinstein, and S. Heﬀernan. Component-based problem solving environments for large-scale scientiﬁc computing. Journal on Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience, (14):1337–1349, 2002.

