Performance Analysis of IP-Based Multimedia
Communication Networks to Support Video
Traﬃc
Alexander F. Yaroslavtsev1 , Tae-Jin Lee2 , Min Young Chung2 , and
Hyunseung Choo2
1

2

Institute of Mining, Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Science
Novosibirsk, Russia +7-3832-170930
yar@misd.nsc.ru
School of Information and Communication Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University
440-776, Suwon, Korea +82-31-290-7145
{tjlee,mychung,choo}@ece.skku.ac.kr

Abstract. With the rapid growth of the communication equipment
performance, it is possible that communication networks, which use
TCP/IP, will be able to provide real-time applications such as the
broadcasting of a multi-media traﬃc. These applications are sensitive
to transmission delay and its variance, thus estimating QoS is very
important. In this paper, we evaluate the performance of an IP-based
multimedia network in terms of the end-to-end mean delivery time and
the utilization of communication equipments.
Keywords: Performance evaluation, video traﬃc, MPEG encoding.

1

Introduction

In order to support multi-media services in IP-based networks, it is important
to assure service qualities, e.g., delay, since IP networks inherently provide best
eﬀort service. In general, modeling of IP-based networks supporting multi-media
services is complex and thus QoS estimation is challenging.
There have been previous works, which investigate transmission of multimedia traﬃc over IP–networks [1], [2], [3], [4], [5]. Usually simulation methods
are used to research such communication networks. But this approach has a
series of limitations. There are great diﬃculties in adequate representation of
transmission of multi-media traﬃc by analytical models. In [6], Yaroslavtsev et
al. proposed an analytic method based on queuing network theory to model
IP-based high speed communication networks, which is more adequate than
conventional analytical models, and has less computational load than simulation
models.
This paper was partially supported by BK21 program. Dr. Choo is the corresponding
author.
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3036, pp. 573–576, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

574

A.F. Yaroslavtsev et al.

In this paper, we simply evaluate probabilistic temporal characteristics of
an IP-based multimedia network in terms of average delay of data ﬂows and
utilization of equipment. This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we
discuss related work about performance evaluation of communication networks
and modeling of multi-media traﬃc. And we present the model of the investigated
network and the multi-media services as well. Section 3 shows some performance
results on the model of the system.

2

Description of Modeled Communication Network

In this paper, as a representation of communication networks, we consider the
video transmission in an IP network shown in Fig. 1. We have Nw clients connected to a video server via a switch. Each client is connected to the switch
through Ethernet port and an information server is connected to the switch
through fast Ethernet port. To describe the considered network, we use the set
of traﬃc, hardware and software parameters.

Fig. 1. A structure of IP network, for which QOS was estimated

Traﬃc parameters describe the characteristics of transferred traﬃc to the
clients. Video stream must be encoded into an MPEG–4 format [7]. According
to this standard, a digital video stream consists of a sequence of groups of video
pictures (GoP). Each GoP consists of the M/Z–sequence of video frames (VOP
– Video Object Plane). Each GoP or M/Z–sequence has ﬁxed length and structure. In GoP three types of video frame are deﬁned: I–frame (Intra), P–frame
(Predictive) and B–frame (Bidirectional). In the sequel, we will designate the set
of all frame types as Ω= { I,P,B}. Each GoP in video stream has one I–frame,
the ﬁrst frame in GoP. The parameter M deﬁnes the number of frames in groups.
The parameter Z is the distance between P–frames in GOP. For example, the

Performance Analysis of IP-Based Multimedia Communication Networks

575

structure of group of a typical digital video stream with parameters 15/3 has
the following frames: IBBPBBPBBPBBPBB. Values of video traﬃc parameters
are summarized in [6].
Hardware parameters describe the hardware characteristic associated
with communication lines (distance, rate, and Bit Error Rate (BER)); performance of computers (server and nodes); rate of the switch (forwarding rate and
size of its shared memory). Values of hardware parameters are given in [6].
Software parameters deﬁne the characteristics of the network software,
which realize the protocol of video data transmission to clients. An end-to-end
TCP connection between a client and the server is established. Video frames
are encapsulated in TCP segments, and are transmitted along the network to
the clients by IP packets. When IP packets are transmitted over the network,
they undergo random delays, and they can be received with errors or lost. All
these events cause retransmission of appropriate TCP segments and, hence, incur
additional delays. Software parameters are in detail illustrated in [6].

3

Performance Evaluation and Summary

The proposed model allows to estimate a wide set of performance metrics for
video traﬃc transmission over communication networks, e.g., mean number of
IP packets associated with each client in each communication equipment, utilization of each communication equipment, size of required buﬀer in switch or server,
and traﬃc rate and delay in transmitting each frame type. For illustration, we
compute several performance metrics as functions of the number of clients. We
have scaled up the traﬃc parameters so that the traﬃc rate is equal to 2Mbps
for each client.
To evaluate the performance of the considered network, we deﬁne the mean
delivery time of I/P/B frames from the server to a client node as the time
interval between a new I, P, or B frame generated by the server and a correctly
received by the client node. The mean delivery time of each type of frames is
shown in Fig. 2. The mean delivery time of I-frame is considerably greater than
that of B(P)-frame because the size of I-frame is greatly higher than that of
other types. Most of these delivery times is caused by delays in the Ethernet
link for less than 20 clients. The ﬁgure shows that there is considerable amount
of remaining time for frames to be delivered to clients. Let λV OP denote the
generating rate of VOP stream for each client. This remaining time is equal to
1/λV OP = 0.04 sec. And, quality of broadcasting video stream is guaranteed in
the communication network for less number of clients than 20. For more than
25 clients, these delivery times are mostly incurred from delays in fast Ethernet
links and Server, and the metric shows exponential growth.
Fig. 3 shows the utilization of equipments such as fast ethernet link, switching fabric, and server in Fig. 1. The server and the fast Ethernet link have
more considerable load than the other communication equipments. We see that
these coeﬃcients of utilization exhibit unreasonable level for the client number
larger than 25. These equipments are bottlenecks and they can reduce QoS level
considerably.

576

A.F. Yaroslavtsev et al.
1
I
P
B

0.9

0.25

Switch
Server
Fast ethernet

0.8

0.7

0.6
Utilization

Delivery time (msec)

0.2

0.15

0.5

0.4
0.1

0.3

0.2

0.05

0.1
0

5

10

15

20
Number of clients

25

30

35

0

5

10

15

20
Number of clients

25

30

35

Fig. 2. Mean delivery time of ω-frames Fig. 3. The utilization of various commufrom the server to the ﬁrst client node
nication equipment

The results show that the modeled communication network, represented in
Fig. 1, suﬃciently transmits video traﬃc and provides simultaneous broadcasting
of a digital video to 20-25 clients without signiﬁcant loss of QoS. Its characteristics is almost linear until the number of clients increases to more than 25. For
35-40 client nodes, the modeled communication network is shown to be overloaded. Fast Ethernet link and server are bottlenecks in the modeled communication network. Thus the proposed modeling method can be used to investigate
performance of communication networks with more complex topologies.

References
1. Zheng, L., and Zhang, L.: Modeling and Performance Analysis for IP Traﬃc with
Multi-Class QoS in VPN. IEEE MILCOM Vol. 1 (2000) 330-334
2. Tian, T., Li, A.H., Wen, J., and Villasenor, J.D.: Priority Dropping in Network
Transmission of Scalable Video. Int. Conf. on Image Processing Vol. 3 (2000) 400403
3. Wu, D., Hou, Y.T., Zhang, Y.-Q., and Chao, H.J.: Optimal Mode Selection in
Internet Video Communication: an End-to-End Approach. IEEEE ICC Vol. 1 (2000)
264-271.
4. F. Beritelli, G. Ruggeri and G. Schembra: TCP-friendly Transmission of Voice over
IP. IEEE ICC Vol. 2 (2002) 1204-1208
5. de Carvalho Klingelfus, A.L. and Godoy Jr., W.: Mathematical Modeling, Performance Analysis and Simulation of Current Ethernet Computer Networks. 5th IEEE
Int. Conf. on High Speed Networks and Multimedia Commun. (2002) 380-382
6. Yaroslavtsev, A.F., Lee, T.-J., Chung, M.Y., and Choo, H.: Performance Analysis
of IP-Based Multimedia Communication Networks to Support Video Traﬃc.
TR-ECE03-001 Sungkyunkwan University (2003)
7. Overview of the MPEG-4 standard. ISO/IEC JTC1/SC29/WG11 2459 (1998)

