Limited Deﬂection Routing with QoS-Support
HyunSook Kim1 , SuKyoung Lee2 , and JooSeok Song1
1

2

Dept. of Computer Science, Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea,
Graduate School of Information&Communications, Sejong University, Seoul, Korea,

Abstract. In this paper, we propose a Limited Deﬂection Routing with
Wavelength Conversion (LDR with WC) technique which decides alternative paths adaptively according to data burst’s priority. Furthermore,
this technique is extended to support multiple QoS. Performance is evaluated in terms of burst blocking probability as a performance metric. The
proposed LDR with WC enables us to support various QoS in optical
burst switching networks while still maintaining good performance.

1

Introduction

In Optical Burst Switching (OBS) networks, most of the research on contention
resolution has focused on one particular method (e.g. wavelength conversion, deﬂection routing, Fiber Delay Line). Recently, however, several diﬀerent methods
have been integrated and hybrid approaches have emerged. Our scheme considers whether to use wavelength conversion on alternative future paths according
to the QoS priority of each burst, when the alternative path for limited deﬂection
routing is selected. Unlike traditional deﬂection routing, our proposed scheme
determines a node with a wavelength converter to be over an alternative path on
the basis of a certain performance metric, as well as includes limited deﬂection
routing. Considering that generally, only some nodes are capable of converting a
wavelength into diﬀerent one or deﬂection routing in OBS networks, our scheme
has a beneﬁt of reducing the cost of wavelength conversion and the overhead
due to unnecessary deﬂection routing in the overall network. In practice, as we
use more highly eﬃcient functions in switches such as deﬂection routing, wavelength conversion, and optical buﬀering, the overall network performance will
gradually improve, but at a very high cost. To reduce this cost, we assume that
only some nodes have the ability to convert wavelengths, otherwise try to ﬁnd a
cost-eﬃcient alternative path that includes the nodes with wavelength converters
selectively according to the QoS level of the contending burst.

2

Limited Deﬂection Routing with Wavelength
Conversion

In OBS, important approaches for resolving contentions include deﬂection routing and wavelength conversion[1]. If all core nodes have these functions, the
system cost becomes very high. Therefore, we consider the case in which just
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3036, pp. 577–581, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

578

H. Kim, S. Lee, and J. Song
Burst Arrival

No

Contention

Burst Forwarding

Yes
Yes

Sender Check

Retry
after some time

No
No

Alternate
wavelength
Yes

Alternate route

No

Sender
Retransmission

No

Select first path
of deflection
routing table

Yes

Wavelength
Conversion

High Priority
Yes
Select alternative path
Including wavelength
converter

Ncd

Fig. 1. Node with wavelength converter and deﬂection routing function

some nodes have the capability of resolving contentions using the function of
wavelength conversion or deﬂection routing. There are diﬀerent kinds of nodes
within a network as follows : a node which has a wavelength converter, a node
which can perform deﬂection routing in the event of a contention, a node which
can both convert wavelengths and do deﬂection routing, and a node which is
a normal node without wavelength conversion or deﬂection routing capability.
Each core node has a statistical database which has the information of the network state including the network topology, the mean length of a burst, the
average blocking rate over a path, and so on. With the burst blocking rate as
a performance metric, each node tries to resolve contentions according to its
node type. To support QoS, we modify the limited deﬂection routing scheme
proposed in [2] as can be seen in Figure 1. This procedure checks whether the
burst is generated in the congested node by sender check function, and then it
tries wavelength conversion before starting limited deﬂection routing. To apply
our integrated scheme to OBS, it is assumed that the ﬁelds of control packet
include burst priority, oﬀset time, burst size, and so on. When bursts and control packets are generated at an ingress node, the values of these ﬁelds in each
packet are determined.

3

QoS-Support Algorithm of LDR with WC

In this section, we describe how LDR with WC supports various QoS. Since
LDR with WC can choose an optimal alternative path ﬂexibly, it satisﬁes the
QoS while providing several ways of selecting an alternative path. It is very
simple to select the shortest path among the various alternative paths. However,
we aim to choose an cost-eﬃcient path depending on the QoS class of the burst,

Limited Deﬂection Routing with QoS-Support

579

which includes nodes with or without a wavelength converter. We assume that
is zero for any node without a physical wavelength converter. Conversely, a
cwc
i
node with a wavelength converter has a value that is proportional to the number
of available wavelengths.
– Step 1: We collect the paths for which the value of C wc , the sum of the
wavelength conversion cost at each node, cwc
i , is greater than zero. This
means that we select some paths from the deﬂection routing database, on
which the deﬂected burst can pass by one or more wavelength converters.
– Step 2 : For each candidate path gathered in Step 1, we compute the standard deviation of the number of available wavelengths per path. If the standard deviation of any path is smaller than a given threshold, the number
of available wavelengths at each node on the path does not diﬀer significantly. Although one path has several nodes with wavelength converters,
if the number of available wavelengths is concentrated at one node, there
is a high possibility of further blocking. Therefore, we do not consider the
average number of available wavelengths, but the standard deviation of the
number of available wavelengths.
– Step 3 : We examine the mean blocking probability on each candidate path
gathered in Step 1. Since one of the important and challenging issues in
optical networks is to reduce burst loss, we use the burst blocking probability
as a QoS parameter.
– Step 4 : According to the priority of the burst, we must ﬁnd a path by
minimizing the diﬀerence between the respective value of the wavelength
conversion cost, the standard deviation of the path, and the mean blocking
probability, and threshold value.
– Step 5 : The alternative paths obtained by this process are stored in a deﬂection routing table at each node. Information necessary to compute the
paths is also provided from the OAM control packet and the control packet
for each burst. This process of updating the deﬂection routing table is also
periodic, but the frequency is low. If it is high, it will deteriorate the performance of the whole network. That is, frequent updates of information about
network status and the overload of exchanging control packets are always a
trade-oﬀ.

4

Performance Evaluation

Simulations are carried out on NSFNET topology with 14 nodes where the number of wavelengths per link is 6, the average burst length is 1Mb and link bandwidth is 1Gbps. The type of node is determined randomly and the pairs of source
and destination nodes are also selected randomly. At every ingress node, we assume a Poisson burst arrival with a mean rate of λ. When two or more bursts
collide at the same node, one of the following policies is applied : No Conversion
and No Deﬂection routing (NCND), Only Wavelength Conversion (WC), Only
Deﬂection Routing (DR), LDR with Wavelength Conversion (LDRWC). Next,
we deﬁne some QoS classes similar to [3] and the requested blocking probability

580

H. Kim, S. Lee, and J. Song
0.16
NCND
WC
DR
LDRWC

0.14

0.12

Loss rate

0.1

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Traffic load

Fig. 2. Loss rate vs. Traﬃc load

as a QoS parameter is respectively 10-1 , 10-2 , 10-3 , and 10-4 . It is assumed that a
burst is randomly generated with one of the four QoS classes at the edge router.
Performance is evaluated in terms of loss rate and throughput.
Figure 2 shows that the mean loss rate is smaller in LDR with WC than
in WC or DR. In addition, we observe that LDR with WC is more eﬃcient
at high loads because the diﬀerence between the performances at low and high
loads is less than that in the other schemes. That is, the other schemes have a
deteriorated performance at high load compared to that at low load. Accordingly,
LDR with WC can be considered to provide a uniform performance consistently
in the overall network, irrespective of traﬃc ﬂuctuations. Our algorithm is also
simulated with diﬀerent QoS classes. Mean burst loss rate obtained from our
simulation is 0.98 × 10-1 , 1.01 × 10-2 , 1.13 × 10-3 and 1.29 × 10-4 compared with
the required mean burst loss rate for each class: 10-1 , 10-2 , 10-3 and 10-4 , while
respectively keeping throughput of 0.90%, 0.98%, 0.99% and 0.99%. This result
reveals that if we use the LDR with WC algorithm, we can isolate a speciﬁc QoS
class and adequately support the QoS in terms of blocking probability.

5

Conclusions

Simulation results indicated that the proposed LDR with WC scheme achieves
a lower loss rate than existing contention resolution schemes. Moreover, it was
shown that the LDR with WC satisﬁes the burst loss rate required for each class
while still keeping good throughput. Finally, the LDR with WC is more eﬃcient
in a large network environment with high traﬃc load.

References
1. S. Yao, B. Mukherjee, S.J.B. Yoo and S. Dixit: A Uniﬁed Study of ContentionResolution Schemes in Optical Packet-Switched Networks. IEEE Journal of Lightwave Technology, Vol. 21, No. 3, March 2003, p. 672-683.

Limited Deﬂection Routing with QoS-Support

581

2. H.S. Kim, S.K. Lee and J.S. Song: Optical Burst Switching with Limited Deﬂection
Routing Rules. IEICE Trans. on Commun., Vol. E86-B, No. 5, May 2003, p. 15501554.
3. W.H. So, H.C. Lee and Y.C. Kim: QoS Supporting Algorithms for Optical Internet
Based on Optical Burst Switching. Photonic Network Communications, Vol. 5, No.
2, March 2003, p. 147-162.

