Adaptive QoS Framework
for Multiview 3D Streaming
Jin Ryong Kim1 , Youjip Won2 , and Yuichi Iwadate3
1

3

Digital Contents Research Division, Electronics and Telecommunications Research
Institute, Daejeon, Korea
jessekim@etri.re.kr
2
Div. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea
yjwon@ece.hanyang.ac.kr
NHK Science & Technical Research Laboratories, Japan Broadcasting Corporation,
Tokyo, Japan
iwadate.y-ja@nhk.or.jp

Abstract. We present the adaptive QoS framework for multi-view 3D
streaming to deliver the media in time and at the same time, we provide
an optimal solution to minimize the quality variation. We dynamically
adjust the number of polygons in 3D model so that it can support
constant frame rate. We also propose to minimize the frequencies in QoS
transition to provide better user perceptive streaming. As a result, the
stable frame transmission rate is guaranteed and the quality ﬂuctuation
becomes smoother.
Keywords: QoS, Virtual Studio, Interactive TV, Multimedia Streaming, 3D Streaming

1

Introduction

When 3D media move downstream to viewers, transmission rate in the network
will be varied depending on the network traﬃc condition. We propose an adaptive
QoS management scheme to eﬃciently stream time-critical media and optimal
quality adaptation scheduling algorithm for multiview 3D streaming.
NHK[3] developed a 3D model generation system using multiple cameras with
multi-baseline stereo algorithm and the volume intersection method. It is designed to generate 3D model media contents and support any viewpoint. Salehi[5]
proposed an optimal rate smoothing algorithm based on the traﬃc smoothing
technique to achieve minimum variability of the transmission rate. Cuetos et
al.[2] proposed to ﬁnd a shortest path to minimize variability. Nelakuditi et
al.[4] accomplished the maximum reduction of quality variability for layered
CBR video using bidirectional layer selection. This paper extends NHK’s multiple camera system by developing the QoS architecture to develop 3D streaming
system for immersive environment. It is designed for delivering visual contents
from the studio to the consumer platform via the Internet.
This work is in part funded by KOSEF through Statistical Research Center for
Complex System at Seoul National University.
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3036, pp. 519–522, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

520

2

J.R. Kim, Y. Won, and Y. Iwadate

Rate Adaptive Transmission

The idea of our scheme is to monitor the network bandwidth availability and
send the 3D video having appropriate bit rate. Each time slot represents the time
unit for playing a video. Let k be the time slot at tk . C is the number of frames in
a time slot and it is set to C=20 for every time slot to have a ﬁxed frame rate for
every time slot. We deﬁne Wk as a quantitative amount of the available network
bandwidth at each time slot k. We assume that the current Wk is known. Given a
maximum network bandwidth, Wk is ﬂuctuating over a wide range. The available
network bandwidth curve is divided into time slots and quantiﬁed under δ ≥ φ
for k = 1...N where N is the total number of time slots, φk is inner portion of
network bandwidth curve, and δk is outer portion of network bandwidth curve.
Wk is an optimal value at each time slot k from the network available bandwidth
curve. QoS level at time slot k is determined as follow: if available bandwidth
is greater than rE , then QoSk is assigned as ’E’, where QoSk is QoS level at k
and rlv is bit rate for QoS level lv. If available bandwidth is between rE and
rG , then QoSk is assigned as ’G’. If available bandwidth is between rG and rF ,
QoSk is assigned as ’F’. If available bandwidth is between rF and rP , then QoSk
is assigned as ’P’. If available bandwidth is lower than rP , then QoSk is assigned
as ’B’. Qosk of ’E’, ’G’, ’F’, ’P’, and ’B’ can be mapped into quality scale Qk of
5, 4, 3, 2, and 1 for simplicity.

3

Optimizing Quality Variation

Fig. 1(a) illustrates the unstable video transmission if the server transmits only
one quality of the video sequence and Fig. 1(b) illustrates how the video sequence
is adaptively transmitted under variable network bandwidth using our existing
scheme. It also illustrates the quality ﬂuctuation in Fig. 1 (b). Each colored time
slot represents the distinct quality. The basic idea of our extended scheme is
that instead of changing the quality of the time slot at each point of time, we
keep the same quality and raise the quality level at some point. We accomplish
this scheme by prefetching some portions of the next time slot as shown in
Fig. 1(c). This enables us to maximize the usage of available network bandwidth
and minimize the quality variation.

Available Network
Bandwidth (Mbits/sec)

Available Network
Bandwidth (Mbits/sec)

Available Network
Bandwidth (Mbits/sec)

(a)

Time
(b)

Time

Fig. 1. Example of quality optimization

(c)

Time

Adaptive QoS Framework for Multiview 3D Streaming

521

We forecast the future network bandwidth availability using double exponential smoothing based predictor (DESP)[1]. Using DESP, the future available network bandwidth can be forecasted as P (k) = αW (k)+(1−α)(W (k−1)+b(k−1))
and b(k) = γ(P (k) − P (k − 1)) + (1 − γ)b(k − 1) where P (k) is smoothed value
at k and b(k) is a trend equation. α and γ are smoothing and trend constants,
respectively, and α ∈ [0, 1] and γ ∈ [0, 1]. Forecast equation Z(k) is deﬁned as
Z(k + u) = P (k) + ub(k) where u denotes u − period ahead forecast.
We model the quality adaptation for CBR video by replacing re-scheduled
time slots to maintain a uniform quality scale. In formulating optimal quality adaptation, we consider a discrete-time model. We assume that there are
5 seconds of buﬀers in the client. The time slots are scheduled in the server
based on DESP. We set u as 4 to have 4 time slots in the server. We consider
the future available network bandwidth trend as a reference quality scale for
every point of time. Let i be the index and N be the number of time slots
in the server. Then, the mean quality scale of the time slots in the server
N +k

Qi

i=k+1
is Qavg =
. We deﬁne a majority quality scale in the system for
N
selecting optimal quality scale. Let fR (r, k) denotes a set of frequencies of
quality scales where r ∈ {E, G, F, P, B}. Then, the majority quality scale is
Qmajority = max{fR (r, k)}. We now introduce our prefetching algorithm. The
time slots are divided into layers with the same size and it is represented as
granules. When the server transmits the time slot with rescheduled quality scale,
some vacant granules become available. Then, we take advantage of using these
empty spots to prefetch some granules from the next time slot. We keep track of
residual bandwidth RB(k) and it is deﬁned as RB(k) = RB(k − 1) + Wk − rlv .
L(k) denotes the depth of layer at k and it is deﬁned as L(k) = rlv
l where l
denotes the size of granule. e(k) denotes the number of empty granules and
it is e(k) = RB(k)
. Using L(k) and e(k), we prefetch granules in k + 1 as
l
L(k+1)
P ref etch = j=L(k+1)−e(k)+1 Qjk+1 where j denotes the layer index.

4

Performance Experiment

We examine the eﬀectiveness of rate adaptive transmission. To measure the
smoothness of the quality scale, we use average run length(ARL) metric proposed
by [4]. ARL is the metric to measure a sequence of consecutive frames in a layer.
This metric attempts to measure the smoothness in the perceived quality of a
L

ki

nj

where ki is the number
layered video. It is deﬁned by ARL = L1 i=1 j=1
ki
of runs in the ith layer, and nj is the length of the jth run. Fig. 2 illustrates
the performance of rate adaptation transmission scheme between normal and
optimal transmission. Fig. 2(a) illustrates the quality ﬂuctuation with the traﬃc
interferences at 5 Mbps in normal rate adaptive transmission. In Fig. 2(a), the
majority quality scale in this ﬁgure is ’F’ and some transitions are occurred
between ’G’ and ’F’. ARL is 1.263, which is very small run length. As a result,
the quality ﬂuctuation and degradation of perceptual quality is highly occurred.

J.R. Kim, Y. Won, and Y. Iwadate

5

5

4

4

3

3

QoS Level

QoS Level

522

2

1

2

1

0

0
0

20
40
60
80
Frame Sequence (5Mbits/sec UDP Traffic)

100

(a) UDP Traﬃc = 5 Mbits/sec

0

20
40
60
80
Frame Sequence (5Mbits/sec UDP Traffic)

100

(b) UDP Traﬃc = 5 Mbits/sec

Fig. 2. Performance of Normal and Optimal Rate Adaptive Transmission

Fig. 2(b) is the performance of optimal rate transmission with the traﬃc
interferences at 5 Mbps. In Fig. 2(b), ARL is 14.286. Note that ARL is longer
in optimal rate transmission than normal rate adaptation scheme. It is also
noticed that only two quality scales are used and an extremely smoothed result
is accomplished. Overall, the results show that the optimal rate transmission
algorithm exhibits smoother quality ﬂuctuation compared to the normal rate
adaptive transmission scheme.

5

Conclusion

In this paper, we proposed adaptive QoS management to reduce time delay and
guarantee the constant playback rate in delivering high-quality, 3D contents.
We also provided optimal quality adaptation scheme to minimize the quality
ﬂuctuation. Our results show that proposed QoS architecture can eﬀectively
utilize the available network bandwidth and minimize the quality variation.

References
1. C. Chatﬁeld. Time-series forecasting. Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2001.
2. P. de Cuetos and K. Ross. Adaptive rate control for streaming stored ﬁne grained
scalable video. In Proceedings of NOSSDAV 2002. ACM, May 2002.
3. Y. Iwadate, M. Katayama, K. Tomiyama, and H. Imaizumi. Vrml animation from
multi-view images. In ICME2002 IEEE International Conference on Multimedia
and Expo, pages 881–884. IEEE, August 2002.
4. S. Nelakuditi, R. Harinath, E. Kusmierek, and Z.-L. Zhang. Providing smoother
quality layered video stream. In Proceedings of NOSSDAV 2000. ACM, June 2000.
5. J. Salehi, Z.-L. Zhang, J. Kurose, and D. Towsley. Supporting stored video: Reducing
rate variability and end-to-end resource requirements through optimal smoothing.
IEEE/ACM Trans. Networking, 6(4):397–410, August 1998.

