Improvements to Response-Surface Based Vehicle Design
Using a Feature-Centric Approach
1

David Thompson , Srinivasan Parthasarathy2, Raghu Machiraju2,
and Scott Lawrence3
1

Department of Aerospace Engineering and Computational Simulation and Design Center,
Mississippi State University, MS
dst@erc.msstate.edu
2 Computer and Information Science, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH
{raghu,srini}@cis.ohio-state.edu
3 Systems Analysis Branch, Ames Research Center, NASA, Moffett Field, CA
Scott.L.Lawrence@nasa.gov

Abstract. In this paper, we present our vision for a framework to facilitate
computationally-based aerospace vehicle design by improving the quality of the
response surfaces that can be developed for a given cost. The response surfaces
are developed using computational fluid dynamics (CFD) techniques of varying
fidelity. We propose to improve the quality of a given response surface by
exploiting the relationships between the response surface and the flow features
that evolve in response to changes in the design parameters. The underlying
technology, generalized feature mining, is employed to locate and
characterize features as well as provide explanations for feature-feature and
feature-vehicle interactions. We briefly describe the components of our
framework and outline two different strategies to improve the quality of a
response surface. We also highlight ongoing efforts.

1 Introduction
Design studies for advanced aerospace vehicles are typically performed using a suite
of computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulation tools. An integral component of
these design studies is the development of response surfaces describing vehicle
performance characteristics as functions of the various geometrical design parameters.
Essentially, the response surfaces provide a method for abstracting the results of a
simulation [1]. A response surface may be generated using tools of differing fidelity,
i.e., variable complexity modeling [1]. Because of various factors associated with the
simulations, e.g., incomplete convergence of iterative methods, round-off errors, and
truncation errors [2], numerical noise may be present in the response surfaces. When
such noise occurs, the optimization procedure may be slow to converge or converge
to an erroneous local extrema in the design space. This can be partially obviated
through the use of response surface modeling [1]. The response surfaces typically
include force and moment components and consist of the outputs from a series of
CFD simulations. Continuous approximations to the response surfaces are obtained
through a surface fitting process. These continuous approximations are then employed
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3038, pp. 764–770, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

Improvements to Response-Surface Based Vehicle Design

765

in a design algorithm to determine a geometrical parameter set that results in a set of
vehicle characteristics that satisfy specified criteria.
Response surfaces can also be employed to optimize vehicle trajectories. In this
context, the design parameters include vehicle attitude, control surface deflections,
etc. Knowledge about the presence and location of flow features would provide
guidance on judicious use of the available analysis tools as well as provide an
understanding of the level of confidence that can be placed on the computational
results in various regions of the parameter space.
Unfortunately, the quality of a given response surface is difficult to ascertain. This
is primarily due to the fact that development of analysis techniques for CFD data has
not kept pace with our ability to generate massive data sets. To address the difficulties
associated with analyzing evolutionary data generated by large-scale simulations of
complex phenomena, we are developing a framework that we term generalized
feature mining. In the context of this effort, i.e., aerospace vehicle design, we are
interested in how flow features, which influence the performance of the vehicle,
evolve in response to changes in the design parameters. Hence, the features, which
may be static features in the sense that they do not evolve over time, do evolve as the
design parameters are modified.
1.1 Motivation
We can formalize the notion of response surfaces by letting a={a1,…,an} be the set of
n parameters that are considered in the design of a vehicle. These typically include the
geometrical characteristics of the configuration of interest. Let f(a)={ψ1(a),…,ψm(a)}
be m quantities of interest such as force and moment components. Each of the ψι(a)
form a response surface. Vehicle design attempts to find a set of design parameters a
which yields a desirable vector f(a) for certain operational conditions. These response
surfaces are obtained by computing the flow field and the desired quantities ψι for a
given configuration a. It should be noted that some response surfaces, such as
configuration gross weight, depend only on the geometry and material properties and
are independent of the flow simulation.
What is lacking from the approaches described above is a true “cause and effect”
perspective for vehicle design. Changes in the response surfaces ψi(a) are correlated
only to changes in the design parameter vector a. In our approach, we seek
explanations for the behavior of a response surface ψi. Desirable conditions may
occur in due to the presence (or absence) of specific flow phenomena. Understanding
the properties of these phenomena and their interactions with the vehicle or other flow
features provides more insight than correlations with the design parameters. We
believe that these insights will lead to more cost effective methods for estimating the
response surface, thereby reducing design cost.
1.2 Outline of Paper
In Section 2 we describe the basic components of our feature-centric design
framework. Section 3 describes two scenarios which can exploit generalized feature
mining in a design context. In Section 4, we describe related work and in Section 5

766

D. Thompson et al.

we describe on-going work in to develop generalized feature mining technologies.
Finally, we include a summary of the paper in Section 6.

2 Components of Generalized Feature Mining
The generalized feature mining framework will accept as input a set of CFD
simulation results S and the corresponding set of designs A that produced these
results. Additional inputs include a definition of the material properties and a
specification of flight and environmental conditions. There are four components that
must be developed to accomplish our stated objective:
•

•

•
•

Extraction of the feature set: The simulation results S will be processed to
extract features F. Shape descriptors will be used to characterize the features.
Here, a shape descriptor for a given feature is an abstract representation of
the feature including its geometrical and dynamical characteristics.
Explanation of feature-feature and feature-vehicle interactions: In
addition to shape descriptors, generalized feature mining will generate
explanations E correlated with changes in the design a through the evolution
of the feature set F.
Characterization of a response surface: Once a response surface R is
generated, it will be characterized qualitatively and quantitatively using
shape descriptors F and explanations E.
Estimation of the response surface: New points on the response surface
will be estimated based on the response surface characterization. This will
facilitate determination of whether an additional computation needs to be
performed to locally 1) refine the response surface or 2) improve its accuracy
user a higher fidelity method.

3 Application to Aerospace Vehicle Design
We envision that our framework may be employed for aerospace vehicle design via
two different design-of-experiment paradigms. Both approaches are designed to
improve the quality of a response surface that can be generated for a given cost
resulting in a higher confidence design. We describe them below:
•

The quality of a response surface may be improved locally through the use of
higher fidelity methods. An initial response surface is developed using lower
fidelity (less expensive) computational tools. Our framework is then
employed to identify regions of the response surface whose associated
feature catalogs, i.e., flow features, feature-feature interactions, and featurevehicle interactions, suggest that a higher fidelity simulation tool should be
employed. The cost of generating the response surface is decreased since the
number of expensive simulations needed to adequately define the response
surface is reduced.

Improvements to Response-Surface Based Vehicle Design

•

767

The quality of a response surface may be improved locally through
refinement. An initial response surface is developed using a relatively coarse
sampling. Our framework is then employed to identify regions of the
response surface whose associated feature catalogs suggest are undersampled. Additional simulations of appropriate fidelity may be performed at
the identified design points. The cost of generating the response surface is
again decreased since the number of expensive simulations needed to
adequately define the response surface is reduced.

We also suggest that it may be possible to employ the two different paradigms in
tandem to adaptively generate a high quality response surface for a reduced cost.

4 Related Work
In this section we report on work related to the current effort. A timely book on
scientific and engineering data mining techniques edited by Grossman, Kamath,
Kegelmeyer, Kumar, and Namburu [3] discusses many issues relevant to this effort.
Kamath provides a beautiful overview of the area along with some of the inherent
challenges (Chapter 1). Marusic and his associates (Chapter 13) and Han and his
associates (Chapter 14) consider the problem of mining computational fluid dynamics
simulations using standard data mining techniques in conjunction with basic physical
modeling of entities or features. The work by the authors Machiraju, Thompson and
colleagues (Chapter 15) on the EVITA project is a precursor to the current effort. Han
and colleagues (Chapter 25), Sekhar and colleagues (Chapter 26), and Lesage and
Pace (Chapter 24) report on the usefulness of spatial data analysis and survey such
techniques in the context of engineering and scientific applications. Additionally
techniques for mining astronomical data (Chapters 5 and 6) and earth science
observations (Chapter 10) are also reported in this book. However, few of the above
methods actually account for the structural or physical properties of the data. Also,
none of them address the application of these techniques to design.
Yip and Zhao [4] proposed a framework called Spatial Aggregation (SA). They
relied on segmentation (or spatial aggregation) to cluster both physical and abstract
entities and constructed imagistic solvers to gain insights about physical phenomena.
Our paradigms for feature mining have close relationship to the SA framework. The
work by Ester and colleagues [5] on trend detection in spatial databases and spatial
database primitives are also quite relevant to our work on spatial associations. The
work by Graves and colleagues [6] is also relevant but focused mainly on feature
extraction and mining of image data (satellite). It should be noted that the ADAM
framework is extensible and it may be possible to incorporate many of the techniques
described here.

5 Ongoing Work
In this section we describe our preliminary efforts in data mining and effort towards
realizing a framework for generalized feature mining. Our combined preliminary

768

D. Thompson et al.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 1. Point Classification Techniques (a) The Blunt Fin Example (b) A zoomed version

work on feature mining has been reported in the literature [7-9]. It should be noted
that our work spans two application domains, namely CFD and molecular dynamics.
Because of the paucity of space and vehicle design context, we focus on work
applicable to CFD simulation data.
We first describe two distinct feature mining paradigms. The common thread is
that both are bottom-up feature constructions based on underlying physically based
criteria. They consist essentially of similar steps; however, the order of the steps is
different. The first paradigm, based on point classification, is suitable for features
that can be defined and detected with local operators such as shocks and defects. The
second paradigm, based on an aggregate classification, is suitable for features with a
more global influence such as vortices. More details can be found in [8-9].
As an example of the point classification paradigm, we consider shock wave
detection in flow fields. A shock is an abrupt compression wave that may occur in
fluid flows when the velocity of the fluid exceeds the local speed of sound. The
properties of shocks are can be exploited to develop highly discriminating shock
detection algorithms [10]. Figure 1(a) shows a detached oblique shock that wraps
around the blunt fin in the standard blunt fin/flat plate flow field solution. Figure 1(b)
shows the symmetry plane which intersects a lambda-shock.
We recently developed vortex detection and verification algorithms that exploit the
aggregate classification paradigm [11,12]. For the local detection operator, a
combinatorial labeling scheme is employed. Our detection algorithm labels the
velocity vectors at the grid points and identifies grid cells that are likely to contain the
vortex core. Our technique then segments candidate vortex core regions by
aggregating points identified from the detection step. We then classify (or verify)
these candidate core regions based on the existence of swirling streamlines
surrounding them. In Figure 2 we show the vortex cores and a detailed view of the
vortical flow near the fin/plate intersection in the left and center images, respectively.
The aggregate classification paradigm identifies individual points as being probable
candidate points in a feature and then aggregates them. The verification algorithm

Improvements to Response-Surface Based Vehicle Design

769

Fig. 2. Aggregate Classification Techniques. We use the Blunt Fin example again. The first
inset shows the verification algorithm at work. The second inset shows the modeling of the
swirling region as a collection of frusta.

then is applied to the aggregate using physics-based non-local criteria to determine
whether the aggregate is actually a feature. In this case, the binary feature
classification is applied to an aggregate of points. Features that are regional in nature,
such as a vortex, benefit from the aggregate classification approach.
Having extracted the features, we now describe the next step: characterizing them
using geometric shape attributes. The swirling region of a vortex can be characterized
using a sequence of elliptical frusta (a conical frusta with two ends as ellipses) [8].
Starting from the upstream extent of the vortex core, the modeling process seeds a set
of swirling streamlines surrounding the core region. Each elliptical frustum is oriented
along the longest segment of the vortex core that does not curve by more than a userspecified amount. We illustrate the adaptive and hierarchical shape characterization
process in the right image of Figure 2. The elliptical shape of the primary vortex as
well as its curved core provide visual validation of the choice of the geometric
descriptors.
We now describe an ongoing data mining effort that has, to date, been employed
for the discovery of substructures in large molecules. Motifminer, is a novel scalable
toolkit to efficiently discover frequently occuring spatial and structural relationships
in scientific data [13]. The technique relies on range pruning (limits the search for
viable spatial relationships) and candidate pruning (similar to candidate pruning in
association rule mining but with a spatial twist) for pruning the search space of
possible frequent structures. We also rely on fuzzy recursive hashing, a technique
akin to geometric hashing, for rapid matching of frequent spatial relationships (to
determine frequency of occurrence).
In addition feature characterization, much work is being conducted towards
tracking of these swirling regions. Also, work has begun toward determining spatial
associations and using the gained knowledge to glean explanations about the
underlying phenomena.

770

D. Thompson et al.

6 Summary
We have described our vision for a feature-centric framework to improve simulationbased aerospace vehicle design. We proposed two different strategies, both based on
generalized feature mining, to improve the quality of response surfaces employed in
the design process by exploiting the relationships between the response surface and
the flow features that evolve in response to changes in the design parameters. Also
included were brief discussions of the various components of our framework and
current efforts to realize these components. We believe our approach may prove to be
a viable cost effective alternative to current automated design techniques.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

8.

9.
10.
11.
12.
13.

Giunta, A., Golividov, O., Knill, D. L., Grossman, B., Haftka, B., Mason, W., Watson, L.:
Multidisciplinary Design Optimization of Advanced Aircraft Configurations. 15th International Conference on Numerical Methods in Fluid Dynamics, Monterey, CA, June 1996.
Baker, C., Grossman, B., Haftka, R., Mason, W., Watson, T.: High-Speed Civil Transport
Design Space Exploration Using Aerodynamic Response Surface Approximations, J.
Aircraft, 39(2):215–220, 2002.
Grossman, R., Kamath, C., Kegelmeyer, P., Kumar, V., Namburu, R.: Data Mining for
Scientific and Engineering Applications. Kluwer Academic Press, 2001.
K. Yip and F. Zhao: Spatial Aggregation: Theory and Applications. J. of Artificial
Intelligence Research, 5:1–26, Aug 1996.
Ester, R., Frommelt, A., Kriegel, H., Sander, A.: Algorithms for characterization and trend
detection in spatial databases. KDD, 1998.
Ramachandran, R., Conover, H., Graves, S., Keiser, K.: Algorithm development and
mining (ADAM) system for earth science applications. Second Conference on Artificial
th
Intelligence, 80 American Meteorogical Society Annual Meeting, 2000.
Machiraju, R., Parthasarathy, S., Thompson, D. S., Wikins, J., Gatlin, B., Choy, T. S.,
Richie, D., Jiang, M., Mehta, S., Coatney, M., Barr, S., Hazzard, K.: Mining Complex
Evolutionary Phenomena. In H. Kargupta , editor, Data Mining for Scientific and
Engineering Applications. MIT Press, 2003.
Jiang, M., Choy, T. S., Mehta, S., Coatney, M., Barr, S., Hazzard, K., Richie, D.,
Parthasarathy, S., Machiraju, R., Thompson, D., Wilkins, J., Gatlin, B.: Feature Mining
Algorithms for Scientific Data. In Proceedings of SIAM Data Mining Conference, pages
13–24,May 2003.
Thompson, D., Machiraju, R., Jiang, M., Nair, J., Craciun, G., Venkata, S.: Physics-Based
Feature Mining for Large Data Exploration. In IEEE Computing in Science and
Engineering, 4(4):22–30, July-August 2002.
Lovely, D., Haimes, R.: Shock Detection from Computational Fluid Dynamics Results.
AIAA Paper 99-3285, AIAA 14th Computational Fluid Dynamics Conference, June 1999.
Jiang, M., Machiraju, R., Thompson, D.: Novel Approach to Vortex Core Region
Detection, In Proceedings of Joint Eurographics-IEEE TCVG Symposium on
Visualization, pages 217–225, May 2002.
Jiang, M., Machiraju, R., Thompson, D.: Geometric Verification of Swirling Features in
Flow Fields. In Proceedings of IEEE Visualization '02, pages 307–314, October 2002.
Parthasarathy, P., Coatney, M.: Efficient discovery of common substructures in
acromolecules. In Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Data Mining, 2002.

