Adaptive Coupled Physical and Biogeochemical
Ocean Predictions: A Conceptual Basis
P.F.J. Lermusiaux1 , C. Evangelinos2 , R. Tian1 , P.J. Haley1 , J.J. McCarthy1 ,
N.M. Patrikalakis2 , A.R. Robinson1 , and H. Schmidt2
2

1
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, U.S.A.
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, U.S.A.

Abstract. Physical and biogeochemical ocean dynamics can be intermittent and highly variable, and involve interactions on multiple scales.
In general, the oceanic ﬁelds, processes and interactions that matter thus
vary in time and space. For eﬃcient forecasting, the structures and parameters of models must evolve and respond dynamically to new data injected into the executing prediction system. The conceptual basis of this
adaptive modeling and corresponding computational scheme is the subject of this presentation. Speciﬁcally, we discuss the process of adaptive
modeling for coupled physical and biogeochemical ocean models. The
adaptivity is introduced within an interdisciplinary prediction system.
Model-data misﬁts and data assimilation schemes are used to provide
feedback from measurements to applications and modify the runtime behavior of the prediction system. Illustrative examples in Massachusetts
Bay and Monterey Bay are presented to highlight ongoing progress.

1

Introduction

A team of scientists and engineers is collaborating to contribute to the advancement of interdisciplinary ocean science and forecasting through an eﬀective union
of ocean sciences and information technologies, focusing on adaptive modeling and adaptive sampling for coastal physical-biogeochemical-acoustical processes. Accurate ocean predictions and optimized rapid responses are essential
for many oceanic applications, including ﬁsheries, pollution control, hazard management, and maritime and naval operations. Because of multiple uncertainties
in oceanic measurements and dynamical models, these capabilities require assimilation of physical, biogeochemical and acoustical data into dynamical models.
Importantly, the coastal environment can be highly variable and intermittent on
multiple scales, and oceanic variables, parameters and interactions that matter
vary in time and space. Thus, eﬃcient models must evolve during predictions.
This evolution occurs as new data is injected and assimilated into the prediction
system. The data-model comparisons of the data assimilation process then also
involve a direct feedback of the data to the models, forming a dynamic datadriven application system (DDDAS [1]). The focus of this paper is to present and
illustrate a conceptual basis for such adaptive ocean modeling and prediction.
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3038, pp. 685–692, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

686

P.F.J. Lermusiaux et al.

The advances in oceanic numerical models and data assimilation (DA, [2])
schemes of the last decade have given rise to interdisciplinary Ocean Observing
and Prediction Systems (e.g. [3]) that are used in operational settings. The next
generation of such systems will advance the interaction between simulation and
measurement to a new level where the forecast application changes its runtime
behavior to adapt to new measurements. Importantly, the data assimilation community [4] is starting to recognize the importance of this adaptation, from the
correction of model biases to the multi-model data assimilation and automated
evolution of model structures as a function of model-data misﬁts.
Automated objective adaptive modeling allows the optimal use of approximate models for rapidly evolving ocean dynamics. Presently, a model quantity
is said to be adaptive if its formulation, classically assumed constant, is made
variable as a function of data values. Both structural as well as parametric
adaptation are possible. Physical adaptive modeling includes regime transition
(e.g., well-mixed to stratiﬁed) and evolving turbulent mixing parameterizations.
Biogeochemical adaptive modeling includes variations of biological assemblages
with time and space (e.g., variable zooplankton dynamics, summer to fall phytoplankton populations, etc) and evolving biogeochemical rates and ratios. This
is especially important because biogeochemical modeling is in its infancy and
model uncertainties are very large. The adaptive component also greatly facilitates quantitative comparisons of competing physical or biogeochemical models,
thus ultimately leading to better scientiﬁc understanding.
In what follows, Section 2 outlines several properties of ocean forecasting
and DA schemes that are relevant for adaptive modeling. Section 3 describes the
conceptual basis of our implementation of adaptivity. Section 4 illustrates some
initial progress toward such dynamic data-driven systems. Section 5 concludes.

2

Adaptive Ocean Predictions and Data Assimilation

The presently employed interdisciplinary nowcasting and forecasting system is
the Harvard Ocean Prediction System (HOPS, [3]). The DA scheme is Error Subspace Statistical Estimation (ESSE, [5]). The high level architecture involves the
component encapsulation of binaries using XML [6]. HOPS is a portable and
generic system that simulates the 4D ocean dynamics. It has been applied to
many regions [3] and has provided accurate operational forecasts. With adaptive
modeling, the data assimilated by HOPS corrects not only ﬁeld estimates but also
the forecast model itself, leading to a dynamic system. ESSE combines forecasts
and data based on their errors. It captures the uncertainties that matter by focusing on the largest error modes. These dominant errors are evolved by an ensemble
(Monte-Carlo) approach. The ESSE predictions of uncertainties in the forecast
are central to adaptive modeling based on Bayesian system identiﬁcation.
To carry-out adaptive ocean modeling based on dynamic data-driven
schemes, one must account for speciﬁc properties of ocean predictions and data
assimilation. These include: forecasting timelines, data transfers and processing,
measurement models to link data to predictive models, dynamical adjustments,
and multivariate error covariances. These properties are discussed next.

Adaptive Coupled Physical and Biogeochemical Ocean Predictions

687

Fig. 1. Forecasting timelines. Top row: “Observation” or “ocean” time T during which
measurements are made and the real phenomena occur. Middle row: “Forecaster” time
τ k during which the kth forecasting procedure and tasks are started and ﬁnished.
Bottom row: “ith simulation” time ti which covers portions of the real “ocean” time
for each simulation. Multiple simulations are usually distributed on several computers,
including ensembles of forecasts for uncertainty predictions (ESSE).

An important consideration for real-time adaptive modeling relates to the different times involved in ocean forecasting: the observation time, forecaster time
and simulation time (Fig. 1). New observations are made available in batches
(Fig. 1, ﬁrst row) during periods Tk , from the start of the experiment (T0 ) up to
the ﬁnal time (Tf ). During the experiment, for each prediction k (Fig. 1, zoom
in middle row), the forecaster repeats a set of tasks (from τ0k to τfk ). These tasks
include the processing of the currently available data and model (from τ0k to
ti0 ), the computation of r + 1 data-driven forecast simulations (from ti0 to ti+r
f ),
and the study, selection and web-distribution of the best forecasts (from ti+r
to
f
k
τf ). Within these forecast computations, a speciﬁc forecast simulation i (Fig.
1, zoom in bottom row) is executed during ti0 to tif and associated to a “simulation time”. For example, the ith simulation starts with the assimilation and
adaptive modeling based on observations T0 , then integrates the dynamic model
with data assimilation and adaptive modeling based on observations T1 , etc., up
to the last observation period Tk which corresponds to the nowcast. After Tk ,
there are no new data available and the simulation enters the forecasting period
proper, up to the last prediction time Tk+n .
Data-driven ocean applications involve measurement models which link the
measured variables to the model state variables. These measurement models can
be complex, e.g. for linking the measured acoustic travel times to the simulated
ﬁelds of zooplankton concentrations and temperature. In addition, many of the
state variables are usually not observed and inferring the non-observed variables
by dynamical adjustment (e.g. [7]) prior to data assimilation is often crucial.

688

P.F.J. Lermusiaux et al.

This reduces unphysical data shocks/adjustments that would otherwise occur
after assimilation. With a fully multivariate DA scheme such as ESSE, forecast
error covariances can infer the non-observed variables from the observed ones but
it usually remains helpful to impose weak-constraint dynamical adjustments.

3

Implementing Adaptivity

We have been considering the following cases in our design thus far (Fig. 2):
1. running a single, adaptive interdisciplinary model,
2. running a single physical model, coupled to a set of competing biological
models whose parameters are adapted,
3. running competing interdisciplinary models and adapting their parameters.
In all cases, the basis of the adaptation are the misﬁts between model estimates and data. When misﬁts are large, models are adapted. In the latter two
cases, models can be rejected when seen as too inadequate. In the context of
ESSE, expected bounds on misﬁts are given by the forecast uncertainties. Importantly, the computation of uncertainties for adaptive modeling can be based
on small-size ESSE ensembles, one for each candidate models. This is feasible
because error variances often converge faster than covariances. The adaptation
triggers are provided to the software through external ﬁles, regularly checked
at runtime and updated when data-forecast misﬁts warrant a speciﬁc model
structure/parameter modiﬁcation.
For example, in the ﬁrst case (Fig. 2, left), the code may modify the carbonto-chlorophyll ratio, increase the number of state variables (by adding mesozooplankton) or alter the form of a source term. The latter two structural adaptations are cleanly implemented by using C function pointers to choose between
Fortran modules. Physical and biological adaptation must be dynamically compatible but don’t need to be computationally concurrent. In the second case
(Fig. 2, right), the forecasts of competing biogeochemical models are compared
based on their respective data-forecast misﬁts and the best biological functional
forms selected for each time period Ti (Fig. 1). The third case is a combination
of the former two.

Fig. 2. Approaches for adaptive coupled physical-biogeochemical modeling

Adaptive Coupled Physical and Biogeochemical Ocean Predictions

689

We are developing all three cases using a model of concurrent processes directly coupled (using MPI); we are considering the use of a more ﬂexible coupling
framework [8] for the future. Several computational challenges involved in the
implementation of adaptivity for coupled physical-biological forecasts remain to
be researched. They include the optimum operational choice between cases (i)
to (iii), the impact of multiple observing and forecasting timelines, the interaction between parameter and structural adaptivity, the details of the quantitative
schemes which trigger the adaptive switch/behavior, the relationships between
adaptivity and consistent model re-initializations and data assimilation, the different computational meshes, and ﬁnally, the issues of communications costs and
load imbalance in many-to-one scenarios.

4

Initial Progress and Prospectus

Three initial results are now presented. The ﬁrst two are experiments which exercise the concept of adaptive modeling but do not yet utilize the whole dynamic
data-driven computational system. The last result summarizes the development
of a new adaptive biogeochemical computational model.
4.1

Biogeochemical Adaptive Modeling in Massachusetts Bay

The ﬁrst example corresponds to dynamic data-driven predictions of coupled
physical and biological dynamics in Massachusetts Bay during June 2001, as
part of the Assessment of Skill for Coastal Ocean Transients (ASCOT-01) experiment. The goals of ASCOT-01 were to enhance the eﬃciency and extend
the scope of nowcasting and forecasting of oceanic ﬁelds for Coastal Predictive
Skill Experiments and Rapid Environmental Assessments. The limited physical
dimensions of the Bay allowed a relatively comprehensive sampling and forecasting of transient conditions. The focus was on coastal ocean responses to wind
events, including upwellings and subsequent advections of nutrients and organisms. The predictions illustrated by Fig. 3 were carried-out with the Harvard
coupled models, initialization procedure and data assimilation schemes (see [7]).
In June (end of the Spring bloom), the ecosystem is usually in a diﬀerent
state than it is in Aug-Sept (summer/summer-to-fall transition). For June 2001,

Fig. 3. Adaptive biogeochemical modeling during ASCOT-01 in Mass. Bay, June 2001.
Two left panels: June 24 nowcast of surface Chl (mg/m3 ) and corresponding west-east
cross-section. Two right panels: June 27 forecast. All ﬁelds are after adaptation.

690

P.F.J. Lermusiaux et al.

important state variables were the 4D ﬁelds of phytoplankton, zooplankton,
detritus, nitrate, ammonium and chlorophyll-a (e.g. Fig 4), as in Aug-Sept 1998
[7]. However, model parameters needed to be modiﬁed. The parameters whose
values where adapted to the June 2001 conditions included light attenuation
scales, photosynthetic parameters, nutrient uptake constants, phytoplankton and
zooplankton mortality rates, zooplankton grazing parameters, settling/sinking
velocities for phytoplankton/detritus, and re-mineralization timescales.
Once the experiment started, model parameters were adapted to the new
data collected, using the concept of DDDAS. The techniques utilized are illustrated on Fig 3 (right side, cases 2 and 3). Firstly, a set of physical-biological
predictions was executed with a single physical model but diﬀerent biological
model parameters. The adaptive biological parameters were the: photosynthetic
parameters, half saturation constants for ammonium/nitrate uptakes, zooplankton grazing parameters and zooplankton mortality rates. Each member of the set
of predictions was then compared to the new data collected. The biological parameters of the coupled prediction which was the closest to this new data (within
error bounds) were ultimately selected as the best parameters. This process was
repeated several times during the experiment. Secondly, the representation of
the Charles River outﬂow from Boston Harbor was adapted. This was necessary
because the real-time data likely indicated that the outﬂow was larger in June
2001 than in August 1998. The physical strength of the simulated nitrate outﬂow was therefore increased. A sample of the nowcast and forecast chlorophyll
concentration ﬁelds after adaptation are shown on Fig. 3. Note the eﬀects of the
southwesterly winds during the June 23-27 evolution (advection of Chl plume
and increase in sub-surface maxima). Importantly, the adaptive modeling allowed the 2-3 day forecast of the Chl ﬁeld to be better than persistence (assume
oceanic conditions are constant) by about 5 to 20 percent.
4.2

Physical Adaptive Modeling in Monterey Bay

The second example corresponds to the Autonomous Ocean Sampling Network
(AOSN-II) ﬁeld experiment in the Monterey Bay region. It utilized a plethora
of remote and in-situ sensors and platforms including multiple satellite images,
drifters, gliders, moorings, AUV and ship-based data (www.mbari.org/aosn).
These data were assimilated into numerical models and daily predictions of the
ocean ﬁelds and uncertainties were issued. The diﬀerent sensors provided correlated, sometimes redundant, measurements of the environment. Another important component was the multiple predictive models. In addition, multiple
ESSE runs of the same model were carried-out, including stochastic forcings to
represent model uncertainties. These ensembles of ESSE simulations produced
plausible dynamical scenarios for the region.
Prior to the experiment, model parameters were calibrated to historical conditions judged to be similar to the conditions expected in August 2003. Once
the experiment started, several parameters of the physical ocean model were
adapted to the new 2003 data. This adaptation involved the parameterization
of the transfer of atmospheric ﬂuxes to the upper-layers of the sea. As shown on

Adaptive Coupled Physical and Biogeochemical Ocean Predictions

691

Fig. 4. Adaptive physical modeling during AOSN-II in Monterey Bay, August 2003:
surface T on 16 Aug 2003. Left: before adaptation. Right: after adaptation.

Fig. 4, the new values for wind mixing clearly modiﬁed surface properties and
improved the temperature ﬁelds and ocean currents (not shown).
4.3

Generalized Adaptive Biogeochemical Ocean Model

Oceanic states evolve and go through transitions. Eﬃcient predictive models
must have the same behavior. This is especially important for marine ecosystems.
To automate the dynamic switch of biogeochemical parameters and structures,
a new generalized biogeochemical ocean model is being developed [9].
This generalized model is fully modular and ﬂexible (Fig. 5). It has been scientiﬁcally constructed based on a serious study of all possible functional groups
and parameterizations for coastal ecosystems such as Massachusetts Bay and
Monterey Bay (Sects. 4.1,4.2). A general set of state variables and of mathematical structures representing their interactions was selected, based on importance, completeness, eﬃciency and accuracy. This led to a generalized model
(Fig. 5) with the following functional groups of state variables: nutrients (Ni ),
phytoplankton (Pi ), zooplankton (Zi ), detritus (Di ), dissolved organic matter
(DOMi ), bacteria (Bi ) and auxiliary variables (Ai ). Within each functional
group, the number of state variables varies from 1 to n. The parameterizations of
the interactions among state variables is also variable. Changes in their number
at each trophic level can result in automatic changes in these parameterizations.

Fig. 5. Generalized biogeochemical model. Thicker arrows imply more processes.

692

P.F.J. Lermusiaux et al.

With this ﬂexibility, the generalized biogeochemical model can adapt to diﬀerent ecosystems, scientiﬁc objectives and available measurements. Details of its
properties and implementation are given in [9].

5

Conclusion and Future Research

Adaptive modeling based on DDDAS will become essential for interdisciplinary
ocean predictions. The present manuscript provides a conceptual basis and illustrative examples for this adaptation. Opportunities and challenges in adaptive
ocean modeling abound over a wide spectrum of needs, from coastal ocean science to global climate predictions. Adaptive ocean modeling must be anticipated
to accelerate progress in fundamental research and to enable rapid operational
predictions otherwise not possible.
Acknowledgments. We thank W.G. Leslie, the ASCOT-01 and AOSN-II
teams, and M. Armstrong. This project was funded in part from NSF/ITR
(grant EIA-0121263), ONR (grants N00014-01-1-0771, N00014-02-1-0989 and
N00014-97-1-0239) and DoC (NOAA via MIT Sea Grant, grant NA86RG0074).

References
1. Darema, F., et al.: NSF sponsored workshop on dynamic data driven application
systems. Technical report, National Science Foundation (2000)
http://www.cise.nsf.gov/cns/darema/dd_das/dd_das_work_shop_rprt.pdf.
2. Robinson, A., Lermusiaux, P.: Data Assimilation in Models. In: Encyclopedia of
Ocean Sciences. Academic Press Ltd., London (2001) 623–634
3. Robinson, A., et al.: Harvard Ocean Prediction System (HOPS) (2001-2004)
http://oceans.deas.harvard.edu/HOPS/HOPS.html.
4. Stammer, D., Rizzoli, P., Carton, J., Cummings, J., Lermusiaux, P., Moore, A.: A
U.S. plan for sustained data assimilation in ocean research (2004)
http://www.atmos.umd.edu/˜carton/dameeting.
5. Lermusiaux, P., Robinson, A., Haley, P., Leslie, W.: Advanced interdisciplinary data
assimilation: Filtering and smoothing via Error Subspace Statistical Estimation. In:
The OCEANS 2002 MTS/IEEE, Holland Publications (2002) 795–802
6. Evangelinos, C., Chang, R., Lermusiaux, P., Patrikalakis, N.: Rapid real-time interdisciplinary ocean forecasting using adaptive sampling and adaptive modeling and
legacy codes: Component encapsulation using XML. In Sloot, P., et al., eds.: ICCS
2003. Volume 2660 of LNCS., Springer (2003) 375–384
7. Besiktepe, S., Lermusiaux, P., Robinson, A.: Coupled physical and biochemical data
driven simulations of Massachusetts Bay in late summer: real-time and post-cruise
data assimilation. J. of Marine Systems 40 (2003) 171–212. M. Gregoire, P. Brasseur
and P.F.J. Lermusiaux (Eds.).
8. Larson, J.W., Jacob, R.L., Foster, I., Guo, J.: The Model Coupling Toolkit. Technical Report ANL/CGC-007-0401, Argonne National Laboratory (2001)
9. Tian, R., Lermusiaux, P., McCarthy, J., Robinson, A.: The Harvard generalized
biogeochemical ocean model. Technical report, Harvard University DEAS (2004)

