PairAnalyzer: Extracting and Visualizing RNA Structure
Elements Formed by Base Pairing
Daeho Lim and Kyungsook Han*
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Inha University, Inchon 402-751, Korea
Kingtiger1@hanmail.net, khan@inha.ac.kr

Abstract. Most currently known molecular structures were determined by Xray crystallography or Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR). These methods
generate a large amount of structure data, even for small molecules, and consist
mainly of three-dimensional atomic coordinates. These are useful for analyzing
molecular structure, but structure elements at higher level are also needed for a
complete understanding of structure, and especially for structure prediction.
Computational approaches exist for identifying secondary structural elements in
proteins from atomic coordinates. However, similar methods have not been
developed for RNA, due in part to the very small amount of structure data so far
available, and extracting the structural elements of RNA requires substantial
manual work. Since the number of three-dimensional RNA structures is
increasing, a more systematic and automated method is needed. We have
developed a set of algorithms for recognizing secondary and tertiary structural
elements in RNA molecules and in the protein-RNA structures in protein data
banks (PDB). The algorithms were implemented in to a web-based program
called PairAnalyzer. The present work represents the first attempt at extracting
RNA structure elements from atomic coordinates in structure databases. The
regularities in the structure elements revealed by the algorithms should provide
useful information for predicting the structure of RNA molecules bound to
proteins. PairAnalyzer is accessible at http://wilab.inha.ac.kr/PairAnalyzer/.

1 Introduction
Mining biological data in databases has become the focus of increasing interest over
the past several years. However, most data mining in bioinformatics is limited to
sequence data. The structure of a molecule is much more complex, but it is important
as it determines the biological function of the molecule. It is therefore not enough just
to analyze sequence data if one wishes to understand the structure of a molecule more
completely.
We have developed a set of algorithms and a program called PairAnalyzer that
recognize secondary and tertiary RNA structure elements from the three-dimensional
atomic coordinates of protein-RNA complexes obtained from protein data bank
(PDB), which provides a rich source of structural data [1]. The structure data were
first cleaned up to make all the atoms accurately named and ordered, and no atoms
*

To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: khan@inha.ac.kr

M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3036, pp. 279–286, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

280

D. Lim and K. Han

have alternate locations. PairAnalyzer identifies hydrogen bonds and base pairs, and
classifies the base pairs into one of 28 types [2]. These base pairs include noncanonical pairs such as purine-purine pairs and pyrimidine-pyrimidine pairs as well as
canonical pairs such as Watson-Crick pairs and wobble pairs. PairAnalyzer also
extracts RNA sequences to integrate them with the data of base pairs. Secondary or
tertiary structural elements consisting of base pairs are then visualized for user
scrutiny. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt to extracting RNA
structural elements from the atomic coordinates in structure databases. PairAnalyzer
is intended for analyzing RNA structures. However, it can also be used for analyzing
DNA structures since DNA is similar to RNA in hydrogen bonding between
complementary bases.

2

Background of Base Pairs and Base Pairing Rules

An RNA nucleotide consists of a molecule of sugar, a molecule of phosphoric acid,
and a molecule called a base. A base pair is formed when one base is paired with
another base by hydrogen bonds. Base pairs can be classified into canonical base pairs
(Watson-Crick base pairs) and non-canonical base pairs. We consider base pairs of 28
types [2] comprising both canonical and non-canonical base pairs. Fig. 1 shows four
base pairs.

Fig. 1. G-C and A-U Watson-Crick pairs, G-A purine-purine pair, and C-U pyrimidinepyrimidine pair

A base consists of a fixed number of atoms (see Fig 1). These fixed numbers
provide important clues for extracting base pair data and classifying the data into
types of base pairs. Base pairs are formed by hydrogen bonding between atoms of

PairAnalyzer: Extracting and Visualizing RNA Structure Elements

281

base. For example, the Watson-Crick A-U pair has two hydrogen bonds: between N1
of adenine (A) and N3 of uracil (U), and between N6 of A and O4 of U. Thus we can
define the hydrogen bonds that generate base pairs and classify the base pairs. In this
study we define base pair rules to classify base pairs, and divide them into 28 types by
means of these base pair rules.

3 Algorithms
Our algorithm is divided into two parts. The first part extracts information about
secondary and tertiary structure elements of RNA by analyzing data in a PDB file [1].
We use HB-plus [3] to obtain data on all the hydrogen bonds that are present from the
PDB file, and this data is used to generate base pair data. We can then obtain insight
into the secondary or tertiary structure elements of the RNA by analyzing this data
and integrating it with sequence data. The second part derives a visual representation
of the structure of the RNA by integrating the information about structure elements
obtained in the first part with knowledge of the coordinates of the nucleotides. Fig. 2
and 3 show the framework of the first part and second part, respectively. This section
describes the algorithms for the two parts.
3.1 First Part: Extracting Structure Elements of RNA
The first part consists of 5 steps, and the final output is information about the
secondary and tertiary structure elements of the RNA.
Step 1: From a PDB file, extract data on all the hydrogen bonds by using HB-plus [3],
and record this data in Hydrogen Bonds.
Step 2: Extract the RNA sequence data by analyzing the PDB file, and record it in
RNA-SEQ.
Step 3: Extract only those hydrogen bonds that bond one base to another from the
hydrogen bond data obtained in Step 1. Record these hydrogen bonds in the
Base-Base List.
Step 4: Extract those hydrogen bonds that are involved in base pairing, and classify
them into the 28 types by means of the Base pair rules. Record these hydrogen
bonds separately in the Base-Pair List.
Step 5: Integrate the sequence data in RNA-SEQ with the base pairs data in the BasePair List. Match all the nucleotides in RNA-SEQ to the nucleotides in the BasePair List to determine the hydrogen bonding relationships of each nucleotide.

282

D. Lim and K. Han
PROCESS flow
DATA flow

START

Extract
RNA
Sequence

PDB

RNASEQ

Step 2

RNA
Structure
elements
Data

HB-plus

Step 1

Base-Base
List

Hydrogen
Bonds

Base-Pair
List

Make
Base-Base
List

Classify
Base-Pair
List

Integrate
RNA-SEQ
with
Base-Pair List

Step 3

Step 4

Step 5

Fig. 2. Framework for extracting base pairs of 28 types and structure elements of RNA from
PDB

3.2 Second Part: Visualizing RNA Structure
The 3 steps of the second part are outlined as follows.
Step 1: Obtain the 3D coordinate of every nucleotide by computing the average
coordinate values of all the atoms of the nucleotide.
Step 2: Integrate the 3D coordinates of nucleotides with structure elements, and
derive the connectivity relation among nucleotides.
Step 3: Represent the structure of the RNA visually by combining the information
about structure elements with the coordinate values of the nucleotides.
PROCESS flow
DATA flow

START

Nucleotides
Coordinate
List

PDB

Extract
Nucleotides
Coordinate

Step 1

RNA
Structure
elements
Data

Structure
Coordinate
List
Integrate
Coordinates
with
Structure
elements
data

Step 2

Fig. 3. Framework for visualizing the RNA structure

Visual
Structure

Visualize
Structure

Step 3

PairAnalyzer: Extracting and Visualizing RNA Structure Elements

283

4 Experimental Results
PairAnalyzer is written in Microsoft Visual C#, and is executable within a Web
browser on any PC with Windows 2000/XP/Me/98/NT 4.0 as its operating system.
PairAnalyzer takes as input PDB file and HB2 file. As output, PairAnalyzer produces
a drawing of RNA structure elements and information about base pairs. Fig. 4
displays the tertiary structure of tRNA (PDB identifier: 1EHZ) derived by
PairAnalyzer. Nodes of the drawing indicate nucleotides of RNA and the blue lines
indicate that nucleotides are connected in the RNA backbone. In addition, the red
dotted lines indicate that two bases are hydrogen bonded. The text window in the left
shows the information about the nucleotide sequence, base pairs and their types of
tRNA.

Fig. 4. Interface of PairAnalyzer with the main window and visual panel

Although PairAnalyzer is intended for analyzing RNA structures, it can be used for
analyzing DNA structures since DNA is similar to RNA in hydrogen bonding
between complementary bases. Fig. 5 shows a small structure of Z-DNA (PDB
identifier: 249D) obtained by PairAnalyzer. Z-DNA is a left-handed structure [4].
PairAnalyzer can extract structure elements of left-handed nucleic acids as well as
regular nucleic acids because its structure analysis is based on extracting base pairs
formed by hydrogen bonds.

284

D. Lim and K. Han

Fig. 5. Z-DNA structure (PDB identifier: 239D) extracted by PairAnalyzer

PairAnalyzer can extract a structure involving multiple RNA stands. The structure
shown in Fig. 6 has two RNA chains (chains M and N), extracted from a protein-RNA
complex (PDB identifier: 1DFU). It can also identify base-triplets. A base-triplet is a
tertiary RNA interaction in which a base pair interacts with a third base [5].

Fig. 6. Structure to have 2 RNA chains (chains M and N), extracted from a protein-RNA
complex (PDB identifier: 1DFU)

Programs like Rasmol [6] and Mol-Script [7] can generate the structure of a
molecule from the three-dimensional coordinates of its atoms. There are also
programs that represent secondary or tertiary structure elements in a plane. However
with programs like Rasmol and Mol-Script one cannot easily obtain information about
each nucleotide in the RNA and the binding relations between the nucleotides,
because these programs represent the structures of molecules at the atomic level. In
addition programs that visualize structure elements in a plane have difficulty
representing tertiary structure elements. On the other hand, our algorithm uses the
three-dimensional coordinates of the nucleotides to generate secondary and tertiary
structures. Hence it produces stereoscopic RNA structures. Moreover it provides not
only the configuration of a given RNA molecule but also the bonding relations and
types of base pairs between the nucleotides.
Fig. 7 shows the tertiary structure of domain V of 23S ribosomal RNA (PDB
identifier: 1FFZ) drawn by PairAnalyzer. This structure consists of many nucleotides

PairAnalyzer: Extracting and Visualizing RNA Structure Elements

285

and has complex structure elements. If input data in PDB file is given, PairAnalyzer
can analyze any structure and extract information about structure elements.

Fig. 7. Tertiary structure of domain V of 23S ribosomal RNA (PDB identifier: 1FFZ) extracted
and visualized by PairAnalyzer

5 Conclusion
Up to now, extracting secondary and tertiary structure elements of RNA from the
three-dimensional atomic coordinates has relied upon a substantial amount of manual
work. In this study we have developed a set of algorithms for recognizing secondary
or tertiary structure elements of RNA in protein-RNA complexes obtained from PDB.
Experimental tests showed that our algorithm is easily capable of automatically
extracting base-triplet structures and all secondary or tertiary structure elements
formed by hydrogen bonding. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt to
extract and visualize RNA structure elements from the atomic coordinates in structure
databases. We expect it to help research on RNA structures, and the regularities in the
structure elements discovered should provide useful information for predicting the
structure of RNA molecules bound to proteins.

286

D. Lim and K. Han

Acknowledgements. This work was supported by the Ministry of Information and
Communication of Korea under grant 01-PJ11-PG9-01BT00B-0012.

References
1. Berman, H.M., Westbrook, J., Feng, Z., Gilliland, G., Bhat, T.N., Weissig, H., Shindyalov,
I.N., Bourne, P.E.: The Protein Data Bank. Nucleic Acids Res. 28 (2000) 235-242
2. Tinoco, Jr.: The RNA World (R. F. Gesteland, J. F. Atkins, Eds.), Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press, (1993) 603-607
3. McDonald, I.K. Thornton, J.M.: Satisfying Hydrogen Bonding Potential in Proteins. J.
Mol.Biol. 238 (1994) 777-793
4. Lubert Stryer.: Biochemstry. 4edn. W.H.Freeman, New York (1995)
5. Akmaev, V.R., Kelley, S.T., Stormo, G.D.: Phylogenetically enhanced statistical tools for
RNA structure prediction. Bioinformatics 16 (2000) 501-512
6. Roger Sayle : RASMOL, http://www.umass.edu/microbio/rasmol/
7. Per J. Kraulis: MOLSCRIPT: a program to produce both detailed and schematic plots of
protein structures, Journal of Applied Crystallography. 24 (1991), pp 946-950.

