Automatic Extraction of Hierarchical Urban
Networks: A Micro-Spatial Approach
Rui Carvalho1 and Michael Batty2
1

The Bartlett School of Graduate Studies
rui.carvalho@ucl.ac.uk,
2
Centre for Advanced Spatial Analysis
University College London,
1-19 Torrington Place, London WC1E 6BT, UK
m.batty@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract. We present an image processing technique for the identiﬁcation of ’axial lines’ [1] from ridges in isovist ﬁelds ﬁrst proposed by Rana
[2,3]. These ridges are formed from the maximum diametric lengths of the
individual isovists, sometimes called viewsheds, that make up the isovist
ﬁelds [4]. We discuss current strengths and weaknesses of the method,
and show how it can be implemented easily and eﬀectively.

1

Axial Maps as Skeletons for Urban Morphology

Axial lines are used in ’space syntax’ to simplify connections between spaces
that make up an urban or architectural morphology. Usually they are deﬁned
manually by partitioning the space into the smallest number of largest convex
subdivisions and deﬁning these lines as those that link these spaces together.
Subsequent analysis of the resulting set of lines (which is called an ‘axial map’)
enables the relative nearness or accessibility of these lines to be computed. These
can then form the basis for ranking the relative importance of the underlying
spatial subdivisions and associating this with measures of urban intensity, density, or traﬃc ﬂow [1,5,6]. Progress has been slow at generating these lines automatically. Lack of agreement on their deﬁnition and lack of awareness as to how
similar problems have been treated in ﬁelds such as pattern recognition, robotics
and computer vision have inhibited explorations of the problem and only very
recently have there been any attempts to evolve methods for the automated
generation of such lines [7,8,4].
One obvious advantage of a rigorous algorithmic deﬁnition of axial lines is
the potential use of the computer to free humans from the tedious tracing of lines
on large urban systems. Perhaps less obvious is the insight that mathematical
procedures may bring about urban networks, and their context in the burgeoning body of research into the structure and function of complex networks [9,10].
Indeed, on one hand urban morphologies display a surprising degree of universality [11,12,13,14,15], but little is yet known about the relation between this
observed universality and the transport and social networks embedded within
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3038, pp. 1109–1116, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

1110

R. Carvalho and M. Batty

urban space (but see [16,17]). On the other hand, axial maps are a substrate for
human navigation and rigorous extraction of axial lines may substantiate the
development of models for processes that take place on urban networks which
range from issues covering the eﬃciency of navigation, and the vulnerability of
network nodes and links to failure, attack and related crises.
Axial maps can be regarded as members of a larger family of axial representations (often called skeletons) of 2D images. There is a vast literature on this,
originating with the work of Blum on the Medial Axis Transform (MAT) [18,19].

2

Axial Lines as Ridges on Isovist Fields

An isovist is the space deﬁned around a point (or centroid) from which an object
can move in any direction before it encounters some obstacle. We shall see that
the paradigm shift from the set of maximal discs inside the object (as in the
MAT) to the maximal straight line that can be ﬁt inside its isovists holds a key
to understanding what axial lines are.
As in ’space syntax’, we simplify the problem by eliminating terrain elevation
and associate each isovist centroid with a pair of horizontal coordinates (x, y)
and a third coordinate - the length of the longest straight line across the isovist
at each point which we deﬁne on the lattice as ∆max
i,j . We extend previous work by
Rana [3], where he noted that ”the ridge lines give an indication of the disposition
of the axial lines”, by using a modiﬁcation of the Medial Axis Transform [18,
19] and the Hough Transform [20]. The hypothesis states that all axial lines are
ridges on the surface of ∆max
i,j . The reader can absorb the concept by ’embodying’
herself in the ∆max
landscape:
movement along the perpendicular direction to an
i,j
max
axial line implies a decrease along the ∆max
i,j surface; and ∆i,j is an invariant,
both along the axial line and along the ridge. The hypothesis goes further to
predict that the converse is also true, i.e., that up to an issue of scale, all ridges
on the ∆max
i,j landscape are axial lines.
Here we sample isovist ﬁelds by generating isovists for the set of points on
a regular lattice [2,21,8,22]. Speciﬁcally, we are interested in the isovist ﬁeld
deﬁned by the length of the longest straight line across the isovist at each mesh
point, (i, j). This measure is denoted the maximum diametric length, ∆max
i,j [4],
or the maximum of the sum of the length of the lines of sight in two opposite
directions [8, p 204]. To simplify notation, we will prefer the former term.
First, we generate a Digital Elevation Model (DEM) [23] of the isovist ﬁeld,
where ∆max
is associated with mesh point (i, j) [21,8]. Our algorithm detects
i,j
ridges by extracting the strict maxima (i.e. a cell with value stricly greater than
any of its nearest neighbours [24]) of the discrete DEM. Next, we use an image
processing transformation (the Hough Transform) on a binary image containing
the local maxima points which lets us rank the detected lines in the Hough
parameter space. Finally, we invert the Hough transform to ﬁnd the location of
axial lines on the original image.
The process of using the HT to detect lines in an image involves the computation of the HT for the entire image, accumulating evidence in an array for

Automatic Extraction of Hierarchical Urban Networks

1111

b)

a)

100

100

400
200
0
60

50

60

50
40

40

20

20
0

0

0

0

Fig. 1. (a) Plot of the Maximum Diametric Length (∆max
i,j ) isovist ﬁeld for an ’H’
shapped open space structure. (b) Zoom-in (detail) of (a) showing the ridges on the
longer arms of the ’H’ shape. Arrows point to the ridges o nboth ﬁgures.

events by a voting (counting) scheme and searching the accumulator array for
peaks which hold information of potential lines present in the input image. The
peaks provide only the length of the normal to the line and the angle that the
normal makes with the y-axis. They do not provide any information regarding
the length, position or end points of the line segment in the image plane [25].
Our line detection algorithm starts by extracting the point that has the largest
number of votes on parameter space, which corresponds to the line deﬁned by
the largest number of collinear local maxima of ∆max
i,j , and proceeds by extracting lines in rank order of the number of their votes on parameter space. One of
us [4] has previously proposed rank-order methods as a rigorous formulation of
the procedure originally outlined of “ﬁrst ﬁnding the longest straight line that
can be drawn, then the second longest line and so on ( . . . )” [1, p 99].
To test the hypothesis that axial lines are equivalent to ridges on the ∆max
i,j
surface, we start with a simple geometric example: an ‘H’ shaped open space
structure. As illustrated in Fig. 1, axial lines are equivalent to ridges for this
simple geometric example, if extended until the borders on the open space. Indeed, one conﬁrms this both in Fig. 1a) and Fig. 1b) by properly zooming-in the
∆max
i,j landscape. Next, we aim at developing a method to extract these ridges as
lines by sampling. In Fig. 2a), we plot the local maxima of the discretized ∆max
i,j
landscape, which are a discretized signature of the ridges on the ∆max
contini,j
uous ﬁeld. Figure 2b) is the Hough transform of Fig. 2a) where θ goes from 0˚
to 180˚ in increments of 1˚. The peaks on Fig. 2b) are the maxima in parameter
space, (ρ, θ), which are ranked by height in Fig. 2c). Finally, the ranked maxima
in parameter space are inverted onto the coordinates of the lines in the original
space, yielding the detected lines which are plotted on Fig. 2d).
Having tested the hypothesis on a simple geometry, we repeat the procedure
for the French town of Gassin —see Fig. 3. We have scanned the open space
structure of Gassin [1, p 91] as a binary image and reduced the resolution of the
scanned image to 300 dpi (see inset of Fig. 3). The resulting image has 171 × 300
points, and is read into a Matlab matrix.

1112

R. Carvalho and M. Batty

Fig. 2. (a) Local maxima of the Maximum Diametric Length (∆max
i,j ) for the ’H’ shaped
structure in Fig. 1. (b) Hough transform of (a). (c) rank of the local maxima of the
surface in (b). (d) The Hough transform is inverted and the 6 highest peaks in (c)
deﬁne the axial lines shown.

Next we use a ray-tracing algorithm in Matlab (angle step=0.01˚) to determeasure for each point in the mesh that corresponds to open
mine the ∆max
i,j
space. The landscape of ∆max
is plot on Fig. 3. To extract the ridges on this
i,j
landscape, we determine the local maxima. Next, we apply the Hough Transform, as in the ‘H’ shape example, and invert it to determine the 6 ﬁrst axial lines
(see Fig. 4). We should alert readers to the fact that as we have not imposed any
boundary conditions on our deﬁnition of lines from the Hough Transform, three
of these lines intersect building forms illustrating that the technique is identifying the dominant linear features in image space but ignoring any obstacles which
interfere with the continuity of these linear features. We consider that this is a
detail that can be addressed in subsequent development of the approach.

3

Where Do We Go from Here?

Most axial representations of images aim at a simpliﬁed representation of the
original image, in graph form and without the loss of morphological information.
Therefore, most shape graphs are invertible –a characteristic not shared with
axial maps, as the original shape cannot be uniquely reconstructed from the

Automatic Extraction of Hierarchical Urban Networks

1113

Fig. 3. Plot of the Maximum Diametric Length (∆max
i,j ) isovist ﬁeld for the town of
Gassin. The inset shows the scanned image from [1]

latter. Also, metric information on the nodes length is often stored together with
the nodes (the latter often being weighted by the former), whereas it is discharged
in axial maps. On the other hand, most skeletonizations aim at a representation
of shape as the human observer sees it and therefore aim mostly at small scale
shapes (images), whereas the process of generating axial maps assumes that the
observer is immersed in the shape and aims at the representation of large scale
shapes (environments). Nevertheless, we have shown that the extraction of axial
lines can be accomplished with methods very similar to those routinely employed
in pattern recognition and computer vision (e.g. the Medial Axial Transform and
the Hough Transform).
The hypothesis has successfully passed the test of extracting axial lines both
for a simple geometry and for a classical case study in Space Syntax – the town of
Gassin. Indeed, l2,detected , l3,detected , l4,detected , l5,detected and l6,detected in Fig. 4
all match reasonably well lines originally drawn [1]. Diﬀerences between original
and detected lines appear for l3,original and l3,detected , where the mesh we used
to detect lines was not ﬁne enough to account for the detail of the geometry
and the HT counts collinear points along a line that intersects buildings, and
for l5,original and l5,detected , where the original solution is clearly not the longest
line through the space.
Fig. 4 highlights two fundamental issues. First, deﬁning axial lines as the
longest lines of sight may lead to unconnected lines on the urban periphery. The

1114

R. Carvalho and M. Batty

Fig. 4. (a) Axial lines for the town of Gassin [1]. (b) Local maxima of ∆max
i,j (squares)
and lines detected by the proposed algorithm.

problem is quite evident with line l1,original in Fig. 4a) [1, p 91], where the solution to the longest line crossing the space is l1,detected —see Fig. 4b). Thus, the
price to pay for a rigorous algorithm may be that not all expected connections are
traced. The second problem is an issue of scale, as one could continue identifying more local ridges with increasing image resolution (see discussion in [4]). We
believe that the problem is solved if the width of the narrowest street is selected
as a threshold for the length of axial lines detected from ridges on isovist ﬁelds.
Only lines with length higher than the threshold are extracted. We speculate that
this satisﬁes almost always the condition that all possible links are established,
but are aware that more lines may be extracted automatically than by humanprocessing. Again, this seems to be the price to pay for a rigorous algorithm.
By being purely local, our method gives a solution to the global problem of
tracing axial maps in a time proportional to the number of mesh points. Thus,
algorithm optimization is akin to local optimization (mesh placement and raytracing algorithm). Although most of the present eﬀort has been in testing the
hypothesis, it is obvious that regular grids are largely redundant. Indeed, much
optimization could be accomplished by generating denser grids near points where
the derivative of the boundary is away from zero (e.g. turns) to improve detection at the extremities of axial lines. Also, the algorithm could be improved by
generating iterative solutions that would increase grid and angle sweep resolutions until a satisfactory solution would be reached or by parallelizing visibility
analysis calculations [26].
Our approach to axial map extraction is preliminary as the HT detects only
line parameters while axial lines are line segments. Nevertheless, there has been

Automatic Extraction of Hierarchical Urban Networks

1115

considerable research eﬀort put into line segment detection in urban systems,
generated mainly by the detection of road lane markers [27,28], and we are
conﬁdent that further improvements involve only existing theory.
This note shows that global entities in urban morphology can be deﬁned
with a purely local approach. We have shown that there is no need to invoke the
concept of convex space to deﬁne axial lines. By providing rigorous algorithms
inspired by work in pattern recognition and computer vision, we have started
to uncover problems implicit in the original deﬁnition (disconnected lines at
boundary, scale issues), but have proposed working solutions to all of them
which, we believe will engage other disciplines in the eﬀort of gaining insight into
urban morphology. Finally, we look with considerable optimism to the automatic
extraction of axial lines and axial maps in the near future and believe that
automatic processing of medium to large scale cities may be only a few years
away from being implemented on desktop computers.
Acknowledgments. RC acknowledges generous ﬁnancial support from Grant
EPSRC GR/N21376/01 and is grateful to Bill Hillier and Alan Penn for
valuable comments. The authors are indebted to Sanjay Rana both for the
original idea that axial lines appear as ridges in the MDL isovist ﬁeld
and for using his Isovist Analyst Extension (see http://www.geog.le.ac.uk/
sanjayrana/software isovistanalyst.htm) to provide independent corroboration
on the ‘H’ test problem.

References
1. Hillier, B., Hanson, J.: The Social Logic of Space. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge (1984)
2. Benedikt, M.: To take hold of space: isovists and isovist ﬁelds. Environ. Plan. B 6
(1979) 47–65
3. Rana, S.: Isovist analyst extension for arcview 3.2 (2002)
4. Batty, M., Rana, S.: The automatic deﬁnition and generation of axial lines and
axial maps. Environ. Plan. B 31 (2004) forthcoming.
5. Hillier, B., Penn, A., Hanson, J., T, T.G., Xu, J.: Natural movement: or, conﬁguration and attraction in urban pedestrian movement. Environ. Plan. B 20 (1993)
29–66
6. Peponis, J., Ross, C., Rashid, M.: The structure of urban space, movement and
co-presence: The case of atlanta. Geoforum 28 (1997) 341–358
7. Peponis, J., Wineman, J., Bafna, S., Rashid, M., Kim, S.: On the generation of
linear representations of spatial conﬁguration. Environ. Plan. B 25 (1998) 559–576
8. Ratti, C.: Urban analysis for environmental prediction. Phd thesis, University of
Cambridge (2001)
9. Albert, R., Barab´
asi, A.L.: Statistical mechanics of complex networks. Rev. Mod.
Phys. 74 (2002) 47–97
10. Newman, M.E.J.: The structure and function of complex networks. SIAM Rev.
45 (2003) 167–256
11. Batty, M., Longley, P.: Fractal Cities. Academic Press, San Diego, CA (1994)

1116

R. Carvalho and M. Batty

12. Carvalho, R., Penn, A.: Scaling and universality in the micro-structure of urban
space. Physica A 332 (2004) 539–547
13. Frankhauser, P.: La Fractalit´e des Structures Urbaines. Anthropos, Paris (1994)
14. Makse, H.A., Havlin, S., Stanley, H.E.: Modelling urban growth patterns. Nature
377 (1995) 608–612
15. Makse, H.A., Jr, J.S.A., Batty, M., Havlin, S., Stanley, H.E.: Modeling urban
growth patterns with correlated percolation. Phys. Rev. E 58 (1998) 7054–7062
16. Latora, V., Marchiori, M.: Is the boston subway a small-world network? Physica
A 314 (2002) 109–113
17. Chowell, G., Hyman, J.M., Eubank, S., Castillo-Chavez, C.: Scaling laws for the
movement of people between locations in a large city. Phys. Rev. E 68 (2003)
066102
18. Blum, H.: Biological shape and visual science (part 1). J. Theor. Biol. 38 (1973)
205–287
19. Blum, H., Nagel, R.N.: Shape description using weighted symmetric features.
Pattern Recogn. 10 (1978) 167–180
20. Illingworth, J., Kittler, J.: A survey of the hough transform. Computer Vision,
Graphics, and Image Processing 44 (1988) 87–116
21. Batty, M.: Exploring isovist ﬁelds: space and shape in architectural and urban
morphology. Environ. Plan. B 28 (2001) 123–150
22. Turner, A., Doxa, M., O’Sullivan, D., Penn, A.: From isovists to visibility graphs:
a methodology for the analysis of architectural space. Environ. Plan. B 28 (2001)
103–121
23. Burrough, P.A., McDonnell, R.A.: Principles of Geographical Information Systems.
Spatial Information Systems and Geostatistics. Oxford University Press (1998)
24. Niblack, C., Gibbons, P., Capson, D.: Generating skeletons and ceterlines from the
distance transform. CVGIP: Graphical Models and Image Processing 54 (1992)
420–437
25. Gonzalez, R.C., Woods, R.E.: Digital Image Processing. Addison-Wesley (1992)
26. Mills, K., Fox, G., Heimbach, R.: Implementing an intervisibility analysis model
on a parallel computing system. Computers & Geosciences 18 (1992) 1047–1054
27. Kamat-Sadekar, V., Ganesan, S.: Complete description of multiple line segments
using the hough transform. Image and Vision Computing 16 (1998) 597–613
28. Pomerleau, D., Jochem, T.: Rapidly adapting machine vision for automated vehicle
steering. IEEE Expert 11 (1996) 19–27

