Segmentation of Fundus Eye Images Using
Methods of Mathematical Morphology for
Glaucoma Diagnosis
1
´
Katarzyna St¸apor1 , Adam Switonski
, Radim Chrastek2 , and
Georg Michelson3
1

Institute of Computer Science, Silesian University of Technology, Akademicka 16,
PL-44-100 Gliwice, Poland,
2
Chair for Pattern Recognition, Friedrich-Alexander-University
Erlangen-Nuremberg, Martenstrasse 3, D-91058 Erlangen, Germany,
3
Department of Ophthalmology, Friedrich-Alexander-University
Erlangen-Nuremberg Schwabachanlage 6, D-91054 Erlangen, Germany
delta@ivp.iinf.polsl.gliwice.pl

Abstract. In this paper the new method for automatic segmentation of
cup and optic disc in fundus eye images taken from classical fundus camera is proposed. The proposed method is fully based on techniques from
mathematical morphology. Detection of cup region makes use of watershed transformation with markers imposed, while optic disk is extracted
based on geodesic reconstruction by dilation. The obtained results are
encouraging.

1

Introduction

Glaucoma is a group of diseases characterized by the proceeding optic nerve
neuropathy which leads to the rising diminution in vision ﬁeld, ending with
blindness. The correct optic disk (i.e. the exit of the optic nerve from the eye
known as ”blind spot”) structure contains: neuroretinal rim of pink color and
centrally placed yellowish cup [5]. The shape of the optic disc is more or less circular, interrupted by the outgoing vessels. Its size varies from patient to patient.
Its diameter lies between 40 and 60 piksels on 640x480 color photographs. The
cup is the area within the optic disc where no nerve ﬁbers and blood vessels are
present and in 3D image appears as an excavation. The neuroretinal rim is the
area between optic disc border and cup border.
Glaucomatous changes in retina appearance embrace various changes in neuroretinal rim and cup, as the result of nerve ﬁbers damages.
Optic disc structures evaluation is one of the most important examinations
in glaucoma progress monitoring and diagnosis. Searching for glaucoma damages
during routine examination is not an easy task and gives uncertain results even
with the experienced ophthalmologist [5]. The existing methods of qualitative
analysis are very subjective, while quantitative methods of optic disc morphology evaluation (cup to disc ratio, neuroretinal rim area) do not result in full
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3039, pp. 41–48, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

42

K. St¸apor et al.

diagnosis. The new, quantitative methods based on scanning-laser-tomography
are expensive and accessible only in specialized ophthalmic centers.
Thus, there is a need for cheaper and more objective methods that enable
automatic classiﬁcation of digital fundus eye images (fei) into normal and glaucomatous ones. The ﬁrst, but most important step in all such methods is automatic
segmentation of optic disc structures from fei.
In the existing approaches to automatic segmentation of fei for supporting
glaucoma examinations researchers focused on the detection of the optic disk.
These methods make use of Hough transform [8], active contours [6], tools from
mathematical morphology [12].
In [4] important proofs that shape of the eye cup and its numerical characteristics correlate with progress of glaucoma disease were presented.
As far as we know, no automatic method for the segmentation of cup from
fei has been reported.
This paper presents the new method for automatic segmentation of cup region
as well as optic disc from fei taken from classical fundus camera. The proposed
method is fully based on techniques from mathematical morphology: mainly
watershed transformation and geodesic reconstruction.

2

Some Grey-Level Morphological Operators

In this section we brieﬂy deﬁne the basic morphological operators used in this
paper (for a comprehensive presentation see [1,11]). Let Df and DB be subsets
of Z 2 and T = {tmin , ..., tmax } be an ordered set of gray levels. A grey-level
image f can be deﬁned as a function:
f : Df ⊂ Z 2 → T,

(1)

Furthermore, we deﬁne another image known as a structuring element B:
B : DB ⊂ Z 2 → T,

(2)

We will restrict to ﬂat, symmetric structuring elements B. We can now write the
four basic morphological operators: erosion, dilation, opening and closing as:
E B (f )(x, y) =

{f (x − j, y − k)},

(3)

sup {f (x − j, y − k)},

(4)

inf
(j,k)∈DB

DB (f )(x, y) =

(j,k)∈DB

OB (f )(x, y) = DB (E B (f )(x, y)),
B

B

B

C (f )(x, y) = E (D (f )(x, y)),

(5)
(6)

Symmetric, morphological gradient of an image f can be deﬁned as:
grad(f )(x, y) = DB (f )(x, y) − E B (f )(x, y),

(7)

Segmentation of Fundus Eye Images

43

Furthermore, we shall deﬁne geodesic transformation of an image f : geodesic
erosion and dilation of size n:
B,g
B,g
B,g
((Ec(n−1)
(f ))(x, y)
(f )(x, y) = Ec(1)
Ec(n)

(8)

B,g
Ec(1)
(f )(x, y) = sup{E B (f )(x, y), g(x, y)}

(9)

B,g
B,g
B,g
(f )(x, y) = Dc(1)
((Dc(n−1)
(f ))(x, y)
Dc(n)

(10)

B,g
Dc(1)
(f )(x, y) = inf {DB (f )(x, y), g(x, y)}

(11)

reconstruction by dilation and reconstruction by erosion:
B,g
(f )(x, y)
RB,f (g)(x, y) = Dc(∞)

(12)

B,g
R∗B,f (g)(x, y) = Ec(∞)
(f )(x, y)

(13)

B,g
B,g
where Dc(∞)
(Ec(∞)
) is the limit which is obtained by iterating unit geodesic
erosion of f above (under) g until stability is reached, i.e.:
B,g
B,g
(f )(x, y) = Dc(i+1)
(f )(x, y)
Dc(i)

(14)

Furthermore, we shall make use of the watershed transformation, for which
we do not give a mathematical deﬁnition here.

3
3.1

Detection of Cup Region Based on Watershed
Transformation
The Color Space

Having compared several color spaces, we found the contours of the cup region
to appear most continuous and most contrasted against the background in the
a channel of the Lab color space [3] (image fa - Fig. 1a).
3.2

Pre-processing

First, we apply a shade-correction operator in order to remove slow background
variations. Thus, we calculate:
fa1 = fa − ASF (fa ) + k,

(15)

where k is a positive constant and
ASF (fa ) = C nB (...(O2B (OB (fa ))))...),

(16)

is the result of alternating sequential ﬁltering of fa with n suﬃciently large to remove the cup. This is the approximation of the slow variations of the background
of image fa .

44

K. St¸apor et al.

Next, the image fa1 is ﬁltered in order to eliminate large grey level variations
within a cup region caused by the outgoing vessels. We ”ﬁll” the vessels by
applying a simple closing operation:
fa2 = C B (fa1 ),

(17)

with a structuring element B bigger than the maximal width of vessels - we use
a circle with a radius 15. The result is shown in Fig. 1b.
3.3

Finding Markers for Watershed Transformation

To automatically ﬁnd the internal marker, we ﬁrst localize approximately the
cup region. As we know approximately the size of the cup, and assuming that
parts of the cup region belong to the darkest parts of the image fa2 , we apply
a simple global thresholding:
fa3 = Tt1 (fa2 ),

(18)

fa3 .

The parameter t1 is chosen based on a cumulative
to obtain a binary image
histogram in a way that 2% of the darkest pixels will be considered as objects.
The image fa3 contains cup region as well as other pathologies, like for example
exudates. They are not very big, and they are far from reaching the size of
the cup. Hence, we select the biggest particle of the image fa3 (giving image fa4
shown in Fig. 1c) which coincides with the candidate region containing the cup.
The coordinates of the centroid c of the candidate region in the image fa4 are
calculated as:
xc =

x

y
x

fa4 (x, y) · x
y

fa4 (x, y)

, yc =

x

y
x

fa4 (x, y) · y
y

fa4 (x, y)

(19)

The calculated centroid c(xc , yc ) is taken as the internal marker mint for
watershed transformation. As external marker mext we use a circle Ccup (c, rcup )
with a center at the calculated centroid c and a radius rcup bigger than the
diameter of the biggest cup (see Fig. 1d).
3.4

Watershed Transformation

In order to detect exact contours of the cup region, we apply the classical watershed transformation:
fa6 = W T mint ∪mext (fa5 ),
to the morphological gradient of the ﬁltered image

(20)

fa2 :

fa5 = grad(fa2 ) = DB (fa2 ) − E B (fa2 )

(21)

with internal mint and external mext markers imposed to avoid oversegmentation of the image. The watershed transformation assigns to each local
minimum of fa5 one catchment basin (one connected region), in a way that all
x ∈ Dfa5 belong to a basin except a one pixel strong line that delimits the basins
(the watershed line). This watershed line deﬁnes the exact contour of the cup.

Segmentation of Fundus Eye Images

3.5

45

Post-processing

The shape irregularities in the segmentation result are due to the outgoing vessels or to low contrast. We can regularize the shape of the contour using standard
morphological ﬁltering techniques, i.e. smoothing by binary opening-closing operations of the resulted cup region. The ﬁnal segmentation result is shown in Fig.
1f.

4

Detection of the Optic Disc Using Geodesic
Reconstruction

Having compared several color spaces, we found that the contours of the optic
disc are most contrasted against the background in the G channel of the RGB
color space (Fig. 2a - image fG ). Finding the contours of the optic disc is based
on the morphological reconstruction by dilation of the image fG :
B,g
1
= RD
(fG ),
fG

(22)

starting from a properly constructed marker image g(x) (Fig. 2b)

g(x) =

0 if x ∈ Cdisc (c, rdisc )
fG if x ∈
/ Cdisc (c, rdisc )

(23)

where Cdisc (c, rdisc ) is a circle with a center, being the centroid c(xc , yc ) calculated during cup region detection (as described in the previous section), and
a radius rdisc equal to a radius of a typical optic disc. This circle is a candidate region comprising the optic disc inside. All the pixels in a marker image
g(x) which are comprised in a circle Cdisc (c, rdisc ) are set to zero (means black).
The reconstruction operator propagates the values of fG (x) of pixels x next to
the circle into the circle by the successive geodesic dilation under the mask fG .
As optic disc is entirely comprised within the circle, it is completely removed,
whereas regions that are not entirely comprised in the circle are nearly entirely
reconstructed. Next, a simple thresholding operation is applied to the diﬀerence
1
between the original image fG and the reconstructed image fG
:
2
1
= Tt2 (fG − fG
),
fG

(24)

The threshold Tt2 has been experimentally set so as to diﬀerentiate between
optic disc region and the rest of the image. To avoid inﬂuence of the vessels in
2
the image fG
(Fig. 2e), the binary closing operation is performed on the image
2
fG which gives the result - the optic disc region. Its contour is shown in Fig. 2f
imposed on the input image.

46

K. St¸apor et al.

a)

b)

c)

d)

e)

f)

Fig. 1. The detection of the cup region: a) channel a of the input image (image fa );
b) channel a after closing operation (image fa2 ); c) candidate region on the thresholded
image (image fa4 ); d) channel a with the external marker imposed; e) morphological
gradient of image fa2 (imagefa5 ); f) result of the segmentation - watershed line imposed
on the input image

5

Results and Conclusions

We tested the algorithm on 50-ty images of size 640x480 that have not been
used for the development of the algorithm. The images were taken from the
Canon CF-60Uvi fundus-camera. In 48 images we could found exact cup and disc
contours. However in two images the contrast was to low, the algorithm failed
and the result was not acceptable. It is important to note that the contours of the
cup and optic disc obtained as a result of the presented segmentation methods
coincide with the contours marked by an ophthalmologist. The results of using
the presented method are very encouraging.

Segmentation of Fundus Eye Images

a)

b)

c)

d)

e)

f)

47

Fig. 2. The detection of the optic disc: a) channel G of the input image (image fG );
1
b) the marker image g(x); c) the reconstructed image fG
; d) the diﬀerence between
original and reconstructed images; e) the result after thresholding the diﬀerence image;
f) result of the segmentation - contours of the detected optic disc imposed on the input
image

References
1. Beucher S., Meyer F.: The morphological approach to image segmentation: the
watershed transformation. E.R. Dougherty (Eds.): Mathematical morphology in
image processing (1993) 433-481
2. Goh K.G, et al: ADRIS: an Automatic Diabetic Retinal Image Screening system.
K. J. Cios (Eds.): Medical Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery. Springer-Verlag
New York (2000) (181-210)
3. Gonzalez R.C., Woods R.E.: Digital image processing. Prentice-Hall (2002)
4. Jonas J. et al.: Ophthalmoscopic evalutation of the optic nerve head. Survey of
Ophthalmology. Vol. 43, No. 4 (January - February 1999)

48

K. St¸apor et al.

5. Kanski J. et al. Glaucoma: a color manual of diagnosis and treatment. ButterworthHeinemann (1996)
6. Morris D.T., Donnison C.: Identifying the Neuroretinal Rim Boundary Using Dynamic Contours. Image and Vision Computing, Vol. 17. (1999) 169-174
7. Osareh A., et al.: Classiﬁcation and localisation of diabetic related eye disease. A.
Heyden et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2002, LNCS 2353 (2002) 502-516
8. Pinz A., et al.: Mapping the human retina. IEEE Trans. Medical Imaging, Vol.1,
(1998) (210-215)
9. soi Soille P.: Morphological Image analysis: principles and applications. SpringerVerlag, Berlin (1999)
10. Tamura S., Okamoto Y.: Zero-crossing interval correction in tracing eye-fundus
blood vessels. Pattern Recognition, Vol.21, No. 3, (1988) (227-233)
11. Vincent L.: Morphological grayscale reconstruction in image analysis: applications
and eﬃcient algorithms. IEEE Trans. On Image processing, Vol.2, No. 2, (1993),
(176-201)
12. Walter T., Klein J.: Segmentation of color fundus images of the human retina:
detection of the optic disc and the vascular tree using morphological techniques.
Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Medical Data Analysis, (1999) (282-287)

