DEVMA: Developing Virtual Environments with
Awareness Models
Pilar Herrero and Angélica de Antonio
Facultad de Informática. Universidad Politécnica de Madrid.
Campus de Montegancedo S/N.
28.660 Boadilla del Monte. Madrid. Spain
{pherrero,angelica}@fi.upm.es

Abstract. In this paper, we present an application, called DEVMA, developed
at the Universidad Politécnica de Madrid with the aim of introducing into a 2D
virtual environment some of the key concepts of the Spatial Model of
Interaction (SMI) – an awareness model designed for Computer Supported
Collaborative Work (CSCW). This application also takes into account how
these concepts can be deformed by the presence of boundaries in the
environment and how these deformations could have an influence on the
awareness of interaction between them.

1 The Spatial Model of Interaction (SMI)
The aim of this research was to study how the key concepts of one of the most
successful models of awareness in Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW),
called the Spatial Model of Interaction (SMI) [1,2], are deformed by the presence of
objects that were acting as boundaries in the environment. It allows objects in a
virtual world to govern their interaction through some key concepts: medium, aura,
awareness, focus, nimbus, adapters and boundaries.
Aura is the sub-space which effectively bounds the presence of an object within a
given medium and which acts as an enabler of potential interaction. In each particular
medium, it is possible to delimit the observing object's interest. This area is called
focus "The more an object is within your focus the more aware you are of it". The
focus concept has been implemented in the SMI as an “triangle” cone limited by the
object’s aura.
In the same way, it is possible to represent the observed object's projection in a
particular medium. This area is called nimbus: "The more an object is within your
nimbus the more aware it is of you". The nimbus concept, as it was defined in the
Spatial Model of Interaction, has always been implemented as an circumference in a
visual medium. The radio of this circumference has an “ideal” infinite value, although
in practice, it is limited by the object’s aura.
The main concept involved in controlling interaction between objects is
“awareness”. One object’s awareness of another object quantifies the subjective
importance or relevance of that object. The awareness relationship between every pair
of objects is achieved on the basis of quantifiable levels of awareness between them
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3036, pp. 433–436, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

434

P. Herrero and A. de Antonio

and it is unidirectional and specific to each medium. Awareness between objects in a
given medium is manipulated via focus and nimbus. Moreover, an object's aura, focus,
nimbus, and hence awareness, can be modified through boundaries and some artefacts
called adapters.
For a simple discrete model of focus and nimbus, there are tree possible
classifications of awareness values when two objects are negotiating unidirectional
awareness [3]:
• Full awareness: The awareness that object A has of object B in a medium M is
“full” when object B is inside A’s focus and object A is inside B’s nimbus (Figure
1).
• Peripheral awareness: The awareness that object A has of object B in a medium M
is “peripheral” when (Figure 2) object B is outside A’s focus but object A is inside
B’s nimbus, or object B is inside A’s focus but object A is outside B’s nimbus.
• No awareness: An object A has no awareness of object B in a medium M when
object B is outside A’s focus and object A is outside B’s nimbus.

Observer Object
(A)

Observed Object
(B)

Observer Object
(A)

Observed Object
(B)

A’s focus

A’s focus

Medium (M)
B’s nimbus

Fig. 1. Full Awareness

Medium (M)
B’s nimbus

Fig. 2. Peripheral Awareness

In this application we have concentrated on four of these concepts: focus, nimbus,
awareness and boundaries. More specifically, we have concentrated on how to
introduce the geometrical modifications that boundaries can produce on the focus
(and nimbus) shape and how these modifications can have an influence on the
awareness of interaction between participants.

2 The DEVMA Application
This application shows the avatar’s focus and nimbus deformation while it is moving
around the environment and interfering with some boundaries. The user can introduce
one or more avatars, having the chance of modifying its spatial properties – such as
the avatar’s position.
The application also allows to modify some of the focus properties such as the
focus’ length (see “longitud” in the Figure 3) or the focus’ angle (see “Ángulo” in the
Fig. 3). In the same way, the DEVMA application allows the user to modify the
nimbus’ ratio [4].

DEVMA: Developing Virtual Environments with Awareness Models

435

Fig. 3. Focus’ Properties

The user also has the possibility of introducing one or more boundaries, interacting
with each of them using the keyboard, mouse or application menu. When the avatar’s
focus (or nimbus) intersect with an obstacle, the focus’s (or nimbus’) shape will be
deformed as it is showed in the figures 4.

Fig. 4. Avatar’s Focus and Nimbus Deformation in the Environment

The application also determine if there is any kind of awareness between avatars
and, if later, it can classify it as full awareness, peripheral awareness or no
awareness. In the figure 5 it is possible to appreciate how there is a “Full Awareness”
between the avatars 1 and 2.

436

P. Herrero and A. de Antonio

Fig. 5. Full Awareness between Avatars

References
1.

2.

3.
4.

Benford, S. Prinz, W. Mariani, J. Rodden, T. Navarro, L. Bignoli, E. Grant Brown C. and
Naslund, T. MOCCA - A Distributed Environment For Collaboration, Available from the
MOCCA Working Group of Co-Tech.
Benford, S., and Fahlén, L.E. A spatial model of interaction in large virtual environments,
in Proc. Third European Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work
(ECSCW'93), Milano, Italy. Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp. 109-124.
Greenhalgh, C., Large Scale Collaborative Virtual Environments, Doctoral Thesis.
University of Nottingham. October 1997.
Herrero P. A Human-Like Perceptual Model for Intelligent Virtual Agents PhD Thesis.
Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, June 2003.

