Distributed Collaborative Adaptive Sensing for
Hazardous Weather Detection, Tracking, and Predicting*
1

2

1

3

J. Brotzge , V. Chandresakar , K. Droegemeier , J. Kurose ,
4
4
4
D. McLaughlin4, B. Philips , M. Preston , and S. Sekelsky
1

Center for Analysis and Prediction of Storms, University of Oklahoma,
100 East Boyd Norman, OK 73019-1012,
{jbrotzge,kkd}@ou.edu
2
Dept. Electrical & Computer Engineering Colorado State University,
Fort Collins, CO 80523-1373,
chandra@engr.colostate.edu
3
Dept. Computer Science, University Massachusetts,
Amherst MA 01003
kurose@cs.umass.edu
4 Dept. Electrical and Computer Engineering, University Massachusetts,
Amherst MA 01003
{mclaughlin,bphilips,mpreston,sekelsky}@ecs.umass.edu

Abstract. A new data-driven approach to atmospheric sensing and detecting/
predicting hazardous atmospheric phenomena is presented. Dense networks of
small high-resolution radars are deployed with sufficient density to spatially
resolve tornadoes and other dangerous storm events and overcome the earth
curvature-induced blockage that limits today’s ground-radar networks. A
distributed computation infrastructure manages both the scanning of the radar
beams and the flow of data processing by dynamically optimizing system
resources in response to multiple, conflicting end-user needs. In this paper, we
provide a high-level overview of a system architecture embodying this new
approach towards sensing, detection and prediction. We describe the system’s
data rates, and overview various modes in which the system can operate.

1 Introduction
Current approaches for observing the atmosphere are based upon a paradigm of
widely separated, geographically fixed sensors that, by necessity, operate independent
of the phenomena being observed and of the sometimes disparate needs of multiple
end users. This is true of the WSR-88D Next Generation Doppler Radar (NEXRAD)
system, which consists of 141 ground-based radars and serves as the cornerstone of
the weather and storm-sensing system in the United States. This system has
*

This work was supported by a grant from the Engineering Research Centers program of the
National Science Foundation under cooperative agreement EEC-0313747. Any opinions,
findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.

M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3038, pp. 670–677, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

Distributed Collaborative Adaptive Sensing

671

tremendous capabilities to observe many types of weather phenomena, yet it remains
fundamentally constrained in sensitivity and spatial resolution owing to the very long
operating range (hundreds of km) over which the radars operate. Systems such as this
are unable to view much of the lower atmosphere because the radar beam overshoots
approximately the lowest 1 km due to the curvature of the Earth. These systems are
also unable to spatially resolve many tornadoes and other damage-causing phenomena
that have spatial scales smaller than the 2-4 km resolution achieved by the radar
beams at long ranges.
This paper introduces a new, transforming paradigm for atmospheric sensing
based on Distributed Collaborative Adaptive Sensing (DCAS) networks designed to
overcome the fundamental limitations of current approaches to sensing and predicting
atmospheric hazards. Distributed refers to the use of large numbers of small, solidstate radars, spaced appropriately, to overcome blockage due to the Earth’s curvature,
resolution degradation caused by spreading of radar beams at long ranges, and the
large temporal sampling intervals that result from today’s use of mechanically
scanned antennas. In addition to providing high-resolution sampling throughout the
entire troposphere, this distributed concept lends itself to the efficient utilization of
low-power solid-state radars. These radars operate collaboratively, via coordinated
targeting of multiple radar beams, based on atmospheric and hydrologic analysis tools
(detection, tracking, and predicting algorithms). This enables the critical resources of
the sensing system, such as radiated power, antenna beam positions, and data
communications bandwidth, to be allocated to enable sampling and data acquisition in
specific regions of the atmosphere where particular threats exist. Adaptive refers to
the ability of these radars and the associated computing and communications
infrastructure to rapidly reconfigure in response to changing conditions in a manner
that optimizes response to competing end user demands. For example, such a system
could track tornadoes for public warning while simultaneously collecting information
on the parent storm and providing quantitative precipitation estimates for input to
hydrologic prediction models. The system is thus driven by the data needs of the endusers as shown in Figure 1. The very first test bed of the project employing four
radars will not use phased arrays: it will use off-the-shelf dishes moved around using
motorized pedestals, and that system will be up and running in Spring 2005. There is
underway a technology push for the project to make a phased array version of the
system. This version will replace the individual dishes with phased array panels.
Since there won't be any moving parts, the beams will be able to move around much
quicker in response to data requests. That system will be fielded in the Spring of 2006
and will have 9 phased array radars arranged in a cooperative network.
In October of 2003, the National Science Foundation created an Engineering
Research Center (ERC) among the University of Massachusetts (lead university),
University of Oklahoma, Colorado State University, and the University of Puerto
Rico at Mayaguez, and a consortium of industrial partners to lay the fundamental and
technological foundations for DCAS and to investigate the practicability of this new
paradigm for storm sensing and prediction. Called the Center for Collaborative
Adaptive Sensing of the Atmosphere (CASA) [2], this ERC will create a series of
test-beds that enable exploration of the design-space of DCAS using fielded hardware
and software and enable proof-of-concept demonstration experiments involving
specific end-users. This paper describes the architecture and data requirements for
NetRad, which is the first of a series of system-level test-beds to be created and
deployed by this center.

672

J. Brotzge et al.

Fig. 1. Distributed Collaborative Adaptive Sensing System (DCAS) Driven by End-User Data
Needs

Fig. 2. DCAS System Functional View

2 DCAS Data Handling Architecture
High-level functional views of the NetRad architecture are shown in Figures 2 and 3.
Users, either directly, or through meteorological algorithms, request stored and live
radar data from the system. Competing resource requests (e.g., for radar beam
scheduling) are mediated by the resource control algorithms in order to optimize
overall utility. Data is returned from the radars through the data store, and to the
requesting algorithms and users.
Figure 3 shows that data is at the very heart of the NetRad system. A distributed
data storage facility is currently being designed that supports (i) querying, (ii)
reading, and (iii) writing of data. The data store acts as an intermediary between data
producers and consumers. The data producers include the radars and QC algorithms

Distributed Collaborative Adaptive Sensing

673

Fig. 3. Overview of NetRad architecture

that create QC-enhanced data; the data consumers include end-users who want direct
access to retrieved data, hazardous weather detection and prediction algorithms,
quantitative precipitation estimation and prediction algorithms, and quality control
algorithms that read data in order to create new QC-enhanced data. The use of a data
storage facility to provide a level of indirection [4] (i.e., act as an intermediary)
between data producers and data consumers provides many benefits in terms of
system structure. For example, with this level of indirection, it is easy for multiple
data consumers to receive the same data, and to dynamically add new data consumers
for the data stream. Similarly, a late arriving request for data that is currently being
streamed to an existing consumer can be satisfied by adding the new consumer to the
ongoing multicast data stream, and initiating a second patching stream that allows the
new consumer to receive the missed data.
The interface to the data store will provide for read, write, and query [1]
operations.
− Data store write interface. Radar observations are written into the data
store. Similarly outputs from the QC (Quality Control) algorithms (e.g., to
perform dealiasing) are written into the data store. Each stored data set will
have a data provenance indicating the data source characteristics, and a
history of all processing that has been performed to produce the data set.
− Data store query interface. The data store will provide a query interface
over the globally stored data. An individual query will return a “handle” to
data matching the query, as well as the provenance information stored with
the data. The handle can then be used directly to read the data, if desired.
Two basic types of queries that will be supported. The first type of query
specifies a spatial region and a time interval; a handle to all matched data is
returned. The second type of query is one that specifies a condition on the
value of data; a handle to all matched data is again returned.
− Data store read interface. A handle is presented to the data store to read
data associated with the query. The data store provides a pipe abstraction that
allows data to be read as they are being written. This allows a data consumer

674

J. Brotzge et al.

to receive data in real-time, i.e., without waiting for it to first be stored in the
data store.
We note that while the actual storage location of data may be contained in the data
pedigree, data readers and writers will typically read/write/query data in a storagelocation-blind manner.

3 Per-radar Data Rates
In this section we describe the radar data being produced, as well as the overall rates
associated with this data. A NetRad radar operating in “surveillance mode”
(surveying the volume of atmosphere above the radar and out to a radius of 30 km)
will sense roughly over an area with a radius of 30km, to a height of 3 km. This
sensed volume is divided into unit volumes (referred to as voxels) of approximately
500m by 500m by 100m. These dimensions are set by the combination of the radar’s
two-degree antenna beamwidth and the 1 uSEC width of the transmitted pulse. A
NetRad radar will thus sample approximately 350K voxels every 30 seconds.
The following six quantities are estimated per voxel every 30 seconds. These
values are often referred to as moment data (referring to moments of the Doppler
Spectrum of the received signals), as they are averaged over a number of radar pulses
transmitted in a given beam position.
− Reflectivity (Z): This is a measure of the amount of the backscattered signal
returned to a radar due to scatterers (e.g., raindrops and hail) in the voxel being
sampled. It is proportional to the volumetric radar cross section of the
observation volume and proportional to the sixth power of the diameter of the
ensemble of hydrometeors in the observation volume.
− Mean Doppler Velocity (V). This is the mean of the Doppler velocity
spectrum, indicating the average radial velocity of scatterers in the voxel.
− Doppler Spectrum Width (W). This is a measure of the spectral spread and
often approximated by the standard deviation of a Gaussian shaped model for
the Doppler spectrum.
− Differential reflectivity (Zdr). NetRad will be deploying polarimetric radars,
transmitting a signal that has equal powers at horizontal and vertical states Zdr
is the ratio of the power returned by the horizontally and vertically polarized
pulses and is a measure of the deviation from a spherical shape, of the
scatterers.
− Correlation coefficient (ρhv). This is a measure of the correlation between
the horizontally and vertically polarized returns.
−
Differential phase ( ΦDP). This is a measure of the difference in phase
between the horizontally and vertically polarized returns, dominated by the
propagation phase difference between two polarization states.
Given that the 350K voxels each produce six four-byte moment data (Z,V,W, Zdr,
ρhv,ΦDP) every 30 seconds, the moment data rate is slightly over 2 Mbps. A small
amount of additional overhead (including timing, radar operating parameters, and
packetization overhead) will increase this value slightly.

Distributed Collaborative Adaptive Sensing

675

Certain meteorological algorithms will require “raw” (unaveraged) radar data –
per-pulse data corresponding to the received signals (amplitude and phase in the
horizontal and vertical polarization directions, for 8 bytes total per point) received in
response to each of the N pulses for a given voxel. The data rate for this pulse-rate
data is thus approximately 100 Mbps.
We note that these requirements are for uncompressed data. Studies of
compression of WSR-88D NEXRAD moment data (which is of much coarser scale
than NetRad data) indicates that compression ratios between 1:6 and 1:10 can be
achieved [3]. The compression ratios of NetRad moment and pulse data, which result
from sensing the atmosphere at a much finer scale than NEXRAD, remain an open
question.
In summary then, the per-radar data rates are approximately 2 Mbps for moment
data, and 100 Mbps for pulse rate data. Each radar in the network will contribute this
amount of data.

4 Adaptive Sensing through Data Mining
Once the moment data have been collected in the distributed data storage facility, the
data are ready to be 'mined'. Data mining describes the process by which observations
and/or gridded analyses/forecasts are interrogated to extract useful information.
A number of algorithms are included within the NetRad architecture for the
detection of hazardous weather phenomena. Which algorithm is applied and when is
dependent upon the scanning mode of the radar. Five scanning modes are established:
Severe Storm Anticipation, Tornado Acquisition, Tornado Pinpointing, Quantitative
Precipitation Estimation, and Data Assimilation and Prediction. Thus, through data
mining processes, the radar scanning strategy adapts based upon the development of
hazardous weather events.
During the Severe Storm Anticipation mode, the radar scanning strategy consists
of general survey volume scans in search of any hazardous weather development. A
Storm-Cell algorithm determines storm-cell boundaries and other radar observed
thunderstorm characteristics. A Boundary Identification algorithm determines
discontinuities that may trigger further storm growth and/or lead to tornadogenesis.
Other algorithms search for shear and mid-level convergence as possible precursors
for tornado development.
If a tornado precursor is identified, one or more nearby radars will switch to
Tornado Acquisition mode. During this mode, the radar(s) will only focus on the areas
of interest while collaborative radars continue to survey for general thunderstorm
development. Meanwhile, several additional detection algorithms now begin to search
for actual tornado signatures. Reflectivity and vorticity features, such as hook echoes
and regions of circulation, are determined. From these features, once a tornado is
identified, then Tornado Pinpointing mode is activated.
Tornado Pinpointing mode takes advantage of the collaborative radar system by
triangulation of the beams to isolate the location of a tornado to within 100 m.
Tornado triangulation merges data from multiple nodes to pinpoint the exact location
(and possible trajectory) of the tornado(s).
Heavy rainfall often is an overlooked hazard in thunderstorms. Once storm cells
are detected, the Quantitative Precipitation Estimation (QPE) mode is activated.

676

J. Brotzge et al.

Scanning strategies will commence that allow rainfall fields to be mapped in realtime. The Data Assimilation and Prediction mode is also activated as storm cells are
identified.
Assimilation of the NetRad data into a gridded 3-D volume analysis provides a
critical advantage for improved detection and forecast performance: a means to
combine NetRad data with external data sources such as NEXRAD Doppler radar,
geostationary satellite, surface and upper-air observations, and operational numerical
analysis and prediction grids. Assimilation describes the process by which
atmospheric observations are combined with prior forecast information to yield a
physically complete, dynamically consistent 3-dimensional state of the atmosphere,
and includes such techniques as 3D- and 4D-variational analysis, ensemble Kalman
filtering, single-Doppler velocity retrieval, and simple adjoints.
Such real-time assimilation of NetRad data provides the analyses for forecasts of
hydrometeors, 3-D winds, and thermodynamic quantities, on spatial scales of order 1
km, for use in nowcasting and forecasting severe storm threats including but not
limited to strong surface winds, hail, heavy precipitation, and tornadic potential.
Nowcasting involves the use of meteorological information to generate 0-1 hour
forecasts which rely heavily upon statistical techniques. One- to three-hour forecasts
are made using much more advanced numerical weather prediction models, such as
the Advanced Regional Prediction System (ARPS) and the Weather Research
Forecast (WRF) models.
As a tornado or other important weather feature is identified, the corresponding
coordinates (latitude and longitude) are sent to the Distributed Resource Control
Component (DRCC). The DRCC converts the tornado coordinates into the
appropriate polar coordinates (elevation and azimuth). The DRCC then adjusts scan
strategies among the nodes. The exact scan strategy is based, in part, on the
prioritization needs as defined by the End Users. These scan strategy commands are
then sent back to the individual nodes.

5 Summary
The DCAS paradigm described in this paper is a dynamic data-driven system that
samples the atmosphere when and where end-user needs are greatest. The concept has
the potential to dramatically improve our ability to observe the lower troposphere, and
to vastly improve our ability to observe, understand, and predict severe storms,
floods, and other atmospheric and airborne hazards. Many knowledge and technology
barriers need to be overcome prior to creating practicable DCAS systems, however.
Among these barriers are the need to define an architecture and an appropriate
interface to end-users, the lack of small, low-cost solid-state radars, the need to define
optimization approaches and policies to adaptively allocate resources in a quantifiably
optimal fashion. The NetRad system described at high level in this paper is but the
first of a series of system-level test-beds that will be created by the CASA
Engineering Research Center to explore the DCAS design space and instantiate the
concept in the field.

Distributed Collaborative Adaptive Sensing

677

References
1.
2.
3.
4.

J. Annis, Y. Zhao, J. Voeckler, M. Wilde, S. Kent, I. Foster, “Applying Chimera Virtual
Data Concepts to Cluster Finding in the Sloan Sky Survey.” Supercomputing 2002
(SC2002), November 2002.
Center for Collaborative Adaptive Sensing of the Atmosphere, www.casa.umass.edu
S.D. Smith, K. Kelleher, Lakshmivarahan, “Compression of NEXRAD (WSR-88D) Radar
Data Using Burrows-Wheeler Algorithm,” Proc.18th IIPS, Orlando FL, Amer. Meteor.
Soc., 133-135.
I. Stoica, D. Adkins, S. Zhuang, S. Shenker, S. Surana, “Internet Indirection Infrastructure,” Proc. ACM Sigcomm 2002.

