Introducing Physical Boundaries in Virtual
Environments
Pilar Herrero and Angélica de Antonio
Facultad de Informática. Universidad Politécnica de Madrid.
Campus de Montegancedo S/N.
28.660 Boadilla del Monte. Madrid. Spain
{pherrero,angelica}@fi.upm.es
Abstract. In this paper, we present an application developed at the Universidad
Politécnica de Madrid with the aim of introducing boundaries’ deformations
into virtual environments. These studies have been run from a geometrical point
of view with the aim of analysing how boundaries can modify the shape of
some of the key concepts introduced into one of the most successful awareness
models in Computer Supported Collaborative Work (CSCW), known as the
Spatial Model of Interaction (SMI).

1 Introduction
The Spatial Model of Interaction (SMI) [1], as its name suggests, uses the properties
of space as the basis for mediating interaction. It allows objects in a virtual world to
govern their interaction through some key concepts – such as medium, aura,
awareness, focus, nimbus, adapters and boundaries.
In the SMI the focus was understood as the observing object's interest, the nimbus
was introduced as the observed object's projection and boundaries were identified as
those objects that divide the space into different areas or regions, controlling the
interaction between all of them. An object's focus and nimbus, can be modified
through boundaries.
The main concept involved in controlling interaction between objects is awareness.
Awareness quantifies and qualifies the interaction between every pair of objects in a
given medium, being manipulated via focus and nimbus.
In this paper we are going to analyse how boundaries can modify the shape of
focus and nimbus and how these modifications depend not just on the kind of
boundary but also on the boundary’s shape. We are also going to introduce some of
the algorithms developed at the Universidad Politécnica de Madrid with the aim of
introducing these deformations inside several projects and applications.

2 Physical Deformation
Starting from previous implementations of these concepts [2,3] where focus has been
implemented as a triangle and nimbus has been implemented as a circumference, we
have made a couple of assumptions: the focus shape was a circular sector and the
nimbus shape was a circumference.
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3039, pp. 252–257, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

Introducing Physical Boundaries in Virtual Environments

253

2.1 Deforming the Object Focus
The pseudo-code associated with this deformation was:
1. Detect the boundaries with which it is possible to interact.
2. Having determined these boundaries, for each one (Oi), it is necessary to get:
a. The set of boundary vertices, which we have called the “Significant Points”
b. Having established the vertices, for each one (Vij):
i. Define segments between the centre of the focus shape and the vertex (Vij).
ii. Having established the segments, calculate the straight line defined by each of
these segments (Sij) and the other boundaries.
iii. Taking into account the set of straight lines obtained in the previous point,
calculate which intersect with the focus shape.
iv. From the points of intersection calculated in the previous step, get the points
that are the closest to the centre of the focus shape (OC) and furthest away
from Vij. Each of these points will be called Pij and will be part of the deformed
shape. If Vij is not coincident with Pij, then Vij will also be part of the deformed
shape. However, if there is any point of intersection closer to OC than Vij, there
will be no points of deformation related to this vertex, and the set of points
obtained will be part of the set of “Final Points” used in the deformation.
3. From the previous step, we got all the points necessary to define the deformation
of the focus shape. However, the points have to be ordered by an ordering
algorithm to define the correct deformation shape.
4. It could be necessary to add some of the circular sector vertices to the list of
“Final Points” (see section 2.1.2)
5. Divide the deformed circular sector shape into different simple figures like
circular sectors and triangles to build the resulting deformed circular sector shape
taking the previous points as starting points.
6. Finally, draw the deformed circular sector shape, tracing the outline of the figures
that define the outline of the deformed circular sector shape (Figure 1).

Fig. 1. Deformed Focus

Fig. 2. Selected vertices with a
circle and discarded vertices
with a diamond

2.1.1 Focus Significant Points
Focus Significant Points are points that help to identify the shapes contributing to the
deformed focus shape. Initially, significant points are determined by each of the
boundaries that intersect with the deformed focus shape in the environment.
At first glance, one might think that these points are the vertices of these
boundaries. However, this not the case, because depending on the boundary position

254

P. Herrero and A. de Antonio

related to the centre of the circular sector shape, we will have to discard the vertices
that are hidden by the actual boundary (see the diamond vertices in Figure 2).
Having discarded these vertices, we also have to discard, from the remaining set of
vertices, the vertices that are outside the circular sector shape. Instead, we are going to
consider the points of intersection between the edges coming out of these vertices and
the border of the circular sector shape (see the diamond vertices in Figure 3).
2.1.2 Final Points
The best way of understanding what points have to be considered as Final Points is
by means of an illustration using a couple of examples.
If boundaries do not interfere with each other, then each of the boundaries is
contributing independently to the set of final points (Figure 4). Moreover, it is
necessary to add the three vertices of the circular sector.

Fig. 3. Selected vertices with a circle and
discarded vertices with a diamond

Fig. 4. Final Points

However, if a part of the object is in hiding, as is the case in the example shown in
Figure 5, the final points provided by each of the boundaries have to be carefully
analysed.
Boundary 2

(A)

(B)

(C)

Boundary 1

Fig. 5. Final Points with a circle

In Figure 5 (A), we can see that of all the final points that the boundary 1 should
provide – 4 points if no other boundary was interfering – just 2 of these points are
contributing as final points, because of the presence of boundary 2 (the diamond point
means that the other two points cannot be introduced). In Figure 5 (B), we can see the
final points provided by boundary 2, one of the final points provided by this boundary
is on boundary 1’s edge. In Figure 5 (C), we can see the final points provided by the
vertex of the circular sector. From this figure, we can appreciate that the diamond

Introducing Physical Boundaries in Virtual Environments

255

point is obstructing the incorporation of the third vertex. The set of final points is the
union of all the final points provided by each of these boundaries and the circular
sector figure.
2.1.3 Ordering Algorithm
We have used a basic ordering criterion and some additional criteria for some specific
situations that could occur while the application is running [4].
The basic ordering criterion is that given two points P1 and P2, P1 is said to be
greater than P2 related to the origin of co-ordinates OC and the origin angle α (Figure
6), and we write P1 >OCα P2, if α1 ≠ α2 and α1 > α2, where: α is the angle defined by
the lower edge of the circular sector; α1 is the angle of the straight line defined by
OC-P1 dependent on α; α2 is the angle of the straight line defined by OC-P2
dependent on α.
α2
OC

OC

X

α
P2

Y

α1

Y

X

α

α2

α1
P1

P2

P1
α1≠α2, α2 >α1 → P2 >OC P1

α1≠α2, α2 >α1 → P2 >OC P1

Fig. 6. Ordering Criterion

2.2 Deforming the Object Nimbus
The sequence of steps in the pseudo-code is similar for deforming both focus and
nimbus, the difference lying the internal procedure for completing each of the steps,
that is, how the list of significant or final points is calculated. The pseudo-code for
deforming the focus shape has another important difference: an additional step
(number 4), which is not necessary for deforming the nimbus shape. The deformed
circular shape is showed at the Figure 7.

Fig. 7. Deformed nimbus

2.2.1 Significant Points
Significant points are the points that help to identify the shapes contributing to the
deformed circular nimbus shape. Initially, significant points are determined by each of
the boundaries that intersect with the deformed nimbus shape in the environment.
At first glance, one might think that these points are the vertex of this boundary.
However, this not the case, because:

256

P. Herrero and A. de Antonio

Depending on the boundary position related to the centre of the circular shape, we
will have to discard the vertices that are hidden by the actual boundary (see the
diamond vertices in Figure 8).
Having discarded these vertices, we also have to discard, from the remaining set of
vertices, the vertices that are outside the circular shape. Instead, we are going to
consider the points of intersection between the edges coming out of these vertices and
the border of the circular shape (see the diamond vertices in Figure 9).

Fig. 8. Selected vertices with a circle and
discarded vertices with a diamond

Fig. 9. Selected vertices with a diamond
and discarded vertices with a circle

2.2.2 Final Points
The best way of understanding what points have to be considered as Final Points is
by means of an illustration using a couple of examples.
If boundaries do not interfere with each other, then each of the boundaries is
contributing independently to the set of final points (Figure 10).
However, if a part of the object is in hiding, as is the case in the example shown in
Figure 11, the final points provided by each of the boundaries have to be carefully
analysed. In Figure 11 (A), we can see that of all the final points that boundary 1
should provide – 4 points if no other boundary was interfering – just 2 of these points
are contributing as final points, because of the presence of boundary 2 (the diamond
point means that the other two points cannot be introduced). In Figure 11 (B), we can
see the final points provided by boundary 2, one of the final points provided by this
boundary is on boundary 1’s edge. The set of final points is the union of all the final
points provided by each of these boundaries.
Boundary 2

(A)

Fig. 10. Final Points

Boundary 1

(B)

Fig. 11. Final Points with a circle

Introducing Physical Boundaries in Virtual Environments

257

2.2.3
Ordering Algorithm
We have used a basic ordering criterion and some additional criteria for some specific
situations that could occur while the application is running [4].
The basic ordering criterion is that given two points P1 and P2, P1 is said to be
bigger than P2 related to the origin of co-ordinates OC (Figure 12), and we write P1
>OC P2, if α1 ≠ α2 and α1 > α2, where: α1 is the angle of the straight line defined by
OC-P1; α2 is the angle of the straight line defined by OC-P2.
OC

X

α2

α1
P1

Y

P2

α1≠α2, α2 >α1 → P2 >OC P1

Fig. 12. Ordering criterion

3 Conclusions
We have developed an application to analyze how the presence of boundaries could
modify some of the Key concepts of one of the most successful awareness models in
Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW), called the Spatial Model of
Interaction (SMI) [1]. The SMI manages awareness in Collaborative Virtual
Environments (CVEs) through these set of key concepts.
These studies have been run from a geometrical point of view with the aim of
analysing how boundaries can modify the shape of two of key concepts introduced
into the SMI – focus and nimbus - and how these modifications can have an effect on
the awareness of interaction between each of them [4].

References
1.

2.

3.
4.

Benford, S., and Fahlén, L.E. A spatial model of interaction in large virtual
environments, in Proc. Third European Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative
Work (ECSCW'93), Milano, Italy. Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp. 109-124.
Greenhalgh, C. Dynamic, embodied multicast groups in MASSIVE-2, Technical Report
NOTTCS-TR-96-8, Department of Computer Science, University of Nottingham, UK,
1996.
Greenhalgh, C., Large Scale Collaborative Virtual Environments, Doctoral Thesis.
University of Nottingham. October 1997.
Herrero P. A Human-Like Perceptual Model for Intelligent Virtual Agents PhD Thesis.
Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, June 2003.

