Implicit and Explicit Higher Order Time
Integration Schemes for Fluid-Structure
Interaction Computations
Alexander van Zuijlen and Hester Bijl
Delft University of Technology, Faculty of Aerospace Engineering,
P.O. Box 5058, 2600GB, The Netherlands
A.H.vanZuijlen@lr.tudelft.nl

Abstract. In this paper higher order time integration schemes are applied to ﬂuid-structure interaction (FSI) simulations. For a given accuracy, we investigate the eﬃciency of higher order time integration schemes compared to lower order methods. In the partitioned FSI simulations
on a one-dimensional piston problem, a mixed implicit/explicit (IMEX)
time integration scheme is employed: the implicit scheme is used to integrate the ﬂuid and structural dynamics, whereas an explicit Runge-Kutta
scheme integrates the coupling terms. The resulting IMEX scheme retains the order of the implicit and explicit schemes. In the IMEX scheme
considered, the implicit scheme consists of an explicit ﬁrst stage, singly
diagonally implicit Runge-Kutta (ESDIRK) scheme, which is a multistage, L-stable scheme.

1

Introduction

For many engineering applications, ﬂuid-structure interaction (FSI) phenomena
are important for an eﬃcient and safe design. Increased computational power has
enabled the simulation of FSI, through coupling of existing ﬂow and structure
solvers. However, the simulation of long term dynamic behavior is still very time
consuming. Therefore eﬃciency of the FSI solver is of the utmost importance.
It has already been demonstrated that for ﬂow applications, higher order time
integration schemes are computationally more eﬃcient than popular lower order
schemes, even for engineering levels of accuracy [2]. This drives the idea to use
higher order time integration schemes for ﬂuid-structure interaction simulations
as well. So far we only found examples of ﬂuid-structure interaction computations based on at most second order implicit time integration methods [3,5,11].
For the coupled ﬂuid-structure simulations we envisage a partitioned scheme,
meaning that an existing ﬂow and structure solver can be used, each solving
eﬃciently their own equations on a separate domain and coupling is obtained
through boundary conditions. A partitioned strategy enables the re-use of all the
eﬀort put into the development and optimization of such codes, especially the
Funded by the Netherlands Organisation for Scientiﬁc Research (NWO)
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3039, pp. 604–611, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

Implicit and Explicit Higher Order Time Integration Schemes

605

iterative solvers. In the partitioned scheme, the coupling terms between ﬂuid and
structure are not solved in a fully coupled system, but are given as a boundary
condition. In order to obtain a stronger coupling, a predictor-corrector scheme is
sometimes suggested, but we only found applications with ﬁrst or second order
time integration schemes. Also the use of sub-iterations at every time step is
sometimes proposed, which comes, however, at an increased computational cost.
An other possibility is to integrate one system with an explicit scheme, which
can only be done eﬃciently in the absence of stiﬀness for that system.
In this paper we consider a mixed implicit/explicit (IMEX) time integration scheme based on higher order implicit and explicit Runge-Kutta methods.
The separate ﬂuid and structural dynamics are integrated by an unconditionally
stable, implicit scheme and only the coupling component is integrated by the
explicit scheme. The IMEX scheme is applied to a linear and a nonlinear, onedimensional piston, which resembles a simple ﬂuid-structure interaction problem.
The order and accuracy of the resulting scheme are investigated and eﬃciency
is compared to lower order methods.

2

Fluid-Structure Interaction Model Problem

The test case considered is the one-dimensional piston problem (Fig. 1), which
is often used as an initial test case for ﬂuid-structure interaction simulations [1,
10].

fluid

m
k

L

x, q

0

Fig. 1. The one-dimensional piston problem

The ﬂow is modelled as a one-dimensional, isentropic, inviscid ﬂow. Usually,
the governing equation for the ﬂow are written in the arbitrary LagrangianEulerian (ALE) to cope with the moving and deforming mesh [4,6]. In this
paper, however, we only consider the ﬂuid on a non-moving mesh. The governing
equation for the ﬂuid yields
d
dt
wherein wf =
ρu
ρu2 +p

ρ
ρu

K

wf dx +

∂K

F (wf ) · nds = 0,

(1)

the ﬂuid state vector, ∂K is the boundary of K, F (wf ) =

is the ﬂux vector and n is the unit normal vector perpendicular to
∂K pointing outward. Coupling is achieved through an inﬂow/outﬂow boundary
condition at the interface u(x = 0) = 0, u(x = L) = q.
˙

606

A. van Zuijlen and H. Bijl

The structure is modelled as a simple harmonic oscillator with spring stiﬀness
k, mass m and without any physical damping under an external pressure force
due to a diﬀerence between the ambient pressure and the pressure in the ﬂow at
the interface, yielding
m¨
q + kq = p(x = L) − p0 ,
(2)
2

d
wherein q¨ denotes the structural acceleration dt
2 q, p(x = L) is the pressure in
the ﬂow at the interface and p0 is the ambient pressure.
The ﬂow is discretized using a cell-centered Finite Volume (FV) method
on a uniform mesh of N cells. A standard second order central scheme and a
ﬁrst order upwind scheme [8] are used. In the ﬂuid domain two ghost cells K0
and Kn+1 are introduced to cope with the boundary conditions. The structural
dynamics are written as a system of two ordinary diﬀerential equations for which
the state vector is denoted by ws . The coupled, nonlinear system is written in
semi-discrete form

w˙ f = Ff (wf , ws ),

w˙ s = Fs (ws , wf ),

(3)

wherein Ff the ﬂux for the ﬂuid under boundary condition ws and Fs the ﬂux
for the structure under boundary condition wf . The system, linearized around
an equilibrium state, yields
w˙ s = As ws + Asf wf ,
w˙ f = Afs ws + Af wf ,

(4)
(5)

wherein ws and wf denote the perturbation in the structure and ﬂuid states
∂Ff
∂Ff
∂Fs
∂Fs
respectively and Af = ∂w
, Afs = ∂w
, Asf = ∂w
and As = ∂w
all evaluated at
s
s
f
f
the equilibrium. The matrix Af is a 2N × 2N band-matrix which contains the
discretization of the ﬂuid domain and As is a 2×2 matrix. The coupling matrices
Afs (2N × 2) and Asf (2 × 2N ) will generally only have a relatively small amount
of non-zero entries, since the coupling only takes place at the boundary of the
domain.

3

Time Integration by Mixed Implicit/Explicit Schemes

We consider any system of the form
w˙ = F (w, t),

(6)

which can be any (semi-discrete) system describing e.g. structural and/or ﬂuid
dynamics. Since future applications involve engineering problems a large range of
eigenvalues will be introduced due to a wide range of scales in the ﬂow (for example in boundary layers [9]), giving rise to the stiﬀness of the system. Stiﬀness can
cause the time step to be limited by stability rather than accuracy considerations. Hence, we only consider L-stable, implicit time integration methods, which
can cope with stiﬀness in a robust fashion and dissipate the high frequency modes. Some well-known unconditionally stable implicit methods include the ﬁrst

Implicit and Explicit Higher Order Time Integration Schemes

607

and second order multi-step Backward Diﬀerentiation Formula (BDF) schemes
[7] and the trapezoidal rule method. The third and higher order multi-step BDF
methods, however, are only L(α)-stable, making them impractical in engineering
codes. Additionally the multi step methods are not self-starting. Less known and
also less applied in engineering codes are implicit Runge-Kutta (IRK) methods
[7]. The IRK methods can be designed with arbitrary high order and L-stability.
When a problem with easily separable stiﬀ and nonstiﬀ components is considered, a combination of implicit and explicit Runge-Kutta methods can be
used. The implicit method is used to integrate the stiﬀ component in a stable
fashion and the nonstiﬀ component of the system is integrated using the explicit
scheme. These combined implicit/explicit (IMEX) schemes are already used for
convection-diﬀusion-reaction problems in [9].
The IMEX schemes we consider in this paper consist of an explicit RungeKutta (ERK) and a stiﬄy-accurate explicit, singly diagonally implicit RungeKutta (ESDIRK) scheme, for which the solution at tn+1 can be made of arbitrary
high order by cancellation of the lower order errors. The ESDIRK scheme is an
L-stable, implicit scheme with an explicit ﬁrst stage, which allows the implicit
stages to be second order accurate. For every stage k we solve
k

w(k) = wn + ∆t

aki F (i) ,

k = 1 . . . s,

(7)

i=1

wherein F (i) = F (w(i) ) is the ﬂux at stage i. After computing s stages, the
solution at the next time level is found by
wn+1 = wn + ∆t

s

bi F (i) .

(8)

i=1

In this paper we consider third to ﬁfth order IMEX methods. At least 37
diﬀerent combinations have been found in the literature, but we only use the
ones reported in [9], which are optimized for the Navier-Stokes equations. The
third, fourth and ﬁfth order schemes consist of a 4, 6 and 8-stage algorithm
respectively. In order to distinguish between the implicit scheme and explicit
schemes, we denote aki for the implicit and a
ˆki for the explicit schemes. Both
schemes use the same bi coeﬃcients to obtain the higher order solution. An sstage ESDIRK scheme needs to solve s − 1 implicit systems within one time step
compared to only one for the multi-step methods. So the question is whether
the higher computational cost of the ESDIRK methods is compensated by their
higher order accuracy.

4

Partitioning Algorithm

When the discretized ﬂuid and structural equations are written as in (6), the
monolithic or fully coupled solution is obtained by direct integration of (6) with
any time integration scheme. For this academic problem, the monolithic solution

608

A. van Zuijlen and H. Bijl

is still manageable, but for real-world applications a partitioned approach is more
favorable. In the proposed partitioning algorithm, both the ﬂuid and structure
are integrated by the ESDIRK scheme. At every stage a Gauss-Seidel type of
partitioning is applied. When the linear systems (4) and (5) are considered, the
structure is advanced to stage k by
(I − akk ∆tAs )ws(k) = wsn + ∆t

k−1

k−1

(j)

a
ˆkj Fsf ,

aki Fs(i) + ∆t
i=1

(9)

j=1

showing that the coupling from ﬂuid to structure is integrated by the ERK
scheme. The coupling ﬂuxes are treated in a consistent, explicit way in order
to retain the higher order of the scheme. Due to the combined implicit/explicit
nature of the scheme, we refer to it as IMEX. The same scheme is obtained when
(k)
we deﬁne a ﬂux predictor for Fsf as
k−1
(∗)

Fsf =
i=1

a
ˆki − aki (i)
Fsf .
akk

(10)

Next the ﬂuid is integrated to stage k by
(k)

(I − akk ∆tAf )wf

= wfn + ∆t

k−1
(i)

aki Ff

(i)

+ Ffs

(k)

+ akk ∆tFfs ,

(11)

i=1
(k)

wherein the coupling ﬂux Ffs is already known from (9). After solving all s
stages of the integration scheme, the state at the next time level is obtained
wsn+1 = wsn + ∆t
wfn+1 = wfn + ∆t

s

bi Fs(i) + Fsf

(i)

,

(12)

(i)

(i)

,

(13)

i=1
s

b i Ff

+ Ffs

i=1

which completes one partitioned integration.
For the nonlinear system (3), the separation of ﬂux contributions to be used
with the implicit and explicit schemes needs extra attention. In order to obtain
separated ﬂux contributions, a linearization of the ﬂux is made around tn
(k) ∂Ff

Ff (wf , ws(k) ) = Ff (wfn , wsn ) + ∆wf
(k)

∂wf

+ ∆ws(k)

∂Ff
+ h.o.t..
∂ws

(14)

We deﬁne the ﬂux at stage k as
(k)

Ff

(k)
(k)
= F¯f + ∆Ffs ,

wherein
(k)
(k)
F¯f = Ff (wf , wsn )

(k)

and ∆Ffs ≈ ∆ws(k)

(15)
∂Ff
.
∂ws

(16)

Implicit and Explicit Higher Order Time Integration Schemes

609

(k)
The contribution F¯f can be considered the ﬂux in the ﬂow under a constant
(k)
boundary condition wsn and ∆Ffs can be considered the change in ﬂux at the
interface caused by a change in structural state within the time step. The integration of the nonlinear system follows the IMEX partitioning algorithm as
described in Eqs. (9–13), with Ff = F¯f , Ffs = ∆Ffs and similarly Fs = F¯s and
Fsf = ∆Fsf .

5

Results and Discussion

The piston problem, for which an exact solution exists in the linear case, has only
one single structural node with a mass m = 2 and a spring stiﬀness k = 1.429.
With these settings the ﬂuid has a strong inﬂuence on the structural motion
without dominating the structural dynamics. In all computations 64 ﬁnite volume cells (FVC) are used to discretize the ﬂow. For the linear simulations the
standard central scheme without artiﬁcial dissipation is used. However for the
nonlinear simulations stabilization is necessary and a ﬁrst order upwind scheme
is employed. The coupled simulations are performed with the IMEX scheme,
using third to ﬁfth order ESDIRK schemes for the implicit time integration and
third to ﬁfth order ERK schemes for the integration of the coupling terms. In the
linear computations a Gaussian elimination is used to solve the implicit systems.
In the nonlinear simulations, a Picard iteration is used for the monolithic BDF2
scheme and a Newton iteration is used in the ﬂow solver. Since the iterative
solvers have diﬀerent eﬃciencies, it is not justiﬁed to determine the work by the
total amount of CPU time. Therefore the work is deﬁned as the number implicit
stages that need to be solved during the simulation.
The linear system has a coupled radial frequency of ωc = 1.01 and a coupled
period of P = 6.19. The computational eﬃciency of the higher order partitioned
IMEX schemes is investigated by comparing them to the monolithic (or fully
coupled) solution with the second order BDF time integration scheme. This
way the eﬃciency of BDF2 is not diminished by partitioning. The energy error
versus work is presented in Fig. 2. Since every time integration scheme has a
ﬁxed number of implicit stages to solve within one time step, we can obtain the
order of the schemes by measuring the slope of the curves in the asymptotic
range, as displayed in Fig. 2. The IMEX schemes show design order in the
asymptotic range. In addition, the eﬃciencies of fourth and ﬁfth order IMEX are
much higher than monolithic BDF2. The partitioned third order IMEX performs
equally with respect to monolithic BDF2. The eﬀect of the consistent explicit
coupling ﬂux treatment can be seen by comparing the result for ﬁfth order IMEX
to the partitioned ESDIRK5 scheme, which uses the ﬂuid state at the previous
time level as a predictor for the implicit ﬂux calculations. The scheme with the
predictor does not show design order and needs about 2.5 times as much work
to obtain the same accuracy as third order IMEX.
For the nonlinear problem an exact solution is not obtained. A “temporally
exact solution” is obtained with the ﬁfth order IMEX scheme and ∆t = 1/1024.
At t = 0 the ﬂow is at rest and the piston has an initial displacement q0 = 0.5.

610

A. van Zuijlen and H. Bijl
Linear piston problem: 64 FVC, k=1.429, m=2, t=5P
0

10

log |(E-Eex)/E(t=0)|

-2
-4
-6
-8

IMEX3: 3.0
IMEX4: 4.6
IMEX5: 5.0
monolithic BDF2: 3.0
partitioned ESDIRK5 with predictor: 3.0
3
2.5
3.5
10
log (work)

-10
-12
2

4

4.5

Fig. 2. Energy eﬃciency of IMEX schemes compared to monolithic BDF2 and partitioned ESDIRK5 without consistent predictor

The piston is released and the simulation is run until t = 7 which is a little over
one period (P ≈ 6.34). At t = 7 the L2 -norm of the error in the ﬂuid density ﬁeld
is determined. For the structure the error for the displacement and velocity are
computed. Simulations are performed with time steps ranging from ∆t = 1 to
∆t = 1/512. In Fig. 3 the L2 -norm of the error in the ﬂuid density ﬁeld is shown
versus work for the third to ﬁfth order IMEX schemes and the monolithic BDF
scheme. From the results the order of the scheme are obtained by calculating
Non-linear piston problem: 64 FVC, k=1.429, m=2, t=7

-4

-6

10

log L2 density field

-2

-8

IMEX3: 3.1
IMEX4: 4.0
IMEX5: 4.8
monolithic BDF2: 2.2

-10
1.5

2

3
2.5
10
log (work)

3.5

4

Fig. 3. Fluid density ﬁeld eﬃciency for the third to ﬁfth order IMEX schemes compared
to monolithic BDF2

the slope of the graphs in the asymptotic range. In the asymptotic range the
IMEX scheme have design order. For the larger time steps (∆t = 1, 1/2), the

Implicit and Explicit Higher Order Time Integration Schemes

611

order of the scheme is diminished, but the accuracy is still far better than the
second order monolithic scheme with the same time step. When the error level
is considered between -2 and -4, we ﬁnd that the monolithic BDF2 scheme needs
≈1.3–2.5 times as much work compared to the fourth and ﬁfth order IMEX
schemes. For higher accuracy requirements, the eﬃciency of the higher order
schemes increases.

6

Conclusions and Future Work

For the partitioned simulation of ﬂuid-structure interaction third to ﬁfth order
IMEX schemes are used. Applied to a linear and nonlinear piston problem, the
IMEX schemes are more eﬃcient than the monolithic BDF2 scheme.
Up to this point only a simple one-dimensional problem has been considered.
Future research focusses on the application of the IMEX scheme to more realistic,
multidimensional problems.

References
1. F.J. Blom, A monolithical ﬂuid-structure interaction algorithm applied to the piston problem, Comp. Meth. Appl. Mech. Engrg. 1998;167:369-91.
2. H. Bijl, M.H. Carpenter, V.N. Vatsa, and C.A. Kennedy, Implicit Time integration
schemes for the unsteady compressible Navier-Stokes equations: laminar ﬂow, J.
Comput. Phys. 2002;179:1-17.
3. C. Farhat, and M. Lesoinne, Two eﬃcient staggered algorithms for the serial and
parallel solution of three-dimensional nonlinear aeroelastic problems, Comp. Meth.
Appl. Mech. Engrg. 2000;182:13-22.
4. C. Farhat, P. Geuzaine, and Celine Grandmont, The discrete geometric conservation law and the nonlinear stability of ALE schemes for the solution of ﬂow
problems on moving grids, J. Comput. Phys. 2001;174:669-94.
5. P. Geuzaine, G. Brown, C. Harris, and C. Farhat, Aeroelastic dynamic analysis of a
full F-16 conﬁguration for various ﬂight conditions, AIAA Journal 2003;41(3):36371.
6. H. Guillard, and C. Farhat, On the signiﬁcance of the geometric conservation
law for ﬂow computations on moving meshes, Comp. Meth. Appl. Mech. Engrg.
2000;190:1467-82.
7. E. Hairer, S.P. Norsett, and G. Wanner, Solving ordinary diﬀerential equations I,
nonstiﬀ problems, Springer Verlag 2000.
8. C. Hirsch, Numerical Computation of internal and external ﬂows. Vol. 1: Fundamentals of numerical discretization, John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 1994.
9. C.A. Kennedy and M.H. Carpenter, Additive Runge-Kutta schemes for convectiondiﬀusion-reaction equations, Appl. Num. Math. 2003;44:139-81.
10. S. Piperno, C. Farhat, and B. Larrouturou, Partitioned procedures for the transient
solution of coupled aeroelastic problems – Part I: model problem, theory and twodimensional application, Comp. Meth. Appl. Mech. Engrg. 1995;124:79-112.
11. S. Piperno, and C. Farhat, Partitioned procedures for the transient solution of coupled aeroelastic problems – Part II: energy transfer analysis and three-dimensional
applications, Comp. Meth. Appl. Mech. Engrg. 2001;190:3147-70.

