Modelling of Interaction between Surface Waves and Mud
Layer
Lale Balas
Gazi University, Faculty of Engineering and Architecture, Civil Engineering Department, 06570
Ankara, Turkey
lalebal@gazi.edu.tr

Abstract. The analytical and numerical modelling of interaction between the mud
layer at the sea bottom and the surface waves have been presented. In the
simulations the theory for linear water wave movement in a two-layer viscous fluid
system has been considered. The upper layer represents water and the lower layer
represents fluid-mud. The type of the bottom material over which waves are
propagating is assumed to be similar to a viscous fluid, characterized by a viscosity
and density greater than the overlying fluid. It is assumed that the two fluids are
incompressible and isotropic, and the rigid strata is smooth and impermeable. At
the surface the height of the surface wave is specified and the forced interfacial
wave is determined. Developed model solves the equations of motion for an
incompressible fluid by composite finite difference-finite element approximations
on a staggered scheme. Results of analytical and numerical solutions are compared
with the experimental results and favourable agreement has been obtained.

1 Introduction
All over the world, at a great number of coastal areas, especially near the river mouths
carrying large quantities of sediments, the sea bottom is covered by the mud layers.
Surface waves start to interact with the mud layer at the sea bottom when they enter to
the intermediate or shallow wave regions. This interaction generally causes the
dissipation of surface waves step by step and suspension and transportation of mud
due to the pressure generated at the sea bed. The dissipation caused by the mud layer
is greater than the dissipation caused by the friction of rigid sea bottom. Under surface
wave action, mass transport occurs in the mud layer. Gade[1] who is one of the
former reasearchers that investigated the interaction of surface waves with the mud
layer at the bottom, modelled the mud layer as a fluid with a high viscosity.
Dalrymple and Liu[2], analytically investigated the interaction of surface waves with
the viscous mud layer for variable layer thicknesses. Jiang and Zhao[3], investigated
analytically the propagation of waves over fluid mud layer and worked with nonlinear
surface waves. Wen and Liu[4], searched for the effects of viscous dissipation on
mass transport for two dimensional small amplitude interfacial waves in a two-layered
fluid system. In this study, the interaction of surface waves propagating over the mud
layer at the sea bottom has been investigated analytically and numerically.

M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3037, pp. 618–621, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

Modelling of Interaction between Surface Waves and Mud Layer

619

2 Theory
In this study, the water layer with a thickness of h and underlying mud layer with a
thickness of d are modelled as a two layered fluid system. In the modelling, it is assumed
that surface waves follow the linear wave theory; liquid mud layer exhibits viscous liquid
properties; there is no mixture at the interface of water layer and mud layer; liquids are
incompressible; system lies on a smooth, horizontal, impervious and rigid bottom; at the
interface of the system normal and shear stresses are continuous. The density of the
underlying mud layer is greater than the density of the water layer. The developed
numerical model solves fluid particle velocities by Navier-Stokes equations. In the
numerical solution of the equations central finite difference approximations are applied.
In the vertical Galerkin finite element linear shape functions are used. Water depths are
divided into same number of layers at each point in the solution domain. The model
hydrodynamic equations in the Cartesian coordinate system is as follows:
∂u j ∂w j
+
=0
(1)
∂x
∂z
 ∂2u j ∂2u j 
∂u j
∂u j
∂u j
1 ∂Pj

(2)
+uj
+ wj
=−
+υ j 
+
 ∂x2 ∂z2 
∂t
∂x
∂z
ρ j ∂x


 ∂2wj ∂2wj 
∂wj
∂wj
∂wj
1 ∂Pj

(3)
+uj
+ wj
=−
+υ j 
+
2 
 ∂x2
∂t
∂x
∂z
ρ j ∂y
y
∂


Where, x is horizontal coordinate, z is vertical coordinate; t is time; u, w are the fluid
particule velocities in x,z directions respectively; υ is kinematic viscosity; p is
pressure, j=1,2 are upper and lower layer indixes.
The analytical solution of the model has been performed as well. In the analytical
solution the boundary layer approximations applied by Dalrymple and Liu[2] are
considered. The numerical solution method is a composite finite element-finite difference
method. The governing equations are solved by the Galerkin Weighted Residual Method
in the vertical plane and by finite difference approximations in the horizontal plane. The
water depths are divided into the same number of layers following the bottom
topography. In the depth following coordinate system, the layer thickness is proportional
to the local water depth. To increase the vetical resolution, wherever necessary, grid
clustering can be applied in the vertical plane. The system of nonlinear equations are
solved by the Crank-Nicholson Method which has second order accuracy in time.

3 Model Application
Numerical model predictions and analytical solution have been compared with the
experimental studies published in the literature. Firstly the results of laboratory
experiments of De Wit and Kranenburg[5] are compared with the simulations. In the
experiments, various wave amplitudes (< 0,1 m.) are tested. Wave period is 1,5 s. and
initial water depth is 0,30 m. dir. Experimental flume has a length of 40 m. and width
of 0.8 m. Velocity amplitudes in and over the fluid mud layer are presented in Figure

620

L. Balas

(1-a) for China clay and in Figure (1-b) for Westwald Clay. Experimental values of
H(m.),d(m), ρ1 [kg.m-3], ρ2[kg.m-3], Q[m2s-1] and a[m] are 0.325, 0.115, 1000, 1316,
2,7.10-3 and 0.02 respectively for china clay and 0.35, 0.15, 1000, 1186, 5,9.10-3 and
0.02 respectively for Westwald clay.

Fig. 1. Velocity amplitudes, (a) China Clay, (b) Westwald Clay

Fig. 2. Ratio of interfacial and surface wave amplitudes.

It has been observed that analytical and numerical model predictions well agree with
the measurements except from the little deviations just at the interface of the mud and
water layers. Secondly, the experimental results of Sakakiyama and Bijker[6] are
compared with the simulations. They performed the experiment in a wave flume of
24,5 m. in length and 0.5 m. in width. For different wave periods, Sakakiyama and
Bijker[6], observed the ratios of b/a (ratio of interfacial to surface wave amplitude).
Simulated b/a ratios by the model are compared with the measurements and presented
in Figure (2). It is seen that as the value of σ increases, the velocities in the mud layer
decreases and accordingly b/a ratio decreases as well. Model simulations are
favorable compared with the measurements. Calculated mean error is 0.2008% in A
() where ρm is 1370 kg/m3 and υ is 1,5 10-2 (m2/s); it is 0,1971% in B (∆) where ρm is
1300 kg/m3 and υ is 1,0.10-2 (m2/s); it is 0,1489% in C (*) where ρm is 1210 kg/m3 and
υ is 4,0.10-3 (m2/s) and it is 0,1799% in D (+) where ρm is 1140 kg/m3 and υ is 1,0.10-3
(m2/s). Errors are at acceptable levels. Closer to the rigid bottom, difference between

Modelling of Interaction between Surface Waves and Mud Layer

621

the simulations and measurements increases as also observed in the comparisons with
the results of experiment done by De Wit – Kranenburg [5]. These discrepancies are
basically due to the application of linear wave theory in the models.

4 Conclusions
The analytical and numerical modelling of interaction between the mud layer at the sea
bottom and the surface waves have been presented. Variations in the mud layer due to
the effect of waves and changes in the surface waves as a result of these variations are
investigated. The numerical solution method is a composite finite difference-finite
element method. The governing equations written in the Cartesian coordinates are
solved by the Galerkin Weighted Residual Method in the vertical plane and by finite
difference approximations in the horizontal plane. At each grid points in the solution
domain, the water depth is divided into same number of layers following the bottom
topography. In the analytical solution boundary layer approximation has been used.
Results obtained from analytical and numerical solutions are compared with the
measurements obtained from experimental studies, and comparisons have shown an
encouraging agreement. The model that simulates the mud motion under wave action
can be used as a practical tool in diverse coastal engineering applications.

References
1. Gade, H.G.: Effects of nonrigid, impermeable bottom on plane surface waves in shallow
water. Journal of Marine Research, 16 (1958) 61-82
2. Dalrymple, R. A., Liu, P.L.: Waves over soft muds: a two-layer fluid model. Journal of
Physical Oceanography. 8 (1978) 1121-1131
3. Jiang, L., Zhao, Z.: Viscous damping of solitary waves over fluid-mud seabed. Journal of
Waterway, Port, Coastal and Ocean Engineering. 115(1989) 345-362.
4. Wen, J., Liu, P.,L.: Mass transport of interfacial waves in a two-layer fluid system. Journal
of Fluid Mechanics. 297 (1995), 231-254
5. De Wit, P.,J.,Kranenburg, C.: On the effects of a liquefied mud bed on wave and flow
characteristics. Journal of Hydraulic Research, 34 (1996), 3-18.
6. Sakakiyama, T., Bijker, E.,W.: Mass transport velocity in mud layer due to progressive
waves. Journal of Waterway, Port, Coastal and Ocean Engineering, 115 (1989) 614-633.

