Reuse of Paths in Final Gathering Step with
Moving Light Sources
Mateu Sbert and Francesc Castro
Institut d’Inform`
atica i Aplicacions, Universitat de Girona.
Ediﬁci P4. Campus Montilivi. 17071 Girona, Spain.
{mateu,castro}@ima.udg.es

Abstract. In this paper we extend our previous result on reusing
shooting paths when dealing with moving light sources in radiosity to
the ﬁnal gathering step algorithm, which combines a shooting solution
and a gathering step. Paths are reused for each frame in both shooting
and gathering steps, obtaining a noticeable reduction of cost in the
computation of the solutions for every frame. Moreover, the correlation
between consecutive frames happens to be higher than in the case of
independent solutions, resulting in a clear reduction of the temporal
aliasing eﬀects in the animation.
Keywords: Radiosity, Random Walk, Animation

1

Introduction

The radiosity solution [3] can be obtained by combining shooting and gathering
random walks [1]. One of these hybrid algorithms is the ﬁnal gathering step [5].
From a radiosity solution obtained by shooting, a simple gathering step allows
to obtain a ﬁnal solution for a ﬁner level of subdivision.
We present in this paper an acceleration strategy applied to this ﬁnal gathering step algorithm and valid for animations involving moving light sources.
Our strategy is based on the reuse of paths [2], which is done for both shooting
and gathering ones. The reuse of shooting paths has been already presented in
[6], and it will be described in next section. Here we incorporate the reuse of
gathering paths, based on the use of each path for all the frames (that is, for all
positions of the light source). The reuse of both shooting and gathering paths
permits to calculate the solution for all frames with a noticeable reduction of cost
regarding to the independent computation of each solution (classic approach).
Moreover, the reuse of the paths (in both shooting and gathering) produces a
correlation between the solutions of consecutive frames. This fact clearly reduces
the ﬂickering eﬀect observed in the video sequences. This is not applicable when
computing each frame independently, as done in the classic approach.
This paper is organized as follows. In next section we will refer to previous
work, including the reuse of shooting paths. The description of our contribution
appears in Sect. 3. Section 4 presents the results, with both error graphs and
images. Finally, in last section we present the conclusions and future work.
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3039, pp. 189–196, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

190

2
2.1

M. Sbert and F. Castro

Previous Work
Final Gathering Step

Given a radiosity solution at a coarse level, say patches, the ﬁnal gathering
step is meant to solve at a ﬁner level, say elements or pixels, for the interesting
(or important) part of the scene. Rays can be cast from the eye to get a view
dependent solution (usually to obtain a glossy solution enhancing a ﬁrst radiosity
solution) for the pixels in the screen plane as in the photon-map technique [7] ,
or from the patches of interest to get a new radiosity solution for the elements.
On the other hand the ﬁrst radiosity solution can be obtained by a deterministic
method (for instance classic hierarchical radiosity) or a Monte Carlo method
(random walk, hierarchical Monte Carlo) (see [5] for a short survey). When
gathering from a complete radiosity solution, the gathering path can be limited
to length one. The foundation in this case is the following one. Consider the
radiosity equation:
n

p
Bi = Ri Σj=1
Fij Bj + Ej

(1)

where Bi , Ei , Ri are respectively the radiosity, emissivity and reﬂectance value for patch (element) i, and Fij the form factor from patch (element) i to
patch (element) j. We can solve with Monte Carlo equation (1), by choosing N
patches j with a given probability vector (or pdf in the continuous case). Taking as probabilities the form factors Fij , and considering a ﬁrst step radiosity
approximation Bj∗ , the ﬁnal gathering estimator for Bi results in:
N
ˆi = 1 Ri Σj=1
Bj∗ + Ej
B
N

2.2

(2)

Reuse of Shooting Paths in Light Source Animation

Shooting paths can be reused in the context of radiosity when dealing with
moving light sources [6]. The main idea is that a path exiting from a point of the
light source can be used to distribute power from every light source position, or
in other words, to calculate the illumination for every frame. This means that
each path will be used to build n paths, n being the number of light source
positions (see Fig. 1). This involves a noticeable reduction of cost.
Let Φ be the power of a source taking n positions. M points are considered
on the source. Let x be a point on the source repeated in each diﬀerent position
x1 , x2 , ..., xn . Let j be the position taken into account and F (xj , y) the form
factor from xj to a point y (y being any point to receive direct illumination from
xj ). The unbiased estimator for the power arriving to point y from xj is (see [6])
F (xj , y)
Φ
×
F (x1 , y) + F (x2 , y) + ... + F (xn , y) M

(3)

The analysis of the cost shows that the theoretical acceleration factor due to
the reuse of the shooting paths is bounded by l, l being the average length of

Reuse of Paths in Final Gathering Step
position 1
source
x1

position 2

position 3

source

source
x3

x2

y1
y2

191

y3

Fig. 1. 2D representation of a shooting random walk with reuse of the paths. Path
from light source in position 1 (blue) is reused to distribute power from positions 2 and
3 of the light source, and the same with paths from position 2 (black) and 3 (red)

a path, when n grows. On the other hand, the expected error using the same
number of paths per position will be the same in the best case. This corresponds
to the limiting case in which all the light source positions were the same. In
general, the more distant the positions, the bigger the error, due to the fact that
when positions get distant, the sampling pdf for y goes away from the importance
sampling function.

3

Reuse of Gathering Paths in Light Source Animation

The new contribution presented in this paper consists in the reuse of paths in
the ﬁnal gathering step algorithm (reviewed in Sect. 2.1) for the case of moving
light sources. We will reuse both shooting and gathering paths. The reuse of
shooting paths is done in the same way as explained in Sect. 2.2. The reuse of
gathering paths is based on the fact that each gathering path can be used to
gather the radiosity for each of the n frames.
3.1

Dealing with Direct Illumination

The ﬁnal gathering step algorithm presents a problem when dealing with small
light sources. This problem concerns the distribution of the direct illumination.
Such illumination is dealt with when a gathering ray hits a light source. But the
usual small size of the light source makes the number of gathering rays that hit
the source from a given patch to be small, and thus the error for the received
direct illumination is big. This results in an unacceptable aliasing in the ﬁnal
image, only avoided if the number of gathering rays is very large.
This problem can be solved by calculating direct illumination in the shooting
step instead of in the gathering one. Thus, the gathering step will only deal with
the indirect illumination. Final radiosity values will be obtained as the sum of

192

M. Sbert and F. Castro

direct and indirect values. In this approach, the shooting step will work with
two diﬀerent levels of subdivision. The ﬁnest level will be used to store direct
illumination, while the coarse one will be used for the complete shooting solution,
which will be gathered in the ﬁnal step. From here on, we will refer to the ﬁnest
level subdivision units as elements, and to the roughest level ones as patches.
Since direct illumination solution will be calculated at the element level, and
a complete shooting solution will be calculated at the patch level, the number
of paths needed to get a determinated accuracy is not the same in each case.
The number of shooting paths used to calculate direct illumination must be
higher than the one for the complete shooting solution. A compromise consists
of eliminating part of the paths after the ﬁrst reﬂection, using a parameter λ
(0, 1] as the probability for a path to continue after the ﬁrst hit. This means
that each shooting path will have a double function. On the one hand, it will be
used to distribute primary power from the sources to the elements, computing in
this way the direct illumination. On the other hand, it will be used to distribute
power (not only primary) from the sources to the patches in the scene. After
the ﬁrst hit, the continuation of paths will be decided according to λ. If a path
survives, its carried power has to be multiplied by 1/λ to compensate for the
reduction of the number of paths.
3.2

Reusing Gathering Paths

In the gathering step one-length paths are cast from each element i in the scene,
and the nearest intersected patch j is obtained for each path. Then, radiosity of
patch j is gathered by i. The reusing strategy proposed here consists of using
every path to gather at once the radiosity for each of the n solutions corresponding to the n frames (n positions of the light source). Note that each element
and each patch in the scene store an array of n radiosity accumulators (1 per
frame). All n gathering solutions are computed at the cost of a single one. As the
expected error for our solutions is exactly the same as from n results obtained in
n independent executions, the expected speed-up factor of our strategy for the
gathering step will be n.
Also, the reuse of the paths will provide us with an important additional
gain: the correlation between consecutive frames, due to the reuse of the paths,
makes the transition between frames smoother, avoiding the annoying ﬂickering
eﬀect observed with independent solutions. This is clearly visible in the videos
accompanying the paper.
3.3

Comparing the Expected Cost

Next we compare the cost of a radiosity solution S for n frames obtained by
reusing both shooting and gathering paths against another radiosity solution
S obtained without reusing any path (that is, from independent executions for
each frame in both shooting and gathering). Both solutions S and S have been
obtained using the same number of shooting and gathering paths per frame.

Reuse of Paths in Final Gathering Step

193

Let l be the average length of a path. Let N be the total number of shooting
paths per frame, and let Ng be the total number of gathering paths per frame,
being Ng = kN for a positive value k (note that ﬁnding an optimal value of
k is not an objective of this paper). We have to remark that, regarding to the
number of shooting paths per frame, their reuse permits to reduce their number
by a factor of n; that is, to obtain N eﬀective shooting paths per frame, only
M = N/n actual paths have to be cast from each position of the source.
For the sake of simplicity in the following formulas, the cost has been expressed as the number of nearest intersection computations (actually, most of the
real cost is due to such computations).
The results in [6] can be now generalized by considering the parameter λ (see
Sect. 3.1). A simpliﬁcation has been done by considering the cost of a visibility
computation (used in the point-to-point form factor computation) to be the
same as the cost of computing the nearest intersection (actually, and depending
on the implementation, the cost of a visibility computation can be lower or, in
the worst case, equal to the nearest intersection one). The cost of the shooting
step with reusing will be N (n + λ(l − 1)), while the cost without reusing will be
N n(1 + λ(l − 1)).
The total cost of the gathering step when computing independently the n
frames (classic approach) is given by nkN , since we have to cast kN paths for
each frame. Conversely, if we reuse the gathering paths (new approach) we just
have to cast kN one-length paths in total, so this is the cost in this case.
The total expected acceleration factor, that considers the addition of both
shooting and gathering cost, is given by
nN (1 + λ(l − 1)) + nkN
n(1 + λ(l − 1)) + kn
=
N (n + λ(l − 1)) + kN
n + λ(l − 1) + k

(4)

When the number of light source positions (frames) grows to inﬁnity, we have
lim

n→∞

n(1 + λ(l − 1)) + kn
= k + 1 + λ(l − 1)
n + λ(l − 1) + k

(5)

Observe incidentally that the acceleration factor for indirect illumination can
be obtained by putting λ = 1 in (5).
3.4

Expected Error

In the best case, using the same number of paths per position in both classical
and new approach will produce the same error. This best case corresponds to the
limiting case in which all the light source positions were the same. In general,
the more distant the positions, the bigger the error. This is due to the fact
that when positions get distant, p(y) goes away from the importance sampling
function corresponding to each source position j.
This means that the new algorithm presents a theoretical speed-up factor
bounded by the expression (5).

194

4

M. Sbert and F. Castro

Implementation and Results

We have used in our implementation a collision random walk estimator (see [1]).
Parameter λ (see Sect. 3.1) has been set to 0.25 in all our tests. The reason for
this value is that we have subdivided each patch in 4 elements, so that the area
of an element is approximately 1/4 of the area of the patch, and the variance
of the radiosity random walks is known to be proportional to the area of the
elements.
Regarding to the gathering step, the value of k (see Sect. 3.3) that indicates
the relation between the number of shooting and gathering paths, has been set
to 1 in all our tests.
The new algorithm implies some additional storage: for each patch, the accumulated values for each frame must be stored, and also for each element in
which patches are subdivided. This corresponds to store an array of n triplets
(r,g,b) per patch and element, that is, a total of n(P +4P ) = 5nP triplets, where
P is the number of patches. Note that using the classical approach we just have
to store 5P triplets (one per patch and element) for each of the n executions.
However, no storage for the shooting or gathering paths is required, due to the
immediate update of values for each position when dealing with a path.
The tested scene (see Fig. 3) has been discretized in 2686 patches and 10744
elements. We have considered 30 very close light source positions that are tracing
a diagonal route near the ceiling.
We have obtained an acceleration factor of about 6, much higher than the
theoretical prevision (about 2.8 according to (4)) due to the lower cost of the
visibility computations. On the other hand, we have noted that the Mean Square
Error (MSE) using the new method is lower for frames placed in the middle of
the frame sequence than for frames placed in the extremes. This behavior can
be theoretically justiﬁed by the fact that central positions have an importance
sampling function closer to the pdf that we have used than the extreme positions.
We present in Fig. 2 the time vs. MSE graph corresponding to frame 17,
including also the results of reusing only gathering paths (from independent
shooting solutions).
Figure 3 shows two frames in the animation. The one on the left has been
obtained using the classic algorithm, in which no reuse of paths is done. The
one on the right has been obtained using the new algorithm, involving reuse
of both shooting and gathering paths. The number of shooting and gathering
paths is the same in both classic and new approach, but in the new approach
the number of shooting paths includes the reuse. No remarkable diﬀerence is
observed between the quality of left and right images, but the cost is much lower
using the new algorithm.
Animation sequences accompanying the paper 1 show the reduction of the
ﬂickering eﬀect when reusing the paths (see Sect. 3.2). Animation 1 involves
no reuse of paths (classic approach). Each image has been obtained in about
200 seconds. That means a total of 200 × 30= 6000 sec.= 100 min. Animation 2
1

ima.udg.es/∼castro/videoCGGM/anim1.gif|anim2.gif|anim3.gif

Reuse of Paths in Final Gathering Step

195

Fig. 2. Graph of time in seconds (horizontal axis) vs. MSE (vertical axis). This graph
corresponds to frame 17. Note the clear advantage of new method in front of the
classical one, and also in front of reusing only gathering paths

Fig. 3. (left) Frame 17 without reusing paths. 600.000 paths. Time= 70 sec. (right)
Frame 17 reusing shooting and gathering paths. 600.000 paths. Time= 11.7 sec. MSE
is a bit higher in the second image. Speed-up factor about 4.4

involves reuse of the gathering paths, but not of the shooting ones. Each shooting
has spent about 114 sec., and the combined gathering has spent about 86 sec.
This is a total of 114 × 30 + 86 = 3506 sec.= 58.5 min. Animation 3 has been
obtained by reusing both shooting and gathering paths. The combined shooting

196

M. Sbert and F. Castro

has spent 1017 sec., and the combined gathering about 86 sec. This means a
total of 1017 + 86 = 1103 sec. = 18.4 min.

5

Conclusions and Future Work

We have extended in this paper our previous results on reusing shooting paths
to the ﬁnal gathering step algorithm, which combines a shooting solution and
a gathering step. It has been applied in the context of radiosity to the case of
moving light sources. Both shooting and gathering paths have been reused for
each frame, so that diﬀerent frames in an animation (corresponding to diﬀerent
positions of the light source) have been obtained with a considerable gain respect
to the classical algorithm.
The gain will come not only from the reusing strategy, but also from the
inner-frame coherence obtained by eliminating the annoying ﬂickering due to
temporal aliasing.
The scope of the idea presented in this paper is not limited to radiosity. It
could be applied to diﬀerent techniques in global illumination, like virtual light
sources [4], and photon maps [7].
Acknowledgments. This project has been funded in part with a CatalanFlemish Joint Action n. ACI2002-52 from the Catalan Government, and with
grant number TIC2001-2416-C03-01 from the Spanish Government.

References
1. P.Bekaert Hierarchical and Stochastic Algorithms for Radiosity. Ph.D. thesis. Katholic Univ. of Leuven. 1999.
2. P.Bekaert, M.Sbert, and J.Halton Accelerating Path Tracing by Re-Using Paths.
Proceedings of Workshop on Rendering 125-134. 2002.
3. M.Cohen, and J.Wallace Radiosity and Realistic Image Synthesis. Academic Press
Professional, Cambridge. 1993.
4. A.Keller Instant Radiosity. Computer Graphics Proceedings, Siggraph’97. 49-56.
1997.
5. F.Perez Global Illumination Techniques for the Computation of High Quality Images
in General Environments. Ph.D. thesis. Universitat Polit`ecnica de Catalunya. 2003.
6. M.Sbert, F.Castro, and J.Halton Reuse of Paths in Light Source Animation. Computer Graphics International Proceedings (to appear as short paper). 2004.
7. H.Wann Jensen Global Illumination using Photon Maps. Rendering Techniques. p.
21-30. 2004.

