The Computational Science and Engineering (CS&E)
Program at Purdue University
Thomas Downar and Tomasz Kozlowski
School of Nuclear Engineering,
Purdue University,
West Lafayette, Indiana 47907-1290
U.S.A
{downer, tomasz}@ecn.purdue.edu
http://www.cse.purdue.edu

Abstract. Purdue University has established an interdisciplinary graduate
degree program in Computational Science and Engineering (CS&E). Both M.S.
and Ph.D. degrees are offered. The program provides students with the
opportunity to study a specific science or engineering discipline along with
computing in a multi-disciplinary environment. The aim of the program is to
produce a student who has learned how to integrate computing with another
scientific or engineering discipline.

1

Introduction

In the Fall of 1995, Professors John Rice and Elias Houstis from the Computer
Science Department at Purdue created the Computational Science and Engineering
(CS&E) interdisciplinary graduate specialization program. Since 2000, Professor Tom
Downar from the Schools of Engineering has been the director of CS&E which now
has 80 students enrolled from 17 participating departments. Detailed information
about the Purdue CS&E program is available at www.cse.purdue.edu.
The CS&E program is open to students admitted to a home department but interested in performing research at either the M.S. or Ph.D. level with a computational
science and engineering specialization. The student’s participation in the program is
indicated on his/her transcript as a specialization depending on the student's school:
−
−
−
−
−

Agriculture: COMPUTATIONAL SCIENCE
Engineering: COMPUTATIONAL ENGINEERING
Liberal Arts: COMPUTATIONAL SCIENCE
Pharmacy: COMPUTATIONAL SCIENCE
Science: COMPUTATIONAL SCIENCE

Seventeen departments offer CS&E specializations which are listed in Table 1
together with their Heads. Each department has a representative on the CS&E
graduate committee which administers the CS&E program.
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3039, pp. 1188–1195, 2004.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

The Computational Science and Engineering (CS&E) Program

1189

Table 1. CS&E participating department list

DEPARTMMENT

NAME

AERO & ASTRO ENGINEERING

T. N. Farris

AGRICULTURAL ECONOMICS

Sally Thompson

AGRONOMY

Craig A. Beyrouty

BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES

David Asai

CHEMISTRY

Ian Rothwell

COMPUTER SCIENCES

Susanne Hambrusch

EARTH & ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES

Harshvardhan

ELECT & COMP ENGINEERING

Leah Jemieson (Interim Head)

FOOD SCIENCE

P. Nelson

INDUS & PHYS PHARMACY

Stephen R. Byrn

MATHEMATICS

Leonard Lipshitz

MECHANICAL ENGINEERING

E. Daniel Hirleman

MED CHEMISTRY & MOLECULAR
PHARMACOLOGY

Richard F. Borch

NUCLEAR ENGINEERING

Lefteri H. Tsoukalas

PHARMACY PRACTICE

Steven R. Abel

PHYSICS

Andrew Hirsch

PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCES

Thomas Berndt

STATISTICS

Mary Ellen Bock

Funding for the CS&E program is provided by the Provost in the form of a reoccurring grant which is used to fund the salary of the CS&E program coordinator and
provide for incidental expenses such as travel funds and honorarium for CS&E
seminar speakers.
CS&E students are expected to have a strong interest in computation and its application to science and engineering. Their undergraduate training is expected to have
given them a strong foundation in several areas of science, engineering, and
computing. It is, however, likely that many will not have both the interdisciplinary
breadth and depth needed for the CS&E Program. Some students will fill in their
deficiencies by taking some background courses and others will exploit their talents to
catch up on missing background while taking graduate courses. The course CS 501 is
specifically designed to allow students who did not major in computer science or
computer engineering to learn quickly key concepts from upper level undergraduate
computer science courses.
Advising CS&E students is handled by the CS&E staff (for routine matters), the
Advisory Committee (for education program matters), and the major professor (for
research direction). Documents are available to guide the students about requirements

1190

T. Downar and T. Kozlowski

and procedures. The routine registrar and graduate school forms are signed only by
the CS&E staff unless agreed otherwise.
The non-educational support of a CS&E student is normally provided by the home
department. In some cases (e.g., Ph.D. fellows) this support may be given by the
sponsoring department. Examples of such support include:
− Business office support for financial matters,
− Advice and support for matters not directly related to education, e.g., disciplinary
actions, visa problems,
− Office space, provided on the same basis as for regular students in the home
department,
− Supplies, computing, copying, and similar items, provided on the same basis as for
regular students in the home department.
The student enrollment in CS&E is shown in Figure 1.

80
70
60
50

Enrolled

40

Depts.

30

Graduates

20
10
0
1995

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

Fig. 1. Student enrolment in CS&E program

2

Admission to CS&E Program

Admission to CS&E program is administered through the student’s home department.
The Graduate School requires a Bachelor's degree and an overall grade point average
(GPA) of at least 3.00/4 (A=4, B=3, C=2, D=1, F=0). The Graduate School also
requires non-native speakers of English to obtain a score of at least 550 on the test of
English as a Foreign Language (TOEFL). However, the home department might have
higher TOEFL requirement.
There are two basic cases for admission to CS&E program:
1. A student admitted to a participating department at Purdue applies to the CS&E
program. The CS&E Admissions Committee reviews the application and decides
on the admission.
2. An applicant not at Purdue can apply directly to the home department requesting to
be considered for the CS&E specialization or CS&E program. The CS&E Ad-

The Computational Science and Engineering (CS&E) Program

1191

missions Committee reviews these applications and makes recommendations to the
home department for final approval. The home department notifies the applicant of
the result.

3

CS&E Curriculum

The CS&E curriculum is defined through the CS&E core courses and CS&E relevant
courses specified by the participating departments. The basic graduate training in
computational science and engineering is provided by the core courses listed below:
− INTRODUCTION TO CS&E
• CS 501: Introduction to CS&E
− COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
• CS 514: Numerical Analysis
• CS 515: Numerical Analysis of Linear Systems
• ME 581: Numerical Methods
− HIGH PERFORMANCE COMPUTING
• CS 525: Parallel and Vector Computing
• EE 563: Programming Parallel Machines
− INTELLIGENT COMPUTING
• CS 572: Heuristic Problem Solving
• EE 570: Programming Techniques for Artificial Intelligence
− SCIENTIFIC VISUALIZATION
• CS 530: Scientific Visualization
• EE 628: Computer Graphic Simulations and Visualization
− COMPUTATIONAL OPTIMIZATION
• CS 520: Computational Methods in Analysis
• EE 580: Computational Optimization
• IE 535: Linear Programming
• MA 521: Computational optimization
The CS 501 course was created specifically for the CS&E program to help students
acquire the background for the other core courses. The specific objectives of CS 501
are to familiarize students from various disciplines in the science of problem solving.
This includes basic computational tools (e.g. MATLAB, Mathematica, etc),
computational kernels of important problems and core techniques for solving the
problems. CS 501 emphasizes computer simulations as an important design tool and
the role of high performance computing in large scale “Grand Challenge” type
problems.
In addition to the core courses, the CS&E Program maintains a list of CS&Erelevant courses offered by the participating departments. These courses have a
substantial computational component or relevance and are accessible and of potential
interest to students from other departments. This list provides guidance in selecting
CS&E courses for plans of study.

1192

T. Downar and T. Kozlowski

3.1 The CS&E Specialization for the M.S. Degree
The M.S. specialization of the CS&E Program may consist entirely of courses or of
course work plus a project or M.S. thesis up to nine hours. At least thirty hours of
credit are required for the degree, the equivalent of 10 normal courses. The plan of
study must contain total three courses in the CS&E field of which at least two are
CS&E core courses from different groups. No M.S. Degree examination is required.
The plan of study is worked out by a student and advisor; it must be approved by the
graduate committees of both the home department and CS&E program. Further details
on the M.S. requirements are determined by the participating home departments.

3.2 The CS&E Specialization in the Ph.D. Degree
The Ph.D. plan of study is determined by the student and the major professor to
prepare the student for research. The plan of study must also meet Graduate School
requirements and be approved by the graduate committees of both the CS&E Program
and the home department. The graduate committee of the CS&E Program expects
about one third of the courses on the plan of study to be in the computing field. The
following Ph.D. degree requirements are expected:
− The plan of study must contain at least four CS&E courses, including two CS&E
core courses from different groups.
− The CS&E program does not require any general examination.
− GPA requirements: No course with a grade of C or lower may appear on the plan
of study. The GPA in CS&E courses must be at least 3.25. The overall GPA in
graduate courses on the plan of study must be at least 3.25.
− Qualifying examinations: Students are not required to pass any CS&E examination unless the home department or the Ph.D. advisory committee requests it.
− Preliminary examinations: These are given by the Ph.D advisory committee.
− The Chair of the Ph.D. advisory committee must be a member of the CS&E
program faculty. The committee must contain one member from the home
department and one CS&E faculty member not in the home department.
Further details on the Ph.D requirements for each participating department are
provided in the CS&E graduate manual.

3.3 CS&E Specialization Requirements from Participating Departments
Each participating department also specifies requirements for their individual schools
that the student must satisfy. As an example, details of the program requirements from
the Aeronautics and Astronautics Engineering School are provided below.
The specialization in Computational Engineering is available to students in the
School of Aeronautics & Astronautics wishing to develop a strong background in
computational methods of engineering analysis and design. The CS&E specialization

The Computational Science and Engineering (CS&E) Program

1193

is available to both M.S. and Ph.D. students. M.S. students may take either the thesis
or non-thesis option.
The CS&E specialization for MS-A&AE. The student must choose a major and
a minor area from among the approved School list. The CS&E specialization is
available as a minor area under the interdisciplinary area option.
Minimum requirements for the thesis option are:
− Completion of twenty-one credit hours of graduate course work on an approved
plan of study, which must include nine credit hours in the major area, six hours in
the minor area and six hours in mathematics. Six of the CS&E credit hours must
be taken in courses outside the major area.
− Attainment of a minimum cumulative index of 3.0 for graduation.
− Completion of nine credit hours of thesis-related research. Completion of a thesis
to the satisfaction of the student’s examination committee in compliance with the
School and University format requirements.
− Public oral presentation of the research results.
− Passage of a closed oral examination by the examination committee.
Minimum requirements for the non-thesis option are:
− Completion of thirty credit hours of graduate course work on an approved plan of
study, which must include twelve credit hours in the major area, six hours in the
minor area and six hours in mathematics. Six of the CS&E credit hours must be
taken in courses outside the major area.
− Attainment of a minimum cumulative index of 3.0 for graduation.
− Certification of the degree by the student’s examination committee.
The CS&E specialization for Ph.D.-A&AE. The student must choose a major and
a minor area from among the approved School list. The CS&E specialization is not
considered a major or minor area for the Ph.D. degree program.
Minimum requirements for the Ph.D. degree are:
− Completion of eighteen credit hours of graduate course work beyond the M.S.
degree on an approved plan of study.
− Attainment of an index of 3.0 for all courses on an approved plan of study.
− Successful completion of qualifying examinations in the major and minor areas
and in mathematics. In lieu of the minor area qualifying exam, six hours of course
work in the minor area may be taken, subject to obtaining a grade of “B” or better.
Courses used to fulfill the minor area requirement may not be counted toward
satisfaction of the CS&E course requirements.
− Successful completion of an oral preliminary examination given by the student’s
examination committee.
− Completion of a thesis to the satisfaction of the student’s examination committee
in compliance with the School and University format requirements.
− Public oral presentation of the research results.
− Passage of a closed oral examination by the examination committee.

1194

4

T. Downar and T. Kozlowski

CS&E Seminar Program and Fellowships

Another feature of the CS&E program is the seminar program. Students are required
to attend 3 CS&E seminars each semester. An example of the seminars from years
2002-2003 is shown in Table 2 below.
Table 2. Representative CS&E seminary speakers

Speaker
Gene Golub, Computer Science,
Stanford University
Frank Tip, IBM TJ Watson Research
Center
Hironori Kasahara, Waseda
University, Tokyo, Japan
Ricardo Bianchini, Rudger
University
Yousef Saad, University of Minnesita
Steven F. Ashby, Lawrence
Livermore National Laboratory
Ed Angel, University of New Mexico
Ahmed K. Noor, NASA Langley
Research Center
Vince Mousseau, Los Alamos

Li-Shi Luo, ICASE

Title of Talk
Solution of Non-Symmetric, Real
Positive Linear Systems
Practical Extraction Techniques for
Java
Multigrain Parallel Processing in
Japanese Millennium Project IT21
“Advanced Parallelizing Compiler”
Application Transformations for
Energy-Efficient Device Control
Parallel Algebraic Recursive
Multilevel Solvers (pARMS)
Terascale Scientific Simulation
Large Scale Rendering Projects
Perspectives on Multiscale Modeling,
Simulation and Visualization
Physics-Based Preconditioned
Jacobian-free Newton-Krylov
Solutions
Lattice Gas and Lattice Boltzmann
Methods: Past, Present, and Future

An additional service provided by CS&E is to award fellowships and scholarships
to the top CS&E students. Since 1995, CS&E has awarded 30 fellowships to CS&E
students, to include 5 U.S. Department of Education GAANN (Graduate Education in
Areas of National Need) Ph.D. Fellowships.

5

Summary

Future plans for CS&E include the development of a second introductory core course,
CS 502 and closer collaboration with other computational educational programs at
Purdue. Next year, Purdue will begin a Computational Life Sciences program and
plans are underway to begin an Information Systems Science and Engineering
graduate educational program. Plans are to administer all Purdue interdisciplinary
computational educational programs as part of the Computer Research Institute at
Purdue.

The Computational Science and Engineering (CS&E) Program

References
1. Graduate Policies and Procedures Manual, Purdue University, 2003.
http://www.purdue.edu/GradSchool/faculty/resources/policies.html
2. Computer Science and Engineering Manual, Purdue University, 2003.
http://www.cse.purdue.edu/
3. Computing Research Institute, Purdue University, 2003.
http://www.cri.purdue.edu/

1195

