Sphere-Spin-Image: A Viewpoint-Invariant
Surface Representation for 3D Face Recognition
Yueming Wang, Gang Pan, Zhaohui Wu, and Shi Han
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310027, P. R. China
{ymingwang, gpan}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract. This paper presents a new free-form surface representation
scheme, which we call Sphere-Spin-Image(SSI), and its application to 3D
face recognition. An SSI, associated with a point on the surface, is a 2D
histogram constructed from a neighborhood surface of the point using
position information, which captures the characteristic of local shape.
Thus, a free-form surface can be represented by a series of SSIs. Correlation coeﬃcient is used as similarity metric for comparing SSIs. During
face recognition, the SSIs of points on face surface are computed, and
recognition task is achieved by SSI-comparison-based voting method. To
reduce computational cost, only some particular points of face surface
are involved in voting. With face database consisting of 31 diﬀerent pose
models, experimental result of equal error rate 8.32% demonstrates performance of the proposed method.

1

Introduction

Free-form surface representation schemes are widely used both in computer
graphics and computer vision, and have been studied extensively recently. For
the purpose of registration and recognition, the representation scheme should
be (1)viewpoint-independent, (2)general enough to describe the sculpted objects, (3)as compact and expressive as possible. Several representation schemes
have been presented during the last few years. Dorai et al. [12] used shape
K1 +K2 ) along with a spectral extension of the shape
index(S =1/2 - π1 arctan K
1 −K2
measure to build a view-dependent representation of free-form surface named
COSMOS. Johnson and Hebert [9,10] introduced spin image which comprises
descriptive images associated with oriented points on the surface. Using a single
point basis, the positions of the other points on the surface are described by
two parameters. The accumulation of these parameters for many points on the
surface of the object results in an image at each oriented point. Point signature
proposed by Chua and Jarvis [2] serves to describe the structural neighborhood
of a point by encoding the minimum distances of points on a 3D contour to
This work is in part supported by NSF of China under grant No.60273059, National
863 High-Tech Programme under No.2001AA4180, Zhejiang NSF for Outstanding
Young Scientist under No.RC01058 and Doctoral Fund under No.20020335025.
M. Bubak et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2004, LNCS 3037, pp. 427–434, 2004.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

428

Y. Wang et al.

a reference plane. Yamany and Farag [11] generated a signature image where
the image axes are the distance between a point basis and other points on the
surface and the angle between the normal at the point basis and the vector from
the point to each other point. The signature image encodes the mean curvature.
Automatic face recognition has been studied extensively in computer vision
area over past decade. However, most approaches of face recognition are based
on intensity images of faces, only a few exploited three dimensional information
[1]. Face recognition paradigms based on range data images have more potential
than intensity images based approaches because the former is invariant under
the changes of lighting conditions, color and reﬂectance properties of face while
the latter is sensitive to above changes. Previous work of face recognition based
on range data is brieﬂy reviewed in the following. Gordon [6] employed depth
and curvature features from face range data and performed face recognition. It
is done by computing curvatures of face surface to ﬁnd ﬁducial regions such as
eye corner cavities to calculate the face-speciﬁc descriptors(eg. eye separation
etc.). Tanaka et al. [5] presented a correlation-based face recognition approach
based on the analysis of maximum and minimum principal curvatures and their
directions. Chua and Han [3] treated face recognition problem as a non-rigid
object recognition problem. The rigid parts of the face were extracted after
registering the range data of faces having diﬀerent facial expressions using point
signature. The most appropriate models from the database constructed with the
rigid parts of face surfaces are ranked according to their similarity with the test
face.
Motivated by spin image [10] and point signature [3], we present a new approach of 3D local shape representation named Sphere-Spin-Image(SSI) . The
SSI of a point is constructed by mapping 3D coordinates of those surface’s points
within a sphere centered at this point into 2D space. Since SSI represents the
local shape of a point, it can be utilized as a intermediate representation in 3D
face recognition.
This paper is organized as follows: The SSI representation is described in
Section 2. Section 3 discusses the special points selection process and the voting
method based on SSI comparison for face recognition. The experimental results
and conclusion are given in section 4 and section 5 respectively.

2
2.1

Sphere-Spin-Image(SSI) Representation Scheme
Deﬁnition of Sphere-Spin-Image

Given a point p with unit normal n and tangent plane TPp through p on the
surface S, each other point pk on the surface S can be related to p by two
parameters: 1) the distance ρk = p-pk ; 2) the distance from pk to the tangent
plane TPp , dk =n·(pk -p), as shown in Fig.1 (a). Apparently, dk could be either
positive or negative while ρk could not be negative.
The Sphere-Spin-Image(SSI) is deﬁned as follows: for each point p on the
surface S, shown in Fig. 1 (b), a sphere with radius r can be placed centrally at

Sphere-Spin-Image: A Viewpoint-Invariant Surface Representation

(a)

(b)

429

(c)

Fig. 1. (a) Relative position of point pk to point p. (b) A surface patch surrounded by
a sphere centered at p. (c) Examples of SSIs taken at diﬀerent point location on face
surface. Notice the diﬀerence between the SSI corresponding to a location and SSI of
other location.

p. The SSI of p is a 2D histogram of ρk and dk formed by those points both on
the surface S and in the sphere. It can be formalized as:
r
SSI : S r (p) = (Sij
(p))m×n,1≤i≤m,1≤j≤n
r
(p) =
Sij

skij

(1)
(2)

k

where


1, if pk ∈ S and pk − p ≤ r



and i ∗ ∆b1 ≤ ρk < (i + 1) ∗ ∆b1
skij =
and
j ∗ ∆b2 ≤ dk + r < (j + 1) ∗ ∆b2



0, otherwise

(3)

In Eq. 3, ∆b1 and ∆b2 are the sizes of bins in the 2D histogram. Although we
can notice that there is a missing degree of freedom which is the cylindrical
angular parameter around unit normal with SSI representation scheme of freeform surface, each SSI uniquely deﬁnes the location of corresponding point on
the surface using small sizes of bins, as shown in Fig. 1 (c). Obviously, the SSI
is insensitive to pose variance.
The SSI representation scheme is inspired by spin-image [9,10] and point
signature [2]. There are two main diﬀerences between SSI and spin-image. Firstly,
an SSI of a point p uses points within the sphere centered at p on the surface to
construct 2D histogram, while a spin-image of a certain point on the surface uses
all points on the surface to construct 2D histogram. Generally, most 3D scanning
methods can only capture part of the objects at a time [8]. This could be due to
limitation in the physical design and the technology the scanner is built upon.
Using these scanning methods parts of an object’s surface may not be recoverable
because the object itself shadows the structured light from the detector in the
sensor. As shown in Fig. 2, each face surface contains regions that are invisible in
the other. Thus, spin image constructed by all surface’s points, including points
in those invisible regions, will bring ambiguity during matching. Contrastively,
SSIs of two corresponding points of diﬀerent views will cover the same regions of
the surface by using the sphere of some appropriate radius. Secondly, SSI employs

430

Y. Wang et al.

Fig. 2. Two depth images in diﬀerent pose for the same person and their SSIs and spin
images at the same location

the distance from other points to p as a dimension, instead of the distance from
other points to the normal of point p as a dimension in spin-image. Hence, it is
consistent with the use of sphere to deﬁne point’s neighborhood.
2.2

SSI Generation

Prior to SSI comparison and face recognition with SSI, we present a scheme
to derive the SSI representation from object models represented by triangular
meshes.

Fig. 3. Normal of vertex p calculation using the weighted means of triangles’ normal
adjacent to p. np is the normal of vertex p, ni (i=1,2,3,4) is triangle’s normal, Ai
(i=1,2,3,4) is triangle’s area.

Given a free-form surface consisting of triangular meshes, the normal of a
vertex on the surface can be determined by the triangular patches adjacent to
it. For SSIs of points on diﬀerent models, the normals of vertices on diﬀerent

Sphere-Spin-Image: A Viewpoint-Invariant Surface Representation

431

models should be consistent, that is, all normals of vertices on diﬀerent models
must be oriented to the outside of the object. First of all, we sort edges of all
triangular meshes of surface to be counter-clockwise viewed from one side of
object. The consistent triangle’s normal can be calculated based on the sorted
edges, as shown in Fig. 3. Then normals of vertices whose orientation consistently
extend to one side of the object is obtained by the weighted mean of triangle’s
normals adjacent to it. Finally, using the method proposed by Johnson [9], the
orientation of all normals on the surface vertices is determined by calculating
the scalar products of surface normal at each vertex and the vector from the
centroid of the object to the vertex.
Before the construction of SSI, the radius r of sphere and ∆b1 and ∆b2 must
be determined. In our experiments, the r is set as ﬁfty times the mesh resolution
and ∆b1 and ∆b2 are predetermined to be two to four times the mesh resolution
which meets enough precision requirements. Then, the size of SSI, m and n
deﬁned in Eq.1 , can be easily computed by the equations:
r
r
+ 1, n = 2 ∗
+1
(4)
∆b1
∆b2
where
is the ﬂoor operator.
Additionally, to deal with the diﬀerent resolution of range images, we resample the data of all models with same method to construct triangular meshes and
normalizing the SSI after the SSI construction. For normalization, we simply let
the 2D histogram divided by the total number of those points in the sphere.
m=

2.3

SSI Comparison

Since correlation coeﬃcient between images is constantly used to compare the
similarity of images, it is also used to SSIs matching in our experiments. The
correlation coeﬃcient between a given SSI Sr1 and a candidate SSI Sr2 is:
CorCoe(Sr1 , Sr2 ) =
where
Cov(Sr1 , Sr2 ) =

1
N

Cov(Sr1 , Sr2 )

Sr1 (i)Sr2 (i) −
i

1
N2

Sr1 (i)
i

and
D(Sr ) =

3

1
N

Sr (i)2 − (
i

(5)

D(Sr1 ) ∗ D(Sr2 )

1
N

Sr2 (i)

(6)

i
2

Sr (i))

(7)

i

Face Recognition

Before face recognition with SSI, the model database must be built up. For each
model, computing SSIs of every point on the surface has a very high time complexity. Selecting some special points which serve as landmarks of the object to
compute SSIs can considerably reduce the cost while not block the performance
of face recognition markedly. We select these points through two steps:

432

Y. Wang et al.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 4. (a) range image of a model. (b) Special points selection after step(1). (c) Special
points selection after step(2). In (b) and (c), red parts denote the selected points.

– Firstly, ridge lines of a face surface are extracted by thresholding the minimum principal curvature of surface points, kmin ≤ thresholdc . It is shown
in Fig. 4(b).
– Secondly, from Fig. 4(b), it can be seen that ridge lines of a face surface
contains many marginal points which are little help for face recognition but
increase the computing complexity. Thus, we choose points both on ridge
lines and in middle area of face surface as special point set Psp of which SSIs
are computed to construct model database. Marginal points are eliminated
from ridge lines by counting the numbers of points within the point’s related
sphere and discarding the point whose related sphere contains points less
than thresholds . Fig. 4 (c) shows the set Psp .
By the construction of SSIs of points in set Psp for each model, we complete
a model database in which each model has a SSI set Ssp . Face recognition is
then implemented by voting method similar to[3]. For a given scene face, we
want to select the most similar model in the database. Set Psp and Ssp of scene
face can be generated using the same construction method as models. For each
SSI in Ssp of a scene face, correlation coeﬃcients with every SSI in a model’s
Ssp in database are calculated. If the maximum of those correlation coeﬃcients
is larger than a thresholdCorCoe , the model receives a vote. Suppose the SSI
number in set Ssp of the scene face is Nc and the model receives Nm votes, a
voting rate associated to the model is Nm /Nc . The voting rate represents the
likelihood of each model being correctly matched with the scene face. Using the
voting method, the candidate models are ordered according to similarity.

4

Experimental Results

In order to test the eﬀectiveness of the presented approach, we perform several
experiments with models obtained by Delaunay triangulation of range images
downloaded from SAMPL(Signal Analysis and Machine Perception Laboratory)
[7] at Ohio State University. The diﬀerence between the models from the range
images of SAMPL and general model represented by polygon mesh is that the
former have no points information in the regions occluded by itself when the

Sphere-Spin-Image: A Viewpoint-Invariant Surface Representation

433

Fig. 5. Sample images from SAMPL. Six range images in model database. Notice the
variance of the model pose.

model keeps certain special pose. Thus, the range images contain less 3D information. Our experiments involve 31 models of six human subjects and two
human subjects have several views with signiﬁcantly diﬀerent poses. Fig. 5 shows
six samples of the range images.

B
A C D E1

E16 F1

F11

ROC
1

A
BC
D
E1

0.9
0.8
0.7

FAR

0.6
0.5
0.4

E16
F1

0.3
0.2
EER=8.32%

0.1
0
0

F11

(a)

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5
FRR

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

(b)

Fig. 6. (a) Similarity matrix for 31 models. Lightness indicates the dissimilarity between models. (b) ROC(Receiver Operator Characteristic) curve of recognition results.
EER=8.32%.

In our experiments, we investigated the ability of SSI representation scheme
and the voting method to recognition among models in the constructed model
database. We calculated voting rates for all pairs of 31 models and the resulting
voting rates are shown as a matrix in Fig. 6 (a). The lightness of each element(i,j)
is proportional to the magnitude of the dissimilarity between models i and j. The
darker represent better matches, while the lighter indicate worse matches. The
symbols at the left and top side in Fig. 6 (a) denote diﬀerent models where the
same letter with diﬀerent number means the models are of same human subject
with diﬀerent pose.
False reject rate(FRR) and false acceptance rate are quoted in many cases
to evaluate recognition performance. A false acceptance rate(FAR) is the percentage of imposters wrongly matched, and a false rejection rate(FRR) is the

434

Y. Wang et al.

percentage of valid users wrongly rejected. Given a threshold, a FRR and a FAR
can be calculated from the matrix. With diﬀerent thresholds, a plot of numerous FAR and FRR combination, named receiver operator characteristic(ROC)
curve, is obtained, shown in Fig. 6 (b). Equal Error Rate(EER) is the error rate
when FRR equals FAR which can evaluate the performance of our recognition
algorithm. With the signiﬁcantly diﬀerent pose models, EER in our experiment
still maintains 8.32% which is a promising result.

5

Conclusion

This paper introduced a new free-form surface representation named SSI. An
SSI of a given surface’s point encodes neighborhood shape of the point through
constructing a 2D histogram. It is done by mapping 3D coordinates of surface’s
points within a sphere centered at the given point into 2D space. The key feature
of this approach is that it is viewpoint-invariant. Based on SSIs comparison of
special points on models, face recognition experiments were performed by voting
method. Although our model database contains relatively less face subjects due
to the diﬃculty of obtaining the facial range images, signiﬁcant pose variance in
our 3D face database make our experimental results convincing.

References
1. W. Zhao, R. Chellappa, P. J. Phillips, A. Rosenfeld. Face recognition: a literature
survey. ACM Computing Survey, 2003, 35(4): 399-458
2. C. S. Chua, R. Jarvis. Point signatures: A new representation for 3D object recognition. IJCV, 1997, 25(1): 63-85
3. C. S. Chua, F. Han, Y. K. Ho. 3D Human Face Recognition Using Point Signature.
Proc. of Int’l Conf. on Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition, 2000: 233-238
4. R. Osada, T. Funkhouser, B. chazelle et al. Shape distributions. ACM Transactions
on Graphics, 2002, 21(4): 807-832.
5. H. T. Tanaka, M. Ikeda, H. Chiaki. Curvature-based Face Surface Recognition
Using Spherical Correlation-Principal Directions for Curved Object Recognition-.
Proc. of Int’l Conf. on Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition, 1998: 372-377
6. G. G. Gordon. Face recognition from depth maps and surface curvature . Proc. of
SPIE Conf. on Geometric Methods in Computer Vision, 1991, 1570: 234-247.
7. Range Imagery, SAMPL (Signal Analysis and Machine perception Laboratory at
the Ohio State University). [Online]. Available: http://sample.eng.ohio-state.edu
8. R. J. Campbell, P.J.Flynn. A Survey Of Free-Form Object Representation and
Recognition Techniques. CVIU, 2001, 81(2): 166-210
9. A. E. Johnson, M.Hebert. Surface matching for object recognition in complex threedimensional scenes. Image Vision Computing, 1998, 16: 635-651.
10. A. E. Johnson, M.Hebert. Using spin images for eﬃcient object recognition in
cluttered 3D scenes.IEEE Trans. PAMI.1999, 21(5): 433-449
11. S. M. Yamany, A.A.Farag. Surface signatures: an orientation independent free-form
surface representation scheme for the purpose of objects registration and matching.
IEEE Trans. PAMI. 2002, 24(8): 1105-1120
12. C. Dorai, A.K.Jain. COSMOS-A representation scheme for 3D free-form objects.
IEEE Trans. PAMI, 1997, 19: 1115-1130

