Simulation of Micro-, Grand-, and Canonical
Ensembles of Complex Networks
Christoly Biely and Stefan Thurner
Complex Systems Research Group, HNO, Medical University of Vienna,
W¨
ahringer G¨
urtel 18-20, A-1090 Vienna, Austria
and
¨
Atominstitut der Osterreichischen
Universit¨
aten,
Stadionallee 2, A-1020 Vienna, Austria

Abstract. The analysis of statistical ensembles of networks by means of
simulation is an important possibility to explore networks which emerge
by optimization of some ’ﬁtness’-function. In this paper, we compare
the situations of the micro-, grand- and canonical ensemble based on
their respective partition functions. We present results for a speciﬁc,
recently introduced Hamiltonian. Interestingly, for all three ensembles
we ﬁnd scale-free networks with ’complex’ topology for a wide range
of parameters. We further show results of some topological measures
depending on energy and temperature.

1

Introduction

Properties of real-world networks and their exploration by analytical means and
simulation ﬁnds increasing interest among physicists. Most of the real-world
networks share typical structural key features such as non-random clustering,
a scale-free (power-law) degree distribution and a small average path-length.
A vast number of models have been proposed to catch these fundamental aspects [1, 2]. Predominantly, speciﬁc rewirement procedures and the evolution of
networks associated therewith have been discussed, see e.g. [2, 3, 4], emphasizing the role of non-equilibrium processes involved. Orienting towards a statistical discription of networks, the role of superstatistics [5] and network-Feynman
graphs [6, 7] have been brought up. The statistical mechanics of equilibriumnetworks has been discussed recently, theoretically [8, 9] as well as by simulation
[10, 11]. The statistical-mechanics approach may provide signiﬁcant insights into
processes taking place in a network of approximately constant size or in systems, where the number of nodes can be supposed to change adiabatically, i.e.
where the time-scale of rearrangments is much faster than the time-scale on
which new nodes and links are added to the system. Recently, a number of
interesting Hamiltonians have been introduced [3, 9, 10]. A particular form, inspired from utilitiy considerations, has been reported to reproduce features of
real-world-networks (including non-trivial scaling of the cluster-coeﬃcient) [12].
While the latter article focused on the canonical ensemble, the present article
tackles simulations of diﬀerent ensembles, the micro- and grand- canonical in
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part III, LNCS 3993, pp. 1067–1074, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

1068

C. Biely and S. Thurner

particular. The paper is organized as follows: In section 2 we sum up the deﬁnition of relevant network-ensembles. In section 3 we present simulation algorithms
in analogy to other lattice systems. Discussion of results obtained for a speciﬁc
network-Hamiltonian is found in section 4. We conclude with a short discussion
in section 5.

2

Statistical Mechanics of Networks

We consider simple, symmetric networks with a ﬁxed number of distinguishable
nodes i = 1, ..., N , connected by a ﬁxed number of = 1, ..., L indistinguishable
links. The network is represented by its adjacency matrix c, where cij = cji = 1,
if a link connects nodes i and j and cij = cji = 0, otherwise. Thus, we deﬁne
the microcanonical partition function as (also see [8, 10, 12])
ZM (E, N, L) =
P (c)

c2
1
δ(E − H(c))δ(L − Tr( )) ,
L!
2

(1)

with H(c) being the network Hamiltonian and P (c) denoting all permutations
of the entries cij = 1 in N × N adjacency-matrix (not including permutations
of the cij = 0 entries). The canonical partition may be derived from Eq. (1) via
Laplace-Transformation, see e.g. [13], or via the maximum-entropy method, as
proposed by Newman and Park in [9]:
ZC (β, N, L) =
P (c)

c2
1
δ L − Tr( ) e−βH(c)
L!
2

(2)

The generalization to the grand-canonical partition function is straightforward.
It can again be seen as Laplace transform or as maximum-entropy ensemble:
It involves another thermodynamic potential (Lagrange-Parameter), namely the
’link-fugacity’ μ:
1 Lμβ −βH(c)
e
ZG (β, N, μ) =
e
(3)
L!
P (c)

Short discussions about the grand-canonical partition function can be found in
[8, 10, 11].

3

Simulational Aspects

Irrespective of the ensemble deﬁnition applied, the ’core’ of a computer-simulation of Eqs. (1), (2) or (3) will be the rewirement of a randomly chosen link
between nodes i and j to a new link between randomly chosen nodes m and n,
denoted in the following by (i, j) → (m, n). The choice of the random link to
be replaced is best done with a ’master’-list comprising all the links currently
existing in the system. Choosing a random link from a primarily randomly chosen
node does not necessarily fulﬁll the condition of equal a-priori probabilites.

Simulation of Micro-, Grand-, and Canonical Ensembles

1069

In the following, to exclude any methodological doubts, we shortly discuss
the diﬀerent procedures adopted to generate realizations of the three diﬀerent
ensembles investigated based on the rewirement (i, j) → (m, n). Although
the discussion is similar to the one in [11], some important diﬀerences exist (in
particular for the microcanonical ensemble which is deﬁned as ensemble for a
given degree distribution in [11]).
Microcanonical ensemble: Here, we have chosen the method proposed by
Creutz [14], where a ﬁctious demon leads to extra one-dimensional randomness in the system. In close analogy to lattice systems, we have implemented
the following scheme: (i) An initial random conﬁguration with Erand is chosen.
The microcanonical energy E to be simulated is ﬁxed and the demon energy
is set ED = E − Erand . (ii) The energy change ΔE, associated with a random
rewirement trial (i, j) → (m, n) is calculated. (iii) If ΔE < 0, the rewirement is accepted and ED → ED + |ΔU |. If ΔE > 0 it is checked whether
ED > ΔU . If yes, the rewirement is accepted and the demon energy decreased:
ED → ED − ΔE. Otherwise the rewirement is rejected.
Canonical ensemble: For the simulation of the canonical ensemble we have
adopted the method introduced by Metropolis [15]. The application to networks
has already been performed and discussed in previous works [7, 8, 9, 12]. The random rewirement (i, j) → (m, n) with associated energy-change ΔE is accepted
with probability min{1, exp(−β(H(c) − H(ˆ
c)))}, where H(c) is the Hamiltonian
of the system, and cˆ is the adjacency matrix after a proposed rewirement step.
Grand-Canonical ensemble: Although some aspects of the grand-canonical
have been discussed in [8, 10, 11], simulations of a speciﬁc hamiltonian have – to
our knowledge – not been conducted so far. The necessary transition probabilities
can be easily derived from the grand-canonical partition function (3) via the
condition of detailed balance
ˆ N (N −1) − L)!
ˆ
L!(
P (c → ˆ
c)
2
ˆ − μL + H(N, L, c) − H(N, L,
ˆ ˆ
=
exp β(μL
c))
P (ˆ
c → c)
L!( N (N2−1) − L)!

,

(4)
ˆ is the new number of links in the system. Based on this expression,
where L
one can formulate the necessary Monte-Carlo step: A single update step consists
of either adding a link (with probability of acceptance W+1 ), removing a link
(W−1 ) or rewiring a link (W0 ). The general expression for Wt follows from Eq.
(4) and is given by
Wt = min(1, st exp (−βΔE)) t = 0, +1, −1 ,

(5)

where
s0 = 1
s+1 = N (N −1)/2−L
e−βμ
L+1
L
s−1 = N (N −1)/2−L+1
eβμ

(6)
.

Calculation of energy-diﬀerence: It is apparent that in all three cases, calˆ − H is of major importance and should therefore be carried out
culation of H

1070

C. Biely and S. Thurner

Fig. 1. Ensemble-average of cluster-coeﬃcient C(c) and maximal degree Φ(c) in dependence of energy for the micro-canonical ensemble (a) and in dependence of the inverse
temperature β for the canonical ensemble (b). The data for Φ has been adjusted via
division through 2 × 103 .

eﬀectively. This means, that one would not like to calculate the energy diﬀerence
via calculation of the total Hamiltonian of the adjacency matrix c,
H(c) =

H( ) =

ki H(i) ,

(7)

i

where runs over all links and i over all nodes in the system, but only the energy
change associated with a speciﬁc rewirement (i, j) → (m, n). Unfortunately, if
the Hamiltonian depends e.g. on the degrees of both nodes, H( ) = H(ki , kj ),
the correct expression of the energy-change is given by
ΔE = H(km + 1, kn + 1) − H(ki , kj ) +

ΔHτ ξ

,

(8)

τ {k,i,m,n} ξ N (τ )

where
ΔHτ ξ = H(kˆτ , kξ ) − H(kτ , kξ )

,

(9)

and kˆτ is the new degree of node τ . Note, that – of course – additional specialization is necessary if the randomly chosen nodes m and n and/or the randomly
chosen nodes i and k are neighbours of each other. In these cases, Eq. (8) has
to be modiﬁed to the diﬀerent ’special’ cases. Practically, (8) implies that as
soon as N (i) + N (j) + N (m) + N (n) ≈ L holds for any speciﬁc rewirement
(i, j) → (m, n), the eﬀort to correctly calculate the energy-change amounts
to the re-calculation of the total energy sum as given by Eq. (7). Complementary, for N (i) + N (j) + N (m) + N (n) < L the energy may be calculated by
implementation of Eq. (8) more eﬃciently.

Simulation of Micro-, Grand-, and Canonical Ensembles

1071

Fig. 2. Ensemble equivalene of the degree-distribution for the micro-canonical (triangles), canonical (squares) and grand-canonical (circles) ensemble for N = 1000,
L = 3000 and appropriately chosen parameters (see text)

4

Results for a Speciﬁc Hamiltonian

For speciﬁc simulations of the ensembles described above we have chosen the
Hamiltonian introduced in [12]:
H=c−

log(b + Δk ) ,

(10)

where Δk = |ki − kj | (i and j being the nodes link is joining). b and c are
shape-parameters. While the form is somehow similar to a Hamiltonian studied
in [10], Eq. (10) explicitely introduces a form where the energy of the system
can not be expressed as a sum over nodes with the respective contributions only
being dependent on the own degree. We speculate, that it is exactly this circumstance, which also produces scaling of the cluster-coeﬃcient C(k) ∼ k −1 [16].
We simulated micro-, and canonical partition functions of (10) (canonical partition functions have already been simulated in [12]) with c = 0, b = 5 and grandcanonical partition functions with c = 10 and b = 5. Typically, we have simulated
systems of N = 103 nodes for about T = 2 × 106 time-steps, where we averaged
over every 20 × N th conﬁguration of the network. To eliminate dangers of a too
high sampling frequency we have also compared individual runs to simulations
amounting to 9 × 107 rewirements with averages done over every 106 th rewirement step (≈ 700L). No signiﬁcant discrepancies to the results shown have been
found. It has already been stated, that this Hamiltonian exhibits a behaviour of
the internal energy U (T ) indicating the existence of a critical point. Therefore
we do not discuss these aspects here. Instead, we show the maximum degree
Φ(c) of a speciﬁc network ensemble and the average cluster coeﬃcient C in dependence of energy (temperature) for the micro-canonical (canonical) ensemble

1072

C. Biely and S. Thurner

Fig. 3. (a) Some chosen microcanonical ensemble averages of degree distributions for
N = 1000 and L = 8000 at diﬀerent energies

in Figure 1. Φ(c) has already been proposed as order parameter when topological transitions are involved in preceding work [10]. For the micro-canonical
ensemble, the two values ﬁrst grow approximately exponential. At E ≈ − 4500,
the behaviour changes as the network is no longer dominated by a homogenous
mass of nodes, but by ’star-like’ nodes and comparatively low-connected nodes
(still, C(k) ∼ k −1 is preserved for all ensembles). In Figure 2 we demonstrate
the ensemble equivalence for the microcanonical, the grand-canonical and the
canonical ensemble. The ﬁxed energy of the microcanonical ensemble was chosen to be equal to the expectation value of the energy of the canonical ensemble
corresponding to the scale-free regime of the degree-distribution (at T ≈ 0.94
and E ≈ − 3530 units). At this point, we mention that we found the groundstate of microcanonical ensemble at about E ≈ − 9750 units, where the demon’s
energy does no longer fully ’ﬂow’ into the network. For the grand-canonical
degree-distribution we simulated at T ≈ 0.94 and μ ≈ 0.2, recovering the energy
average E ≈ − 3570 units (after subtracting the contribution resulting from
c = 0) and the link average L ≈ 3020. Additionaly, we adapted the parameter
c to a value where the number of links in the system is stable (c = 8.0). At c = 0,
the energy-decrease realized by adding a link is too large to allow stabilization
of the dynamics. Setting c = 0 implies, that every link has a constant cost.
As expected, the ensembles show a nice equivalence. Naturally, also the behaviour for C(k) is very similar, exhibiting scaling of C(k) ∼ k −1 .
Further, we present another interesting microcanonical ensemble average of
networks obtained by the Hamiltonian (10). In [12], it has been pointed out, that
a characteristic scale emerges for increasing number of links L in the system.
Figure 3 shows microcanonical ensemble averages for L = 8000, N = 1000
at various energies. From the degree distribution we see that the network is
organized in a scale free manner over two orders of magnitude at E ≈ −28 × 103
and over one order of magnitude at E ≈ − 10 × 103 . Degrees less than 10 are

Simulation of Micro-, Grand-, and Canonical Ensembles

1073

Fig. 4. (a) Some chosen microcanonical ensemble averages of the degree-dependence
of the Cluster-coeﬃcient distributions C for N = 1000 and L = 8000 at diﬀerent
energies. (b) Respective ensemble averages for the neighbour-connectivities K(k) .

dominated by Poissonian behaviour for E ≈ −28 × 103 . In Figure 4, we show
ensemble averages of C(k) and of the average neighbour connectivity K(k)
at the same energies. These curves show the existence of a highly non-trivial
network-structure, perfectly reproducing the empirical ﬁndings for many socioeconomic networks where the scaling C(k) ∼ k −δ with δ ≈ 1 is observed [16].
It also becomes evident, that the characteristic scaling of C(k) ∼ k −1 does
not depend on the scaling of the degree distribution, thus exhibiting a type of
universal behaviour for its own, see [16] for a brief discussion.

5

Conclusion

We have presented simulations of microcanonical, canonical and grand-canonical
ensembles of networks based on strict application of standard classical statistical mechanics to networks. Based on a previously introduced Hamiltonian [12],
we have documented that the emergence of typical ’complex’ networks is not
bound to the canonical ensemble, as expected. We have also presented results
of changes of topological ’indicators’ along the energies/temperatures involved
in the system. We have further shown that complex organized networks may be
obtained in other regimes of the system than previously explored (for higher L
and lower energy). In summary, we have provided clear evidence that the architecture of real-world networks exhibits – to some extent – patterns not untypical
for equilibrium.

References
1. Barabasi, A.L.: Statistical mechanics of complex networks. Rev. Mod. Phys. 74
(2002) 47.
2. Dorogovtsev, S.N., Mendes, J.F.F.: Evolution of Networks: From Biological Nets
to the Internet and WWW. Oxford University Press (2003).

1074

C. Biely and S. Thurner

3. Baiesi, M., Manna, S.S.: Scale-Free Networks from a Hamiltonian Dynamics. Phys.
Rev. E 68 (2003) 047103.
4. Alava, M.J., Dorogovtsev, S.N.: Complex networks created by aggregation. Phys.
Rev. E 71 (2005) 036107.
5. Abe, S., Thurner, S.: Complex networks emerging from ﬂuctuating random graphs:
Analytic formula for the hidden variable distribution. Phys. Rev. E 72 (2005)
036102.
6. Dorogovtsev, S.N., Mendes, J.F.F., Samukhin A.N.: Principles of statistical mechanics of uncorrelated random networks. Nucl. Phys. B 666 (2003) 396.
7. Burda, Z., Correia, J.D., Krzywicki, A.: Statistical ensemble of scale-free random
graphs. Phys. Rev. E 64 (2001) 046118.
8. Berg, J., L¨
assig, M.: Correlated random networks. Phys. Rev. Lett. 89 (2002)
228701.
9. Park, J., Newman, M.E.J.: The Statistical Mechanics of Networks. Phys. Rev. E
70 (2004) 066117.
10. Farkas, I., Derenyi, I., Palla, G., Vicsek, T.: Equilibrium statistical mechanics of
network structures. Lect. Notes Phys. 650 (2004) 163; Palla, G., Derenyi, I., Farkas,
I., Vicsek, T.: Statistical mechanics of topological phase transitions in networks.
Phys. Rev. E 69 (2004) 046117.
11. Bogacz, L., Burda, Z., Waclaw, B.: Homogeneous complex networks. condmat/0502124.
12. Biely, C., Thurner, S.: Statistical Mechanics of complex networks at a critical point:
Complexity, without Irreversibility? Santa Fe Working Paper 05-10-038.
13. Grandy, W.T.: Foundations of Statistical Mechanics. Kluwer Academic Publishers,
1987.
14. Creutz, M.: Microcanonical Monte Carlo Simulation. Phys. Rev. Lett. 50 (1993)
1411-1414.
15. Metropolis, N., Rosenbluth, A.W., Rosenbluth, M.N., Teller, H., Teller, E.: Equations of state calculations by fast computing machines. J. Chem. Phys. 21(6) (1953)
1087.
16. Ravasz, E. and Barabasi, A.L.: Hierarchical Organization of Complex Networks.
Phys. Rev. E 67 (2003) 026112.

