Design and Veriﬁcation for Hierarchical Power
Eﬃciency System (HPES) Design Techniques
Using Low Power CMOS Digital Logic
Taikyeong Jeong1, and Jaemyoung Lee2
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712-1014 USA
ttjeong@mail.utexas.edu
2
Korea Polytechnic University, Korea 429-793, ROK
lee@kpu.ac.kr

Abstract. This paper presents the design implementation of digital circuit and veriﬁcation method for power eﬃciency systems, focused on
static power consumption while the CMOS logic is in standby mode. As
complexity rises, it is necessary to study the eﬀects of system energy
at the circuit level and to develop accurate fault models to ensure system dependability. Our approach to designing reliable hardware involves
techniques for hierarchical power eﬃciency system (HPES) design and a
judicious mixture of veriﬁcation method is veriﬁed by this formal reﬁnement. This design methodology is validated by the low power adder with
functional veriﬁcation at the chip level after satisfying the design speciﬁcation. It also describes a new HPES integration method combining low
power circuit for special purpose computers. The use of new circuits and
their corresponding HPES design techniques leads to minimal system
failure in terms of reliability, speed, low power and design complexity
over a wide range of integrated circuit (IC) designs.

1

Introduction

The most important role of design and veriﬁcation work is to make sure that
all circuits and systems operate safely. Some designers devote countless hours to
rigorously testing all integrated circuits (ICs) as part of designer’s responsibility
to help ensure that the system remains fail-free with minimal energy usage.
These days special purpose computers associated with energy-eﬃcient designs
are becoming more important in telecommunications, and networking systems.
As one possible way of implementing energy-eﬃcient system design, we propose
the hierarchical power eﬃciency system (HPES) design techniques which include
low power CMOS digital logic focused on stable system fault coverage.
This special purpose requirement, a low power adder design with HPES, is
therefore a good example of the development of fail-free environments because
it contains a well established logical prover, and uses a variety of logic.
This work partially supported by the NASA (Grant No. NNG05GJ38G), and the
corresponding author is T. Jeong.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part I, LNCS 3991, pp. 761–768, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

762

T. Jeong and J. Lee

The implementation in this paper diﬀers from others in the following aspects.
This paper proposes a new low power design method by providing a fast logical approach and low power dissipation. The outcome, such as a low power
adder is introduced and a new method is derived by extending and modifying a
conventional adder for the performance comparison.
To explore the design methodology for these special purpose computers, we
should consider power eﬃciency with circuit-level implementation as well as
system-level dependability. Therefore, we discuss validation of a HPES design
techniques, comparing performance issues, in order to clarify the essence of design methodology in the design and veriﬁcation work. By design of circuit and
system validation, we show an empirical analysis of the full system reliability
and emphasize the overall power eﬃciency.

2

Low Power CMOS Digital Circuit Design

Based on logic evaluation methods, CMOS circuits are classiﬁed into static
CMOS and dynamic CMOS circuits. Static CMOS circuits have both pull-down
and pull-up paths for the logic evaluation [1]. Table 1 shows the criteria of CMOS
logic styles for high performance microprocessors [2].
In addition, the static power dissipation (P [x]static ) will be reduced since the
threshold voltage Vt will be high when the transistors are oﬀ. So, the static power
dissipation formula can be added,
P [x]static =

Id0n + Id0p VDD
2

(1)

−V t
, n is approximately 1.5, and x can be deﬁned as the
where Id0x = exp nV
th
leakage current of nMOS and pMOS. Consequently, the peak power consumption
(P [x]peak ) can be summarized as follows.

P [x]peak = ipeak Vpeak = max[p(t)]
P [x]avg =

1
T

P (t)dt =

VDD
T

(2)
isupply (t)dt

(3)

We can represent the output of a circuit by a mathematical equation such
as equation (3). P [x]avg may be a simple linear function for a linear circuit,
or a complicated non-linear function for a non-linear circuit. The output of a
circuit depends on the current input as well as the previous output and the
values of energy storage elements such as capacitors. To build a circuit model,
hspice simulation was done to gather input/output data. Then, coeﬃcient for
the linear model was determined by least mean square (LMS) error criterion, as
shown in equation (2). As expected, this simple linear circuit model generates
less accurate simulation result for output signal results.
Additionally, the lower the threshold voltage of a given transistor, the higher
the leakage currents (Iof f ) in that transistor. Higher leakage currents may result

Design and Veriﬁcation for HPES Design Techniques

763

Table 1. Criteria of CMOS Logic Styles
Operation Structure

Remarks

Static

Static Complementary: CVSL(Unclocked), Complementary, Diﬀerential split-level
Static Non-Complementary: pseudo nMOS
Dynamic Dynamic Complementary: CVSL(Clocked)
Dynamic Non-Complementary: Domino, Zipper1, Zipper2, Nora , Latched Domino

in higher static power dissipation in typical circuits as the threshold voltages
decrease, and the leakage currents increase [3]. In one embodiment, the precharge
transistor and the evaluate circuit transistors may be high-Vt transistors and may
contribute to low static power dissipation since low leakage current is generated.
In Figure 1, a low power CMOS digital logics are implemented.

(a) Low power CMOS digital logic

(b) Its complementary circuit

Fig. 1. Schematic view of low power CMOS digital circuits

A transistor having the lower threshold voltage is referred to herein as a
low-Vt transistor which is illustrated in the drawings with a dot in the center,
T6 , in Figure 1(a) [4]. This circuit is meant to simultaneously control leakage
currents and enhance performance could provide a boost to circuit design as VDD
drops below 1V . If low power CMOS digital logic provides as much performance
as it promises, this work would help provide incentive for future technology
generations to have better body contacts and change the way that transistors
are optimized.
Therefore, this development through the low power CMOS digital logic, is the
key idea to overcome energy limitation in this special purpose computers.
As we discussed, the low power digital logic which included low leakage currents and high-threshold voltage circuits will be validated as a result of formal

764

T. Jeong and J. Lee

veriﬁcation. Therefore, the design of various thereshold voltage circuit strengthens all other advantages of the circuit, such as strong logic correctness, sensitivity
on noise margin, and static power dissipation.

3
3.1

Design of Low Power Adder
Low Power Dissipation in Adder Design

Figure 2 shows a one-bit full adder cell as a carry save addition which is commonly used in VLSI design. Carry propagate bit (Pi ) and carry generate bit
(Gi ) can be deﬁned as Xi ⊕ Yi and Xi · Yi , respectively. Therefore, when a row
of full adders is applied in parallel, 3 numbers (Xi , Yi and Ci ) can be reduced
to 2 numbers (Si , Ci+1 ), each of a carry bit and a save bit.

(a) Carry propagate/Carry generate
and Carry save addition

(b) Normal adder and Carry save addition

Fig. 2. One-bit full adder and Propagate/Generate addition

For complex VLSI chips and systems, these 3 power reduction steps are dominant in terms of delay, power consumption and silicon area. The output, sum
and carry are ﬁnally converted to one number using a fast carry-propagating
adder such as a carry lookahead adder (CLA) using low power CMOS digital
logic which included various thereshold voltage logic discussed in Section 2. A
detail of the lookahead stage and integrated linear and non-linear logic is shown
in Figure 3.
The core array occupies most of the silicon area of a large multiplier but has
regularity in the design. In many cases, the core array is designed to have a ﬁxed
bit pitch in one direction since it is advantageous to have a common bit pitch for
data-path operators such as multipliers, adders and register arrays. The height
in the other direction has a reliability in the size depending on the need of the

Design and Veriﬁcation for HPES Design Techniques

765

Fig. 3. Schematic view of low power adder lookahead stage

Fig. 4. Block diagram of 32-bit multiplexer core implementation based on 4-bit lookahead adder

speciﬁc operator design. Therefore, the core cells such as full adders and Booth
multiplexors are stacked vertically and connected together with the same cell
width. Figure 4 shows 32-bit slice constructed in this way.
3.2

Hierarchical Power Eﬃciency System (HPES) Design Approach

High performance design with low power adders is one of the most frequent
applications encountered in microprocessor operations and signal processing

766

T. Jeong and J. Lee

applications. Due to its inherent latency and the required large power, we consider a new design and veriﬁcation method, HPES approach, for this special purpose design which is one of the crucial factors to determine system
performance.
We consider a hierarchical design step: Once the power reduction is generated,
formal veriﬁcation can be validated with the multiple number of energy savings.
This process is divided into three steps which are (1) low power reduction, (2)
formal veriﬁcation, and (3) dynamic integration of HPES design. The overall
design as shown in Figure 5 will be composed of a low power adder design and
veriﬁcation by LAMBDA. In the ﬁrst step, the product matrix is reduced to the
bottom hardware part based on linear circuit modeling. Then, static power is
minimized and forms a design product matrix. Dynamic integration and bottom
hardware are propagated at the ﬁnal HPES design stage.
The HPES design, design and formal veriﬁcation method during synthesis
ensure a correct implementation and are employed to provide high coverage
of other faults and 100% stuck at fault coverage. In addition, test circuitry is
mathematically checked and formally proven not to interfere with the functionality of the IC. Exhaustive simulations and tests are employed using multiple
simulations.
Table 2 shows the simulation results on a low power adder from a benchmark
suite, ITC99 [6]. For example, the b14 circuit has 245 ﬂip-ﬂops and the test

Fig. 5. Hierarchical three steps design with HPES techniques

Table 2. Simulation results of the benchmark suite on low power adder at 1.0V VDD
Circuit

Conventional adder

Low power adder

Characteristics of Low power adder

no. of FFs Fault coverage no. of FFs Fault coverage high-Vt usage

b14
b15
b17
b201
b22

245
449
415
490
735

94.23%
90.12%
87.01%
92.23%
85.35%

295
499
465
540
785

99.65%
92.76%
87.11%
94.92%
87.53%

1,172
2,148
1,985
2,344
3,516

Power reduction

17.3%
32.9%
17.6%
20.2%
19.4%

Design and Veriﬁcation for HPES Design Techniques

767

results have been veriﬁed with a set of 160 stimulus vectors and the complete set
of benchmark circuits. The ﬁrst and second column shows a number of FFs and
fault coverage from the conventional adder and low power adder, respectively.
The last column represents diﬀerent high-Vt that were a threshold below ground
and above VDD . Also, the last column implemented a power reduction rate using
a low power adder for comparison. The results conﬁrm that test length and low
power adder are signiﬁcantly reduced while achieving high fault coverage and
energy eﬃciency compared to a conventional adder, with a slight increase in gate
length, given that the supply voltage was scaled by at least 10% per technology
generation from 0.25μm to 0.13μm.
This design was veriﬁed by the hardware with functional veriﬁcation at the
chip-level while satisfying the design speciﬁcation by formal veriﬁcation tool
LAMBDA. The comparison of fault coverage and power reduction rate with
a benchmark circuit (i.e., b14) at various supply voltages range, from 1.3V to
0.9V , is shown in Figure 6(a). It should be noted that the low power adder design
should be determined according to the channel length of the MOS transistor and
other design parameters.
In order to achieve comparable results of the chosen power adder and conventional adder, applied to the carry lookahead function, there must be a gradual
descent of speed and power metrics. The conventional adder function with high
fault coverage applied to the experimental setup is very similar in shape, but
with low fault coverage percent. Additionally, Figure 6(b) shows comparison
results of conventional and low power adder with power reduction rate.
Despite the diﬀerent supply voltage scales, a very good comparison of both
fault coverage and power reduction can be concluded. HPES design with low
power adders is a proven design example that overcome energy limitations and
will satisfy the ultimate goal of reliable system impact on minimal power
usage.

(a) Fault coverage rate at various supply (b) Power reduction at various supply
voltage scales
voltage ranges
Fig. 6. Simulation results of benchmark circuit (b14) at various supply voltages, from
1.3V to 0.9V

768

4

T. Jeong and J. Lee

Conclusions and Future Work

The aim of the paper is to model nonlinear circuits using reliable HPES modeling options, which could be a better substitute of a vulnerable design option
without losing the system performance. Moreover, the proposed design will save
static power consumption and yield beneﬁts for saving overall power dissipation.
Finally, this work attempts to solve energy limitation problems using the HPES
integration method that would ﬁt within existing design speciﬁcations.
In summary, low power CMOS digital circuit power dissipation methodologies
in special purpose computer architectures and its HPES design are compared
with a view to both design integration and its reliability. New architectures are
derived for power reduction methodologies associated with a new design of low
power circuit. The better understanding of the eﬀects of power eﬃciency can
be used to develop accurate HPES models that can be applied into the future
design technology.

References
1. R. E. Bryant, K. -T. Cheng, A. B. Kahng, K. Keutzer, W. Lamy, R. Newton, L.
Pileggi, J. M. Rabaey and A. Sangiovanni-Vincetelli, “Limitations and challenges
of computer-aided design tehcnology for CMOS VLSI,” Proc. of the IEEE, vol. 89.,
no.3., Mar 2001
2. A. P. Chandrakasan and R. W. Brodersen, “Low power digital CMOS design,”
Kluwer Academic Publishers 1995 USA.
3. P. Pant, R. K. Roy and A Chatterjee, “Dual-threshold voltage assignement with
transistor sizing for low power CMOS circuits,” IEEE Trans. on VLSI System, vol.
9, no. 2, pp. 390-394, Apr. 2001
4. T. Jeong and A. Ambler., “Design trade-oﬀs and power reduction techniques for
high performance circuits and system,” Springer-Verlag, ISSN: 0302-9743, 2006
5. D. Liu and C. Svensson, “Trading speed for low power by choice of supply and
thershold voltages,” IEEE J. of Solid-State Circutis, vol. 28, pp. 10-17, Jan 1993.
6. F. Corno and M. S. Reorda, “RT-level ITC 99 benchmarks and ﬁrst ATPG results,”
IEEE Design and Test of Computers, pp. 44-53, July-August 2000

