Adaptive Mesh Reﬁnement and Domain
Decomposition: A Framework to Study
Multi-physical and Multi-scale Phenomena.
First Application to Reacting Gas Flows
J. Ryan
ONERA,B.P. 72, 92322 Chˆ
atillon cedex, France
ryan@onera.fr

Abstract. The aim of this work is to extend the Adaptive Mesh Reﬁnement (AMR) technique . AMR is an ideal platform for coupling diﬀerent
discretisations and models, as each grid level can use a diﬀerent solver.
Compact conditions have to be deﬁned and these are problems which are
at the core of Domain Decomposition methods. An application to a planar shock interacting with a circular diﬀusion H2-air ﬂame is presented.

1

Introduction

The complexity of combustion and the subsequent diﬃculty of describing the
intricate coupling between the many physical phenomena due to the presence
of multiple length scales and the large number of species involved still limit the
impact of numerical studies. One of the themes which is presented here is to
extend the Adaptive Mesh Reﬁnement (AMR) technique initially written for a
ﬁnite volume algorithm to ﬁnite diﬀerences in order to integrate a 3D combustion
solver. One of the main problems with AMR is the connection between coarse
and ﬁne patches. Domain decomposition methods can help to improve these. The
ﬁnal aim of our work is the coupling of various combustion solvers from simpliﬁed
combustion model on a coarse grid to high precision DNS Finite Diﬀerence
reacting gas model.

2

Adaptive Mesh Reﬁnement

The locally adaptive mesh reﬁnement method written at Onera by M. Borrel et al
[2], originally developed by Berger and Oliger [1] and many other authors, uses a
sequence of nested levels of reﬁned structured grids (patches), on which diﬀerent
solvers on each level can be applied. These patches are built around cells that
have been ﬂagged with a problem dependant sensor, with a grouping/clustering
technique.
The system of overlaid grids with successively ﬁner spacing in time and in space
needs the following operators to couple the diﬀerent levels Prolongation operator
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part II, LNCS 3992, pp. 66–69, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

Adaptive Mesh Reﬁnement and Domain Decomposition

67

(P), Restriction operator (R), Fine coarse boundary treatment (FC), Fine ﬁne
boundary treatment(FF).
The ﬁrst operator (P) usually consists in retrieving values from former patches
and interpolating the missing values. The second operator ( (R) )replaces coarse
values by the overlying newly computed ﬁne values. The last operator (FF) , as
the scheme is entirely time explicit, is only coding work as it consists in retrieving
computed values from neighbouring patches. Instabilities arise from the choice
of the third operator (FC) . In the original Finite Volume method , ﬁne coarse
boundary treatments are dealt with by creating around the ﬁne patch a set of
ﬁctitious points with values interpolated from the coarse grid. Fluxes between
ﬁne and coarse interfaces are readjusted after computation. Applied to high order ﬁnite diﬀerence discretisation, replacing interpolated values by values such
that ﬁne and coarse gradients were equal proved to be stable in all considered
cases.

3

AMR and Combustion

Th´evenin’s two-dimensional studies [3] have shown the necessity for a high precision solver (6th order in space and 4th order in time) with a large number of
points. For three dimensional cases, this becomes quite prohibitive. Only locally
adaptive and reﬁned grids can resolve this impediment, especially as cases to
be studied show locality of structures. To reduce even more computation costs
, and as complex chemistry modeling is not necessary every where and all the
time, a lower order algorithm MAJIC has been tested and integrated within the
AMR platform. This method can run on coarse grids and detect areas that need
to be reﬁned in terms of geometry and model, and if necessary, a higher order
solver can be used locally .
3.1

MAJIC

MAJIC is a 3D Finite Diﬀerence discretization code with a simpliﬁed combustion
model developed by G. Billet [4]. MAJIC uses a time-splitting method . The 3-D
ﬁnite diﬀerence operator is split into a product of simpler explicit operators. The
convective terms are solved by a AU SM + −M U SCL−triad approach ( [6]). The
”double ﬂux model” presented in [6] is used to preserve pressure and velocity
across the contact discontinuities . All the diﬀusion and dissipation terms are
solved with a centered second-order scheme.
3.2

Planar Shock Interacting with a Circular Diﬀusion H2-Air
Flame

A circular diﬀusion ﬂame moving in a supersonic air ﬂow (M = 2.) interacts
with a steady planar shock. The bubble contains a H2-N2 mixture (YH2 =
0.233, YN2 = 0.767) at temperature T = 300KUpstream, the temperature of

68

J. Ryan

Fig. 1. Before the shock

Fig. 2. Through the shock

Fig. 3. After the shock

the ambient air is 1500K and the pressure is uniform (p = 1bar). This interaction sets up two counter-rotating vortices that are going to stretch the ﬂame
and enhance the total burning velocity. A detailed chemistry (9 species and 38
reactions) and detailed transport properties are used.
On ﬁgures (1,2,3), are shown temperature evolution through the shock and
the attached patches.

4

AMR and Coupling

AMR is an ideal platform for coupling diﬀerent discretizations and models, as
each grid level can use a diﬀerent solver. In the classical AMR technique, ﬁctitious points and interpolated values are created to allow the ﬁne grid to compute
the needed derivatives. To extend this to high order schemes , compact conditions have to be deﬁned and these are problems which are at the core of Domain
Decomposition methods.
4.1

Artiﬁcial Boundary Conditions

J. Gander, L. Halpern and F. Nataf in [5] developed optimal transmission conditions for space - time domain decompositions for wave propagation problems.
When deﬁning a ﬁner patch, and using explicit time schemes, the time step to
preserve the CFL number is reduced by the reﬁnement factor. Fictitious points
have thus to be deﬁned at all the intermediate time steps. The space-time domain boundary conditions (Robin type conditions in time and space) mentioned
above simpliﬁes computation of these boundary values. From the underlying
coarse domain, space and time derivatives can be computed at the boundaries of
the ﬁne patch, and combined to provide a boundary condition for the ﬁner grid.
Computation can then proceed in the ﬁne patch. Fine values are then injected
in the coarse grid.
First comparisons between the ﬁctitious points technique and the time domain
method ( Artiﬁcial boundary conditions, ABC) were performed in the case of the
one dimensional unsteady convection diﬀusion of a Gaussian The ABC method
gives better results for low order schemes, and are as good for a high order scheme.

Adaptive Mesh Reﬁnement and Domain Decomposition

69

Fig. 4. Time evolution of a temperature blob round a NACA airfoil

Another test to validate the artiﬁcial boundary conditions was the 2D convection diﬀusion equation round a NACA airfoil. Two domains were used with
a diﬀerent solver :P1 ﬁnite elements, on the triangular mesh close to the airfoil,
second order ﬁnite diﬀerences on the far-away ﬁeld.

5

Conclusion

The AMR technique has shown to be valid in the case of diﬀerent discretisations of the ﬂuid equations. Future work will concern coupling diﬀerent (simple
to complex) modeling of these equations. The AMR-DDM technique can be extended to other ﬁelds of physics (solid mechanics, electro-magnetism, ...). The
use of common tools cannot but be fruitful to develop multi-physics coupling.

References
1. Berger M. J. , Oliger J. Adaptive Mesh Reﬁnement for Hyperbolic Partial Diﬀerential Equations. J. Comput. Phys., 53, pp. 484-512, (1984).
2. Borrel M., Hur´e N. A MUSCL/DG AMR Method in 3D: A Multiblock Multigrid
AMR Method in 3D using a MUSCL or a Discontinuous Galerkin Approach. Finite
Volume for Complex Applications, Porquerolles, France, June 2002
3. Th´evenin D., Gicquel O., Hilka M. and Darabiha N., Direct Numerical Simulation
of turbulent premixed ﬂames using intrinsic low-dimensional manifolds, Combustion
Science and Technology ,149, pp.297-337 (1999)
4. Billet G. Vers l’extension de l’approche MUSCL-AUSM-triade `
a la LES et la DNS
des ´ecoulements compressibles visqueux. Application `
a la combustion instationnaire
des ﬂammes de diﬀusion avec chimie simpliﬁ´ee. Rapport ONERA (2001).
5. Gander M.J. ,Halpern L. ,Nataf. F. Optimal convergence for Overlapping and NonOverlapping Schwartz Wave form, relaxation. 11th International Conference on Domain Decomposition Methods, (1999).
6. Billet G., Abgrall R. An adaptive shock capturing algorithm for solvingunsteady
reactive ﬂows. Computers and Fluids, 32, pp 1473-1495, (2003).

