Lattice Properties of Two-Dimensional
Charge-Stabilized Colloidal Crystals
Pavel Dyshlovenko1 and Yiming Li2
1

2

Laboratory of Computer Simulations, Ulyanovsk State technical University,
Ulyanovsk 432027, Russia
pavel@ulstu.ru
Department of Communication Engineering, National Chiao Tung University,
Hsinchu 300, Taiwan
ymli@faculty.nctu.edu.tw

Abstract. In this paper, electrostatic interaction in two-dimensional
colloidal crystals obeying the non-linear Poisson-Boltzmann equation is
studied numerically. We ﬁrst give an overview of the recently developed
approach to study of the lattice properties of colloidal crystals. The central point of the theory is determination of the force constants, which
are the coeﬃcients of the energy quadratic form of the crystal. Particular attention is given to the symmetry considerations. Some prospective
topics of research are brieﬂy discussed.

1

Introduction

Colloidal crystals are dispersions of colloidal particles arranged into a regular
lattice. Besides their importance for studying structural phase transitions resembling conventional melting and freezing, they are also well-deﬁned model
systems whose macroscopic properties can be directly connected to the underlying microscopic interparticle interactions.
Theoretical analysis of lattice properties of colloidal crystals, such as normal
modes of oscillations or elastic properties, is mostly based on the representation
of the potential energy of the particles as a sum of pair interactions. Although
the concept of pairwise interaction is adequate for many systems, such as the
dipole-dipole interaction [1, 2] and purely entropic forces [3, 4], it fails for chargestabilized colloidal crystals. In particular, it was shown that charge-stabilized
colloidal crystals’ elastic properties observed cannot be understood within the
idea of linear superposition of pairwise interactions [5].
In this paper, we consider a two-dimensional charge-stabilized colloidal crystal
obeying the general nonlinear Poisson-Boltzmann (PB) equation. Description of
recently proposed approach [6, 7] is included. Our approach enables the force
constant determination and successfully provides quantitative estimation of the
many-particle eﬀects. It validates the approximation of the nearest neighbor
interaction in such systems. In particular, it turns out that the contribution of
many-particle to the total electrostatic potential energy is signiﬁcant and cannot
be neglected for a broad range of particle radii and crystal lattice parameters.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part IV, LNCS 3994, pp. 599–606, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

600

P. Dyshlovenko and Y. Li

This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we state the model formulation. In Section 3, we state the force constants determination. In Section 4, we
discuss the role of symmetry. In Section 5, we present the numerical methods.
Section 6 reports the results. Section 7 draws conclusions.

2

Mathematical Model Formulation

The colloidal crystal under consideration is shown in the Fig. 1. It consists
of inﬁnitely long cylindrical colloidal particles of radius R arranged in a twodimensional hexagonal lattice with the lattice constant a. The system of the
particles is immersed in symmetrical univalent electrolyte. The particles are
perfectly rigid dielectric rods. The dielectric permittivity of the particles is much
smaller then the one of electrolyte solution, so it is set to be zero for all numerical
calculations in the paper. The particles are charged with uniform surface charge
density σ which is kept constant (the so-called constant-charge or cc-model). The
crystal system considered in the paper can be pertinent to the behavior of rodlike objects like DNA molecules, tobacco mosaic viruses [8] and fd viruses [9], rodlike polyelectrolytes [10] or some mesoscopic objects [11]. Throughout the present
paper, length and electro-static potential are expressed in units of Debye length
κ−1 = (2nqe2 / kT )−1/2 and kT /qe respectively, where n is the concentration of
either of the species in the electrolyte, qe is the absolute value of the electronic
charge, is the absolute permittivity of the electrolyte, k is the Boltzmann
constant, T is the absolute temperature, and the rationalised SI system of units
is used to express the factors.
Electric potential φ in such a system obeys the non-linear PB equation [12]
in the electrolyte’s domain outside the particles and the Laplace equation in the
interior of the particles:
∂2φ ∂2φ
+ 2 =
∂x2
∂y

sinh φ, (in the electrolyte),
0,
(inside the particles).

(1)

Electric ﬁeld at the surface of the particles meets the electrostatic boundary
condition
En = σ,
(2)
where En is a normal component of the electric ﬁeld in the electrolyte and
dielectric permittivity of the particles is equal to zero. As usual, the tangential
component of the electric ﬁeld at the interface remains continuous.
There are no net forces on the particles when all the particles are located in
their equilibrium positions. If one or more of the particles are displaced from the
equilibrium, the non-zero net forces on them arise. The force on any particle in
the system can be calculated by means of integration of the stress tensor:
∇φ ⊗ ∇φ −

F=
Γ

1
|∇φ|2 + cosh φ − 1 I · n dΓ,
2

(3)

Lattice Properties of Two-Dimensional Charge-Stabilized Colloidal Crystals

3

2

y
4

601

0

1
x

5

6

a2
a1

a

2R

Fig. 1. Two-dimensional hexagonal colloidal crystal lattice. Particles are inﬁnite rods
perpendicular to the plane of the ﬁgure. Domain of the numerical problem comprises
seven particles 0 to 6 with corresponding hexagonal Wigner-Seitz cells.

where Γ is a Wigner-Seitz cell’s boundary, n is an outer normal vector to the
element dΓ , and I is an identity matrix. Although any closed loop enclosing
the particle can be employed for the integration, using of the boundary of the
Wigner-Seitz cell is practical since it provides rather low errors in process of
numerical implementation of the integration.

3

Force Constants Determination

Classical potential energy V of a crystal for small displacements of the particles
from the equilibrium positions can be written [13] as follows:
V =

1
2

α,β,N,M

∂2V
∂Zα,N ∂Zβ,N+M

Zα,N Zβ,N+M ,

(4)

where Zα,N is an α-component of the displacement Z from the equilibrium
position pointed by vector N, α = x, y, β = x, y, N and M are vectors of the
Bravais lattice. Coeﬃcients
M
=
Cαβ

∂2V
∂Zα,N ∂Zβ,N+M

(5)

of the quadratic form (4) are called force constants. They do not depend on N
M
and can be arranged into the square matrix C = Cαβ
of a quadratic form,

602

P. Dyshlovenko and Y. Li

M
the coeﬃcients Cαβ
at ﬁxed M constituting the 2 × 2 submatrix C M of the
general matrix, and M ∈ {(0, 0), (1, 0), (0, 1), (−1, 1), (−1, 0), (0, −1), (1, −1)} in
our consideration.
Determination of the force constants is based on the observation that the ﬁrst
derivatives (∂V /∂Zα,N ), α = x, y, are merely the components of the force on
the particle N. The forces can be calculated directly by integrating the stress
tensor, as it has been mentioned above, after the solution of the PB equation has
been obtained. Then, the primary numerical data for the forces on the particles
of the system exerted by the shift of the central particle 0 are transformed into
the forces Fα,0 on the central particle caused by the shifts of diﬀerent particles
using the symmetries of the crystal. These forces are expressed as the functions
of corresponding displacements, both positive and negative: Fα,0 = Fα,0 (Zβ,M ),
α = x, y, β = x, y, M ∈ {(0, 0), (1, 0), (0, 1), (−1, 1), (−1, 0), (0, −1), (1, −1)}.
M
Finally, the force constants are obtained as Cαβ
= −∂Fα,0 /∂Zβ,M. The differentiation was carried out by ﬁtting the numerical data for the functions
Fα,0 = Fα,0 (Zβ,M ) with polynomials of power 7 and taking the coeﬃcient of
the linear term as the ﬁrst derivative at point 0.

4

Role of Symmetry

Taking into account the symmetry of the crystal enables signiﬁcant reduction of
the amount of numerical calculations. First, direct calculation of the forces on
the central particle 0 would require multiple solutions of the PB equation for
conﬁgurations with diﬀerent particles shifted from their equilibrium positions.
Translational and inversion symmetry of the crystal lattice makes it possible to
reduce the calculation of the forces on the central particle 0 arising from the
motion of diﬀerent particles to the calculation of the forces on all the particles (seven here) due to the motion of only the central particle alone. Having
the numerical solution of the PB equation for the conﬁguration with only the
central particle shifted, the forces on all the particles in the system can then
be obtained by taking the integral of the stress tensor over the corresponding
contours. The post-solution integration is much less expensive in the sense of
computer resources required than the numerical solution itself.
Second, mirror symmetry of the problem allows the use of only a half of the
problem’s domain. When the particle 0 is shifted along the x-axis, the problem
retains the mirror symmetry about this axis. Thus, without loss of generality,
the upper half of the domain above the x-axis is required.
Finally, rotational symmetry of the crystal lattice allows further reduction of
the calculations at the post-solution stage. The seven particles under consideration belong to two diﬀerent orbits of the rotational subgroup of the crystal point
group. The ﬁrst orbit consists of only the central particle 0. The particles 1 to
6 constitute another orbit: they transform into each other when rotating about
the point 0 at the angle multiple of π/3. For symmetry reasons, matrix C (0,0)
has diagonal elements equal to each other and oﬀ-diagonal ones equal to zero.
(0,0)
Consequently, matrix C (0,0) is completely determined by only one, say Cx,x , of

Lattice Properties of Two-Dimensional Charge-Stabilized Colloidal Crystals

603

its diagonal element. For the same reasons, matrix C (1,0) for the particle 1 has
zero oﬀ-diagonal elements and is thus determined by only two diagonal elements
(1,0)
(1,0)
Cx,x and Cy,y . Since particles 1 to 6 belong to the same orbit of the rotational
subgroup of the crystal point group the force constant matrices of these particles are not independent. If the matrix of the particle described by vector M is
known, the matrices of the other particles can be obtained by the matrix transformation according to the rule of quadratic forms’ matrix transformation [9]:
C N = RT (φ)C M R(φ),

(6)

where M, N ∈ {(1, 0), (0, 1), (−1, 1), (−1, 0), (0, −1), (1, −1)}, φ is the angle between the vectors N and M, and superscript T means matrix transposition.
Therefore, the complete set of 28 force constants (7 particles × 4 matrix elements, in the approximation of nearest neighbour interaction) is completely
determined only by the three non-trivial independent parameters which should
be obtained directly from computer experiments. The other constants are obtained then by means of symmetry transformations (6).

5

Numerical Procedures

Equations (1) and (2) are solved numerically using the method described in
[14, 15]. This method combines the ﬁnite-element solution of the equation with
an adaptive mesh reﬁnement [16, 17, 18]. It is well suited for the two-dimensional
problems with complicated geometry and variety of boundary conditions. The
domain of the problem for numerical solution consists of the Wigner-Seitz cells
of the central particle 0 and its six nearest neighbours 1 to 6. The standard von
Neumann boundary conditions hold at the outer boundary of the domain.
The numerical calculations are carried out for the central particle shifted by
ten equal steps along the positive direction of the x-axis so that the largest shift
amounted to 10% of the separation distance between the neatest particles. The
forces exerted by this shift on all the seven particles on the particles were calculated by means of numerical integration of the stress tensor, as it was described
above. Since the domain of the problem is restricted to the seven particles, the
interaction of the central particles with its nearest neighbours is only considered
in this paper. It is shown in [6] that this is a very good approximation for a
broad range of parameters a and R.
Domain of the problem with the mesh of triangular elements on it is shown
in the Fig. 2. Due to the mirror symmetry about the x-axis only the upper half
of the domain is required. The mesh is a Delaunay triangulation of the domain
at each stage of the solution.

6

Results and Discussion

The force constants of the two-dimensional hexagonal charge-stabilized colloidal
crystal for the typical set of parameters σ = 2.0, R = 1.0 and a = 5.0 are shown
in Table 1. Only the three independent force constants are presented; the other

604

P. Dyshlovenko and Y. Li

Fig. 2. Domain of the problem and irregular mesh of triangular elements on it. The
round boundaries of colloidal particles are clearly observed. The mesh is obtained in
the beginning of the solution after the ﬁrst iteration of the numerical procedure and
consists of 2160 triangular elements. The ﬁnal mesh is obtained after ten iterations
comprised more than 135000 elements, concentrated mostly at the outer boundaries of
the particles.

ones can be obtained my means of the transformation (6). Complete set of the
results and their systematic analysis are provided in [7]. Nevertheless, the example in Table 1 illustrates the main features of the data obtained. First, it turns
(1,0)
out that the force constant Cy,y for the system considered is deﬁnitely nonzero, while the theory of harmonic crystal based on the assumption of pairwise
interaction between particles requires always this constant to be strictly equal
to zero. A quantitative estimation of the contribution of the many-particle interaction into a total electrostatic interaction in a system was introduced in [6]. It
was shown there that the collective electrostatic interaction in two-dimensional
colloidal crystals cannot be expressed as a sum of pair interactions between the
particles and that the many-particle interactions are strong enough for a broad
range of charge densities σ on the particles, radii R of the particles and lattice
parameters a even at very large ones when the interparticle interaction itself
(0,0)
(1,0)
is weak. Another feature of the data in Table 1 is that the ratio Cx,x /Cx,x
is not exactly equal to −3 as it should be according to the approximation of
the nearest-neighbor interaction. A quantitative measure of the validity of the
nearest-neighbor interaction approximation based on this discrepancy was proTable 1. Force constants of the crystal for σ = 2.0, R = 1.0 and a = 5.0
(0,0)

Cx,x

0.6756891

(1,0)

Cx,x

-0.2663590

(1,0)

Cy,y

0.0480621

Lattice Properties of Two-Dimensional Charge-Stabilized Colloidal Crystals

605

posed in [6]. It was shown there, that this approximation remains a rather good
one for a broad range of crystal parameters σ, R and a.

7

Conclusions

In this paper, we have computationally explored the electrostatic interaction in
two-dimensional colloidal crystals. The non-linear Poisson-Boltzmann equation
has been solved numerically with adaptive ﬁnite element method. An overview
of the recently developed approach to study of the lattice properties of colloidal
crystals has been reported. The central point of the theory focuses on determination of the force constants, which are the coeﬃcients of the energy quadratic
form of the crystal. Particular attention has been given to the symmetry considerations. Some prospective topics of research have brieﬂy been discussed. The
characteristics of the crystal system considered in the paper seem to be valid for
broader range of the colloidal systems. In particular, the crystal with the particles
obeying the constant potential model (cp-model) or recently proposed constant
total charge model (ctc-model) should be investigated. Corresponding calculations are currently in progress. Diﬀerent types of crystal lattices, primarily the
square one, are also of interest. One more question to study is the contribution
of the neighbors further then the nearest ones into the total electrostatic interaction and corresponding modiﬁcation of the crystal’s properties. To study this
problem, further development of the program code is needed to enable suﬃcient
number of particles in the system. There are no doubts that three-dimensional
colloidal crystals possess many features of their two-dimensional counterparts.
However, study of three-dimensional problems will require eﬀorts for new program code development utilizing the power of modern libraries for partial diﬀerential equation solution and involving some kind of parallelization [19].

Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by Taiwan National Science Council (NSC)
under Contract NSC-94-2215-E-009-084 and Contract NSC-95-2752-E-009-003PAE, by the Ministry of Economic Aﬀairs, Taiwan under Contract 93-EC-17-A07-S1-0011, and by the Taiwan semiconductor manufacturing company under a
2005-2006 grant. One of the author (P.D.) gratefully acknowledges the ﬁnancial
support from the Mianowski Fund of Foundation for Polish Science during his
visit to the Institute of Catalysis and Surface Chemistry (Cracow) where a part
of the present work was carried out.

References
1. Keim, P., Maret, G., Herz, U., von Gr¨
unberg, H.H.: Harmonic lattice behavior of
two-dimensional colloidal crystals. Phys. Rev. Lett. 92 (2004) 215504
2. Hay, M.B., Workman, R.K., Manne, S.: Two-dimensional condensed phases from
particles with tunable interactions. Phys. Rev. E 67 (2003) 012401

606

P. Dyshlovenko and Y. Li

3. Cheng, Z., Zhu, J., Russel, W.B., Chaikin, P.M.: Phonons in an entropic crystal.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 85(7) (2000) 1460–1463
4. Penciu, R.S., Kafesaki, M., Fytas, G., Economou, E.N., Steﬀen, W., Hollingsworth,
A., Russel, W.B.: Phonons in colloidal crystals. Europhys. Lett. 58(5) (2002) 699–
704
5. Weiss, J.A., Larsen, A.E., Grier, D.G.: Interactions, dynamics, and elasticity in
charge-stabilized colloidal crystals. J. Chem. Phys. 109(19) (1998) 8659–8666
6. Dyshlovenko, P.E.: Evidence of many-particle interactions in two-dimensional
charge-stabilized colloidal crystals. Phys. Rev. Lett. 95 (2005) 038302
7. Dyshlovenko, P.E. (the paper in preparation)
8. Adams, M., Fraden, S. Biophys. J. 74 (1998) 669
9. Purdy, K.R., Dogic, Z., Fraden, S., R¨
uhm, A., Lurio, L., Mochrie, S.G.J.: Measuring
the nematic order of suspensions of colloidal fd virus by x-ray diﬀraction and optical
birefringence. Phys. Rev. E 67 (2003) 031708
10. Guilleaume, B., Blaul, J., Ballauﬀ, M., Wittemann, M., Rehahn, M., Goerigk,
G.: The distribution of counterions around synthetic rod-like polyelectrolytes in
solution. Eur. Phys. J. E 8 (2002) 299–309
11. de A. A. Soler-Illia, G.J., Sanchez, C., Lebeau, B., Patarin, J.: Chemical strategies
to design textured materials: from microporous and mesoporous oxides to nanonetworks and hierarchical structures. Chem. Rev. 102 (2002) 4093–4138
12. Israelachvili, J.N.: Chap. 12. In: Intermolecular and Surface Forces. Academic
Press (1991)
13. Feynman, R.P.: Chap. 1. In: Statistical Mechanics. W. A. Benjamin, Inc., Massachusetts (1972)
14. Dyshlovenko, P.E.: Adaptive mesh enrichment for the poissonboltzmann equation.
J. Comp. Phys. 172 (2001) 198–208
15. Dyshlovenko, P.E.: Adaptive numerical method for poissonboltzmann equation
and its application. Comp. Phys. Commun. 147 (2002) 335–338
16. Li, Y., Sze, S.M., Chao, T.S.: A Practical Implementation of Parallel Dynamic
Load Balancing for Adaptive Computing in VLSI Device Simulation. Comp. Phys.
Commun. 147 (2002) 335–338
17. Li, Y., Chao, T.S., Sze, S.M.: A Domain Partition Approach to Parallel Adaptive
Simulation of Dynamic Threshold Voltage MOSFET. Eng. Comput. 18 (2002)
124–137
18. Li, Y., Yu, S.M.: A Parallel Adaptive Finite Volume Method for Nanoscale Doublegate MOSFETs Simulation. J. Comput. Appl. Math. 175 (2005) 87–99
19. Li, Y.: A Parallel Monotone Iterative Method for the Numerical Solution of Multidimensional Semiconductor Poisson Equation. Comp. Phys. Commun. 153 (2003)
359–372

