A Grid-Based Flavonoid Informatics Portal*
HaiGuo Xu1, Karpjoo Jeong2,**, Seunho Jung3, Hanku Lee2, Segil Jeon4,
KumWon Cho5, and Hyunmyung Kim3
1

Department of Advanced Technology Fusion, Konkuk University, Seoul, Korea
haegook@ricl.konkuk.ac.kr
2 School of Internet and Multimedia Engineering, Konkuk University, Seoul, Korea
(jeongk, hlee)@konkuk.ac.kr
3 Department of Microbial Engineering, Konkuk University, Seoul, Korea
shjung@konkuk.ac.kr, swisdom@empal.com
4 BioMolecular Informatics Center, Konkuk University, Seoul, Korea
sgjeon@ricl.konkuk.ac.kr
5 Korea Institute of Science and Technology Information
ckw@kisti.re.kr

Abstract. Recently new techniques to efficiently manage biological information of biology have played an important role in the area of information technology. The flavonoids are members of a class of natural compounds that recently has been the subject of considerable scientific and therapeutic interest.
This paper presents a Grid-based flavonoids web portal system. We designed
relational schema, XML schema for flavonoids information and their user interfaces and proposed interoperable web service components for an efficient implementation of flavonoids web portal.

1 Introduction
The need for efficient management of biological information of biology on complex
and various data is rapidly increasing in the area of information technology. Flavonoids are a class of plant pigments and found in a wide range of foods. Recent interests
by the biochemical community in flavonoids information are dramatically increased
[1, 2, 3]. These include antioxidative, antiallergic, anticarcinogenic effects etc. To
address these needs a database and user-friendly application of the flavonoids information (i.e. flavonoid name, mass, structure, NMR, activity, related literature etc.)
was developed. Today flavonoids information system deals with many different data
types. But legacy database systems can’t properly manage (i.e. modeling, storing, and
querying) flavonoids information that has been recognized as a key component of
today’s flavonoids research.
Grid web portals make it possible to provide seamless access to heterogeneous information via a browser-based user interface. It provides a complete set of open, productive, and self-service tools for publishing information, building applications, and
deploying and administering enterprise portal environments. These portals are typi*

This work was supported by the Bio/Molecular Informatics Center at Konkuk University
(KRF2004-F00019).
**
Corresponding author. Ph: 82-2-450-3510.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part IV, LNCS 3994, pp. 293 – 300, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

294

H. Xu et al.

cally built around several services including data management and user session management. These services may be built on top of Grid technologies such as Globus [4].
However, developing applications utilizing the Grid technologies remains very difficult due to the lack of high-level tools to support developers. Web service applications have recently been popularized through various domains. The development of
web services protocols such as the Simple Object Access (SOAP), Web Services
Description Language (WSDL) and the Universal Description, Discovery and Integration (UDDI) protocol has simplified the integration and the interaction the between
other organizations [5, 6, 7]. However, existing web services protocols have not been
designed for the use in science experimental domain or knowledge intensive infrastructures. The representative databases for flavonoids are the United States Department of Agriculture’s (USDA) flavonoids database that provides the information of
the flavonoids composition in food, and the part of the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes
and Genomes (KEGG) pathway database that provides the information of some flavonoids related to flavonoids biosynthesis [8, 9, 10, 11]. However, any well-defined
flavonoids database systems for managing of research results and related knowledge
(e.g. flavonoids information, literatures etc.) are not systematically well-developed
yet. An important shortcoming of existing databases is their lack of interoperability
and reusability.
In this paper, we propose a data model for storing and retrieving of the flavonoids
information, and design and develop a Grid-based flavonoids web portal system. We
also propose web service components for efficient implementation of the portal. The
main goal of the flavonoids web portal is to collaboratively work with flavonoids
researchers, to provide reusable services, to provide hybrid data model for flavonoids
information, and to show how effectively flavonoids information is shared and retrieved in a Grid web portal environment using web services. By adopting grid web
portal technology into flavonoids research domain, we can overcome the difficulties
caused by a large amount of distributed and shared flavonoids information. Moreover,
compared to legacy querying models, the web portal can more effectively support
complex queries and incomplete data (i.e. NMR spectroscopy data) by combing ERmodel and XML-model.

2 Related Works
The flavonoids are members of a class of natural compounds that recently has been
the subject of considerable scientific and therapeutic interest. These include antioxidative, antimicrobial, anticarcinogenic, and cardioprotective effects [12]. To represent
these effects, flavonoids database systems started to develope. But each system only
works for specific queries and data. So far only a few databases have developed. The
flavonoids database developed by USDA provides the contents of flavonoids. KEGG
pathway database provides the information of biosynthesis for flavonoids. KEGG
mainly deals with the ligand of an enzyme involved in biosynthesis, whereas the
physiological properties and chemicophysical characteristics were neglected. But
these databases are inadequate for the fields of natural and medical science. Consumption of flavonoids, biologically active polyphenolic compounds found in plants,

A Grid-Based Flavonoid Informatics Portal

295

has been associated with decreased risk for some age-related and chronic diseases in
humans. KEGG consists of three databases: PATHWAY for representation of higher
order functions in terms of the network of interaction molecules, GENES for the collection of gene catalogs for all the completely sequenced genomes and some partial
genomes, and LIGAND for the collection of chemical compounds in the cell enzyme
molecules and enzymatic reactions. To the further investigation of flavonoids intake
and health, the USDA published the database for the flavonoids content of selected
foods in 2003.

3 The Proposed Flavonoids Grid Web Portal Model
3.1 Data Model
The proposed flavonoids data model is a hybrid model based on Entity Relationship
model (i.e. ER-model) and XML-model. We have used ER-model for flavonoids
information and XML-model for chemical shift table of NMR spectroscopy. This
hybrid data model supports complex query and new types of flavonoids information
such as NMR for flavonoids information. Flavonoids information and NMR spectroscopy are two major data types in hybrid data model. Flavonoids information represents a single flavonoids compound such as name, formula, mass, structure, related
reaction, related enzyme, NMR, MS, references, etc. NMR spectroscopy, described
by XML syntax, represents chemical shift table information for determining the content of a flavonoids as well as its molecular structure.

Fig. 1. E-R diagram for flavonoids information

Figure 1 represents the E-R diagram for the complete flavonoids data model. In ER diagram, the NMR field is a pdf (i.e. portable document format) file name of the
NMR structure, the MS field a pdf file name of the MassSpectroscopy structure, the
Coordinate field a text file for the model in the PDB site format, and the Figure field a
structure image file name, the PubID field the paperID of the PubMed site.

296

H. Xu et al.

a. Tree structure

b. Textual version

Fig. 2. An example of a XML Schema of NMR spectroscopy

We have designed a XML schema for NMR chemical shift data. The XML model
provides the extensibility for representing incomplete information. Figure 2 shows a
textual version and a tree representation of this XML schema. The NMR_XML element is the root element of the XML schema that consists of zero or more NMR_Row
elements. The NMR_Row element represents rows with zero or more NMR_Column
elements. The NMR_Column element represents columns with zero or more Position,
ProtonShift, and CarbonShift elements. The Position element, the ProtonShift element, and the CarbonShift element represent a position value, a protonshift value, and
a carbonshift value, respectively, in the chemical shift table.
3.2 The Architecture of Flavonoids Grid Web Portal
The architecture of flavonoids Grid web portal mainly consists of grid middleware,
portal, web services and database. Figure 4 shows the architecture of flavonoids Grid
web portal. The information service provides metadata of flavonoids. The information
service of the proposed web portal consists of three databases: Literature database,
Flavonoids content database, and NMR XML database. Literature database stores
related journal articles, commercially published books, other references, etc. The
proposed literature database provides links of the existing literature databases via the
Internet. Flavonoids content database stores KEGG information as well as new information such as NMR, MS, activity of flavonoids, 3D structure, etc. NMR XML database is an XML database for storing of the NML chemical shift table information.
The computational service provides a web-based grid computing environment for
molecular simulation. Flavonoids researchers require high-performance computing
resources via secure grid web portal interfaces. We have adopted a molecular simulation computational Grid System called MGrid into these computational services.
MGrid (the Molecular simulation Grid system) is a very promising research technique
for biochemical research areas that inevitably need high-performance environments.
For example, simulations for bio-conjugates of protein, DNA, lipid, and carbohydrates definitely need HPC environments. Computational power can’t solve the whole
problem. It is very difficult to know appropriate simulation settings in advance.
Moreover, simulation outcomes of those molecules with three-dimensional structures

A Grid-Based Flavonoid Informatics Portal

297

are difficult to validate without real experiments. These two critical problems, the
requirements of computational power and the validation of simulation outcomes, have
decreased the popularity of the molecular simulations. The MGrid system is designed
to address these two issues and based on distributed molecular simulation architecture. Currently, the MGrid system is being ported to the test bed (http://
www.mgrid.or.kr).

User

User

User Portal
Web Services
Wormbase
GridSphere Framework
MGrid
Computational
Services

Java Cog

Globus, GRAM, GFTP,GASS

Computing
Resources

Computing
Resources

Literature
DB
Flavonoid
Information DB

Information
Services

Pub Med

NMR
XML DB

Fig. 4. Overall System Architecture

Generally, a portal is consisted of three components: portal, portlet, and portal container. The GridSphere portal framework [13] is installed and executed on the top of
the Apache Tomcat that is a servlet container. The GridSphere is a standard portlet
framework to build web portals. It is based on advanced web technology, web security and meta-computing technology such as PKI and Globus to provide secure and
interactive services.

4 Implementation of Flavonoids Grid Web Portal Using Web
Services
We developed flavonoids web services supporting flavonoids insertion and retrieval
web services that are a threshold to the GridSphere portlet container. Each web service has only one interface in WSDL, so any flavonoids research groups and developers who want to use the web services can directly implement their own interface
in WSDL.
The workflow of the web services is divided into 7 steps as shown in Figure 5.
Step 1 uses a Java2WSDL compiler transforming a Java remote interface into a
WSDL document. Step 2 uses a WSDL2Java compiler generating tie-based skeletons
(i.e. you can extend a tie class and add code to your subclass that sets the target for
delegation to be your implementation class). Step 3 and 4 execute insertion or re-

298

H. Xu et al.

trieval portlet services through the web browser. Then, at next steps, the GridSphere
portlet container will manage those portlet applications and call specific web services.
Finally, data will be inserted into one of databases or retrieved from it.

End Users

Z
Web
Browser
Relational
DB

Java Source files

HTTP(S)
[

XML
DB

Insertion
X

Generate
WSDL

^

\
Generate
Stub Objects

Y

Retrieval

^

Document

WSDL Document

HTTP(S)
[

\

Call services

Java
stub classes

]

GridSphere
Framework

Fig. 5. Workflow of Web Services for Flavonoids

4.1 Web Services for Insertion and Retrieval of Flavonoids Information
We implemented flavonoids web services for storing and retrieving flavonoids information. The services consist of a flavonoids service, an enzyme service, a reaction
service, a literature service, and a NMR data insertion web service. The web services
for the insertion of flavonoids and enzyme information deal with fundamental information of flavonoids and enzyme such as mass, molecular formula, molecular name,
etc. The reaction service inserts interaction information between flavonoids and
ligands into ER-database. The literature service inserts related literature information
into ER-database. Through the literature service, flavonoids researchers share flavonoids information.
Moreover, the flavonoids web services can more effectively support complex queries and incomplete data (i.e. NMR spectroscopy data) by combing ER-model and
XML-model. For example, a user can search flavonoids information with respect to
name, formula, and range of molecular weight. Also a user can send XPath query to
search the NMR spectroscopy data and get a result that is presented as XSL style
sheets using the NMR Retrieval web service.
4.2 User Interfaces for Grid-Based Flavonoids Web Portal
A user can easily insert or retrieve flavonoids information through the user-friendly
flavonoids web portal. Figure 6 shows screen shots of the flavonoids web portal. The
inserted data consists of flavonoids contents and NMR XML instances. Items of the
flavonoids information are entry number, name, formula, mass, structure, reaction,

A Grid-Based Flavonoid Informatics Portal

299

enzyme, NMR(PDF format), MS(PDF format), etc. When a user clicks the 3D Structure link on the structure item (refer to c on Figure 6), the system shows the 3D structure of current flavonoids using Jmol API [14]. When a user clicks the PUBID link on
the application item (refer to c on Figure 6), the system shows retrieved papers from
PubMed site [15].

a. Insertion of flavonoids information

b. Retrieval using keyword and NMR values

c. Results of flavonoids information retrieval

d. Results of NMR XML retrieval

Fig. 6. Insertion and Retrieval Examples
4.3 Advantages
The proposed Grid based flavonoids web portal contributes to solve the problems of
current flavonoids databases by easy-implementing the flavonoids web portal and
sharing flavonoids information through the web portal. It is easy for users to customize search preferences and display environments. Moreover, the GridSphere portal
framework makes it easy to build and deploy portals without any modifications.

5 Conclusion
In this paper, we proposed a Grid based flavonoids web portal to easily share flavonoids information through the portal. We analyzed existing flavonoids databases such
as USDA and KEGG, and designed relational schema, XML schema for flavonoids

300

H. Xu et al.

information, and their user interfaces. We explained Flavonoinformatics and showed
the proposed architecture for efficient implementation of the flavonoids web portal.
We implemented the web portal based on the proposed web service components.
There should be further researches on automatic collecting and processing of related literatures from other literature systems (e.g. PubMed etc.). Also, the proposed
web service components should be extended to include other functions, such as update and deletion.

References
1. The biochemistry and medical significance of the flavonoids (2002) Havsteen, B.H. Parmacol. Ther. 96, 67-202.
2. Anthocyanins and other flavonoids (2004) Williams, C.A., Grayer, R.J. Nat. Prod. Rep.
21, 539-573.
3. Peterson J, Dwyer J, “Taxonomic classification helps identify flavonoid-containing foods
on a semiquantitative food frequency questionnaire,” J Am Diet Assoc, 98:682-4, 1998.
4. http://www.globus.org
5. SOAP, http://www.w3c.org/TR/SOAP
6. WSDL, http://www.w3c.org/TR/wsdl
7. UDDI, http://www.uddi.org/
8. Kanehisa, M. and Goto, S., “KEGG: Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes”, Necleic
Acids Res, 1;28(1):27-30, 2000.
9. Reinhold U, Seiter S, Ugurel S, Tilgen W., “Treatment of progressive pigmented purpura
with oral bioflavonoids and ascorbic acid: an open pilot study in 3 patients,” J Am Acad
Dermatol, 41(2 Pt 1):207-8, 1999.
10. http://www.genome.jp/kegg
11. http://www.ars.usda.gov/main/site_main.htm?modecode=12354500
12. 12.So FV, Guthrie N, Chambers AF, et al., “Inhibition of human breast cancer cell proliferation and delay of mammary tumorigenesis by flavonoids and citrus juices,” Nutr Cancer, 26:167-81, 1996.
13. http://www.gridsphere.org/
14. http://jmol.sourceforge.net/
15. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi

