Phase Transitions in Gene Knockdown Networks
of Transitive RNAi
Shibin Qiu and Terran Lane
Dept. of Computer Science, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, 87131
{sqiu, terran}@cs.unm.edu

Abstract. Since gene silencing by RNA interference (RNAi) has been
observed when inexact matches exist in siRNA-mRNA binding, the number of mismatched nucleotides allowed by nature becomes an important
quantity in characterizing RNAi speciﬁcity. We use scale-free graphs
to model the knockdown interactions among diﬀerent genes and estimate the allowable ﬂexibility by examining transitive RNAi, which ampliﬁes siRNA and cyclically silences targets. Simulation results in S.
pombe indicate that continually increasing the number of mismatches
risks transcriptome-wide knockdown and eventually turns RNAi from
defensive to self-destructive. At the phase transition, the number of mismatches indicates a critical value beyond which tRNAi would cause an
organism instable. This critical value suggests an upper limit of no more
than 6 nt mismatches in the binding.

1

Introduction

RNAi becomes unspeciﬁc when close or exact identity between siRNA and nontarget mRNA produces “oﬀ-target” degradation. Empirical studies have demonstrated that such oﬀ-target eﬀects occur in the presence of single and multiple
nucleotide mismatches between siRNA and oﬀ-target mRNA [1, 2, 3, 4]. It is conceivable that an siRNA-mRNA binding that is too permissive might knock down
a substantial portion of genes in an organism and cause loss of function of too
many genes, which would in turn make an organism unstable. Since such instability is not observed, there must be an upper limit on the ﬂexibility allowed
by nature. To date, it is unclear how much ﬂexibility is actually allowed in this
binding function. Here we estimate the allowable mismatches by examining the
knockdown interactions of transitive RNAi using a network model.
In transitive RNAi (tRNAi), gene knockdown is mediated by ∼21 nucleotide
(nt) siRNAs produced by enzyme Dicer from an initiating dsRNA. These siRNAs
also serve as primers for RNA-directed RNA polymerase (RdRP) to generate
elongated dsRNA from the target mRNA, which are cleaved again by Dicer to
produce secondary siRNAs, yielding degradation of secondary targets [5]. tRNAi
(or post-transcriptional gene silencing, PTGS) has been observed in plants, fungi,
ﬂies, and worms [5, 6, 7]. tRNAi is highly eﬃcient for gene silencing and has been
termed as “nature’s own PCR machine” due to its siRNA ampliﬁcation [6]. But
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part II, LNCS 3992, pp. 895–903, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

896

S. Qiu and T. Lane

siRNA proliferation in tRNAi also increases the chances of undesirable knockdowns, especially when the siRNA-mRNA binding is not stringent.
In D. melanogaster, where tRNAi has been observed [6], mismatches of 3 or 4
nt between siRNA and mRNA were tolerated [1]. Although tRNAi has not been
conﬁrmed in mammals, mutations in siRNA of 3 to 4 nt were allowed [2]. Moreover, in some cases siRNAs with 9 nt mismatches have been shown to directly
silence non-target genes in cultured human cells [3]. In RNAi experiments, mismatches can also be intentionally introduced during siRNA synthesis to improve
silencing eﬃcacy, as RISC prefers lower binding energy at one of the termini of
siRNA [8]. However, excessive ﬂexibility is dangerous since it may silence too
many unintended targets and, more seriously, may cause instability.
Since tRNAi may cause chain reactions, and its eﬀects are diﬃcult to fully
observe [5, 9], it is expensive, if feasible, to experimentally investigate tRNAi at
a genomic scale by silencing each gene as primary target. However, a computational simulation is able to model the knockdown interactions at a transcriptomic
scale. In this work, we construct gene knockdown networks based on principles
and parameters observed in biological experiments to investigate the impact of
mismatches on genome stability.
We ﬁnd that the knockdown network became dense when less stringent RNAi
bindings were employed in our simulation and a giant component (a large group
of connected genes) emerged. In a knockdown network, genes connected to a
common node can be silenced by a single primary siRNA and the giant component can be silenced with only a few primary siRNAs. This phase transition
with respect to binding permissiveness will turn RNAi from defensive into selfdestructive and imply a loss of genomic stability. Such instability is not observed
in nature, implying that the biological siRNA-mRNA binding function does not
support a large number of mismatches in general. This phase transition suggests
a critical value for the permitted ﬂexibility of RNAi binding. Due to evolutionary
conservations, the results can be used as a references for allowable mismatches
in organisms not having tRNAi.

2

Network Model of Transitive RNAi

In this section, we describe the biological mechanism of tRNAi and the construction of our network model.
2.1

Transitive RNAi

We can outline dsRNA-mediated tRNAi in the following steps [5].
1. A dsRNA is introduced into the cell to initiate gene silencing;
2. Dicer cleaves the dsRNA into siRNAs of length 21-25 nt;
3. RISC unwinds the siRNA to help target the appropriate mRNA;
4. RISC-siRNA complex recognizes the primary target mRNA;
5. RISC cleaves the siRNA/mRNA hybrid and the primary target is degraded;
6. RdRP produces elongated dsRNA from the target site on the primary target;

Phase Transitions in Gene Knockdown Networks of Transitive RNAi

120

linear
step

100

score (%)

897

80
60
40
20
0
0

100

200

300

400

500

distance (nt)

(a)

(b)

Fig. 1. Transitive RNAi. (a) First three stages of tRNAi, silencing 7 targets with a
single primary siRNA. (b) Scoring schemes for secondary siRNAs.

7. Dicer cleaves the elongated dsRNA into secondary siRNAs;
8. RISC destroys the secondary targets using the secondary siRNAs. Now the
secondary targets become primary targets, and tRNAi cycles to step 3.
In addition to degrading the primary target mRNA as in ordinary RNAi,
the siRNA hybridized with its complimentary target can be used by RdRP to
produce an elongated dsRNA upstream of the target site(step 6). Dicer then generates more siRNAs, the secondary siRNAs, using the elongated dsRNA (step 7).
These secondary siRNAs associate with RISC which knocks down secondary targets (step 8). The secondary siRNAs are in turn elongated to generate tertiary
siRNAs, which silence tertiary targets. Since tRNAi is cyclic [5], it may cause
a chain reaction of gene knockdown [5]. Figure 1 (a) shows tRNAi of the ﬁrst
three stages, where seven targets are silenced with a single primary siRNA.
Even though G-U wobbles and bulges may also ber permitted in siRNA-target
binding [2], mismatches contribute the most to oﬀ-targeting eﬀects [10]. We used
contiguous mismatches, because they are frequently employed experimentally
and are computationally easy to implement [1, 2, 3].
2.2

Simulation of Transitive RNAi

We randomly pick an siRNA from a gene gi , i = 1, 2, ..., N , where N is the
number of genes in the transcriptome of an organism. And ﬁnd its target genes.
We introduce variable mismatches in the siRNA-mRNA binding as a parameter.

898

S. Qiu and T. Lane

This siRNA is the primary siRNA and its targets are primary targets (including
oﬀ-targets). We denote the collection of primary targets as Ti1 . We then pick a
500 nt elongated dsRNA upstream of the binding site from each gene in Ti1 (see
explanations later in this section). Overlapping secondary siRNAs are generated
at all possible positions from these elongated dsRNAs. We assign diﬀerential
silencing scores to the secondary siRNAs, with higher scores being assigned to
siRNAs closer to the binding site on the primary target and lower scores to those
farther away from the binding site [5]. We employ two scoring schemes, i.e. linear
and the step-wise, as shown in Figure 1(b).
We search for the secondary targets Ti2 matched by the secondary siRNAs
using a ﬁlter based on a silencing score threshold of fs =90% (see explanations
later in this section). Since tRNAi is cyclic [5], we continue the target search by
using the secondary targets to produce tertiary siRNAs and ﬁnding the tertiary
targets Ti3 . Figure 1(a) shows 4 secondary siRNAs and 7 tertiary siRNAs. The
induced targets, when gene gi is aimed primarily, is the collection of the targets
at each stage. If we observe tRNAi up to the tth stage, then the total targets are
t
in Sit = j=1 Tij . For example, if t = 3, then Si3 contains primary, secondary,
and tertiary targets when gi is the primary target of the siRNA.
Through siRNA ampliﬁcation and binding ﬂexibility, silencing gi with a primary siRNA will likely knock down other genes. The knockdown relationships
between genes can be represented by a graph, as described below. As every gene
in Sit will be degraded as a consequence of a primary siRNA when gi is intended
to be silenced, we add an edge from gi to each gene in Sit . We conduct a target
search for each gene of an organism and construct a directed graph Gt as the
knockdown network of t-stage tRNAi. The graph Gt is parameterized by m,
length of mismatch allowed by the siRNA-target binding, and t, the number of
stages. We then study the statistics of Gt and compute the largest connected
component of Gt . The phase transition of G − t is used to estimate the allowable
mismatches in the binding. We average the statistics over 100 networks, each of
which is initiated by a random siRNA primarily aiming each gene.
To simulate the general principles of tRNAi, we ignore some of the subtle
variations reported in the literature since they do not yield signiﬁcant diﬀerences.
Particularly, we need to point the following speciﬁcs in our computation.
1. The length of the elongated region is restricted to 500 nt, which is more
consistent with the model proposed by Sijen et al. [5], although Lipardi and
colleagues have proposed that the full length of the target mRNA be used [6].
2. We use the region upstream of the binding site to generate elongated
dsRNA, although some experiments suggest both upstream and downstream
produce secondary siRNAs [11, 12].
3. If an siRNA matches multiple sites on a target, all upstream regions are used
for elongated dsRNA for the next stage. This is consistent with the extension
(ligation) model of Lipardi and colleagues [6].
4. We do not allow self-cycles: once a gene has been included as a target in
S t−1 covering stage t − 1, it will not be included in S t .

Phase Transitions in Gene Knockdown Networks of Transitive RNAi

899

5. Though tRNAi may contain inﬁnitely many stages, we only consider up to
9 stages. This consideration is based on the threshold model [5, 13], which suggests that an abundance of target mRNA is required to maintain tRNAi. Since
siRNA ampliﬁcation leads to acceleration in RNA degradation, which reduces
the mRNA level dramatically, the possibility of very long chain is unlikely.
6. Although every siRNA in the elongated region of 500 nt is possibly functional, and is scored according to the model of Sijen [5] (Figure 1(b)), we used a
cutoﬀ threshold of fs =90%. We make this simpliﬁcation since we found that
lowering fs to increase the length of eﬀective region did not have a significant eﬀect on the graphs. However, adjusting fs provides ﬂexibility in our
simulation.
2.3

Algorithms and Graph Statistics

We use string kernels and binary search trees for eﬃcient searches [4]. For a
random graph, the relative largest component size ρ is the number of nodes
in the largest connected cluster divided by the total number of nodes in the
graph. When ρ is greater than a certain level, the connected genes form a giant
component [14]. To ensure the largest component is indeed a giant component, we
use ρ ≥ 90% as the criterion. When a graph increases its density to eventually
contain a giant component as m gets larger, it is said to go through a phase
transition. To quantify the density of a graph, we also measure the average
distance between any two reachable vertices in the graph. We use breadth ﬁrstsearch algorithms to calculate the component sizes.

3

Results

Since evidence of tRNAi has been observed in S. pombe [11], we use its 5401
cDNA sequences (obtained from Sanger Institute ftp://ftp.sanger.ac.uk) to
test our network model. Due to large amounts of genomic scale searches and
graphical computations, data of this small organism is tractable. Results are
shown below.
3.1

Degree Distributions

We evaluated degree distributions in the gene knockdown networks of S. pombe
using 21 nt siRNAs, simulating tRNAi for three stages, t = 3, and allowing for
two mismatch lengths, m = 4 and 6. Figure 2 (a) shows the log-log plot of the
cumulative frequencies Pcum (k) = d≥k P (d), where P (d) is the frequency of
vertices having d edges. As indicated, the degrees roughly follow power distributions. If expressed as P (k) ∼ k −γ , then γ = 3.28 and 3.59 for the two curves
(statistically signiﬁcant, p-value < 10−3 ) . Since a power law distribution is not
modal, the connectivity of a knockdown network is characterized by a continuum
hierarchy with most of the genes connecting to a small number of genes, and
a small number of genes connecting to a large number of genes. A power law
distribution also suggests that the knockdown network is scale free [14].

S. Qiu and T. Lane

m=4, t=3
m=6, t=3

-0.5
-1
log Pk

-1.5
-2
-2.5
-3
-3.5
-4
0

1

2

3

log k

(a)

1

2 stages
3 stages
5 stages

0.9
0.8

relative size of largest component

0

relative size of largest component

900

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

1

2 stages
3 stages
5 stages
7 stages
9 stages

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

1

2

3

4

5
m

(b)

6

7

8

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

m

(c)

Fig. 2. Knockdown network properties. (a) Log-log plots of degree distributions. Xaxis is the degree in logarithmic scale; Y-axis is the cumulative frequency Pcum (k) =
d≥k P (d) in logarithmic scale. (b) Phase transitions: m, on X-axis, is the number of
mismatches in siRNA-mRNA bindings. Y-axis is ρ, the largest component size divided
by the number of genes. (c) Convergence of phase transitions up to t = 9 stages.

3.2

Phase Transitions

We computed the relative size ρ of the largest component of the knockdown
networks. Figure 2 (b) shows ρ for transitive RNAi covering two, three, and ﬁve
stages in the chain reaction, when increasing ﬂexibility was allowed by siRNAtarget bindings (m=1-8) using 21-mers as siRNA. As Figure 2 (b) suggests, when
siRNA-target binding was stringent (m ≤ 4 nt), the graphs were sparse and the
largest components were small (ρ < 1%). The average distance between any
two vertices in the graph was about 12 hops. But the graphs experienced very
sharp phase transitions to have giant components when increasing ﬂexibility was
allowed (m ≥ 5). If we consider 5 transitive stages, a 6 nt mismatch yielded a
giant component containing 95% of the nodes in the network. In such a dense
network, the average distance was about 3 hops. Figure 2 (b) also indicates that
more stages increased the chance of phase transitions when m was small.
In the knockdown network, genes connected to a common gene can be knocked
down by a single primary siRNA. And the giant component can be knocked down
with only a few primary siRNAs, since the average distance is short. This phase
transition will turn RNAi from defensive into self-destructive and suggests a loss
of stability in an organism. Therefore, mismatches of 6 nt or longer would cause
instability in an organism, and thus are not biologically plausible.
Though the degree distributions, P (k), both followed a power law before and
after the phase transition, they had slightly diﬀerent slopes. γ = 3.28 for the
graph corresponding to m = 4 before the phase transition, and γ = 3.59 for
m = 6 after the phase transition. The network having a giant component also
had a larger maximum degree and average degree.
3.3

Convergence of Phase Transitions

Previously, we examined phase transitions of tRNAi up to 5 stages. To further investigate the eﬀect of stages, we simulated 9 stages and display the results in Figure 2 (c). As indicated in the ﬁgure, phase transition patterns of
7 and 9 stages did not diﬀer much from that of 5 stages and the patterns

Phase Transitions in Gene Knockdown Networks of Transitive RNAi

901

of stages 7 and 9 were almost indistinguishable. The curves tend to converge
with stages. Even though we did not simulate more stages than 10 due to
computational intensity of the simulation, we expect a convergence of phase
transition w.r.t stages for even more stages. Our results were solely derived
from sequence data in the transcriptome and did not consider mRNA concentration. Nonetheless, they are consistent with the threshold model of
tRNAi [5, 13].

4

Discussions and Conclusions

We modelled gene knockdown interactions as scale free graphs, which demonstrated that increasing the ﬂexibility of siRNA-target binding increased the
density of the graph. Statistics indicated that giant components existed if mismatches of more than 6 nt were allowed. This phase transition would turn RNAi
from defensive to self-destructive. Therefore, the critical mismatch allowed in
RNAi, especially in tRNAi, is unlikely to be higher than 6 nt.
The power-law-like degree distribution of the knockdown network in S. pombe
implies that the knockdown network is scale free, suggesting that larger genomes
exhibit similar patterns of knockdown interactions. Therefore, our results on S.
pombe may be generalizable to other organisms. In particular, excessive mismatches in tRNAi will cause instability and there must be an upper limit to the
allowable ﬂexibility in all organisms. Since S. pombe has a small transcriptome,
we are not sure whether the limits in other species are the same, or shorter due
to higher chance of knockdown interactions.
Our results about the convergence of phase transition were solely derived from
transcript sequence and did not consider mRNA concentration. Nonetheless,
they are consistent with the threshold model of tRNAi [5, 13]. The threshold
model suggests that an abundance of target mRNA is required to maintain
tRNAi. Since siRNA ampliﬁcation leads to acceleration in RNA degradation,
which in turn reduces the mRNA level dramatically, the existence of very long
chains are unlikely. Our results implies that sequence usage and concentration
are consistent and somewhat related.
When we simulated tRNAi, we made conservative assumptions about the
length of elongated dsRNA, only considered upstream of the target site, and
limited the number of stages. If the assumptions are violated in nature, the
graphs would be denser and the permissive ﬂexibility even more stringent. Therefore our estimation is an optimistic upper bound. The similarity model used to
characterize siRNA-target binding only considered contiguous mismatches. If
we relax the contiguity restriction, the graph might get denser and the critical
mismatch might decrease slightly. If we consider variable silencing potencies of
diﬀerent siRNAs, some siRNAs may be non-functional and the graph would be
somewhat sparser and the critical mismatch might be a little longer. But if siRNAs are uniformly picked, then the knockdown networks are still scale-free. If
both upstream and downstream sequences were used for elongated dsRNA, then
the graph would get denser and the critical mismatch might decrease slightly.

902

S. Qiu and T. Lane

Additionally, dsRNA may induce DNA methylation, which degrades more targets at transcription level and causes smaller critical mismatches [12].
Although we only studied tRNAi, high degree of evolutionary conservations of
the RNAi mechanism implies that similar behaviors may exist in organisms not
having tRNAi, such as H. sapiens. Furthermore, it is possible for larger mammalian genomes to have smaller critical mismatches. Therefore, our estimations
are more consistent with the results in [1, 2]. However, mismatches longer than
6 nt, such as 9 nt in [3], are generally infrequent, and would probably cause
extensive undesirable knockdowns and even instabilities.

Acknowledgement
This work is supported by NIH grant P20RR18754 from the Institutional Development Award Program of the National Center for Research Resource. We
thank Coenraad M. Adema for helpful suggestions.

References
1. Elbashir, S.M., Martinez, J., Patkaniowska, A., Lendeckel, W., Tuschl, T.: Functional atonamy of siRNA for mediating eﬃcient RNAi in Drosophila melanogaster
embryo lysate. The EMBO Journal 20 (2001) 6877–6888
2. Saxena, S., Jonsson, Z.O., Dutta, A.: Small RNAs with imperfect match to endogenous mRNA repress translation. Journal of Biological Chemistry 278 (2003)
44312–44319
3. Jackson, A., Bartz, S., Schelter, J., Kobayashi, S., Burchard, J., Mao, M., Li, B.,
Cavet, G., Linsley, P.S.: Expression proﬁling reveals oﬀ-target gene regulation by
RNAi. Nature Biotechnology 21 (2003) 635–637
4. Qiu, S., Adema, C.M., Lane, T.: A computational study of oﬀ-target eﬀects of
RNA interference. Nucleic Acids Research 33 (2005) 1834–1847
5. Sijen, T., Fleenor, J., Simmer, F., Thijssen, K., Parrish, S., Timmons, L., Plasterk,
R., Fire, A.: On the role of RNA ampliﬁcation in dsRNA-triggered gene silencing.
Cell 107 (2001) 465–476
6. Lipardi, C., Wei, Q., Paterson, B.: RNAi as random degradative PCR: siRNA
primers convert mRNA into dsRNA that are degraded to generate new siRNA.
Cell 107 (2001) 297–307
7. Dalmay, T., Hamilton, A., Rudd, S., Angell, S., Baulcombe, D.: An RNAdependent RNA polymerase gene in Arabidopsis is required for posttranscriptional
gene silencing mediated by a transgene but not by a virus. Cell 101 (2000) 543–553
8. Ui-Tei, K., Naito, Y., Takahashi, F., Haraguchi, T., Ohki-Hamazaki, H., et al.:
Guidelines for the selection of highly eﬀective siRNA sequences for mammalian
and chick RNA interference. Nucleic Acids Research 32 (2004) 936–948
9. Dillin, A.: The speciﬁcs of small interfering RNA speciﬁcity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 100 (2003) 6289–6291
10. Qiu, S., Lane, T.: String kernels of imperfect matches for oﬀ-target detection in
RNA interferance. In Sunderam, V., et al., eds.: Proc. 1st IWBRA and 5th ICCS.
LNCS vol. 3515, Springer-Verlag (2005) 894–902
11. Allshire, R.: RNAi and heterochromatina hushed-up aﬀair. Science 297 (2002)
1818–1819

Phase Transitions in Gene Knockdown Networks of Transitive RNAi

903

12. Vaistij, F., Jones, L., Baulcombe, D.: Spreading of RNA targeting and DNA methylation in RNA silencing requires transcription of the target gene and a putative
RNA-dependent RNA polymerase. The Plant Cell 14 (2002) 857–867
13. Metzlaﬀ, M., O’Dell, M., Cluster, P., Flavell, R.: RNA-mediated RNA degradation
and chalcone synthase A silencing in Petunia. Cell 88 (1997) 845–854
14. Barab´
asi, A.L., Albert, R.: Emergence of scaling in random networks. Science 286
(1999) 509–512

