Ontology-Driven Resource Selecting in the Grid
Environments
Wenju Zhang, Yin Li, Fei Liu, and Fanyuan Ma
Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, P.R.China, 200030
{zwj, liyin, liufei, fyma}@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract. In the Grid environments where many diﬀerent implementations are available, the need for semantic matching based on a deﬁned ontology becomes increasingly important. Especially for service or resource
discovery and selection. In this paper, we propose a ﬂexible and extensible approach for solving resource discovery and selection in the Grid
Environments using ontology and semantic web and grid technologies.
We have designed and prototyped an ontology-driven resource discovery
and selection framework that exploits ontologies and domain knowledge
base. We present results obtained when this framework is applied in the
context of drug discovery grid. These results demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of our framework.

1

Introduction

The need to discover and select entities that match speciﬁed requirements arises
in many contexts in distributed systems like Peer-to-Peer networks and Grids.
In such environments, many diﬀerent nodes, possibly spanner across multiple
organizations, need to share resource [3].
A common issue both in Peer-to-Peer and Grid is related to the fact that data
and resources need to be described in a way that is understandable and usable
by the community that is target user, by means of ontologies.
In this paper, we propose a ﬂexible and extensible approach for performing
Grid resource discovery and selection using an ontology-driven model and an OMatch resource rank algorithm. Unlike the traditional Grid resource matching
that describe resource request properties based on symmetric ﬂat attributes, separate ontologies are created to declaratively describe resources and job requests
using an expressive ontology language. Moreover, we propose an O-Match resource rank algorithm to balance the symmetric and asymmetric matching.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lists the related work.
Section 3 presents ontology-driven resource discovery and selection techniques
and algorithms. Section 4 presents the prototype implementation and experimental results. Finally, Section 5 gives the conclusions.
This research work is supported in part by the the National High Technology
Research and Development Program of China (863 Program), under Grant No.
2004AA104270.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part I, LNCS 3991, pp. 818–821, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

Ontology-Driven Resource Selecting in the Grid Environments

2

819

Related Work

Related to the resource discovery and selection solution. Globus MDS and UDDI
are two such examples; MDS has been widely used in the Grid community for
resource discovery while UDDI has been used in the web community for business
service discovery.
Diﬀerent approaches for ontology-based resources matching and selecting in
the grid systems also have been proposed [2]. Matchmaker [4] is a framework
in order to provide a ﬂexible strategy for the resource matching problem in the
Grid. This approach is based on three ontologies: a resource ontology, a resource
request ontology and a policy ontology.

3

Ontology-Driven Resource Discovery and Selection

Semantic matching is based on OWL-S [1] ontologies. The advertisements and
requests refer to OWL-S concepts and the associated semantic. By using OWLS, the matching process can perform implications on the subsumption hierarchy leading to the recognition of semantic matches despite their syntactical
diﬀerences.
3.1

Ontology-Based Semantic Annotation

The meaning of services is implicitly expressed by the implementation expressed
in the form of the programming language source code. The purpose of the semantic annotation is to express this intrinsic meaning explicitly and in a machine
processable way. The Resource Description Framework (RDF) from W3C was
designed to serve this purpose and the OWL builds on RDF to provide a way
of adding domain speciﬁc vocabulary for resource description by using concepts
taxonomy.
Semantic annotation of a service is developed in two stages. First, the user
annotates a service with intended meaning. Next, diﬀerent aspects of a service
method need to be described independently as distinct resources. This stage
concentrates on expressing the syntactic meaning of the service by annotating
the semantics of the deﬁnition of the service method.
3.2

Ontology-Based Semantic Matching

The ﬁrst step in autonomic service adaptation is to ﬁnd services that are conceptually equivalent to the client’s requirements. These requirements are expressed
through the semantic annotation of the interface by using OWL. This ties each
of the interface method to a domain concept.
A semantic matching service will need to perform two main inference operations - class and property inferencing. Each interface annotation ties the concept
of a method to a ontology class.

820

3.3

W. Zhang et al.

The O-Match Algorithm

In order to enforce dynamic ontology matching, we require a ﬂexible algorithm
with the aim of facing two diﬀerent requirements of the matching process. These
requirements have been addressed by the O-Match algorithm for dynamic ontology matching. The aim of O-Match is to allow a dynamic choice of the kind
of features to be considered in the matching process. O-Match is based on two
basic functions, namely a datatype compatibility function T (dt, dt ) → {0, 1},
and a property and relation closeness function C(e, e ) → [0, 1].
The datatype compatibility function T (dt, dt ) → {0, 1} is deﬁned to evaluate
the compatibility of data types of two properties according to a pre-deﬁned set
CR of compatibility rules. Given two datatypes dt and dt , the function returns 1
if dt and dt are compatible according to CR, and 0 otherwise. For instance,
with reference to XML Schema datatypes, examples of compatibility rules that
hold between datatypes are: xsd : integer ⇔ xsd : int, xsd : integer ⇔ xsd :
f loat, xsd : decimal ⇔ xsd : f loatandxsd : short ⇔ xsd : int.
The property and relation closeness function C(e, e ) → [0, 1] calculates a measure of the distance between two context elements of concepts. C(e, e ) exploits
the weights associated with context elements and returns a value in the range
[0,1] proportional to the absolute value of the complement of the diﬀerence between the weights associated with the elements. For any pairs of elements e and
e , the highest value is obtained when weights of e and e coincide.

4
4.1

Prototype Implementation and Experimental
Evaluation
Prototype Implementation

The ontology-based resources discovery and selection framework consists of three
components: 1) resources discovery and selection engine, 2) resources database,
capturing all the resources available in this domain, and 3) domain ontology
knowledge base, capturing the domain model and additional knowledge about
the domain.
We have developed two ontologies using OWL-S including resource ontology
and domain ontology. The resource ontology provides an abstract model for
describing resources, their capabilities and their relationships. The domain ontology is used during the resource selecting process. It is typically deﬁned by the
grid middleware.
4.2

Experimental Results

To verify the validity of our resources discovery and selection framework and OMatch algorithm, we conducted experiments in the context of the Drug Discovery
Grid project’s test bed (http://www.ddgrid.ac.cn). which comprised 8 clusters
at 5 diﬀerent cities. We compared the execution time and eﬃciency of resources
discovery and selection with UDDI-based resources selection.

Ontology-Driven Resource Selecting in the Grid Environments

Fig. 1. The job execution time for
diﬀerent job sizes

821

Fig. 2. The resource discovery and
selection time for diﬀerent job sizes

Figure 1 illustrates the job execution time for diﬀerent job sizes with diﬀerent resource discovery and selection algorithms. The results show that the job
execution time is reduced with the ontology-based resource discovery and selection (O-RDS) algorithm. That is to say, those resources are optimal used at
this scenario. Figure 2 shows that the total resource selection time increased
with O-RDS algorithm. It is obviously at this dynamically resource selection
environment.

5

Conclusions

We have proposed a ontology-driven resources discovery and selection framework
that provides a common resources selection service for diﬀerent kinds of application. This framework exploits existing ontology and semantic web and grid
technologies. We have used drug discovery grid test bed to validate the design
and implementation of the resource selection framework, with promising results.

References
1. Web Ontology Language (OWL). http://www.w3.org/2004/OWL/.
2. J. Kim, Y. Gil, and M. Spraragen. A Knowledge-Based Approach to Interactive
Workﬂow Composition, Proc. ICAPS workshop Planning and Scheduling for Web
and Grid Services, 2004.
3. E. Deelman et al. Mapping Abstract Complex Workﬂows onto Grid Environments,
Journal of Grid Computing, vol. 1, 2003.
4. H. Tangmunarunkit, S. Decker, and C. Kesselman. Ontology-based Resource Matching in the Grid - The Grid Meets the SemanticWeb. In Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on Semantics in Peer-to-Peer and Grid Computing (SemPGRID)
at WWW 2003, pages 706C721, Budapest, Hungary, May 2003.

