A Self-supervised Learning Framework for Classifying
Microarray Gene Expression Data
Yijuan Lu1, Qi Tian1, Feng Liu2, Maribel Sanchez3, and Yufeng Wang3
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at San Antonio, TX, USA
{lyijuan, qitian}@cs.utsa.edu
2
Department of Pharmacology, University of Texas Health Science Center
at San Antonio, TX, USA
liuf@uthsca.edu
3
Department of Biology, University of Texas at San Antonio, TX, USA
msanchez@lonestar.utsa.edu, yufeng.wang@utsa.edu

Abstract. It is important to develop computational methods that can effectively
resolve two intrinsic problems in microarray data: high dimensionality and
small sample size. In this paper, we propose a self-supervised learning framework for classifying microarray gene expression data using Kernel Discriminant-EM (KDEM) algorithm. This framework applies self-supervised learning
techniques in an optimal nonlinear discriminating subspace. It efficiently utilizes a large set of unlabeled data to compensate for the insufficiency of a small
set of labeled data and it extends linear algorithm in DEM to kernel algorithm
to handle nonlinearly separable data in a lower dimensional space. Extensive
experiments on the Plasmodium falciparum expression profiles show the promising performance of the approach.

1 Introduction
High throughput microarray technology enables the large-scale characterization of
gene expression profiles rapidly. Genes that are involved in correlated functions tend
to yield similar expression patterns in microarray hybridization experiments.
To date, various machine learning methods have been applied to analyze microarray data to capture specific expression patterns. Despite that some of the methods
have achieved useful classification results, two problems still plague efforts to analyze high throughput microarray data: (i) the high dimensionality of data, and (ii) the
relatively small sample size.
As high dimensionality obscures the details in the data and small sample size precludes the influence of solidly supported conclusions, an approach that is relatively
unaffected by these problems will allow us to get more from less.
The small sample problem can be alleviated by self-supervised learning techniques, which take a hybrid of labeled and unlabeled data to train classifiers. These
techniques normally assume that only a fraction of the data is labeled with ground
truth, but still take advantage of the entire dataset to generate a good classifier. They
make the assumption that unlabeled data contains information about the joint data
distribution over features, which can be used to help supervised learning. This
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part II, LNCS 3992, pp. 686 – 693, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

A Self-supervised Learning Framework

687

learning paradigm could be viewed as an integration of supervised learning and unsupervised learning.
The problem of high dimensionality can be alleviated by discriminant analysis. It
is to find a mapping such that the data are clustered in the reduced feature space, in
which the probabilistic structure could be simplified and captured by simpler model
assumption, e.g., Gaussian mixtures.
Discriminant-EM (DEM) [1] effectively combines self-supervised learning and
discriminant analysis for content-based image retrieval. It applies self-supervised
learning techniques in a lower dimensional space projected by discriminant analysis.
The basic idea is to learn discriminating features and a classifier simultaneously by
inserting a multi-class linear discriminating step in the standard expectationmaximization (EM) [2] iteration loop. However, since its discriminating step is linear,
DEM has an obvious drawback in handling data that are not linearly separable.
In this paper, we generalize the DEM algorithm from a linear setting to a nonlinear
one, and propose a self-supervised learning framework for microarray analysis using
Kernel Discriminant-EM (KDEM). KDEM transforms the original data space X to a
higher dimensional kernel “feature space” F and then projects the transformed data to
a lower dimensional discriminating subspace, such that nonlinear discriminating features could be identified and training data could be better classified in a nonlinear
feature subspace. Extensive experiments are performed on the microarray dataset of
malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum for classification of specific functional
classes.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present kernel DEM
algorithm. In Section 3, we apply KDEM and other algorithms to gene classification
and use KDEM to identify putative genes of specific functional classes. Finally conclusions and future work are given in Section 4.

2 Kernel Discriminant-EM Algorithm
Kernel DEM (KDEM) is a generalization of DEM [1] in which instead of a simple
linear transformation to project the data into discriminant subspaces, the data is first
projected nonlinearly into a high dimensional feature space F where the data are better linearly separated. After that, the original Multiple Discriminant Analysis (MDA)
[2] algorithm is applied in a kernel feature space F, which is related to the original
space by a non-linear mapping φ : x → φ ( x) . To avoid working with the mapped data
explicitly, the kernel function computes a dot product in a feature space F: k ( x, z ) =
(φ ( x ) T ⋅ φ ( z )) . Formulating MDA using only dot products of the form φ iT ⋅ φ j , the

reproducing kernel matrix can be substituted into the formulation and eliminate the
need for direct nonlinear transformation.
Using superscript φ to denote quantities in the new space, we have the objective
function of MDA in the following form:
Wopt = arg max
W

| W T S Bφ W |

| W T SWφ W |

(1)

688

Y. Lu et al.
C

S Bφ = ∑ N j ⋅ ( m φj − m φ )( m φj − m φ ) T

(2)

j =1

C Nj

SWφ = ∑∑ (φ (x i( j ) ) − m φj )(φ (x i( j ) ) − m φj ) T

(3)

j =1 i =1

S B and SW are between-class and within-class scatter matrices,
1 N
1 N
mφ = ∑ φ (x k ) , mφj =
∑ φ (x k ) , where j = 1, K , C , and N is the total number of
N k =1
N j k =1

with

j

samples.
In general, there is no other way to express the solution Wopt ∈ F , either because F
is too high or infinite dimension, or because we do not even know the actual feature
space connected to a certain kernel. Hence the goal of kernel multiple discriminant
analysis (KMDA) [3] is to find
| AT K A |
(4)
A opt = arg max T B
A
| A KW A |
r
r
Where A = [α1 , L , α C −1 ] , K B and K W are N × N matrices which require only kernel
computations on the training samples [3].
Kernel DEM can be initialized by selecting all labeled data as kernel vectors, and
training a weak classifier based on only labeled samples. Then, the three steps of
Kernel DEM are iterated until some convergence criterion is satisfied:

ˆ (k ) ]
• E-step: set Zˆ ( k +1) = E[ Z | D; Θ
k +1
• D-step: set A opt
= arg max
A

| AT K B A |
, and project a data point x to a linear sub| A T KW A |

space of feature space F.
ˆ ( k +1) = arg max p (Θ | D; Zˆ ( k +1) )
• M-Step: set Θ
Θ

The same notation is used as in [1]. The E-step gives probabilistic labels to unlabeled data, which are then used by the D-step to separate the data.

3 Experiments and Analysis
3.1 Dataset
The microarray dataset used in this study is a time-course expression profile of malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum, during the 48-hour red blood cell cycle [4].
The original data are downloadable from http://malaria.ucsf.edu/SupplementalData.
php, which include the profiles of 46 consecutive time points excluding 23-hour and
29-hour during which synchronized samples were not available. After standard quality control filtering and normalization, a complete dataset consisted of signals for
7091 oligonucleotides corresponding to over 4000 Open Reading Frames (ORFs) [5].
Note that the spots with array features were recorded as empty and thus were not

A Self-supervised Learning Framework

689

included for further study if the sum of median intensities is smaller than the local
background plus two times its standard deviation.
In the original paper [4], 14 functional classes of proteins were shown to exhibit
distinct developmental profiles by Fourier Transform, including components involved
in genetic information flow, metabolic pathways, cellular regulatory networks, organellar activities, and parasite-specific activities. Because the number of genes in class 5
and 7 were too small to train, we combined class 3 with class 7 to form a large group
given that they are naturally consequential in metabolic pathways, and combine class
4 with class 5 given that they both represent nucleotide synthetic pathways. Finally,
the entire ground truth dataset included the expression of 472 annotated genes in a
total of 12 functional classes (Table 1).

3.2 Experiments
In a well-cited microarray classification study [6], SVM, decision tree and multi-layer
perceptrons (MLP) etc. have been investigated, and SVM, especially SVM with radial
basis (RBF) kernel significantly outperformed the other algorithms in the functional
classification. Therefore we were focused on the comparison of KDEM with SVM
using the same radial basis kernel (RBF) functions. RBF functions used are
K ( X, Y) = exp(− || X − Y || 2 / 2α 2 ) . In our testing, α was set to be a widely used value, the
median of the Euclidean distances from each positive example to the nearest negative
example [6].
We performed a two-class classification with positive genes from one functional
class and the negative genes from the remaining classes. Hence, each gene can be
classified in one of the four ways: true positive (TP), true negative (TN), false positive (FP) and false negative (FN), according to the ground truth and classifier results.
The malaria dataset is an imbalanced dataset, in which the number of negative genes
is much larger than the number of positive genes. For example, for class Mitochondrial, the number of positive instances was only 16 whereas the number of negative
instances reached 456. In this case, we chose to use f_measure=2⋅(recall×precision)/
(recall+precision) to measure the overall performance of each classifier. Besides, for
each class, we randomly selected 2/3 positive genes and 2/3 negative genes as training
set and the remaining gene data as testing set for classification. This procedure was
repeated for 30 times. Finally, we obtained the average values of f_measure of 30
rounds for each class.
Table 1 shows the f_measure for three different classifiers on the twelve functional
classes. From this table, we can clearly see that: (i) KDEM outperformed SVM for
total of eleven classes. SVM failed for most classes with small size and yielded zero
f_measure. It is because given small sample size, SVM could hardly find sufficient
labeled data to train classifiers well. By contrast, KDEM releases the pain of small
sample size problem by incorporating a large number of unlabeled data. (ii) When the
sample size was large, for example, for class 2, KDEM also performed at least as
good as SVM. (iii) Compared to DEM, KDEM also achieved superior performance on
most classes except for class 5. This shows that KDEM, provided good kernel functions, has a better capacity than DEM to separate linearly non-separable data. For
example, for the functional class Proteasome, the f_measure of KDEM was 87.4,

690

Y. Lu et al.

whereas DEM could only achieved 28.8. For class 5, KDEM doesn’t show significant
advantages over DEM, which is probably due to that the data are more likely linearly
separable. We will further investigate this to prove our assumption. (iv) Figure 1
shows the performance of KDEM, DEM and SVM as the size of training samples
drops from 2/3 to 1/5 of the total samples. It is clear that the performance of KDEM is
good and stable while the performance of DEM and SVM declines with smaller training samples.
Overall, the superior classification results of KDEM over other methods demonstrate its promise for classifying microarray gene expression data.
Table 1. Comparison of f_measure for KDEM, DEM, and SVM on twelve classes

Class_ID

Functional Class

SVM-rbf

DEM

KDEM-rbf

23

0.0

16.0

30.0

149

87.5

79.7

87.2

23

1.33

17.6

35.6

21

0.0

22.0

23.6

36

17.6

59.9

58.4

35

70.9

28.8

87.4

Plastid genome

18

57.9

67.3

81.3

Merozoite invasion

80

84.1

80.7

86.5

9

Actin myosin motors

13

0.0

32.7

35.3

10

Early ring transcripts

31

91.3

90.6

91.4

11

Mitochondrial

16

0.0

27.3

35.5

12

Organellar Translation

27

0.0

26.2

42.4

1
2

Transcription
Cytoplasmic Translation

3

Glycolysis pathway and TCA cycle

4

nucleotide synthesis

5

DNA replication

6

Proteasome

7
8

Number

100

KDEM_rbf
f_measure

90

svm_rbf

80

70

DEM
60
2/3

1/2

1/3

1/5

portion of training set

Fig. 1. Comparison of f_measure for KDEM, DEM, and SVM on Mitochondrial class with
different sizes of training set

A Self-supervised Learning Framework

691

Table 2. Representative co-expressed genes of specific functional classes. The classification is
based on their expression profiles during erythrocytic developmental cycle in malaria parasite.

692

Y. Lu et al.

3.3 Putative Genes of Specific Functional Classes Identified by KDEM
After validation of our algorithms on a small set of genes (472) with ground truth
from P. falciparum microarry dataset, we applied KDEM to the rest of unknown 3776
putative malaria genes to classify six specific functional categories.
Table 2 shows several representative genes that were predicted to belong to six
functional classes. Their potential functionality is confirmed by independent predictions based on Gene Ontology [8], demonstrating that self-supervised learning is a
powerful expression classification method. Such classification could shed light on
novel network components and interactions:
(1) Transcription, translation, and DNA replication machineries are complex networks that involve fine regulations of DNA (RNA)-protein and protein-protein interactions. For instance, besides essential enzymes (DNA-directed RNA polymerase
complex), transcriptional factors such as Gas41 and Sir2 homolog and transcriptional
activators may participate in the regulation of transcription (Table 2). The promoter
regions of these regulators are yet to be discovered.
(2) Glycolysis/TCA cycle and Nucleotide (DNA or RNA) synthesis exemplify
metabolic networks which involve protein-metabolite interactions. For example, the
presence of a cascade of co-expressed enzymes, including glucose-6-phosphate isomerase, glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, pyruvate kinase, lactate dehydrogenase
(Table 2), not only suggests that malaria parasite possesses conserved key components in carbohydrate metabolism, but also portrays the various co-factors and metabolites that are involved in the activity of each enzyme.
(3) Proteasome is a tightly-wrapped complex of threonine proteases and regulatory
proteins that mediate protein-protein interactions in cell cycle control and stress response. In previous work [9], we predicted a number threonine proteases and ubiquitin hydrolases, sketching the core elements of malarial proteasome. A concerted
regulation pattern revealed by this study is consistent with the postulation of an essential ATP-dependent ubiquitin-proteasome pathway, which was inferred from the results of inhibition assays [10].

4 Discussions
Kernel Discriminant-EM (DEM) proposed a framework to address the small sample
problem and the high dimensionality problem by applying self-supervised learning in
an optimal nonlinear discriminant subspace. The proposed algorithm is applied on
gene classification on the Plasmodium falciparum dataset, and KDEM outperforms
linear DEM and SVM in the extensive tests.
The insights provided by self-supervised learning on transcriptomic data into the
dynamics of gene networks could shed light on as yet unrecognized network interactions [11]. A significant roadblock on the use of genomic data to better understand
infectious diseases is our inability to assign gene functionality. Malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum appears among the most problematic: 60% of the open reading
frames are annotated as “hypothetical” [5]. Our study may provide an effective means
to circumvent this problem. By identifying co-expressed genes in developmental
cycle, it also helps us to identify what could conceivably be network modules. Any

A Self-supervised Learning Framework

693

network module could contain a range of proteins and regulatory elements [11]. The
key components of these modules may have stringent functional constraint and hence
are conserved across species [12]. Subtracting these known from the modules, the
remaining “hypothetical” in transcriptomic maps represent lineage-specific gaps in
gene networks. The ability to assign a “hypothetical” gene to a specific network module opens an opportunity toward a tempo-specific functional characterization, because
for a parasite with multiple hosts (human and mosquito) and a dynamic life cycle,
“when and where” to initial wet-lab experiments is of critical importance. This network view should allow us to locate choke points in the parasite - potential vulnerabilities that could result in new malarial control strategies.

Acknowledgements
This work is support in part by San Antonio Life Science Institute (SALSI) and ARO
grant W911NF-05-1-0404 to Q. Tian, and San Antonio Area Foundation, NIH RCMI
grant 2G12RR013646-06A1, and UTSA Faculty Research Award to Y. Wang.

References
1. Wu, Y., Tian, Q., and Huang, T. S.: Discriminant EM algorithm with application to image
retrieval, Proc. of IEEE Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (2000)
2. Duda, R. O., Hart, P. E., and Stork, D. G.: 2nd Pattern Classification, John Wiley & Sons,
Inc. (2001)
3. Schölkopf, B. and Smola, A. J.: Learning with Kernels. Mass: MIT Press. (2002)
4. Bozdech, Z. Llinas M., Pulliam, B. L., Wong, E. D., Zhu, J. DeRisi, J. L.: The transcriptome of the intraerythrocytic development cycle of plasmodium falciparum. Plos Biology,
(2003)
5. 1(1): 1-16
6. Gardner, M.J., N. Hall, E. Fung, O. White, M. Berriman, R.W. Hyman, J.M. et al.: Genome sequence of the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. Nature, (2002)
419: 498-511
7. Brown, M.P., Grundy, W.N., Lin, D., et al.: Knowledge-based analysis of microarray gene
expression data by using support vector machines, Proc. Natl, Acad. Sci. USA, (2000),
97(1): 262-267
8. The Gene Ontology Consortium, “Gene Ontology: tool for the unification of biology,” Nature Genet. (2000) Vol. 25, 25-29
9. Wu, Y., Wang, X., Liu, X., and Wang Y.: Data-mining approaches reveal hidden families
of proteases in the genome of malaria parasite, Genome Res. (2003) 13:601-616
10. 9.Gantt S.M., Myung J.M., Briones M.R., Li W.D., Corey E.J., Omura S., Nussenzweig
V., Sinnis, P.: Proteasome inhibitors block development of Plasmodium spp., Antimicrob
Agents Chemother. (1998) 42:2731-2738
11. Kitano, H.: Systems biology: A brief overview. Science, (2002) 295: 1662-1664
12. Bowers, P.M., Cokus, S.J., Eisenberg, D., Yeates, T.O.: Use of logic relationships to decipher protein network organization, Science. (2004) 306:2246-2249

