Application of Virtual Ant Algorithms in the
Optimization of CFRP Shear Strengthened
Precracked Structures
Xin-She Yang, Janet M. Lees, and Chris T. Morley
Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge
Trumpington Street, Cambridge CB2 1PZ, UK
xy227@eng.cam.ac.uk

Abstract. Many engineering applications often involve the minimization of objective functions. The optimization becomes very diﬃcult when
the objective functions are either unknown or do not have an explicit
form. This is certainly the case in the strengthening of existing precracked reinforced concrete structures using external carbon ﬁbre reinforced polymer (CFRP) reinforcement. For a given concrete structure,
the identiﬁcation of the optimum strengthening system is very important and diﬃcult, and depends on many parameters including the extent
and distribution of existing cracks, loading capacity, materials and environment. The choice of these parameters essentially forms a coupled
problem of ﬁnite element analysis and parameter optimization with the
aim of increasing the serviceability of the structure concerned. In this
paper, virtual ant algorithms combined with nonlinear FE analysis are
used in the optimization of the strengthening parameters. Simulations
show that the location and orientation of the CFRP reinforcement has a
signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the behaviour of the strengthened structure. The
orientation of the reinforcement with a ﬁxed location becomes optimal
if the reinforcing material is placed perpendicular to the existing crack
direction. The implication for strengthening will also be presented.

1

Introduction

Nature inspired algorithms based on swarm intelligence and the self-organized
behaviour of social insects can now be used to solve many complex problems
such as the travelling salesman problem and the rerouting of traﬃc in a busy
telecom network [5]. New algorithms are often developed in the form of a hybrid
combination of biology-derived algorithms and conventional methods, and this
is especially true in many engineering applications. On the other hand, the development of optimum strengthening and repair strategies for existing reinforced
concrete structures is a challenging task. For a given structure, the most appropriate solution will depend on many factors such as the extent and distribution
of any existing cracks, the loading capacity, the type of structure, available materials and environmental considerations [2, 3, 4]. The identiﬁcation of the best
strengthening method is essentially a coupled optimization problem consisting
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part I, LNCS 3991, pp. 834–837, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

Application of Virtual Ant Algorithms

835

of ﬁnite element analysis and parameter optimization with the aim of increasing
the serviceability of an existing structure. The optimization of parameters such
as the area, spacing, location and orientation of additional CFRP reinforcing
elements to strengthen a structure can be obtained by searching the parameter
space and results from ﬁnite element (FE) analyses for a given set of these parameters. This paper aims to develop a simple optimization procedure to simulate
diﬀerent strengthening strategies for rectangular beams with dapped ends.

2

Virtual Ant Algorithms

Many problems in engineering and other disciplines involve optimizations that
depend on a number of parameters, and the choice of these parameters aﬀects
the performance or objectives of the system concerned. The optimization target
is often measured in terms of objective or ﬁtness functions in qualitative models.
The Virtual Ant Algorithm (VAA) starts with a troop of virtual ants, each
ant randomly wonders in the phase space and in most cases; the phase space
can be simply a 2-D or 3-D space. The main steps of the virtual ant algorithm
are: 1) Create a initial population of virtual ants, and encode the function into
virtual food; 2) Deﬁne the criterion for marking food/route with pheromone; 3)
Evolution of virtual ants with time by random walking and broadcasting the
best local to others if a better food location is found; 4) Evaluate the encoded
concentration/locations of ants; 5) Decode the results to obtain the solution.
Furthermore, in order to avoid the trapping at local maxima, a probability of
p = 0.01 ∼ 0.05 is used to perturb the position and directions of the ants. There
is a tradeoﬀ between the computational eﬃciency in parameter searching and
the computing time of ﬁnite element analysis. For the simulations used in this
paper, the number of ants is taken to be in the range of 20-60.
The optimization problem in this paper forms a coupled problem including
parameter-searching and the nonlinear ﬁnite element analysis. The virtual food
in our optimization is the loading capacity. For each ant and each parameter
set, a nonlinear ﬁnite element analysis is carried out in the sequential manner.
The nonlinear ﬁnite element model used for our simulations is the smeared crack
model developed by de Borst and others [1]. The diﬃculty is that the explicit
form of the optimization function or load capacity is not known. Standard optimization approaches usually require a known optimization function before any
optimization algorithms can be applied. However, we will show that virtual ant
algorithms are also applicable to the functions that are not explicitly known.

3
3.1

Simulations and Results
Strengthening of Beams with Dapped Ends

The strengthening of reinforced concrete beams with dapped ends has been
studied experimentally by Taher using various types of reinforcement [6]. Consider a beam of 2200 × 300 × 150 mm with dapped ends (150 mm × 150 mm),

836

X.-S. Yang, J.M. Lees, and C.T. Morley

where the reinforcement bars are placed at 100 mm from the top and 50 mm
from the bottom surface of the beam. Both reinforcement layers have a total
area of 100 mm2 . The beam is loaded under the four-point bending conditions.
The values used in the simulations for the concrete are, a Young’s Modulus of
elasticity Econc =21000 N/mm2 , a Poisson’s ratio ν = 0.15, a compressive cube
strength fcu =53 N/mm2 , and a tensile strength ft =6 N/mm2 . The additional
CFRP strengthening reinforcement is considered as brittle elastic, but it is always within the elastic range for all the simulations. Figure 1 shows the crack
stress at a load of f = 10 kN. We can see the stress concentration at the corners
at both ends of the beam. This will lead to crack formation at these corners.
If we strengthen this system with a CFRP reinforcing strap anchored near the

Fig. 1. Crack strain and eﬀect of strengthening in a beam with dapped ends

top and bottom surfaces, we can study the eﬀect of the strengthening system.
The CFRP reinforcement is anchored at both ends but it is unbonded and not
prestressed. The simulation of the strengthened beam gives the distribution of
crack strains and crack patterns shown in the lower ﬁgure in Figure 1. We can see
that the shear cracks are less extensive and have shifted away from the corners.
3.2

Optimization of Strengthening Parameters

The optimization of the strengthening parameters is carried out in the following
manner. First, we use the same beam as shown in Figure 2 and vary the location
(x) of the midpoint and orientation (θ) of the CFRP reinforcement, then we run
the FE analysis to obtain the ﬁnal load. The load is then normalised using the
failure load for x/d = 1 and θ = 0. Figure 2 shows the load variation versus
the orientation and location where the dots show the updating process of the
parameter set (x/d, θ) and the ﬁtness or load function which is the normalized
ﬁnal load where d = 300 is the depth of the beam. From these ﬁgures, we can see
that the ﬁnal load reaches the maximum after about 60 parameter combinations,
and this corresponds to the optimal angle of θ = 45◦ . For a domain of 100 ×
100 grids, the virtual ant algorithms can reach the optimal setting (after only
about 60 combinations) far more quickly than a regular searching algorithm
where it would be necessary to consider 10000 possible combinations. The search
eﬃciency is therefore increased by more than two orders or 125 times. Further
work will extend the current work to the strengthening and repair of various
structures under various time-dependent loading conditions and history.

Application of Virtual Ant Algorithms

837

Fig. 2. Evolution of load with the location and orientation

4

Conclusions

By simulating the swarm interactions of social ants, we used the virtual ant algorithm to solve the function optimizations. An optimization problem for strengthening concrete structures is then formulated by coupling parameter searching
and nonlinear ﬁnite element analysis. By using eﬃcient parameter searching to
optimize the search for the best strengthening parameters and combining it with
FE simulations, we have reached the optimal load without knowing the shape
of the ﬁtness function. Simulations show that both the location and orientation
of additional CFRP strengthening reinforcement elements are important. In the
case of a beam with dapped ends, the optimal strengthening parameters are
x = 0.5d and θ = 45◦ . As expected, this result suggests that the best option
is to strengthen in the direction that is perpendicular to the direction of major
cracks. Further research will consider the optimum strengthening strategy for
structures with a complex geometry and time-dependent loading history.
Acknowledgement. The authors are grateful to EPSRC for their ﬁnancial
support (GR/S55101/01).

References
1. de Borst R.: Smeared cracking, plastity, creep and thermal loading - a uniﬁed approach, Comp. Meth. Appl. Mech. Eng., 62 (1987) 89-110.
2. Lees J. M., Winistoerfer A. U. and Meier, U.: External prestressed CFRP straps for
the shear enhancement of concrete, ASCE J Composites for Construction, 6 (2002)
249-256.
3. Hoult N. A. and Lees J. M.: Shear retroﬁtting of reinfoced concrete beams using
CFRP straps, Proc. Advanced Composite Materials in Bridges and Structures, 20-23
July, Calgary, (2004).
4. Lees, J.M., Morley, C.T., Yang, X.S., Hasan Dirar, S.M.O.: Fibre reinforced polymer
strengthening of pre-cracked concrete structures, Concrete, 39 (2005) 36-37
5. Solnon C.: Ants can solve constraint satisfaction problems. IEEE Trans. Evolutionary Computing, 6 (2002) 347-357.
6. Taher, S. E. M.: Strengthening of critically designed girders with dapped ends,
Structures and Buildings, 158 (2005) 141-152.

