A Power Saving Scheme for Integrated WLAN
and Cellular Networks
SuKyoung Lee
Dept. of Computer Science, Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea
sklee@cs.yonsei.ac.kr.

Abstract. For the integration of WLAN and cellular networks, there
have been recently several eﬀorts to provide an optimized system design. However, it is noted from the existing schemes that in idle state,
WLAN interface is supposed to be periodically turned on to receive periodic beacons from access points with cellular interface turned on at the
same time for the paging from base station, resulting in signiﬁcant power
consumption. Therefore, in order to save the power consumption, when
WLAN interface goes to idle state, we propose to turn oﬀ the WLAN interface without any periodic wake-up while at the same time, the existing
paging of cellular networks are utilized. It is conﬁrmed via both analytical modeling and simulation that the proposed scheme achieves better
performance as compared to techniques currently adopted in WLAN in
terms of power consumption.

1

Introduction

Most recently, a signiﬁcant number of carriers are migrating towards heterogeneous wireless networking where Wireless Local Area Networks (WLANs) based
on IEEE 802.11 standards and 3G (third-generation) cellular networks co-exist,
in order to oﬀer Internet access to end users with better Quality of Service (QoS).
However, cost-eﬀective integration of heterogeneous wireless networks is not yet
accomplished, so that there have been many research activities having focused
on this integration [1]-[3].
It is a challenge to maintain mobile terminals’ active connections as they
move across over diﬀerent types of wireless networks (that is known as “vertical handoﬀ”), while minimizing power consumption [1]. There have been several
eﬀorts to connect mobile device equipped with multiple interfaces, to the most
optimal one among the access networks in terms of network performance. In [1],
new performance metrics are introduced for providing seamless mobility. The
authors of [2] proposed an end-to-end mobility management system that reduces ping-pong eﬀect by obtaining the condition of diﬀerent networks. Various
network layer based inter-network handover techniques are addressed and their
performance is investigated in [3].
This work was supported by the Korea Research Foundation Grant funded by the
Korean Government(MOEHRD) (KRF-204-2005-D00029).
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part II, LNCS 3992, pp. 985–991, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

986

S. Lee

Here, it is worthy of notice that a large portion of the power consumption in
wireless interface is idle power. In most of the existing vertical handoﬀ management schemes [1]-[3], MN (Mobile Node) must turn on both WLAN and cellular
interfaces at once even in the idle state with power save mode to receive periodic
beacons from Access Points (APs) while receiving paging messages from Base
Station (BS), resulting in signiﬁcant power consumption.
Therefore, in this paper, in order to save power consumption of MN in the
integrated WLAN and cellular networks, when WLAN interface goes to idle
state, we propose to turn oﬀ the WLAN interface without any periodic wake-up
while at the same time, the existing Paging Channel (PCH) of cellular networks is
utilized to turn on the WLAN interface for incoming data. Noting that WLAN is
primarily used for accessing Internet where mainly downloading relatively longlived multimedia data service and the WLAN interface is forced to be in the idle
state for most of the time, it is beneﬁcial to turn oﬀ WLAN interface for the idle
period.
It is conﬁrmed via both analytical modeling and simulation results that the
proposed power saving scheme achieves better performance as compared to techniques currently adopted in WLAN in terms of the total power consumption.

2

Power-Eﬃcient Interface Switching

When connected to a WLAN, WLAN interface card is usually in idle mode for
around 70% of the overall time [4]. In idle state, the power consumption level
for WLAN interface is about 10 times as great as that of cellular interface [5].
Our scheme targets on saving this power consumption, where WLAN interface
is turned oﬀ without any periodic wake-up during idle period, which is called
“inactive” state in this paper. Herein, WLAN interface has following states:
– Communication state: WLAN interface sends or/and receives data.
– Non-communication state: WLAN interface goes to this state when the data
session completes.
1. Typical WLAN: Idle state; 2. Proposed system: Inactive state
In our system model, in idle state, the cellular interface is assumed to listen
continuously to the PCH to detect messages directed at APs in its cell as well
as itself. The PCH of cellular network is utilized also to provide the information
about APs in its current cell– Serving GPRS Support Node (SGSN) has an
acquisition of IP address and Service Set Identiﬁer (SSID) of all APs in its
coverage where some 802.11 gateways serving the APs have a direct link to the
SGSN, at the stage of conﬁguration where BSs are initialized.
In this paper, we focus on downlink traﬃc since it is envisioned that 4th generation wireless system’s traﬃc pattern will be highly asymmetrical, with 50/1
ratio or more favoring the downlink. Basing our system on 3GPP system, note
that Radio Network Controller (RNC) is responsible for controlling user connections between a user and the core network with buﬀers for diﬀerent users [6].
Thus, for downlink transmission, BS notiﬁes MN when the number of packets

A Power Saving Scheme for Integrated WLAN and Cellular Networks

987

Table 1. Detailed procedure of the proposed power saving scheme for downlink traﬃc
for integrated WLAN and cellular networks
(1) For downlink transmission, data traﬃc comes into a per-user-buﬀer at RNC
when MN’s WLAN interface is in inactive state. (2) Once the number of packets
in the buﬀer reaches to threshold n, the BS notiﬁes the MN about the existence of
downlink data via its PCH. (3) On receiving the notiﬁcation, WLAN interface is
turned on (i.e. goes to communication state) and WLAN IF READY message is sent
to corresponding 802.11 gateway while receiving the incoming data through cellular
network. (4) Upon receiving the WLAN IF READY message, the 802.11 gateway
sends VERTICAL HANDOFF COMPLETE message including the SSID and MAC
address of the AP selected for the MN. (5) Once the SGSN receives the VERTICAL HANDOFF COMPLETE message, it starts to forward the remaining data to
802.11 gateway instead of to the BS. (6) The 802.11 gateway transmits the remaining
data received from the SGSN to the MN.

in a per-user-buﬀer at RNC [6] for incoming data reaches a certain threshold
n (usually, ≤ maximum buﬀer size) so that the MN should not consume its
power due to frequent turn-on and oﬀ actions which might occur if MN should
be awakened upon receiving a packet from cellular network. The proposed power
saving scheme for downlink traﬃc is described at length in Table 1.

3

Analytical Model of Power Consumption

Typically, users’ packets are separated into buﬀers at RNC [6] while BS simultaneously serves a number of users so that BS should provide the opportunity
for a scheduler to select the optimal user to transmit to at any instant [7]. To
investigate the performance of the proposed scheme, we now develop an analytical model for heterogeneous networks treating the per-user-buﬀer at RNC with
the traﬃc common in WLAN system, also considering the power on/oﬀ state of
WLAN interface.
Unlike a cellular network, as far as traﬃc patterns are concerned, WLAN
system is characterized as its traﬃc has an on/oﬀ behavior [8]. For example,
for a web page transfer, a MN alternates between on period, ton and oﬀ period,
toﬀ during which a set of web pages is used to be downloaded as an application
session and there is no traﬃc due to user’s thinking time, respectively. The
probabilities of a MN being in ton and of a MN being in toﬀ are given by pton =
β
α
α+β and ptoﬀ = α+β , respectively. Both on and oﬀ periods are assumed to have
an exponential distribution with the mean, β -1 and α-1 , respectively. During ton
period, we assume that traﬃc arrives with a Poisson distribution the mean of
which is λ. It is also assumed that each mobile user has only one TCP session
active at a time from cellular network due to the lack of multi-tasking ability in
current operating system of mobile device for cellular networks.
Let N be the maximum number of packets allowed in a per-user-buﬀer at
RNC. If we set the threshold n to the buﬀer size, N , the arrival process to each

988

S. Lee
WLAN interface is turned on (Active state):
For ti, data traffic comes into RNC buffer
D

1-D

1

0
E

(1-E)O (1-E)O

(1-E)O (1-E)O

2

N-1

(1-E)P (1-E)P
i : WLAN interface is turned off;

(1-E)P

N

(1-E)P

i : turned on

Fig. 1. State transition diagram for n = N

buﬀer of RNC can be modeled as an Interrupted Bernoulli Process (IBP). In
the ﬁrst place, to analyze the buﬀer under our proposed scheme with n = N ,
we note that during toﬀ period, the buﬀer content must be zero. When the state
of the buﬀer at RNC ﬁrst makes a transition to ton state, for each subsequent
transition to the same ton state, a packet arrives to the buﬀer with mean λ while
at the same time, the content of the buﬀer is transmitted to the MN through
cellular interface with mean rate μ until the BS wakes up the corresponding
WLAN interface by its PCH or the traﬃc ﬂow ends without turning on WLAN
interface due to the transient characteristic of the current traﬃc. Therefore, we
are able to construct a Markov chain model for per-user-buﬀer at RNC as shown
in Fig 1. If we denote pi as the steady-state probability that the buﬀer contains
i packets, then the steady-state probabilities are given by
p0 = ptoﬀ

(1)

αp0 = βp1
αp0 + (1 − β)μp2 = (1 − β)λp1 + βp1
λpi−1 + μpi+1 = (λ + μ)pi

2≤i≤N −2

(2)
(3)
(4)

Let x and ti denote the time elapsed from the moment when the WLAN interface
β
,
is turned on and the time taken to initialize WLAN, respectively. Since p0 = α+β
from Eqs. 1-4, the rate at which WLAN interface is turned on from inactive state
is given by
)
p(N
on = (1 − β)λpN −1 (1 − (1 − β)μpN )u(x)

=

α(1 − β)λρN −2
α(1 − β)λρN −2
1−
u(x)
α+β
α+β

(5)

1 ti − x > 0
and ρ = μλ . Thus, it can be easily known from
0 ti − x ≤ 0
the case of n = N that the rate at which WLAN interface is turned on
with
k−2
(k)
n = k becomes pon = (1 − β)λpk−1 (1 − (1 − β)μpk )u(x) = α(1−β)λρ
(1
−
α+β

where u(x) =

α(1−β)λρk−2
)u(x).
α+β

For the proposed scheme with n = 1 where WLAN interface is turned on from
inactive state once the ﬁrst packet of traﬃc ﬂow comes to the buﬀer at RNC, the
rate at which WLAN interface is turned on from inactive state is expressed as

A Power Saving Scheme for Integrated WLAN and Cellular Networks

p(1)
on = αp0 =

αβ
.
α+β

989

(6)

For the case of typical WLAN interface with power save mode, the sleeping
interface must wake up periodically to receive regular beacons coming from the
AP, which identify whether idle interface has data buﬀered at the AP and waiting
for delivery. For idle mode, let w and s denote the wake-up rate for receiving
beacons from AP and the sleep rate after receiving beacons from AP, respectively,
both of which are ﬁxed. Then, for idle state with power save mode, we have the
rate at which WLAN interface is turned on as followings:
w
)p0
pon =(α + (1 − α)
w+s
(7)
(w + sα)β
.
=
(w + s)(α + β)
Now we can compute the average power consumed for non-communication
state during unit time t. Let Ci and Cd be the power consumed for wake-up
to receive beacon/data and the baseline power consumption for doze state of
idle period, respectively. Let Cia be the power consumption due to the wake
up from inactive state to receive incoming data which will be vertically handed
oﬀ from cellular network. For our proposed scheme, there is no baseline power
consumption since MN goes to inactive state in non-communication state. Then,
for non-communication state, the average power-consumption during time t is
P Wnc =

(Ci Pon + Cd p0 )t
(k)
Cia Pon t

for typical WLAN
for PCP with n = k

(8)

where in general, Cia is known to be greater than Ci , so that Ci and Cia are set
to 0.68 W and 1 W, respectively while Cd is assumed to have the value of 0.06
W in this study, where the power consumption values are obtained from [5].

4

Performance Evaluation

To obtain some simulation results as well as numerical results, we assume that
during on period, the downlink transmission rate to MN is 80 Kbps while ton
is 120 and 360 sec. It is also assumed that ti is 1 sec. The buﬀer size, Lb and
the packet size are set to is 20 Kbytes and 1000 bytes, respectively. For typical
WLAN interface with power save mode, beacon period is set to 100 ms.
In Figs. 2 (a) and (b), the average power consumed by WLAN interface for
non-communication state, P Wnc is plotted as a function of oﬀ period ranging
from 30 to 360 sec for ton =120 and 360 sec, respectively when R=50 Kbps which
denotes the data rate to BS during ton . The graphs in Fig. 2 show that P Wnc
obtained with typical WLAN system is higher than the proposed system, where
when n = N , the power consumption under the proposed scheme is lower than
when n = 1 over all the ranges of oﬀ period. We also know that in terms of power
consumption, the above observed performance improvement is valid, irrespective
of whether the active period is 120 sec or 360 sec.

990

S. Lee
0

0

10

10
Proposed (n=N)
Proposed (n=1)
Typical WLAN

Proposed (n=N)
Proposed (n=1)
Typical WLAN

−1

−1

(W)

10

−2

−2

10

nc

10

PW

PW

nc

(W)

10

−3

−3

10

10

−4

10

−4

100

200

10

300

Idle period (sec)
(c) t =120 sec and R=50 Kbps

100

200

300

Idle period (sec)
(d) t =360 sec and R=50 Kbps

on

on

Fig. 2. Numerical power consumption versus oﬀ period
Traffic
Sessions
Iub
Iu-ps
Gn
Gn
622Mbps
40Kbps
40Kbps
10Mbps
BS 15ms RNC 0.4ms SGSN 10ms GGSN 15ms Server
Uu
32Kbps
10ms
UE
(MS) 100Kbps
10ms

10Mbps
15ms
AP 10Mbps
15ms

Wired Link
Wireless Link
Node

802.11
GW

Fig. 3. Network topology

0

10

0

Proposed (n=N)
Proposed (n=1)
Typical WLAN

10

Proposed (n=N)
Proposed (n=1)
Typical WLAN

−1

−1

10

PWnc (W)

PWnc (W)

10

−2

−2

10

10

−3

10

−3

100

200

300

Mean idle period (sec)
(a) t =120 sec and R=50 Kbps
on

10

100

200

300

Mean idle period (sec)
(b) t =360 sec and R=50 Kbps
on

Fig. 4. Simulated power consumption versus varying mean idle period

Through simulation, we also compare the performance of the proposed scheme
with typical WLAN system with periodic wake-up in idle state, in terms of power
consumption for non-communication state. For this comparison, a simulation

A Power Saving Scheme for Integrated WLAN and Cellular Networks

991

environment is created by extending the UMTS Terrestrial Radio Access Network
(UTRAN) support modules [9]. The simulation topology is depicted in Fig. 3.
Fig. 4 plots the power consumed by the WLAN interface for non-communication
state versus idle period ranging from 30 to 360 sec for R=50 Kbps when ton is 120
and 360 sec. We observe that the power consumption behavior patterns shown in
Fig. 4 are aligned along with the numerical results in Fig. 2. From the graphs in
Fig. 4, it is also observed that the proposed scheme with n = N works better with
regard to power consumption, compared to that with n = 1 when the active period
is smaller.

5

Conclusion

In this paper, we propose a power saving scheme for integrated WLAN and
cellular networks, that utilizes the existing paging of cellular networks in order
to turn oﬀ the WLAN interface during idle time. We aimed to save the power
consumption resulting from periodic wake-up during the idle time.
Performance results for the proposed system are derived from the analysis as
well as the simulation with regard to power consumption. The numerical and
simulation results show that the power consumed in non-communication state
for our scheme is lower than typical WLAN system because for the idle time,
the power consumption resulting from the periodic wake-up is removed.

References
1. J. McNair and F. Zhu, “Vertical Handoﬀs in Fourth-Generation Multinetwork Environments”, IEEE Wireless Commun. Mag., vol.11, no.3, pp.8-15, Jun. 2004.
2. C. Guo, Z. Guo, Q. Zhang and W. Zhu, “A Seamless and Proactive End-to-End
Mobility Solution for Roaming across Heterogeneous Wireless Networks”, IEEE
JSAC, vol.22, no.5, pp.834-848, Jun. 2004.
3. R. Chakravorty, P. Vidales, K. Subramanian, I. Pratt, and J. Crowcroft, “Performance Issues with Vertical Handovers - Experiences from GPRS Cellular and WLAN
Hot-spots Integration”, IEEE Proceedings Percom: Pervasive Computing and Communications, 2004
4. Ram Chary, et al, “Power Management Technologies for WLAN enabled Handheld
Devices”, Intel Developer Forum, Fall 2003
5. K. Mahmud, M. Inoue, H. Murakami, M. Hasegawa, and H. Morikawa, “Energy
Consumption Measurement of Wireless Interfaces in Multi-Service User Terminals
ofr Heterogeneous Wireless Networks”, IEICE Trans. Commun., vol.E88-B, no.3,
Mar. 2005.
6. 3GPP TS 25.322. “Radio Link Control (RLC) Protocol Speciﬁcation ”, version 6.2,
Dec. 2004, Available via http://www.3gpp.org.
7. R.G. Mukhtar, S.V. Hanly, and L. Andrew, “Eﬃcient Internet Traﬃc Delivery over
Wireless Networks”, IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 41, no. 21, pp. 46-53, Dec. 2003.
8. V.D. Park and M.S. Corson, “Models for an IP-based Cellular Network”,
http://www.ieee802.org/20/Contribs/ C802.20-03-13r1.pdf.
9. Enhanced UMTS Radio Access Network Extensions for ns-2 (ERUANE), Available
via http://www.ti-wmc.nl/eurane/

