Ab initio Study of Chiral Recognition of β-Butyrolactone
by Cyclodextrins
Waraporn Parasuk1,* and Vudhichai Parasuk2
1
Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science,
Kasetsart University, Bangkok 10900, Thailand
fsciwapa@ku.ac.th
2
Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science,
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand
parasuk@atc.atccu.chula.ac.th

Abstract. Separation of stereoisomers of organic compounds is an important
and challenge task for chemists. Cyclodextrins and their derivatives have been
widely used in chromatography for this application. Experimental results
indicated that substituents on the hydroxyl groups of cyclodextrin affect the
efficiency of the chiral separation of β-butyrolactone. The understanding of the
interactions contributed to the chiral recognition of cyclodextrin would help us
predict the separation capability of a specific pair of cyclodextrin and chiral
compound. Thus, the cyclodextrin substituent effect on the chiral recognition
should be systematically investigated. In this study, Hartree Fock method with
3-21G basis set and density functional theory B3LYP with 6-31G* basis set
were applied to determine the chiral recognition of a chiral model, βbutyrolactone, by β-cyclodextrin and its derivatives. Both methods predicted
comparable values of chiral recognition of β-cyclodextrin derivatives. We found
that methoxyl substitution on the wider rim of cyclodextrin (secondary hydroxyl
groups) give the most effective chiral separation (ΔΔE=18.2 kcal/mol in favor of
R-isomer) followed by substitution on the narrow rim (ΔΔE=9.5 kcal/mol in
favor of S-isomer) while substitution on both side give the worst recognition
(ΔΔE=3.2 kcal/mol in favor of S-isomer). This suggests that β-cyclodextrin with
substitution only on the wider rim give the best chiral selectivity. By replacing
methyl group with chiral hydroxypropyl group, we found that the chiral
selectivity is reduced (ΔΔE=6.4 and 8.4 kcal/mol respectively for R- and S-form
of hydroxypropyl group). This implies that the bulky group causes the reduction
of the chiral selectivity.

1 Introduction
Cyclodextrins (CDs) are cyclic α-1,4 linked oligosaccharides of D-glucose units. The
most naturally available are α-, β-, and γ-CDs with 6, 7, and 8 glucose units. Such a
linkage forms a truncated cone shape of CDs with the 6-primary hydroxyl groups of
glucose at the narrower and the 2- and 3- secondary hydroxyl groups at the wider rim.
The cavity of CDs is less polar than other parts of molecule.[1] The cavity size varies
from 5 to 9 Ǻ depending on numbers of glucose units. CDs can form inclusion
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part III, LNCS 3993, pp. 136 – 142, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

Ab initio Study of Chiral Recognition of β-Butyrolactone by Cyclodextrins

137

complexes with several classes of substances. Several factors govern the stability of
the complexes. Since CDs have a lot of chiral centers, they can form diastereomers
with enantiomeric guests with different stability. Thus, CDs are utilized as reagents
for chiral separation. One of such applications is the usage of CDs as either stationary or
mobile phase in chromatographic separation of isomers.[2] Several classes of
enantiomeric compounds i.e. sugars, alcohols, amines, lactones, epoxides, bicyclic
compounds, were gas chromatographic resolved on derivatized CDs column.[3,4] This
capability of cyclodextrin in chromatography has been widely applied to pharmaceutical
and food additive industries, fragrances, and pheromone res- earch.[2,5] Shitangkoon
and Vigh reported that trichloroacetyl substituents on β-cyclodextrin, as stationary
phase in gas chromatography, gives good column efficiency while monochloroacetyl
yields good selectivity of the chiral separation of β-butyrolactone.[6] They found
furthermore that dichloroacetyl substitution gives the compromised results of the
column efficiency and the chiral selectivity. Substituents seem to have an effect on the
chiral separation of the chromatographic column. To understand the substitution effect
on the chiral separation by cyclodextrin, the inclusion phenomenon between βcyclodextrins and β-butyrolactone were investigated using computational modeling
techniques.
O R'
O
O
OR RO

O
R'O

RO

β-cyclodextrin derivatives
bcd
R=R'=H
bcd-1m
R=H, R'=CH3
bcd-2m
R=CH 3, R'=H
bcd-pm
R=R'=CH3
bcd-1rhp R=H, R'=(R)-CH 2CH(OH)CH3
bcd-1shp R=H, R'=(S)-CH2CH(OH)CH3

OR'

O
RO

O

OR
O
OR

RO
O
RO

O
R'O

OR'

OR
O
OR

RO
OR O
R
O O

R'O

H3C

O
O

H

OR

O

O

O

OR'

β-butyrolactone

Fig. 1. Structure of β-cyclodextrin derivatives and β-butyrolactone

2 Computational Details
Illustrative representation of β-cyclodextrin derivatives and β-butyrolactone are
displayed in Figure 1. Cyclodextrins studied in this work were β-cyclodextrin, denoted
as bcd, and its derivatives. The derivatives were modified by substitution of hydroxyl
with methoxyl groups. The suffixes 1m, 2m, or pm expressed for methoxyl substituted
at primary, secondary, or both rims of the parent cyclodextrin, i.e. bcd-1m, bcd-2m, and
bcd-pm stand for per(6-O-methyl)-β-cyclodextrin, per(2,3-di-O-methyl)-β-cyclodextrin,
and per(2,3,6-tri-O-methyl)-β-cyclodextrin, respectively. Moreover, the substitution of

138

W. Parasuk and V. Parasuk

the primary hydroxyl with chiral substituents, R- and S-2-hydroxypropoxyl, i.e. per(6O-R-2-hydroxymethyl)-β-cyclodextrin and per(6-O-S-2-hydroxymethyl)-β-cyclodextrin
denoted as bcd-1rhp and bcd-1shp, were also studied. Geometries of host β-cyclodextrin
and derivatives, together with those of enantiomers of guest β-butyrolactone, and their
host-guest complexes were taken from our previous work where molecular dynamics
simulations of the inclusion complexes between bcd and β-butyrolactone were
performed.[7] In that study, two orientations of β-butyrolactone i.e. one with methyl
group pointing inward and another with methyl group pointing outward the secondary
end of the cyclodextrin, were considered. In this work, energies of the more stable
complexes, hosts, and guests were recalculated at Hartree Fock level with 3-21g basis
set and density functional theory level using B3LYP functionals with 6-31g* basis set.
The ab initio and DFT calculations were performed using Gaussian98 program [8].

3 Results and Discussion
3.1 Binding Energies
Binding energies, ΔE, of the inclusion complexes were computed from the energy
differences between complexes and corresponding host and guest molecules.
ΔER/S = ER/Scpx - (Ehost + ER/S )
ER/Scpx is the energy of R- or S-β-butyrolactone and cyclodextrin complex. Ehost is the
energy of free cyclodextrin derivative, and ER/S is the energy of guest R- or S-βbutyrolactone. Table 1 displays binding energies of inclusion complexes between bcd
derivatives and R- and S-β-butyrolactone. From the table, HF and B3LYP gave
similar trend of binding energies, even though HF seems to overestimate the binding
energies as compared to the results obtained at B3LYP level. For instances, HF
predicted both bcd and bcd-2m bind to S-β-butyrolactone with the binding energy of 5.3 and -2.7 kcal/mol, respectively, while B3LYP predicted that S-β-butyrolactone
does not bind with bcd and bcd-2m (ΔES = 0.4 and 4.6 kcal/mol). The deficiency of
HF/3-21g in the study of cyclodextrin complex where weak interaction is involved is
clearly seen. Considering the inclusion behavior of R-β-butyrolactone, it is observed
that the R-enantiomer could not bind with bcd and bcd-1m, as indicated by
Table 1. Binding energies (ΔER and ΔES, kcal/mol) of the complexes between R- and S-βbutyrolactone and β-cyclodextrin and derivatives calculated by HF/3-21g and B3LYP/6-31g*

Bcd
bcd-1m
bcd-2m
bcd-pm

HF/3-21g
ΔER
ΔES
1.9
-5.3
0.5
-11.1
-22.1
-2.7
-19.4
-24.8

B3LYP/6-31g*
ΔER
6.2
1.9
-13.6
-14.3

ΔES
0.4
-7.7
4.6
-17.4

Ab initio Study of Chiral Recognition of β-Butyrolactone by Cyclodextrins

139

the positive ΔER while it forms complexes with bcd-2m and bcd-pm (ΔER = -13.6 and
-14.3 kcal/mol, respectively). On the other hand, the S-β-butyrolactone forms
complexes with bcd-1m and bcd-pm (ΔES = -7.7 and -17.4 kcal/mol, respectively)
while it does not bind with bcd and bcd-2m. It could be seen that the complexation
pattern with bcd and bcd derivatives of the R- and S- enantiomers of β-butyrolactone
is distinctive. Thus, the degree of methylation of β-cyclodextrin affected the stability
of the inclusion complex of β-butyrolactone differently for the different enantiomers.

a)

bcd-R

bcd-S

b)

bcd-1m-R

bcd-1m-S

c)

bcd-2m-R

bcd-2m-S

d)

bcd-pm-R

bcd-pm-S

Fig. 2. Side view of inclusion complexes of R- and S-β-butyrolactone with derivatives of βcyclodextrin, a) bcd, b) bcd-1m, c) bcd-2m, and d) bcd-pm. The cyclcodextrin skeletons are
presented as thin line, β-butyrolactone are presented as color stick with
for C, O,
and H, respectively. In all figure the upper side is the wider secondary rim[7].

140

W. Parasuk and V. Parasuk

Figure 2 shows structures of inclusion complexes of bcd and its derivatives with Rand S-β-butyrolactone obtained from MD simulation.[7] In the complex between bcd
and R- and S-β-butyrolactone, the guests were placed inside the cavity of bcd as
shown in Figure 2a. However, these are not the stable complexes since their binding
energies are positive. From Figure 2b, the methyl group of the guest S-βbutyrolactone pointed outward to the wider secondary hydroxyl groups of the bcd-1m,
while the methyl group of R-enantiomer pointed inward to the ring. The former forms
the more stable complex than the latter. This evidence was also observed in the
complexes of host bcd-2m. In figure 2c, the R-enantiomer forms the more stable
complex (ΔER = -13.6 kcal/mol) and its methyl group points outward to the wider end
of the cyclodextrin ring. The S-enantiomer which forms less stable complex,
however, has its methyl group points inward to the cyclodextrin ring. The host bcdpm, in which the hydroxyl groups on both ends are methylated, forms complexes with
both enantiomers with comparable stability. As displayed in figured 2d, the
orientation of the R- and S-guests in both complexes are similar, the guest situated
inside the cavity and the methyl group of the guest points outward to the secondary
end. It is interesting to note that stable complexes of bcd-1m (with S-enantiomer) and
bcd-2m (with R-enantiomer) have the methyl group point outwad the bcd ring while
the unstable ones have the methyl group points inward. This is also the case for bcdpm where both R- and S-enantiomers have the methyl group point outward the
secondary methoxyl rim. The orientation of the guest is very important for the
formation of the stable complex.
3.2 Chiral Recognitions
The chiral recognition of cyclodextrin (ΔΔE), exhibited in Table 2, was computed
from the difference of the binding energies of both enantiomers, ΔER and ΔES, or
from the energy difference of their inclusion complex with R- and S-β-butyrolactone,
ΔΔE = ΔER - ΔES

or

ΔΔE = ERcpx - EScpx

where ERcpx and EScpx are energies of corresponding R- and S-β-butyrolactone
cyclodextrin complexes. Larger ΔΔE means more efficient chiral separation. The bcd2m showed the best chiral recognition with ΔΔE of -19 and -18 kcal/mol by HF and
B3LYP methods, respectively. Though the different level of accuracy predicts
different values of binding energy of the complexes, there is not much different in the
chiral recognition prediction. The negative value expressed larger binding energy for
R- than for S- configuration and vice versa for the positive value. Having the smaller
ΔΔE (in magnitude), bcd-1m has a moderate value of ΔΔE and also could be used for
chiral separation. Though a moderate value was obtained, bcd might not be suitable to
use as chiral selective reagent as it gave positive value of the binding energy to both
enantiomers of β-butyrolactone. Thus, the methylation of the secondary as well as the
primary hydroxyl groups of cyclodextrin could improve its chiral selectivity. The
methylation of the secondary hydroxyl improves the binding with R-enantiomer

Ab initio Study of Chiral Recognition of β-Butyrolactone by Cyclodextrins

141

whereas the methylation of the primary hydroxyl improves the binding with Senantiomer. There are not much difference on the ΔΔE of bcd-1m, bcd-1rhp, and bcd1shp (all have the substituents on the primary hydroxyl groups), i.e. 9.5, 6.4, and 8.4
kcal/mol, respectively. Positive values of ΔΔE confirmed that the substituents on the
primary rim improve the stability of the complex of the S-enantiomer. Thus, the chiral
R- or S-2-hydroxypropyl did not change the chiral preference of cyclodextrin. When
the hydroxyl groups on both rims of bcd are methylated as in bcd-pm, R- and S-βbutyrolactone bind to the host favorably. They form complex with the host with
comparable stability and hence leads to small ΔΔE, not suitable to use as chiral
selective reagent. Thus, the host which forms the more stable complex (greater
binding energy) is the more chiral selective (in exception of bcd-pm in which it forms
stable complex with both R- and S-forms). A similar conclusion could also be
observed from the gas chromatographic experiment.[6] In that study, the
monochloroacetyl derived bcd gives the best chiral selectivity as compared to the
dichloro- and the trichloroacetyl substituted bcds since it forms the most stable
complex as implying from its largest retention time.
Table 2. Chiral recognition energies (ΔΔE, kcal/mol) of β-cyclodextrin and derivatives
calculated by HF/3-21g and B3LYP/6-31g*
ΔΔE

bcd
bcd-1m
bcd-2m
bcd-pm
bcd-2rhp
bcd-2shp

HF/3-21g
7.1
11.5
-19.5
5.4
9.5
13.4

B3LYP/631g*
5.8
9.5
-18.2
3.2
6.4
8.4

4 Conclusions
The stability of the inclusion complexes of β-cyclodextrin derivatives with βbutyrolactone depends on the degree of methylation of β-cyclodextrin. The
derivative bcd-pm, where all the hydroxyl groups are methylated, forms stable
complexes with both configurations of β-butyrolactone and is not very good in the
chiral recognition. From this study, bcd-2m exhibited the best capability of the
chiral recognition for β-butyrolactone and is recommended to use as the chiral
selective agent. The bcd, on the other hand, has positive binding energies for both
R- and S-β-butyrolactone is expected to give poor chiral recognition. Though HF
method seems to overestimate the binding energies of the inclusion complexes, both
HF and B3LYP methods predicted comparable values of chiral recognitions of βcyclodextrin derivatives.

142

W. Parasuk and V. Parasuk

Acknowledgement
The Computational Chemistry Unit Cell (CCUC), Department of Chemistry, Faculty
of Science, Chulalongkorn University is acknowledged for the computational
facilities.

References
1. Li, S., Purdy, W.C.: Cyclodextrins and Their Applications in Analytical Chemistry. Chem.
Rev. 92 (1992) 1457-1470
2. Lipkowitz, K. B., Pearl, G., Coner, B., Peterson, M. A.: Explanation of Where and How
Enantioselective Binding Takes Place on Permethylated β-Cyclodextrin, a Chiral Stationary
Phase used in Gas Chromatography. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 119 (1997) 600-610
3. Armstrong, D.W., Li, W., Chang, C.-D., Pitha, J.: Polar-liquid, Derivatized Cyclodextrin
Stationary Phases for the Capillary Gas Chromatography Separation of Enantiomers. Anal.
Chem. 62 (1990) 914-923
4. Schurig, V., Nowotny, H.-P.: Gas Chromatographic Separation of Enantiomers on
Cyclodextrin Derivatives. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 29 (1990) 939-957
5. Armstrong, D. W., Ward, T.J., Armstrong, R. D., Beesley, T. E.: Separation of Drug
Stereoisomers by the Formation of β-Cyclodextrin Inclusion Complexes. Science 232
(1986) 1132-1135
6. Shitangkoon, A., Vigh, G.: Gas Chromatographic Enantiomer Separations using
Chloroacylpentyl Cyclodextrins. Abstracts of the 24th Congress on Science and Technology
of Thailand, Bangkok (1998) 218-219
7. Parasuk, W., Longwan, N., Tasanakosol W.: Enantiomer Recognition of of β-Butyrolactone
by Cyclodextrin. The fifth Annual National Symposium on Computational Science and
Engineering, Bangkok (2001) 187-193
8. Gaussian 98, Revision A9, Frisch, M. J., Trucks, G. W., Schlegel, H. B., Scuseria, G. E.,
Robb, M. A., Cheeseman, J. R., Zakrzewski, V. G., Montgomery, Jr., J. A., Stratmann, R.
E., Burant, J. C., Dapprich, S., Millam, J. M., Daniels, A. D., Kudin, K. N., Strain, M. C.,
Farkas, O., Tomasi, J., Barone, V., Cossi, M., Cammi, R., Mennucci, B., Pomelli, C.,
Adamo, C., Clifford, S., Ochterski, J., Petersson, G. A., Ayala, P. Y., Cui, Q., Morokuma,
K., Malick, D. K., Rabuck, A. D., Raghavachari, K., Foresman, J. B., Cioslowski, J., Ortiz,
J. V., Baboul, A. G., Stefanov, B. B., Liu, G., Liashenko, A., Piskorz, P., Komaromi, I.,
Gomperts, R., Martin, R. L., Fox, D. J., Keith, T., Al-Laham, M. A., Peng, C. Y.,
Nanayakkara, A., Challacombe, M., Gill, P. M. W., Johnson, B., Chen, W., Wong, M. W.,
Andres, J. L., Gonzalez, C., Head-Gordon, M., Replogle, E. S., and Pople, J. A., Gaussian,
Inc., Pittsburgh PA (1998)

