Numerical Modeling of Plasma - Flow
Interaction
Jean-Charles Mat´eo-V´elez1, Francois Rogier1 ,
Fr´ed´eric Thivet1 , and Pierre Degond2
´
ONERA, D´epartement Mod`eles pour l’A´erodynamique et l’Energ´
etique,
2 avenue Edouard Belin, 31055 Toulouse, France
mateo@onera.fr
http://www.onera.fr
2
UMR 5640, Laboratoire Math´ematiques pour l’Industrie et la Physique,
118 route de Narbonne, 31 062 Toulouse, France

1

Abstract. In the frame of the internal project PUMA (Plasma Used to
Master Aerodynamics), ONERA is conducting fundamental studies of
plasma-ﬂow interactions. In this paper, the ionic wind created by corona
discharges is studied in the case of a subsonic ﬂow over a ﬂat plate.
The proposed mechanism of the ionic wind proposed is the addition of
momentum by collisions between charged and neutral particles. In order
to evaluate the eﬀect of plasma on aerodynamics, a kinetic modeling of
the discharge is coupled with a Fluid Dynamics code.

1

Introduction

A large number of studies has been carried out on the ionic wind since the 60’s
[1]. This phenomenon was ﬁrst discovered by Hauksbee in 1709. It is a way to
provide energy to ﬂows thanks to an electric power supply. The strong advantages
of such an energy supply are that there is no need for external mass addition and
it can act over a wide range of frequencies (0-10 kHz). Numerous experiments
[2]-[6] have pointed out the possibility of adding signiﬁcant momentum in the
boundary layer of subsonic ﬂows.
Boeuf and Pitchford [7] give a detailed description of the origin of ionic wind
created by dielectric barrier discharges. When charged particles are submitted
to an intense electric ﬁeld E, they collide with the neutral molecules of the gas.
i
By this way they can transfer an amount of their momentum. The force fk→n
that exerts a specie k on a neutral n in the direction i is:
i
fk→n
= mk Nk νk−n Uki − Uni

(1)

where mk is the mass of specie k, Nk its density, Uki the ith component of its
mean velocity vector; νk−m is the momentum transfer frequency for collisions
between k and n. This expression simpliﬁes because the velocity of charged
species are three or four orders of magnitude higher than the neutral velocity.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part II, LNCS 3992, pp. 1–9, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

2

J.-C. Mat´eo-V´elez et al.

Let us consider the density current jki and the mobility μk of specie k:
jki = qNk Uki
q
μk =
mk νk−n

(2)
(3)

where q is the electric charge of specie k. Neglecting the gas velocity with respect
to ions and electrons velocities, the volumetric force f exerted by all the charged
particles reads:
jki
(4)
fi =
μk
k

It is important to note that all these contributions to the global force are algebraic. So, the total force can be equal to zero even if the single contributions are
not equal to zero. The conductive density current jci is the sum of the particles
current:
|jki |
(5)
|jci | =
k

And ﬁnally, the total density current
placement density currents and reads:
|jti | =

jti

is the sum of the conductive and dis-

|jki | + ε0
k

∂E
∂t

(6)

where ε0 is the dielectric permittivity of air.
Moreau’s team [4] used a wire-to-wire discharge on a ﬂat plate (Figure 1) and
observed an ionic wind around 5 m/s in the absence of uncoming ﬂow. Two thin
electrodes are ﬂushed mounted in a dielectric plate. The ﬁrst electrode is a 0.7
mm diameter anode set to a +22 kV potential. The second one has a 2 mm
diameter and is set to -10 kV. They are placed at a distance of 4 cm. The regime
of the discharge depends on many parameters such as the potential diﬀerence,
the space between the electrodes, air humidity degree, ﬂow velocity, etc. From
the aerodynamic point of view, the most eﬃcient regime is the corona regime
in which a luminescent discharge appears in the vicinity of both electrodes. The
purpose of this paper is to propose a model of this regime.

Fig. 1. Experimental setup of [4]

Numerical Modeling of Plasma - Flow Interaction

2

3

Modeling Corona Discharges - Flow Interaction

A modeling of the experimental device proposed in [4] and described in section 1
is proposed here. This modeling follows previous work [8].
2.1

Space and Time Scales

In order to simulate numerically the eﬀect of corona discharges on a gas ﬂow,
two diﬀerent time and space scales issues must be solved. First, to be correctly
described, the discharge must be calculated with a maximal time increment of
about 10−11 s, which is representative of the kinetic time scale and the characteristic time of electron transport. In the same time, the characteristic response
time of the ﬂow to the discharge eﬀect is about 10−3 s. As a consequence, a
full coupling of both parts of the problem is hardly realizable. The next three
sections present the set of equations governing the problem, the numerical way
of coupling and the results obtained.
2.2

Equations

The equations are written here in cartesian coordinates with the Einstein notation. The aerodynamic part of the problem follows the continuum and momentum equations (7) and (8):

ρ

∂ρU i
=0
∂xi
∂U i
∂U i
∂2U i
∂P
+ Uj j = − i + μ j i + fi
∂t
∂x
∂x
∂x ∂x

(7)
(8)

where U i is the ith component of the ﬂow velocity vector, ρ the volumetric mass
of air, P the pressure and μ the dynamic viscosity of air. The total electric force
f is calculated solving the density transport equations (9) for a set of N particles
species coupled with the Poisson equation (10) for the electric potential V :
∂Nk Uki
∂Nk
+
= ωk
∂t
∂xi
ρc
ΔV = −
ε0
ρc =

Zk Nk

(9)
(10)
(11)

k

In these equations, ωk is the rate of production of specie k. It is the balance
between chemical production and decomposition. The Δ symbol stands for the
divergence operator. ρc is the space charge density, namely the diﬀerence between
positive and negative charges densities. Zk is the charge of specie k.
The neutral particles velocity is the ﬂow velocity U i . The charged particles
i
velocities are given by a drift-diﬀusion model. The ions velocity Uion
is the sum

4

J.-C. Mat´eo-V´elez et al.
Table 1. Air plasma kinetics of [9]
e, N2 → e, e, N2+
e, O2 → e, e, O2+
Attachment
e, O2 → O2−
Recombination e, N2+ → N2
e, O2+ → O2
O2− , O2+ → O2 , O2
O2− , N2+ → O2 , N2
Excitation
e, O2 → O2∗
Detachment
O2− , O2∗ → e, O2 , O2
Quenching
O2 , O2∗ → O2 , O2
Ionization

of the ﬂow velocity and the drift velocity due to the electric ﬁeld. The electrons
velocity reads the same way, adding the diﬀusion velocity due to heterogeneity of their densities. Ions are heavy particles in comparison to electrons. As a
consequence, their diﬀusion velocity is neglected :
i
= U i ± μion E i
Uion

De ∂Ne
Uei = U i − μe E i −
Ne ∂xi

(12)
(13)

Following [9], the discharge is described by the kinetics of air in high electric
ﬁeld which includes electrons, positive ions O2+ and N2+ , negative ions O2− and
metastables O2∗ . Table 1 gives the reactions taken into account in the present
work. The kinetics coeﬃcients corresponding to these reactions are given by [9]
and [10].
The cathode is considered as a source of electrons thanks to ionic bombardment. The number of electrons Nebbt emitted by this way is supposed proportional
to the number of positive ions colliding with the cathode.
Nebbt = γ

N+ |U+ |
|Ue |

(14)

where γ is the ionic bombardment coeﬃcient.
Finally, a resistance R is connected in series between the anode and the power
supply which voltage is V0 . The cathode is directly connected to the power
supply mass. Thanks to eq. 6, the potential diﬀerence ΔV applied between the
electrodes is:
(15)
ΔV = V0 − RI
where I is the total electric current in amperes. Its expression is given in the
next section.
2.3

1D Discharge Model with Plasma Thickness

Figure 2 presents the way the two parts of the problem (eq. (7)-(8) and eq.
(9)-(14)) will be coupled. The aerodynamic part is solved thanks to a Fluid

Numerical Modeling of Plasma - Flow Interaction

5

Fig. 2. Plasma - Aerodynamics Coupling

Dynamics code developed at ONERA, namely CEDRE. The space integration
scheme follows a generalized MUSCL approach and the time integration scheme
can be explicit ot implicit [12]. For the ﬂow calculation, the volumetric force
exerted by the discharge is needed. The input data for plasma calculation is
the global ﬂow velocity. In this work, the discharge development in one space
dimension without any eﬀect of the external ﬂow is ﬁrst calculated. It consists in
writing equations (9)-(14) in 1D and assuming U = 0. This system is discretized
by a ﬁnite volume method. The integration scheme is a second order scheme in
time and space with a minmod slope limitor for the ﬂuxes computation. The
electric ﬁeld Esp created by space charges is obtained thanks to a LU decomposition. The electric ﬁeld Eext created by the electrodes with no space charge
is calculated thanks to a 2D analytical formula [11], which permits to take into
account the singularity of the two thin electrodes.
We suppose that all the variables (densities, velocities, electric potential, etc.)
are constant over a thickness S(x). It allows the total electric current conservation by ensuring the consistancy of the 2D electric ﬁeld Eext with a 1D approximation. As a consequence, the equations (9)-(14) become:
1 ∂SNk Uk
∂Nk
+
= ωk
∂t
S
∂x
1 ∂
S ∂x

S

∂V
∂x

ρc =

=−

ρc
ε0

Zk Nk

(16)
(17)
(18)

k

Uion = U ± μion E
De ∂SNe
Ue = U − μe E −
SNe ∂x

(19)
(20)

According to (17), S is obtained by solving S(x)Eext (x) equal to a constant.
The intoduction of S allows to consider a non trivial electric ﬁeld respecting a
zero divergence in 1D. The total current I is the same in every cell of the meshing
and is calculated with respect to eq. 21, where L is the electrodes length:
I = jt LS

(21)

6

J.-C. Mat´eo-V´elez et al.

3

Results

Here are presented the results obtained for the discharge development without
any eﬀect of an external ﬂow. The physical and numerical parameters used for
this simulation are presented in Table 2, where Nmesh is the number of cells
of the uniform mesh and Smax the maximal value of S. Figure 3 represents the
evolution of the electric current. After an onset pulse followed by a long transient
regime, the regular pulse regime plotted in Figure 3 is obtained. The frequency
of these pulses is about 100 kHz. This description seems qualitatively close to the
experimental results of [4] obtained for the same conﬁguration (Figure 4). The
minimal computed and experimental currents are about 0.8 mA and 0.5 mA respectively. Yet, the maximal computed current is one order of magnitude higher
than the experimental one. This can be explained by two facts. First, the experimental potential diﬀerence is about 30 kV instead of 40 kV here. Then, the
value of S might be over estimated. This represents a limit of the 1D approach.
2D simulations would determine the thickness S more accurately.
The fact that the pulsed discharge does not numerically appear for potential
smaller than 35 or 40 kV indicates that the kinetics model is under evaluated.
We can argue for the absence of an additional electrons provider: the photoionization. Yet, this regime seems to be similar to the Trichel pulses regime of
negative corona discharges. So the simulation of the cathode region is quite in
good agreement with previous works.
Figure 5 represents the evolution of electron density during a single pulse.
On Figures 5, 6 and 7, the time t = 0 s corresponds to the ignition of a single
pulse. The pulses observed in Figure 3 are due to the periodic creation of electrons thanks to ionization. When the space charge is high enough to diminish
the electric ﬁeld at the electrodes (Figure 6), the discharge is stopped and the
species are evacuated. When the electric ﬁeld reaches its initial value, a new
pulse initiates.
Table 2. Parameters
V0
R
γ
Nmesh Smax
40 kV 10 kΩ 10−4 400
5 mm
5

10

4

I (μA)

10

3

10

2

10
1.5

1.52

1.54 1.56
t (s)

1.58
1.6
−3
x 10

Fig. 3. Calculated electric current

Fig. 4. Exp. electric current [4]

Numerical Modeling of Plasma - Flow Interaction

7

4

10

t = 0 µs
t = 0.52 µs
t = 0.64 µs
t = 1 µs

10

7

10

0

1

2
x (cm)

3

4

2
0

4

Fig. 5. Repartition of electron number
density. t = 0 s corresponds to the beginning of a pulse.

2

4

6
t (µs)

8

10

12

Fig. 6. Evolution of the electric ﬁeld at
the anode (—) and at the cathode (- -)

−1

10

8000
6000

−2

10

4000

y (m)

F (N/m3)

5

3

5

10

x 10

6

9

e

N (cm−3)

11

10

7

E (V/cm)

13

2000

−3

10

−4

10

0
−2000
0

5
t (µs)

10

Fig. 7. Force at the anode (—) and at
the cathode (- -)

0

1

2

3
4
U (m/s)

5

6

Fig. 8. ﬂow velocity proﬁle without
plasma force (—) and with plasma force
(- -)

From the aerodynamic point of view, the forces exerted by the discharges
are also periodic. One of the most prominent features is that the forces are
concentrated in the cathode and anode regions. The force levels are very high
there, about 1000 to 5000 N/m3 . There is almost no force in the space between
the electrodes because the density currents of positive and negative ions j+ and
j− are almost equal, but with opposite signs, see eq. (4). Figure 7 shows the
evolution of the force near the anode and the cathode. The forces are locally
important near electrodes but weak on average. The CFD code CEDRE has
been used in order to simulate the eﬀect of the calculated forces on a subsonic
laminar ﬂow over a ﬂat plate. The external ﬂow velocity is 5 m/s. Figure 8
presents the ﬂow velocity proﬁles obtained at location X = 1 mm on Figure 1
when applying or not applying the force. The gain of velocity is obtained near
the electrodes and is about 0.5 m/s. This inﬂuence is smaller than observed in
experiments [4], where the gain of velocity can reach 1 m/s on a thickness of
5 mm, for an uncoming ﬂow of 5 m/s. The force is insuﬃcient to explain the
experimental velocity gains because it is located just around both electrodes. To
act more eﬃcently on ﬂows, this force should apply on a larger region.

8

4

J.-C. Mat´eo-V´elez et al.

Conclusion

In order to represent the creation of ionic wind by corona discharges, this paper
proposes a simple coupling between a plasma kinetics model and a ﬂow model.
The results of the plasma simulations show a good agreement with the Trichel
pulses. Once applied to the gas ﬂow, the electric force obtained by the plasma
simulations seems insuﬃcient to explain the ionic wind experimentally observed
[4]. Consequently, the eﬀorts are now focused on enriching the kinetics of the
positive corona discharges by taking into account the photoionization process,
as well as plasma-ﬂow coupling.

Aknowledgements
The authors would like to thank G. Quinio from ONERA who realized the ﬁrst
version of the code developed in this work [13], and J. P. Boeuf from CPAT for
a number of usefull discussions. The ﬁrst author thanks DGA for supporting his
research.

References
1. Robinson M.: Movement of air in the electric wind of the corona discharge. AIEE
transactions, New York, USA (1961).
2. Shcherbakov Y. V. and coll.: Drag reduction by AC streamer corona discharges
along a wing-like proﬁle plate. 31st AIAA Plasmadynamics and Lasers Conference,
Denver, USA, AIAA paper 2000-2670 (2000).
3. Roth J. R., Sin H., Madhan R., Wilkinson S.: Flow re-attachment and acceleration
by paraelectric and peristaltic electrohydrodynamic eﬀects. 41st Aerospace Sciences
Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, USA, AIAA paper 2003-531 (2003).
4. Pons J., Moreau E., Touchard G.: Surface DC corona discharges and AC barrier
discharges in ambient air at atmospheric pressure: measurements of the induced
ionic wind velocity. 15th International Conference on Gas Discharges and their
Applications, Toulouse, France (2004).
5. Post M. L., Corke T. C.: Plasma actuators for separation control on airfoils. 11th
International Symposium on Flow Visualization, Notre-Dame, USA (2004).
6. Zavialov I. N., Roupassov D. V., Starikovskii A. Yu., Saddoughi S. G.: Boundary
layer control by gas discharge plasma. European Conference for Aerospace Sciences
(EUCASS), Moscow, Russia (2005).
7. Boeuf J. P., Pitchford L. C.: Electrohydrodynamic force and aerodynamic ﬂow
acceleration in surface barrier discharge. J. Appl. Phys. 97, 103307 (2005).
8. Mateo-Velez J. C., Thivet F., Rogier F., Degond P., Quinio G.: Numerical modeling
of corona discharges and their interaction with aerodynamics. European Conference
for Aerospace Sciences (EUCASS), Moscow, Russia (2005).
9. Morrow R.: The theory of positive glow corona. J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 30, 30993114 (1997).
10. Bolsig, CPAT & Kinema Software, http://www.siglo-kinema.com/bolsig.htm.
11. Li S. Z., Uhm H. S.: Investigation of electrical breakdown characteristics in the
electrodes of cylindrical geometry. Phys. Plasmas 11, 3088-3095 (2004).

Numerical Modeling of Plasma - Flow Interaction

9

12. Chevalier P., Courbet B., Dutoya D., Klotz P., Ruiz E., Troyes J., Villedieu P.:
CEDRE, Development and Validation of a Multiphysic Computational Software.
European Conference for Aerospace Sciences (EUCASS), Moscow, Russia (2005).
13. Quinio G.: Mod´elisation num´erique de la g´en´eration d’un plasma d’air dans un
´ecoulement. PhD thesis, INSA Toulouse, France (december 2005).

