A Design of Energy-Efficient Receivers for Cluster-Head
Nodes in Wireless Sensor Networks*
Hyungkeun Lee1 and Hwa-sung Kim2
1

2

Department of Computer Engineering and
Department of Electronic Communications Engineering
Kwangwoon University
Seoul, Korea
{hklee, hwkim}@daisy.kw.ac.kr

Abstract. In wireless sensor networks, embedded sensor nodes equipped with
sensing, computation, and communication resources are generally constrained
in energy supply. An efficient way to save energy of the network is to partition
the network into distinct clusters with specific nodes called cluster-head. Since,
however, higher level of energy consumption at cluster-head nodes might cause
more damage to the network, energy-saving in cluster-head nodes is critical. In
this paper, we propose an energy-efficient receiver for cluster-head nodes in
two-tiered wireless sensor networks. The receiver performs multiuser detection
and channel decoding jointly in a CDMA system, where information about
channel codes is utilized for multiuser detection. This receiver exhibits improved performance of the sensor networks in terms of overhead, delay and
power, and its excellent performance is shown via simulation.

1 Introduction
Recent advances in MEMS (micro electro-mechanical system) technology and embedded software have resulted in cheap and small devices with sensing, computing
and wireless communication capabilities. A network of these devices could be utilized
for information gathering and distributed sensing in many civil, military and industrial
applications. The use of wireless medium for communication provides the network
operating to convey collected information to a sink node without any fixed infrastructure. Wireless sensor networks pose many new challenges primarily because the sensor nodes are resource constrained, where sensor nodes are powered by small batteries
that cannot be replaced [1]. Under this hard energy constraint, sensor nodes can only
transmit a finite number of bits in their lifetime. Consequently, reducing the energy
consumption per bit for end-to-end transmissions becomes an important design consideration for such networks. Since all layers of the protocol stack contribute to the
energy per bit consumed in its end-to-end transmission, energy minimization requires
a joint design of the underlying hardware where the energy is actually expended.
Another efficient way to save energy of the network is to partition the network into
*

This work is supported by the ubiquitous Autonomic Computing and Network Project, the
Ministry of Information and Communication (MIC) 21st Century Frontier R&D Program in
Korea, and the Research Grant of Kwangwoon University in 2005.

V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part IV, LNCS 3994, pp. 954 – 961, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

A Design of Energy-Efficient Receivers

955

distinct clusters with specific nodes called cluster-head, which is the multi-tiered
wireless sensor network. However, higher level of energy consumption at clusterhead nodes might cause more damage to the network since such cluster-head nodes
also limit accessibility of other sensor nodes. Therefore, the energy-saving mechanism in cluster-head nodes is critical issue and determines the performance and lifetime of such networks [2].
We only consider the simplified case where interference is eliminated by using direct sequence code division multiple access (DS-CDMA) schemes. DS-CDMA is a
popular choice as a multiple access scheme within a cluster of wireless sensor networks, where nodes are assigned different spreading codes. The transmitter of each
sensor node sends its data by modulation with its own sequence. The conventional
DS-CDMA receiver consists of a bank of matched filters to obtain nodes’ data from
the received signal. However, in multiuser detection (MUD) receivers, interference
from the other signals is removed by subtracting it from the desired signal. This is
possible because the correlation properties between the signals are known at the cluster-head node. MUD provides a means of reducing the effect of multiple access interference (MAI), and hence increases the system capacity [3]. The error correction
capability of channel codes plays an important role in achieving performance improvement in noisy and interference-limited environments. Therefore, the transmitted
data from sensor nodes to the cluster-head node are usually protected against errors
due to MAI and noise by employing channel codes in DS-CDMA systems, as depicted in Figure 1.

Fig. 1. K-node Cluster System with MUD and Channel Codes

New design approaches for MUD that include the consideration of channel codes
were proposed in [4], where MUD provides soft outputs including reliability measurements to the channel decoder. Joint detection-decoding (JDD) receivers have been
proposed recently to improve the performance of receivers [5]. These JDD receivers
repeat multiuser detection and error correction in an iterative manner. Therefore, the
complexity of receiver increases linearly with the number of iterations and the complexity of each stage depends on the frame size of the channel codes. In [6], a JDD
receiver was proposed employing multistage parallel interference canceller (PIC),
where each stage utilizes convolutional codes for estimation and cancellation. Multistage PIC is known to be a simple and effective technique for mitigating MAI in DSCDMA systems. However, its performance can be significantly degraded due to incorrect interference decisions that are subtracted from the received signal. It minimizes the effect of incorrect cancellation with the aid of convolutional codes, and also

956

H. Lee and H.-s. Kim

decreases the computation complexity. Cluster-head nodes with such receivers have
interference and noise reduction, so that the nodes can operate with less overhead and
less latency. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents
the concept of JDD receivers employing PIC and convolutional codes, and the analysis of the JDD receiver performance. The application of the receivers in wireless sensor networks is evaluated by simulation in Section 3. Finally, concluding remarks are
given in Section 4.

2 Joint Detection-Decoding Receiver
MUD receivers jointly estimate the transmitted signals of all nodes in the system. A
JDD receiver performs multiuser detection and channel decoding jointly, where information about channel codes is utilized during multiuser detection. Let us assume a
DS-CDMA system employing channel codes, where a sequence of information bits
b k is encoded into the sequence of channel symbols dk and the sequence of channel
symbols is transmitted via the multiuser channel resulting in the matched filter bank
output y k , for a node k. The outputs y k include MAI due to the other k-1 nodes and
are correlated over a frame of channel codes. Therefore, the symbol estimates dˆ k
from the matched filter bank output y k can be jointly detected over nodes and de-

coded in time to obtain the information estimates bˆ k . The error correction capability
of channel codes increases the probability of correct estimates of symbols by performing detection and decoding jointly. This, in turn, improves mitigation of MAI.
2.1 Multistage Parallel Interference Cancellation Receiver

Multistage parallel interference cancellation (PIC) receivers attempt to remove the
MAI through signal processing at multiple stages for all nodes. They have much
lower complexity than linear MUD receivers. As depicted in Figure 2, each stage of
PIC receivers consists of two steps: estimation and cancellation, where estimates of
all nodes’ signals are generated and MAI for all nodes are constructed and canceled
from the received signal based on the estimates. As the accuracy of the estimates
improves through the multiple stages, the performance of receiver also improves [5].
The estimation step computes the estimates of symbols dˆ k (l | l − 1) from the a posteriori signal of the previous stage y k (l − 1) for a node k, where l is the number of
stage. The estimates dˆ k (l | l − 1) are treated as a priori information for the next stage.
The cancellation step tries to remove MAI present in the node’s signal y k (l ) using
the correlation matrix R ,
y k (l ) = y k (0) − ∑ ρ ik dˆi (l | l − 1)
(1)
i≠ k

The final decision is made based on the a posteriori signal of the last stage, yk (L) .
In a conventional multistage PIC receiver, the estimation step makes a hard decision
on the a posteriori signal of the previous stage yk (l − 1) to decide the estimate of

A Design of Energy-Efficient Receivers

957

symbols dˆk (l | l − 1) . However, this estimation step may lead to an incorrect decision
that may cause an incorrect cancellation of interference. Such incorrect cancellation is
propagated to the subsequent stages of the receiver. Therefore, the performance of
multistage PIC receivers improves as the probability of correct decision on the estimates of symbols dˆ k (l | l − 1) increases at each estimation step. In order to improve
the performance of such receivers, JDD receivers that utilize channel codes at estimation steps are described in the next subsections.

y K (0)

d$ K (10
| )

y1 ( L − 1)

y k (1)

yk ( L − 1)

y K (1)

yK ( L − 1)

dˆ1 ( L | L − 1)

dˆk ( L | L − 1)

dˆ K ( L | L − 1)

Cancellation

d$ k (10
| )

y1 (1)

Estimation

Estimation

y k ( 0)

Cancellation

d$1 (10
| )

y1 (0)

y1 ( L )

d$1

y k ( L)

d$k

y K ( L)

d$ K

Fig. 2. Multi-stage PIC Receiver

Performance evaluation of the JDD receivers is shown in [6]. These results show
the obvious performance improvement of JDD receivers, where it is shown that the
systems employing JDD schemes increase the user capacity remarkably or decrease
the bit error rate.
2.2 Joint Detection-Decoding Receiver with Partial Decoding Information

The JDD receiver employs a generalized version of the decoding method in that it
minimizes the probability of error in partial words consisting of one or more channel
symbols. In the trellis diagram of the Viterbi algorithm, a path consists of states and
branches
representing
state
transitions.
Each
entire
codeword
(1)
( N +l )
(1)
( n ( N + l ))
] can be represented by a unique state sequence
d k = [d k , L , d k ] = [d k , L , d k

[

]

S k = S k( 0) , L, S k(t ) , L, S k( N +l +1) , where S k( 0 ) = 0 and vice versa. The partial codeword

[

d (kt ) = d k(( n −1) t +1) , L , d k( nt )

]

corresponds to each state transition (branch) from the state

at time t − 1 to the state S k(t ) at time t , where t = 1,L, N + l . Therefore, the
S
entire codeword of channel symbols d k and the partial codeword of channel symbols
( t −1)
k

d (tk ) correspond to the path and branches of convolutional codes, respectively. The

958

H. Lee and H.-s. Kim

partial codeword d (tk ) also contains partial decoding information about the transmitted
symbols. It can reduce the complexity of the receiver at the expense of suboptimum
decoding at estimation steps.
The estimation steps in the proposed JDD receiver employ y (tk ) , i.e., the a posteriori signal corresponding to the partial codeword of channel symbols d (tk ) . Then they
obtain the estimates of the partial codeword dˆ (kt ) based on the signal y (tk ) and the
probabilities of starting states S k( t −1) , and calculate the probabilities of ending states
( t +1)
S k(t ) for the next signal y k . In [8], the probability functions are defined as

α t ( s t ) = Pr{S k( t ) = s t ; y (k1) ;L ; y (kt ) } and

γ t ( st −1 , s t ) = Pr{S k(t ) = st ; y (kt ) | S k(t −1) = st −1 } ,

(3)

where st and st −1 are the states at time t and time t − 1 , respectively.
By the Markov property of convolutional codes as shown in Equation (5) of [8],
α t ( st ) = ∑ α t −1 ( st −1 )γ t ( st −1 , st ) ,
(4)
st −1

where the boundary conditions are α 0 (0) = 1, and α 0 (i ) = 0 for i ≠ 0.
The probability γ t ( st −1 , st ) can be obtained from Equation (3),

γ t ( st −1 , st ) = Pr{y (kt ) | d (kt ) } ⋅ Pr{S k( t ) = st | S k( t −1) = st −1} ,
where Pr{S

(t )
k

(5)

= s t −1 } is the state transition probability defined as

( t −1)
k
( t −1)
k

= st −1} = 1, if there is a trellis transition from st −1 to st , and
Pr{S = st | S
= st −1} = 0, otherwise. From Equation (4), the MAP decoding
problem on a state transition (branch) becomes the procedure to maximize the probability of the next state based on α t −1 (st −1 ) and γ t ( st −1 , st ) ,
Sˆk(t ) = arg max[log Pr(α t ( st ))] for t = 1,L, N + l ,
(6)
Pr{S

(t )
k
(t )
k

= st | S

= st | S

( t −1)
k

s t ∈S

where S is the set of states, and

st and st +1 at time t and time t+1, respectively.

Finally, the estimates of partial code dˆ (kt ) for t = 1, L , N + l can be obtained as
dˆ (kt ) = arg max [log Pr(α t −1 ( st −1 )γ ( st −1 , st ))] for t = 1,L, N + l .
s t , st −1 ∈S

(7)

Once the estimates of partial codeword dˆ are obtained, they are fed to the cancellation step in the same stage to eliminate MAI. In the cancellation step, MAI is constructed using the correlation matrix R and partial codewords dˆ ( t ) of nodes. Then the
MAI is subtracted from the output of matched filter y (tk ) . These new output signals
(t )
k

form the input to the estimation step in the next stage.

3 JDD Receivers for Cluster-Head Nodes in Sensor Networks
Two-tiered wireless sensor networks, where the network is partitioned into distinct
clusters with specific nodes called cluster-head, usually uses CDMA technology for a

A Design of Energy-Efficient Receivers

959

multiple access scheme as described in [9]. In such networks, the higher level of energy consumption at cluster-head nodes might cause more damage to the network
since such cluster-head nodes also limit accessibility of other sensor nodes. Therefore,
the energy-saving mechanism in cluster-head nodes is critical issue and determines

Average Delay
140
120
100
s)
m
( 80
ya
le 60
D
40
20
0

100

200
300
Number of Nodes
CDMA(JDD)

CDMA(Conv)

400
TDMA

Average Overhead
700
600

sp) 500
bK
( 400
da
eh 300
re
vO200
100
0

100

200
300
Number of Nodes
CDMA(JDD)

CDMA(Conv)

400
TDMA

Energy Consumption
1.6
1.4
1.2
)J 1
(
yg
re 0.8
nE
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

100

200
300
Number of Nodes
CDMA(JDD)

CDMA(Conv)

400
TDMA

Fig. 3. Simulation Results of Receivers in Wireless Sensor Networks

960

H. Lee and H.-s. Kim

the performance and lifetime of networks. The receiver of the cluster-head node
within a dense cluster, however, suffers from MAI due to non-orthogonal PN codes.
MAI in addition to noise causes the bit errors and results in frame retransmissions or
information losses from sensor nodes. In the receiver of cluster-head nodes, MUD can
be employed to eliminate MAI, while channel codes are utilized to cope with bit errors. Therefore, JDD receivers are expected to improve the performance of clusterhead nodes and decrease the number of bits to be delivered between a cluster-head
node and its sensor nodes. As a result, the JDD receiver help such networks save the
energy consumption in the delivery of sensed data from sensor nodes to the clusterhead node.
To evaluate the effectiveness of the receiver for cluster-head nodes, we perform
simulations to compare the performance of different receivers with different multiple
access schemes. Two types of multiple access schemes are evaluated; one is DSCDMA and the other is TDMA. In particular, for a DS-CDMA system, the conventional receiver and the JDD receiver are compared. The main objective of the simulation is to compare the performance of three types of receivers in terms of average
delay, average overhead and total energy consumption.
Experiments are performed on simulations with 100, 200, 300, or 400 sensor nodes
randomly distributed in a 100 × 100 square meter area. Each sensor node is assumed
to have data to send with 2-state MMPP (markov-modulated Poisson process) traffic.
The maximum transmission range of the sensor nodes is set to 10m. It is assumed that
the channel has AWGN (additive white Gaussian noise) and ARQ (automatic repeat
request) scheme is employed to recover frame errors.
In order to capture the performance of different receivers and multiple access
schemes we use the metrics, average delay, average overhead and energy consumption. Figure 3 shows the results about the average delay at the cluster-head nodes, the
average overhead between sensor nodes and a cluster-head node, and the amount of
energy consumption at the cluster-head node according to the number of nodes. It
shows that CDMA systems outperform a TDMA system in terms of delay in clusterhead nodes. Furthermore, the CDMA system utilizing the JDD receiver has less average delay than the one with separate MUD and channel codes at cluster-head nodes. It
also indicates the JDD receiver decrease the amount of average overhead remarkably
between sensor nodes and a cluster-head node. As the number of nodes increases,
however, the overhead amount of TDMA system becomes less. At last, the receiver
with JDD dissipates less energy to forward data from sensor nodes to parent clusterhead nodes than other schemes due to less overhead and the low bit error rate.

4 Conclusions
In this paper, we have proposed a design of the receiver employing PIC and convolution codes, and its application to cluster-head nodes in multi-tiered wireless sensor
networks. Utilizing the state-transition information of convolutional codes, our proposed approach estimates partial codeword of channel symbols corresponding to
branches of state transition in convolutional decoding at each estimation step in PIC.
We have evaluated the performance of the receiver and the performance of the wireless sensor network when the receiver is used for cluster-head nodes. It is shown that

A Design of Energy-Efficient Receivers

961

the receiver outperforms the existing receiver when CDMA is used for a multiple
access scheme. Furthermore, the receiver experiences much less delay than a TDMA
scheme. In particular, the proposed JDD receiver is quite attractive when a number of
users (nodes) exist within a cluster in terms of delay and energy consumption.

References
1. I.F. Akyildiz, W. Su, Y. Sankarasubramaniam, and E. Cayirci, “A Survey on Sensor Networks,” IEEE Communication Magazine, August, 2002.
2. A. J. Goldsmith and S. B. Wicker, “Design challenges for energy-constrained Ad Hoc
wireless networks,” IEEE Wireless Communications Magazine, pp. 8-27 Aug. 2002.
3. S. Verdu, Multiuser Detection, Cambridge University Press, 1998.
4. Y. Shama, B. R. Vojcic and B. Vucetic, “Suboptimum Soft-output Detection Algorithm
for Coded Multiuser Systems,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 48 no. 10, pp.
1622-1625, October 2000.
5. M. C. Reed, C. B. Schlegel, P. D. Alexander and J. A. Asenstorfer, “ Iterative Multiuser
Detection for CDMA with FEC: Near-Single-User Performance,” IEEE Transactions on
Communications, vol. 46 no. 12, pp. 1693-1699, December 1998.
6. H.Lee and P.K.Varshney, “A joint detection-decoding receiver with reduced complexity,”
Proc. of the IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference, pp. 2533-2537, April 2003.
7. S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications, Prentice
Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1983.
8. L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek and J. Raviv, “Optimal Decoding of Linear Codes for
Minimizing Symbol Error Rate,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, IT-20, no. 2,
pp. 284-287, March 1974.
9. W. Heinzelman, A. Chandrakasan, and H. Balakrishnan, “An Application-Specific Protocol Architecture for Wireless Microsensor Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless
Communications, vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 660-670, October 2002.
10. B. Deb, S. Bhatnagar and B. Nath, “A Topology Discovery Algorithm for Sensor Networks with Applications to Network Management,” Technical Report, DCS-TR-441, Rutgers University May, 2001.

