Channel Estimation of High Rate WPAN
System with Diversity Technique
Byung-Su Kang, Myung-Sun Baek, Dong-Jun Cho,
Young-Hwan You, and Hyoung-Kyu Song
uT Communication Research Institute
saturnus@sju.ac.kr, songhk@sejong.ac.kr

Abstract. A simple channel estimation technique for IEEE 802.15.3
HR WPAN system is proposed and assessed, which gives improved performance in multi-path channel. HR WPAN system can be designed for
supporting multimedia traﬃc in the wireless home network. The demand
for a high data rate and reliable technology will increase continuously.
To satisfy the demand, we design a new architecture that applies the
diversity technique to the HR WPAN system. The proposed scheme can
estimate multi-path channel easily by simple operation using preamble,
and also can be utilized in the situation of using one or two transmit
antennas.

1

Introduction

There have been many communication systems for wireless home netwoke. The
development of Wireless Personal Area Network(WPAN) is prompted by the
needs for wireless connectivity of high data rate, low cost, low complexity and low
power consumption. IEEE 802.15.3 standard was designed particularly for the
High Rate WPAN(HR WPAN) which can support short-range communications
among portable consumer electronic devices at high data rate up to 55Mbps[1].
In the future more and more homes will have multiple PCs and multiple
connections to outdoor public telecommunication and broadcasting networks.
So, high data rate wireless communication becomes more concerned for support
of multimedia services. To satisfy these demand, we introduce the multiple-input
multiple-output(MIMO) systems promise improved performance compared to
conventional systems in Rayleigh fading environment[2]. By using two transmit
antennas, we can achieve higher data rate and more reliable communication than
using single antenna. High data rate and reliability can be obtained by space
time block code(STBC) algorithm.
One of the most important condition to use MIMO technique is that the
accurate channel information is needed. In HR WPAN system, the channel estimation uses preamble called constant amplitude zero auto correlation(CAZAC).
We propose an eﬃcient method that estimates multi-path channel in MIMO environment by using CAZAC. The proposed channel estimation algorithm takes
advantage of the orthogonal property of CAZAC. The BER performances of the
proposed scheme have been shown through the simulation results.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part II, LNCS 3992, pp. 1058–1064, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

Channel Estimation of High Rate WPAN System with Diversity Technique

1059

The paper is organized as follows. The system model is described in Section
2. In Section 3, we explain the channel estimation algorithm and the proposed
architecture. Section 4 shows the simulation results and discussions. Finally, our
conclusions are presented in Section 5.

2
2.1

System Model
Space-Time Coded WPAN System

In HR WPAN system, a set of CAZAC sequences is sent in order to allow the receiver to estimate the channel. Before the data is transmitted, the data source is
encoded by QPSK, 16/32/64-QAM with 8-state TCM scheme or DQPSK modulation. TCM oﬀers bandwidth and power advantages over other modulations.
The symbol rate of IEEE 802.15.3 is 11Msymbol/sec and raw physical layer
data rates supported are 11, 22, 33, 44, 55Mbits/sec (QPSK-TCM, DQPSK,
16/32/64-QAM-TCM, respectively)[9].
A space-time block code is deﬁned by a p × n transmission matrix [6]-[7].
The entries of the transmission matrix are linear combinations of the variables
x1 , x2 , · · · , xk and their conjugates. The number of transmission antenna is n,
and we usually use it to separate diﬀerent codes from each other. Since p time
slots are used to transmit k symbols, the rate R of the code is k/p. We consider
only the transmission matrices for one and two transmit antennas, because the
proposed channel estimation algorithm is suitable for two transmit antennas.
For one transmit antenna, the transmission matrix G1 is simply G1 = [x1 ],
for which the code rate is one. For two transmit antennas, there exists a rate
one STBC deﬁned by the transmission matrix G2 given by [4]

G2 =

x1 x2
.
−x∗2 x∗1

(1)

Suppose that there are 2b signals in the constellation. At the ﬁrst time slot,
2b bits arrive at the encoder and select two complex code symbol x1 and x2 .
These code symbols are transmitted simultaneously from antennas one and two,
respectively. At the second time slot, code symbols −x∗2 and x∗1 are transmitted.
Figure 1 represents the case of two-branch transmit diversity with one receive
antenna[4].
2.2

WPAN Channel Model

A short range indoor propagation channel can be described by a Rayleigh fading
model with exponentially decaying power proﬁle [3]. The average root mean
square(RMS) power of the taps can be obtained according to the RMS delay
spread TRMS . Then the coeﬃcients H(τ ) are selected according to
H(τ ) = G(0, στ2 /2) + jG(0, στ2 /2)

(2)

1060

B.-S. Kang et al.

[

[

7UDQVPLVVLRQ6HTXHQFH

− [

[

7[ DQWHQQD

7[ DQWHQQD

K = α  H Mθ

5[DQWHQQD

U U

Q Q
FKDQQHO
HVWLPDWLRQ

KÖ

KÖ

K = αH Mθ
LQWHUIHUHQFH
DQGQRLVH

KÖ KÖ

FRPELQHU

V

V

0D[LPXPOLNHOLKRRGGHWHFWRU
Fig. 1. Two-branch transmit diversity with one receiver

with
στ2 = σ02 exp(−τ Ts /TRMS )

(3)

where Ts is the sampling rate, G(0, στ2 /2) is a zero mean Gaussian random variable with variance στ2 /2 and σ02 = 1 − exp(−Ts /TRMS ) is chosen so that the unit
L
energy constraint τ =0 στ2 = 1 for L = 10TRMS /Ts is satisﬁed where L denotes
the maximum number of paths. In practice, short range indoor channels usually
induce a delay spread of 25-70ns at 2.4GHz.

3

The Proposed Channel Estimation Algorithm

According to the speciﬁcation of the IEEE 802.15.3, the preamble contains 12
periods of a special sequence of N = 16 QPSK symbols called CAZAC sequence
[9]. We apply two transmit antennas and m receive antennas to IEEE 802.15.3
high rate WPAN systems. The transmitted signals from each antenna undergo
multi-path fading independently. The expression for the received signal at the
j-th receive antenna is as follows
2 L−1

Hij (τ )Pij (n − τ ) + wj (n)

y(n) =

j = 1, 2

(4)

i=1 τ =0

where i is transmit antenna index, L is the number of paths, Hij (τ ) is the channel
impulse response(CIR) for antenna i at jth receive antenna, Pij (n) is the detected
CAZAC training sequence transmitted from antenna i at jth receive antenna, and

Channel Estimation of High Rate WPAN System with Diversity Technique

1061

wj (n) is complex additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN). At the receiver, we assume perfect frequency and timing synchronization. To separate multi-channel coeﬃcients, we multiply the received signal by the conjugate of the shifted CAZAC
sequence. The expression for the estimated CIR values is denoted by
ˆ ij (l) = 1/N
H
+w
ˆj (l)

L−1
τ =0 Hij (τ )Pij (l

2
i=1

− τ ) · Pi∗ (l)
(5)

ˆj (l)
= Hij (l) + w

for 0 < l ≤ L

∗

where (·) denotes the complex conjugation and w
ˆj (l) is the AWGN at the lth
path. Also, Pi∗ (l) denotes l times shifted CAZAC sequence from antenna i and
N is the CAZAC length. The ﬁrst term in eq.(4) is always zero except that the
transmitted CAZAC sequence exactly coincides with the conjugated version of
transmitted CAZAC sequence at the receiver, which is called the orthogonality.
When the two CAZACs from each transmit antenna do not guarantee the orthogonality, it is impossible to distinguish the two received signals because of
breaking the autocorrelation property. So P2 (n), which is K times cyclic shifted
version of P1 (n), is transmitted from second antenna. If we choose K = N/2 and
assume K ≥ L, two CAZACs do not overlap at the receiver, without corrupting
autocorrelation property. Based on this assumption, eq.(5) is satisﬁed. The mean
square error (MSE) of the proposed estimator is obtained by
⎤
⎡
M SE = E ⎣

m

2 L−1

ˆ ij (l) − Hij (l)
H

2

⎦ =E w
ˆj (l)2 .

(6)

j=1 i=1 l=0

ˆ i (l)−Hi (l), equals to the AWGN, we can
Because the channel estimation error, H
conclude the MSE is same to the noise variance from eq.(6). Now, we consider
imperfect channel estimation. For a given number of cyclic shift K = N/2, if
L > K, some multipath signals of CAZAC sequences are overlapped, which
results in corrupting orthogonality. In this case, the estimated channel for i,
k = 1, 2 and k = i can be expressed as
⎧
ˆj (l) 0 < L − K
⎨ Hij (l) + Hkj (l + N/2) + w
ˆ ij = Hij (l) + Hkj (l − N/2) + w
H
(7)
ˆj (l) K < L
⎩
ˆj (l)
elsewhere
Hi j(l) + w
Eq.(7) shows that correct estimation is not possible because of the CIR estimates from the other antenna. Therefore, the additional channel estimation error, Hkj (l + N/2) and Hkj (l − N/2), is added to the noise variance. The equation
for total MSE is as follows
M SE = E
+E
+E
when L > K.

2
2
L−K−1
2
(Hkj (l + N/2))
k=1
j=1
l=0
2
2
L−K−1
(Hkj (l − N/2))2
k=1
j=1
l=K
w
ˆj (l)2

(8)

1062

4

B.-S. Kang et al.

Simulation Results and Discussions

We illustrate the performance analysis of the proposed channel estimation algorithm in terms of MSE and BER.
Figure 2 shows the MSE performance in respect to RMS delay and Eb/N 0.
We simulated up to 100ns RMS delay, which means the number of paths is 10.
When Eb/N 0is increased by 10dB, the MSE is reduced by a factor of 0.1 where
RMS delay increases up to 80ns. If the RMS delay is longer than 80ns, it can
be known that the performance is degraded rapidly. This result is induced by
exceeding the number of paths, N/2. Fortunately, since the RMS delay spread
in an indoor wireless channel is less than 80ns[9], our scheme can be eﬀectively
applied to the IEEE 802.15.3 standard, without changing the training symbol.
Figure 3 displays the MSE of channel estimation versus Eb/N 0. The MSE
decreases linearly as Eb/N 0 increases up to RMS delay of 80ns. However, the
MSE converges to 0.7 approximately with RMS delay of 90ns. It is also observed
from two ﬁgures that the analytic error curves according to Eq.(8) match the
simulated error curves.
To estimate channel, we require only one CAZAC. The computational complexity for each CIR estimate is 16 multiplications, 16 additions, and 1 division.
Also it is possible to apply the proposed algorithm to single transmit antenna.
The algorithm can be easily implemented because of low complexity.
The BER performance comparison between the conventional WPAN system
and the space-time coded WPAN system with two transmit antennas is illustrated in Figure 4. As shown in this ﬁgure the BER performance of space-time
coded WPAN system outperforms that of the conventional WPAN system. Also



(E1
(E1
(E1
(E1

06(RI &KDQQHO(VWLPDWLRQ



G%
G%
G%
G%







H










506GHOD\QV

Fig. 2. The MSE performance according to the RMS delay and Eb/N 0

Channel Estimation of High Rate WPAN System with Diversity Technique

1063



06(RIFKDQQHOHVWLPDWLRQ







506GHOD\RIQV
506GHOD\RIQV



H








(E1G%

Fig. 3. The MSE performance of the proposed scheme employing M = 2


3HUIHFW&KDQQHO(VWLPDWLRQ
3URSRVHG&KDQQHO(VWLPDWLRQ
4$0
4$0
4$0



%LW(UURU5DWH



0 1 





0 1 

H

0 
1 

H







(E1G%







Fig. 4. BER performance of both perfect channel and channel estimation with STBC
and conventional WPAN system

the more receive antennas are used, the better BER performance is obtained.
The performance diﬀerence between the WPAN system with channel estimation
and WPAN system with perfect estimation becomes similar for high SNR. In low

1064

B.-S. Kang et al.

SNR, on the other hand the performance degradation of the channel estimation
is observed, which is due to the imperfect channel estimation.

5

Conclusions

In this paper, we apply multi-antenna scheme to HR WPAN system and investigate channel estimation problem. The proposed channel estimation algorithm
can operate in single and multiple antenna system. To recover the transmitted
data in multiple antenna system, we introduce the STBC algorithm. The proposed channel estimation algorithm can estimate the multi-channel information
up to 80ns RMS delay. And also, we have shown the BER performance of spacetime coded WPAN system with the proposed channel estimation scheme. The
simulation result shows that the system performance can be increased by using
the STBC algorithm and proposed channel estimation scheme.

Acknowledgement
This work is ﬁnancially supported by the Ministry of Education and Human
Resources Development (MOE), the Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Energy
(MOCIE) and the Ministry of Labor (MOLAB) through the fostering project
of the Lab of Excellency and is supported by MIC Frontier R&D Program in
KOREA.

References
1. J.Karaoguz, “High-Rate Wireless Wireless Personal Area Networks” IEEE Communication Magazine, vol. 39, no. 12, pp.96-102, Dec. 2001.
2. B. A. Bjerke and J. G. Proakis, “Multiple-antenna diversity techniques for transmission over fading channels” IEEE WCNC’99, Italy, pp.1038-1042, Sept. 1999.
3. Hashemi, H., Tholl, D., Morrison, G., “Statistical modeling of the indoor radio
propogation channel-part I,” IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference, vol.4, pp.338342, May 1992.
4. S.M. Alamouti, “A simple transmit diversity scheme for wireless communications”
IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 1451-1458, Oct. 1998.
5. S.M. Alamouti, “Trellis-coded modulation and transmit diversity: design criteria
and performance evaluation” IEEE Universal Personal Communications., vol. 1,
pp.703-707, Oct. 1998.
6. V. Tarokh, H. Jafarkhani, and A. R. Calderbank, “Space-time block codes from
orthogonal designs,” IEEE Trans. On Info. Theory, vol. 45, no. 5, pp.1456-1467,
July 1999.
7. V. Tarokh, H. Jafarkhani, and A. R. Calderbank, “Space-time block coding for
wireless communications: Performance results,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun.,
vol. 17, no.3, pp.461-471, March 1999.
8. G. J. Foschini Jr. and M. J. Gans “On limits of wireless communication in a fading
environment when using multiple antennas” Wireless Personal Commun., March
1998.
9. IEEE Std P802.15.3-2003, 2003.

