Maintaining Diversity
in Agent-Based Evolutionary Computation
Rafał Dre˙zewski and Marek Kisiel-Dorohinicki
Department of Computer Science,
AGH University of Science and Technology, Krak´ow, Poland
{drezew, doroh}@agh.edu.pl

Abstract. Niching techniques for evolutionary algorithms are aimed at maintaining the diversity through forming subpopulations (species) in multi-modal
domains. Similar techniques may be applied to evolutionary multi-agent systems,
which provide a decentralised model of evolution. In this paper a specific EMAS
realisation is presented, in which the new species formation occurs as a result
of co-evolutionary interactions between preexisting species. Experimental results
aim at comparing the approach with a classical niching techniques and a basic
EMAS implementation.

1 Introduction
The term Evolutionary Computation is usually used to describe a wide range of global
search and optimization techniques based on analogies to natural evolutionary processes.
However, both experiments and analysis show that for multi-modal problem landscapes
a simple evolutionary algorithm will inevitably loose the diversity of its population and
in consequence locate only a single solution—which is often a local optimum. In order to overcome this limitation some mechanism that creates and maintains different
subpopulations (species) in a multi-modal domain must be used.
Traditionally, there are two basic approaches in evolutionary biology to understanding speciation process [3]. The first one called allopatric speciation occurs when
subpopulations of a given species become geographically isolated. After isolation they
follow different paths of evolution, which eventually lead to forming of different species.
The second kind of speciation is called sympatric speciation. Such speciation results
from niche separation due to resource competition, predator-prey co-evolution, sexual
selection, etc. In this case speciation process takes place within single population.
Evolutionary multi-agent systems assume a decentralised model of evolution [5],
which incorporates mechanisms of both allopatric (geographical isolation due to physical distribution of subpopulations) and sympatric (competition for limited resources
in energy-based selection) speciation. In fact, these mechanisms prove not powerful
enough to maintain stable subpopulations locating different optima. That is why the idea
of co-evolutionary multi-agent system (CoEMAS) was introduced [2], which opens new
possibilities of modeling biological speciation mechanisms based on co-evolutionary
interactions—like predator-prey interactions, sexual preferences, etc.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part III, LNCS 3993, pp. 908–911, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

Maintaining Diversity in Agent-Based Evolutionary Computation

909

2 Maintaining Diversity in Evolutionary Algorithms
During the years of research various mechanisms and techniques for creating and maintaining species located within the basins of attraction of local minima (niches) have been
proposed. All these niching techniques allow species formation via the modification of
the parent selection mechanism (fitness sharing [4]), the modification of mechanism
of selecting individuals for new generation (crowding [6]), the restriction of application of the selection and/or recombination mechanisms (by grouping individuals into
subpopulations or by introducing the environment with some topography in which the
individuals are located [1]).
In co-evolutionary algorithms the fitness of each individual depends not only on the
quality of solution to the given problem but also (or solely) on other individuals’ fitness. This makes such techniques applicable in the cases where the fitness function
formulation is difficult (or even impossible). Co-evolution of species was also used as a
mechanism for maintaining population diversity, introducing open-ended evolution and
improving adaptive capabilities of evolutionary algorithms in dynamic environments.
As the result of ongoing research quite many co-evolutionary techniques have been
proposed. Generally, each of these techniques belongs to one of two classes: competitive [7] or cooperative [8].

3 Evolutionary and Co-evolutionary Multi-agent Systems
The main idea of evolutionary multi-agent system is the modeling of evolution process
in MAS [5]. In opposition to classical evolutionary algorithms, in EMAS there is no centralized algorithm which manipulates the whole population. All individuals (agents) are
independent and make their own decisions, particularly these concerning reproduction
and death.
Selection in EMAS is based on a non-renewable resources, which are possessed by
the agents. Every activity costs some resource and may be realized provided that the
agent’s resource level is high enough. Resources can be gained only from the environment or other agents, and the rule is that better fit agents are given more resources than
less fit ones. This means the competition for limited resources in common environment,
which allows for sympatric speciation.
Agents live within an environment with a defined spatial structure and may change
their location within the environment. It is thus a natural model of allopatric speciation
because evolutionary processes may run with different conditions in many locations coexisting in parallel. Agents migrate, so the genetic material (information) is exchanged
between locations. This model is, to some extent, similar to island model of PEA with
all its advantages and disadvantages.
The key idea that differentiates co-evolutionary multi-agent system (CoEMAS) from
EMAS is the co-evolution of several species (which cooperate or compete) in one environment [2]. In the particular model of EMAS with co-evolving species (NCoEMAS)
there is a hierarchical structure of species: agents-solutions live within agents-niches.
In NCoEMAS there is a closed circulation of resources. Some resource is given
from the environment to the agents-niches (proportionally to their fitness) and then

R. Dre˙zewski and M. Kisiel-Dorohinicki
35

910

25

DC
FS
EMAS
NCoEMAS

15
0

0

5

5

10

10

15

npd(t)

nnm(t)

20

25

20

30

DC
FS
EMAS
NCoEMAS

0

a)

1000

2000

3000
t

4000

5000

0

b)

1000

2000

3000

4000

5000

t

Fig. 1. The number of Rastrigin’s function local minima neighborhoods located (a) and the value
of proportional species’ sizes indicator (b) – average values from 20 runs of different algorithms

redistributed among agents-solutions (a competition for limited resources). In spite of
the proportional amount of resource, all agents-niches are also given some minimal
amount of resource in order to keep alive less fitted species of solutions. The resource
spent by the agents returns to the environment.
Each time step every agent-solution searches for the agent-niche, which is located
within the basin of attraction of the same local minimum. If there are no such agentsniches, the agent-solution creates a new agent-niche, which genotype is the copy of
its own genotype and migrates into it. Then each agent-solution, which have enough
resource, searches its agent-niche for the reproduction partner.
In the considered case genotypes of all agents are real-valued vectors. Intermediate
recombination and mutation with self-adaptation are used for agents-solutions and special mutation for agents-niches (the resulting genotype is the center of gravity of agentssolutions that belong to the agent-niche which genotype is mutated). Only agents-niches
can migrate within the environment. They can also merge if they are located at the same
place of environment and if they are located within the basin of attraction of the same
local minimum.

4 Experimental Results
The experiments were carried out for four techniques: EMAS, and NCoEMAS, as well
as deterministic crowding (DC [6]) and fitness sharing (FS [4]). Figure 1a shows the average number of Rastrigin’s function local minima neighborhoods located by the compared systems. The local minima neighborhood was classified as “located” when there
was at least 3 individuals closer than 0.05 to that local minima. Figure 1b shows the average values of proportional species’ sizes indicator npd(t). The npd(t) indicator gives
the higher measure when the sizes of species located within basins of attractions of
local minima are proportional to the “quality” of that local minima.

Maintaining Diversity in Agent-Based Evolutionary Computation

911

The results of experiments indicate that NCoEMAS located more neighborhoods of
local minima and maintained subpopulations more stably than two classical niching
techniques (fitness sharing and deterministic crowding), as well as a classical EMAS.
Tendency to maintain high diversity within species was observed for FS, but in this case
there were also agents located outside the basins of attraction of local minima. DC has
the strong tendency to lose located basins of attraction of local minima during the evolution process. EMAS cannot be applied to multi-modal function optimization without
introducing special mechanisms such as co-evolution. It turned out that competition for
limited resources and environment with a defined spatial structure are not enough to
form and maintain more than one species in the case of multi-modal problems.

5 Concluding Remarks
Most of classical niching techniques indirectly model resource sharing within the
niches. On the other hand, parallel evolutionary algorithms model speciation caused
by geographical isolation of subpopulations. The approach of co-evolutionary multiagent systems combines all these techniques in one coherent model. It allows for natural implementation of the process of sympatric speciation based on niche separation
due to resource competition. At the same time allopatric speciation is achieved based
on environmental structure of EMAS.
The presented results of simulation experiments are promising and encourage further
work on the idea of co-evolution in EMAS. It demands more experimental studies to
find out which parametrs of the introduced techniques are of vast importance for their
efficiency, and how the behaviur of the system changes for different kinds of problems.

References
1. E. Cant´u-Paz. A survey of parallel genetic algorithms. Calculateurs Paralleles, Reseaux et
Systems Repartis, 10(2):141–171, 1998.
2. R. Dre˙zewski. A co-evolutionary multi-agent system for multi-modal function optimization.
In M. Bubak, G. D. van Albada, P. M. A. Sloot, and J. J. Dongarra, editors, Proc. of the 4th
Intl. Conf. on Computational Science (ICCS 2004), LNCS, Springer-Verlag, 2004.
3. S. Gavrilets. Models of speciation: what have we learned in 40 years? Evolution, 57(10):2197–
2215, 2003.
4. D. E. Goldberg and J. Richardson. Genetic algorithms with sharing for multimodal function
optimization. In J. J. Grefenstette, editor, Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on
Genetic Algorithms, pages 41–49. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1987.
5. M. Kisiel-Dorohinicki. Agent-oriented model of simulated evolution. In W. I. Grosky and
F. Plasil, editors, SofSem 2002: Theory and Practice of Informatics, LNCS. Springer-Verlag,
2002.
6. S. W. Mahfoud. Crowding and preselection revisited. In R. M¨anner and B. Manderick, editors,
Parallel Problem Solving from Nature — PPSN-II, Elsevier, 1992.
7. J. Paredis. Coevolutionary computation. Artificial Life, 2(4):355–375, 1995.
8. M. A. Potter and K. A. De Jong. Cooperative coevolution: An architecture for evolving coadapted subcomponents. Evolutionary Computation, 8(1):1–29, 2000.

