EAR-RT: Energy Aware Routing
with Real-Time Guarantee for Wireless
Sensor Networks
Junyoung Heo1 , Sangho Yi1 , Geunyoung Park1, Yookun Cho1 ,
and Jiman Hong2,
1

Seoul National University
{jyheo, shyi, gypark, cho}@ssrnet.snu.ac.kr
2
Kwangwoon University
gman@daisy.kw.ac.kr

Abstract. Most energy aware routing algorithms focus on the increasing the lifetime and long-term connectivity of the wireless sensor networks. But energy eﬃciency sacriﬁces the communication delay between
source and sink node. Therefore, many researchers have mentioned of
energy and delay trade-oﬀs. But the delay was not the main concern.
In this paper we propose EAR-RT, an real-time guaranteed routing protocol for wireless sensor networks without harming energy awareness.
Simulation results show that our real-time routing algorithm provides
real-time guaranteed delivery while network is stable.

1

Introduction

Wireless sensor networks typically consist of hundreds or thousands of sensor
nodes deployed in a geographical region to sense events. Wireless sensor networks provide a high-level description of the events being sensed. They are used
in many applications such as environmental control, civil engineering, automatic
manufacturing, habitant monitoring and so on. They can be used even in harsh
environment [1, 2]. Therefore, their developing entails signiﬁcant technical challenges due to the many environmental constraints.
There are many research issues in the area of sensor networks because of existing a lot of constraints of sensor nodes. The energy constraints is the most
important one of them. Sensor nodes are supplied with power generally by builtin battery. In addition, transmission of a packet in wireless sensor networks is
expensive. Therefore, routing, which is highly correlated with energy consumption, is a critical factor determining the performance of network.
Most previous researches on routing [3, 4, 5] focused on the algorithm design and performance evaluation in terms of the packet transmission overhead
The present research was conducted by the Research Grant of Kwangwoon University
in 2006, and was supported in part by the Brain Korea 21 Project.
Corresponding author.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part IV, LNCS 3994, pp. 946–953, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

EAR-RT: Energy Aware Routing with Real-Time Guarantee

947

and loss rate. On the other hand, some routing algorithms were proposed in
[1, 2, 6, 7, 8] in order to improve scalability of routing algorithms for large sensor
networks.
In our proposed algorithm, the energy drain rate and the residual energy
of each sensor node are used as the routing information, updated per almost
every communication with energy awareness. To obtain such information, our
algorithm takes advantage of the characteristic of wireless network, called overhearing. When two nodes communicate with each other, the neighboring nodes
can overhear the packet being transmitted. Overhearing enables each sensor
node to obtain the energy information of neighboring nodes without additional
overhead. Then, they update their routing tables using this information. Therefore, our algorithm can provide longer connectivity of sensor networks through
eﬃcient use of energy among the nodes in the network. In addition, our algorithm considers real-time communication. Real-time packets must be arrived at
sink node before deadline. But existing energy-aware routing delayed packets to
save energy. So, these routing algorithms are not suitable for real-time packet
transmission.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we present related
works. Section 3 describes a new energy aware routing algorithm with realtime property. Section 4 presents and evaluates the performance of the proposed
algorithm against the prior algorithm. Finally, some conclusions are given in
Section 5.

2

Related Works

There are a lot of research results on sensor network routing for energy awareness
and real-time communications.
In [3], Ganesan et al. proposed the use of braided multi-paths instead of
completely disjoint multi-paths in order to keep the cost of maintaining the
multi-paths low. The costs of such alternate paths are also comparable to the
primary path because they tend to be much closer to the primary path.
In [4], Chang and Tassiulas proposed an algorithm for maximizing the lifetime
of a network by selecting a path whose nodes have the largest residual energy.
In this way, the nodes in the primary path retain their energy resources, and
thus avoid having to continuously rely on the same route. This contributes to
ensuring longer life of a network.
In [7], Chang and Tassiulas also applied this combined metric concept for
direct routing. Their algorithm is proposed to maximize the lifetime of a network
when data rate is known. The main idea is to avoid using the nodes with low
energy and to choose the shortest path.
In [5], Li et al. proposed an algorithm in which the constraint of the residual
energy of a route is relaxed slightly to select a more energy eﬃcient route. It
is generally known that a route with the largest residual energy for routing a
packet entails high energy consumption. Therefore, there is a trade-oﬀ between
minimizing the total consumed energy and the residual energy of the network.
In that paper, groups of the sensors in geographic proximity were clustered

948

J. Heo et al.

together into a zone and each zone was treated as a separate entity and allowed
to determine how it will route a packet across.
Lu et al. proposed real-time communication architecture for sensor networks
[9]. They proposed velocity monotonic scheduling for packet scheduling on a
node. They did not consider end-to-end delay between source and sink.
He et al. proposed end-to-end real-time communication protocol, SPEED[10].
SPEED maintains a desired delivery speed through a combination of feedback
control and non-deterministic geographic forwarding. By doing so, it achieved
real-time communication. However it did not consider energy awareness.

3

EAR-RT: Energy Aware Routing with Real-Time
Guarantee

We had proposed energy aware routing with dynamic probability scaling (EARDPS) in our previous work[11]. This work is based on the energy aware routing
(EAR) proposed by Shah and Rabaey[1]. EAR uses maintenance phase to update
residual energy of sensor nodes. But EAR-DPS uses overheard packets without
maintenance phase to update residual energy. Our proposed algorithm to support
real-time communication is based on EAR-DPS.
EAR and EAR-DPS ﬁnd multiple routes, if any, from source to destination
nodes. Each route is assigned a probability of being selected to transmit a packet,
based on residual energy and the energy for communications at the nodes along
the route. Then, based on these probabilities, one of the candidate routes is
chosen in order to transmit a packet. The probability is proportional to the
energy level at each node, so the routes with higher energy are more likely to be
selected. EAR protects any route from being selected all the time, preventing the
energy depletion [1, 11]. However, the end-to-end delay of communication may
increase. So, EAR and EAR-DPS cannot be used for real-time communication.
EAR-RT resolves this problem by considering the deadline of packets.
The operation of EAR-RT consists of two phases: setup phase and data communication phase. Basically EAR and EAR-DP use similar process. In setup phase,
the sink node initiates a route request and a routing table is built up by ﬁnding all
the paths from a source to the sink and their energy cost and time delay. In data
communication phase, data packets are sent from the source to the sink. Each intermediate node forwards the packet to a neighboring node, which is chosen randomly
among neighboring nodes that can deliver the packet in time. This probability is
inversely proportional to the energy cost of neighboring nodes.
Before describing our EAR-RT algorithm, we make a list of some common
notations used in this paper in Table 1.
3.1

Setup Phase

The sink node initiates the setup phase by ﬂooding a route request message. A
route request message has energy cost(Costi ), time delay(T imei) and residual
energy(Ri ) of a node. Costsink , energy cost of the sink node is 0. T imesink is
also 0.

EAR-RT: Energy Aware Routing with Real-Time Guarantee

949

Table 1. List of notations used in this paper
Ci,j Expected energy cost to send a packet from node i to the sink node via
node j.
Costi Expected energy cost to send a packet from node i to the sink node.
Ei,j Energy cost to send a packet from node i to node j directly.
Ti,j Expected time delay to send a packet from node i to the sink node via
node j.
T imei Expected time to send a packet from node i to the sink node.
Hi,j Time to send a packet from node i to node j directly. It includes transmission delay, queuing delay and so on.
Pi,j Probability to select node j to forward a packet at node i.

When a node receives a route request message from neighboring nodes, it adds
neighboring nodes only which are closer to sink node than itself into routing
table. Then it calculates its energy cost and time delay. Then it forwards a route
request message with its energy cost and time delay.
If node i receives a route request message from node j which is closer to sink
node than node i, then
Costi =

Pi,j Ci,j
j∈RT

T imei =

Pi,j Ti,j
j∈RT

Ci,j = Costj + Ei,j
Ti,j = T imej + Hi,j
1/Ci,j
Pi,j =
k∈RT 1/Ck,i
Ei,j = (d3ij )α /Rjβ ,
where RT is routing table, dij is the distance between node i and node j, Rj
is the residual energy at node j normalized to its initial energy, α and β are
weighting factors[1, 11].
The Ri , residual energy decreases as time goes on. So the residual energy
should be informed to neighbor nodes frequently. EAR-DPS and EAR-RT make
use of overhearing packets to update the residual energy. In the wireless networks,
when two nodes communicate with each other, the neighboring nodes of a sender
can hear the packet being transmitted.
3.2

Data Communication Phase

After setup phase is completed, each sensor node sends data packets that are
collected to the sink node. We consider only a real-time packet with deadline.
The deadline may be predeﬁned or determined by nodes at every transmission.
The laxity is embedded in a packet and re-calculated at every node on a path
to the sink node.

950

J. Heo et al.

The path to the sink node is built up while transmission of a packet. Every
node - including source node - selects the next node according to the following rules:
1. Select nodes in routing table which can deliver a packet within deadline.
RT = {j|Ti,j ≤ laxity of a packet}
2. Calculate probability based on the RT
Pi,j =

1/Ci,j
k∈RT 1/Ck,i

3. Select the next node randomly by the probability, P .
4. When a node i selects node j as the next hop, node i estimates the energy
needed to transmit a data packet to node j and its residual energy after
transmitting.
5. Node i forwards the data packet including its residual energy Ri , current
cost Costi , T imei and new laxity that decreases by Hi,j .
6. Every node k that overhear the packet and its routing table has the node i
recomputes Ck,i based on Ri and Costi in the packet. Also Tk,i is recomputed
based on T imei . Then it recomputes the probability P , Costk and T imek
based on new Ck,i and Ti,i . At this moment, the residual energy of node i is
reﬂected in its neighbors’ routing table.
7. This process continues until the data packet reaches the sink node.

4

Experimentation

We ran a simulation to evaluate our EAR-RT. In this simulation, the area of the
sensor networks was assumed to be 100m×100m. The number of the nodes in the
network was assumed to be 100 nodes – one node is sink node while the others
are sensor nodes. The sink node was located at the center of the ﬁeld and the
sensor nodes are placed randomly in the ﬁeld. All of the sensor nodes sent data
to the sink node at ﬁxed interval. The length of interval between transmissions
at each node was all identical. This interval can be considered as a virtual time
unit. That is, all of the sensor nodes send their data to the sink node just once
a single time unit. Every packet from sensor nodes has a deadline. The deadline
is randomly chosen between 5 and 8 hops.
Every node was given an identical amount, 0.3J, of initial energy. Energy for
transmission was assumed 20nJ/bit + 1pJ/bit/m3 . Energy for reception was
assumed 30nJ/bit[1, 11]. The packet length was assumed 256 bits. Energy metric function with α=1 and β=50 was used. In this simulation, the following
assumptions were made:
– Every node knows its position and distance between itself and other nodes.
– Every node has identical maximum radio range, 20m.
Figure 1 shows the residual energy of each node at time 600 of a network using
EAR-RT and EAR-DPS. Each rectangle indicates sensor node and number in a

EAR-RT: Energy Aware Routing with Real-Time Guarantee

951

Fig. 1. (a) Residual energy of EAR-RT (b) Residual energy of EAR-DPS

100

0.3

95

EAR-RT
EAR-DPS

0.25
Mean of the residual energy (J)

The number of alive nodes

90

85

80

75

EAR-RT
EAR-DPS

0.2

0.15

0.1
70

65

0.05
0

200

400

600
Time

800

1000

1200

0

200

400

600
Time

800

1000

1200

Fig. 2. (a) The number of active nodes during communication phase (b) Mean of
residual energy of each node

rectangle indicates residual energy of a node. Nodes in dark area have smaller
energy than those in light area. This ﬁgure shows that both algorithms aﬀect
the residual energy of nodes alike.
Figure 2(a) shows the number of active nodes in the network. Figure 2(b)
shows the average of residual energy of each node. These ﬁgures tell us that the
energy awareness of EAR-RT is not inferior to EAR-DPS. In case of EAR-RT,
the number of alive nodes and average residual energy are slightly less than
EAR-DPS. However EAR-RT improved the real-time property by sacriﬁcing its
energy awareness a little.
Figure 3 shows the deadline miss ratio of EAR-RT and EAR-DPS. EARRT delivered more packets in time compared to EAR-DPS. While the network
is stable, EAR-RT delivered most packets in time. But some packets of EARDPS cannot meet the deadline because considering only energy. From these results, our EAR-RT is suitable for real-time communications while keeping energy
awareness in sensor networks.

952

J. Heo et al.
100

Deadline miss ratio (%)

80

EAR-RT
EAR-DPS

60

40

20

0
0

100

200

300

400

500

600

Time

Fig. 3. Deadline miss ratio

In Figure 3, around of time 550, the miss ratio increases rapidly. At that time,
nodes around sink node were dead and the network was partitioned. So, most
packets could not be delivered to the sink node.

5

Conclusion

We proposed EAR-RT, an energy aware routing algorithm with real-time guarantee for high survivability and real-time communication of wireless sensor networks. Our algorithm provide real-time communication without harming energy
awareness of existing energy aware routing algorithm, EAR-DPS. Simulation
results showed that our algorithm reduced deadline miss ratio compared to existing algorithm. Consequently our algorithm can provide longer connectivity of
sensor networks and ensure eﬃcient use of energy among the nodes in the sensor
network with guaranteeing real-time properties.

References
1. Shah, R., Rabaey, J.: Energy aware routing for low energy ad hoc sensor networks. In: IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC),
Orlando, FL. (2002)
2. Heinzelman, W.R., Chandrakasan, A., Balakrishnan, H.: Energy-eﬃcient communication protocol for wireless microsensor networks. In: HICSS ’00: Proceedings of
the 33rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences-Volume 8, Washington, DC, USA, IEEE Computer Society (2000) 8020

EAR-RT: Energy Aware Routing with Real-Time Guarantee

953

3. Ganesan, D., Govindan, R., Shenker, S., Estrin, D.: Highly-resilient, energyeﬃcient multipath routing in wireless sensor networks. SIGMOBILE Mob. Comput.
Commun. Rev. 5 (2001) 11–25
4. Chang, J.H., Tassiulas, L.: Maximum lifetime routing in wireless sensor networks.
IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw. 12 (2004) 609–619
5. Li, Q., Aslam, J., Rus, D.: Hierarchical power-aware routing in sensor networks.
In: DIMACS Workshop on Pervasive Networking. (2001)
6. Schurgers, C., Srivastava, M.B.: Energy eﬃcient routing in wireless sensor networks. In: IEEE Military Communications Conference (MILCOM). (2001) 357–
361
7. Chang, J.H., Tassiulas, L.: Energy conserving routing in wireless ad-hoc networks.
In: INFOCOM (1). (2000) 22–31
8. Braginsky, D., Estrin, D.: Rumor routing algorthim for sensor networks. In: WSNA
’02: Proceedings of the 1st ACM international workshop on Wireless sensor networks and applications, New York, NY, USA, ACM Press (2002) 22–31
9. Lu, C., Blum, B.M., Abdelzaher, T.F., Stankovic, J.A., He, T.: Rap: A real-time
communication architecture for large-scale wireless sensor networks. Technical
report, Charlottesville, VA, USA (2002)
10. He, T., Stankovic, J.A., Lu, C., Abdelzaher, T.: Speed: A stateless protocol for
real-time communication in sensor networks. In: ICDCS ’03: Proceedings of the
23rd International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems, Washington,
DC, USA, IEEE Computer Society (2003) 46
11. Park, G., Yi, S., Heo, J., Choi, W.C., Jeon, G., Cho, Y., Shim, C.: Energy aware
routing with dynamic probability scaling. Lecture Notes in Computer Science 3642
(2005) 662–670

