Scenario Decomposition Based Analysis of Next
Generation Mobile Services
Dongchun Shin1 , Jinbae Kim2 , Seungwan Ryu1, , Donsung Oh3 ,
Joowan Lee1 , and Minhyung Kang1
1

2

Department of Information Systems, Chung-Ang University, Korea
Department of Computer&Information, Anyang Technical College, Anyang, Korea
3
Mobile Telecommunications Research Division, ETRI, Taejon, Korea
{dcshin, rush2384, expertz}@cau.ac.kr, jbkim@ianyang.ac.kr,
dsoh@etri.re.kr
Abstract. The next-generation mobile services have not been studied
actively yet because there is no clear deﬁnition what the next generation
mobile communication and its services will be. In this paper, we propose a service analysis framework for eliciting key service functionalities
and core technologies using given various future mobile service scenarios.
The proposed analysis framework, called scenario based service analysis
process (2SAP), consists of 4 sequential analysis steps, a scenario transformation, a scenario decomposition, an analysis of functions for each
situation, and an elicitation of service functionalities.

1

Introduction

It is expected that the next generation mobile communication system will be a
service-driven developed system diﬀers from the technology-driven development
approach of the second and the third generation mobile communication systems [1, 2]. Therefore, in the service-driven system development process for next
generation system, various possible future mobile communication service scenarios are generated ﬁrst. Then core technologies and network elements required
to realize those service scenarios are elicited through scenario based analysis.
Therefore, we believe that it is imperative to have a systematic scenario analysis
method in such service-driven system development approach.
In this paper, we propose a service analysis framework for eliciting key service
functionalities and core technologies when various future mobile service scenarios are given. The proposed analysis framework, called scenario-based service
analysis process (2SAP), consists of 4 sequential analysis steps, a scenario reﬁnement, a scenario decomposition, an analysis of function for each situation,
and an elicitation of service functionalities. Then the reﬁned scenarios are divided into several sets of situations based on several criteria. Each situation is
also divided into several scenes to elicit service functionalities that are required
to realize such scenes. Finally, various basic core technologies that are required
to implement each service functionality are obtained.
Prof. S. Ryu is the corresponding author.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part II, LNCS 3992, pp. 977–984, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

978

D. Shin et al.

This paper is organized as follows. In next section, concept of scenario is introduced followed by generic process of scenario based system design approaches. In
section 3, we propose the scenario based service analysis process (2SAP) for next
generation mobile services. Finally, we conclude this paper with giving further
study issues.

2
2.1

Scenarios and Scenario Based System Design
Scenarios

In designing systems we need better means to describe contexts of user activities. A possible approach is explicit envisioning and documentation of typical
and signiﬁcant user activities early and continuingly in the development process.
Such descriptions are often called scenarios that can support reasoning about
situations of use, even before those situations are actually created [3]. A scenario
is deﬁned as a set of situations having common characteristics generated while
using a system. In short, scenarios are stories about people and their activities.
A scenario should contain basic characteristics such as agent (or users), proper
objectives to use, and operational conditions [4]. In other words, scenarios could
highlight goals, required procedures and role of users and subsystems by describing behavior of the system and activities of users. Such behaviors and activities
include what users try to do with the system, what procedures are required or
not adopted, and to be carried out to achieve, and what interpretations users
make of what happens to them.
2.2

Scenario Based System Design

The basic idea behind scenario-based methods is that descriptions of technologies
in use are essential in discussing and analyzing how those technologies could
be used for reshaping of their activities. A scenario is used to analyze system
requirement because of following properties [3].
– Scenarios are concrete but rough. On the one hand, a scenario could be a
concrete design proposal that can be evaluated and improved by the designer.
On the other hand, it is rough enough for designers to change it easily and
to design details of the system later.
– Scenarios maintain an orientation to users and their needs. Since scenarios
are work-oriented design objects that describes systems in terms of the work
that users will try to do when they use those systems, it makes the design
work remain with the needs and concerns of users. Therefore, scenarios can
be made even more eﬀective as work-oriented design objects when users are
directly involved in creating them.
– A narrative scenario is written to evoke an image of people doing things,
pursuing goals, using technology in support of these goals. The story enables
readers to empathize with the people in the situation, which in turn leads
to questions about motivations, intentions, reactions, and satisfaction.

Scenario Decomposition Based Analysis of Next Generation Mobile Services

979

The concrete and work-oriented nature of scenarios gives eﬀective representation means for human-centered design activities, particularly when these activities include participation of end-users. Because of the fore-mentioned properties
of scenarios, we can get various beneﬁts described below from the scenario-based
requirement analysis in designing a system.
– It gives useful information by decomposing complex problems into small
sub-problems systematically. In addition, since useful information can be
obtained from various problems independently, it is possible to synthesize
requirements from technologies extracted from scenarios.
– By analyzing coherency of scenarios, it is possible to discover distinct objects
and operation conditions that may give eﬀective ways to avoid conﬂict among
end users.
– It provides basic veriﬁcation tools via coherency analysis and completeness
of well-deﬁned scenarios.
– It provides eﬀective and rapid communication ways about system usage and
other concerning matters between all person involved in system development
work.
2.3

A generic Scenario Based Design Approach

The scenario-based design is a design approach that describes future system
usage at the beginning of system development process. Similar to user-centric
design approaches, the scenario based design approach focuses on how people
use the target system to perform their works and activities not on detailed
functionalities. The scenario based design approach consists of three sequential
steps, the analysis step, the design step and the prototyping and evaluation
step.
– In the analysis step, general understanding of the current problem status is
acquired from the problem scenario and related claims. The problem scenario
describes participants (called actors) involved in meaningful activities, and
the related claims and characteristics of the current status that may result
signiﬁcant eﬀects to actors. The problem scenario is transformed and reﬁned
repeatedly by means of repetitive design attempts. Then a root concept that
supports detailed analysis and reﬁnement of the claims by describing essential aspects of initial vision is derived from the initial requirement analysis.
Several important elements that constitute the root concept are a high-level
vision, basic rationale, and stakeholder group.
– The design step is consists of three activity design stages, the activity design
stage, the information design stage and the reciprocal action design stage.
• The activity design stage describes how the activities are improved or
how does it changed by applying usable technologies. In this stage, new
activities are generated by analyzing current meaningful activities. Then,
activity scenario and related claims are obtained in this stage.

980

D. Shin et al.

• Information design stage describes how work information is organized
and/or created while users are using the system. To achieve this purpose,
special treatment of beginners or some who has no experience to use the
system is required. In this stage, information scenarios and related claims
are obtained.
• The last stage of design step is the reciprocal action design stage. This
stage will take concrete shape when detailed exchanged items between
users and the system are speciﬁed and listed.
– Usage list is generated from scenarios and claims. Usage list can be divided
into several detailed operations corresponding to representative operation
situation. Then target usage objective is assigned to each detailed operation. Design scenarios provide realistic work situations, whereas claims make
it possible to analyze those scenarios in terms of expected usage objectives.
When a prototype has suﬃcient functionalities, detailed operations are evaluated and compared with target objectives.
Figure 1 shows a generic scenario-based design framework.
Analysis
• Analysis of Stakeholders
• Field study

Problem
ProblemScenario
Scenario

Claims

Design
•
•
•
•

metaphor
Information technologies
Human-Computer interaction
Guideline

•• Activity
ActivityScenarios
Scenarios
•• Information
InformationScenarios
Scenarios

• Repetitive analysis claims
• Re-designing

•• Reciprocal
Reciprocalaction
action
scenarios
scenarios

Prototyping & Evaluation
Overall evaluation

Usage
Usagespecification
specification

Formative evaluation

Fig. 1. A generic scenario-based design framework

3

Scenario Based Service Analysis Process

In this section we propose the scenario based analysis method for next generation
mobile services, called the scenario-based service analysis process (2SAP). The
proposed analysis method consists of four sequential steps, the scenario reﬁnement process, the scenario decomposition process, the functional analysis process
for each situation, and the service functionalities elicitation process. In the ﬁrst
process, various crude narrative scenarios are reﬁned or better analysis. In the
second process, based on several criteria, each scenario is decompose into a set of
situations having common characteristics generated while using a system. In the
third process, each situation obtained in previous process is also divided into
several scenes to elicit service functionalities that are required to realize such
scenes. Finally, various basic core technologies that are required to implement
each service functionality are obtained in the last process.

Scenario Decomposition Based Analysis of Next Generation Mobile Services

981

In this paper, initial and reﬁned scenarios are described in natural language,
and then expressed by scenario trees in the analysis step. Finally it is modelled
as a use case diagram in both of functionality analysis and core technologies and
service functionalities elicitation processes.
3.1

Scenario Reﬁnement

In order to obtain core technologies and service functionalities of next generation
mobile communication systems, various crude next generation mobile service
scenarios are generated. These scenarios are written as a narrative story with
lots of modiﬁers such as adjectives and adverbs. Although the ”story” type crude
service scenario is easy to understand, it is hard to get core technologies and
service functionalities via analyzing such service scenarios. Thus in the scenario
reﬁnement process, initially generated story type scenario is reﬁned to a concise
one containing essential and necessary contents. In particular, all modiﬁers exists
in a scenario are removed because they are used to make the scenario elegant
and understandable for people. Then, the reﬁned scenario is transformed into an
enumerative type containing list of diﬀerent situations. A possible initial story
type service scenario and a reﬁned and transformed enumerative scenario are
shown in ﬁgure 2 and 3 respectively.

Tom living in LA, CA. is getting up in the morning with listening beautiful morning
call music coming from his mobile phone. Today he is leaving to Toronto, Canada to
meet a researcher work at Nortel Research Center to get useful information about
network gaming business. He gets weather information about Toronto using his
mobile phone. However, thanks to the ubiquitous computing and communication
environment equipped in his house, he sees scenery of Toronto via display devices
located in the wall and gets weather forecast via his audio system. Then various
sensing devices having context information collection capabilities checks his physical
status, and report his physical status to his mobile phone which is the gateway of
the personal area network around him. Then the collected context information is
transmitted to Dr. John who is Tom’s private doctor. Then Tom gets chatting
request from Dr. John for discussing today’s physical treatment. After having good
time with Dr. John via chatting service on his mobile phone, prescription data is
sent to a pharmacy. The medicine will be delivered to the airport by the pharmacy
making it according to prescription. Before leaving home, he downloads Marry’s
photo on his mobile phone immediately to see it in Toronto. Tom starts up his car
using his mobile phone. After arriving airport, he ...........
Fig. 2. An example narrative story type scenario

3.2

Scenario Decomposition

In previous process a scenario is reﬁned and transformed into an enumerative
type having list of diﬀerent situations. Although it is possible to analyze all the
listed situations together, a better and eﬃcient approach is to analyze it after
decomposing the whole scenario into a number of small sub-problems. Therefore,

982

D. Shin et al.

1. Tome get alarming service from his mobile phone.
2. Tom gets weather information about place which he is planning to visit.
3. Physical status of him is sent to his private doctor, and discuss with him via
chatting service. Prescription is sent to pharmacy and medicine will be delivered
to the airport.
4. Download photos of his daughter on his mobile phone.
5. .....
Fig. 3. An example of reﬁned and transformed scenario into an enumerative one

Overall scenario
(Tom case)
total list: 23

Situation 1
(Home)
List 1 to 4

Situation 2
(At the Airport)
List 5 to 7

Situation 3
(In Toronto)
List 8 to 16

Situation 3.1
List 8 to 11

Situation 4
(Coming back home)
List 17 to 23

Situation 3.2
List 12 to 16

Fig. 4. An example of scenario tree representation based on decomposition and grouping approach

in 2SAP methods, the reﬁned scenario is decomposed into a number of groups
of situations based on coherency of them using grouping criteria.
The fundamental grouping criteria are location of a user, devices, and time.
For example, in most cases, a new service is initiated when location and/or devices are changed. In addition, when, time especially date, is changed, it is highly
probable to begin a new situation. However, this grouping task should be conducted carefully by taking circumstances of such changes on location, time and
devices. When there are groups having larger numbers of list than other groups,
they are decomposed into small sub-groups by applying the secondary decomposition criteria such as the number of actors and objectives of each situation.
Figure 4 shows an example of scenario decomposition and grouping process.
3.3

Functional Analysis of Each Situation

In order to get service functionalities from situations described at the end nodes
of the scenario tree, it is required to decompose each situation into smaller units
called scene. A scene is deﬁned as a target service moment that we are interested
in. A scene is thus corresponds service functionality that is essential basis service
technology felt directly by users [2]. The decomposition criteria used for getting
several scenes from a situation are the initiation and/or releasing moment of
services for a user gets it through his(or her) ﬁve senses. By means of intensive
analysis of these scenes, we can obtain functionalities that make these scenes
possible. We ﬁrst establish a pool of possible service functionalities required to

Scenario Decomposition Based Analysis of Next Generation Mobile Services

983

realize next generation mobile services using our previous research result [2].
Detailed functional analysis procedures for each situation are described below.
– Establish a pool of service functionalities. In this case, the pool can be established by assistant of expert groups or investigation of related technologies.
– derives scenes from a situation, and obtains service functionalities required
to realize each scene using the pool of service functionalities.
– Gets a list of required functionalities for each scene.
– Finally, represents each scene (or a situation) as a use case diagram which
describes relations between a user and service functions.
Table 1 gives example lists of scenes and required functionalities for the situation 1. Figure 5 also shows an example use case diagram of the situation 1.
Table 1. Example lists of scenes and required functionalities for the situation 1
Scenes
Scene 1
Scene 2
Scene 3

Description
Gets alarming service via mobile phone
Checking weather of the place to visit
Health check & data transferring to
a doctor
Scene 4 Chatting request from a doctor
Scene 5 prescription is delivered to a pharmacist
Scene 5 Download daughter’s photos

Functionalities
• Mobile phone alarming
• web browsing
• Remote Control
• data messaging & ﬁle transfer
• Chatting / Messenger
• File transfer
• File transfer

Mobile Phone
Alarming

Web Browsing

A Doctor

Data & File
Transfer

Remote
Control

Tom
Chatting /
Messenger

Voice/Video
Communication

A Phamacist

Fig. 5. An example use case diagram of the situation 1

3.4

Elicitation of Service Technologies

Several types of core technologies such as platform technologies, mobile terminal
technologies, and service application technologies are necessary to implement
service functionalities. Service technologies elicitation procedure is described as
follow

984

D. Shin et al.

– Establish a pool of service technologies with assistant of expert groups or
investigation of related reference books or technical documents.
– Derives service technologies for each service functionalities using use case
diagrams obtained in previous process. If there is a service technology that
is required in realizing a service functionality but does not exist in the pool,
creates a new service technology and makes a detailed technological list.
– Gets a list of required service technologies for each service functionalities.
– Finally, for each service functionality, draw a use case diagram describes
relations between a user and service technologies.

4

Conclusion and Further Study Issues

In this article, we propose a service analysis framework for eliciting key service
functionalities and core technologies when various future mobile service scenarios
are given. The proposed analysis framework, called scenario-based service analysis process (2SAP), consists of 4 sequential analysis steps, a scenario reﬁnement,
a scenario decomposition, an analysis of function for each situation, and an
elicitation of service functionalities. We believe that our research activities and
results on next generation mobile services, especially the 2SAP framework, will
play important role in developing core mobile communication technologies as
well as next generation ubiquitous mobile applications and services.

References
1. S. Arbanowski et al., “I-centric Communications: Personalization, Ambient Awareness, and Adaptability for Future Mobile Services,” IEEE Comm. Magazine, 42(10),
pp. 63–69, September, 2004.
2. S. Ryu et al., “Research Activities on the Next Generation Mobile Communications
and Services in Korea,” IEEE Comm. Magazine, 43(9), pp. 122–131, 2005.
3. M. Rosson and J. Caroll, The Human-Computer Interaction Handbook, Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, 2002.
4. H. Zhu and L. Jin, “Scenario Analysis in an Automated Tool for Requirements
Engineering,” Requirement Engineering, 5, pp. 2–22, 2000.

