Design of a Fast Handoﬀ Scheme for
Real-Time Media Application on the IEEE
802.11 Wireless LAN
Mikyung Kang1 , Junghoon Lee1, , Jiman Hong2 , and Jinhwan Kim3
1

Dept. of Computer Science and Statistics, Cheju National University,
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Kwangwoon University
3
Dept. of Multimedia Engineering, Hansung University,
690-756, Jeju Do, Republic of Korea
{mkkang, jhlee}@cheju.ac.kr, gman@daisy.kw.ac.kr, kimjh@hansung.ac.kr

Abstract. This paper proposes and analyzes a fast handoﬀ scheme that
exploits the overallocated bandwidth inevitably generated to guarantee
the QoS requirement of real-time multimedia stream on the IEEE 802.11
wireless LAN. By using the reserved but not used network time and making the priority of the probe frame higher than any other data frames,
AP and station can exchange RTS/CTS to negotiate when to send probe
message, making AP immediately respond to the probe request with
probe response message in the CFP. The result of simulation that focuses on the eﬀect of the amount of overalloation and average number of
simultaneous requests, shows that the proposed scheme reduces the AP
scan time maximally by 16 % for the given experiment parameters.

1

Introduction

IEEE 802.11 based WLANs(Wireless Local Area Networks) have seen immense
growth in the last few years. Because of the mobility-enabling nature of wireless
networks, there is an opportunity for many promising multimedia and peer-topeer applications such as VoIP, 802.11 phones and mobile video conferencing[1].
However, mobile clients suﬀer from quality degradation resulted from frequent
handoﬀ since each cell may cover just a small area, i.e., rooms or sections of a
highway. Frequent handoﬀs and disconnections incur disruptions and instability
of the connection between mobile host and server, even in the middle of an
application session. To the worse, according to the handoﬀ procedure deﬁned in
WLAN standard, the network connection as perceived by the application may
be aﬀected by the jittery and unpredictable handoﬀ latencies. Such problem is
particularly serious for the fast moving device such as telematics.
This research was supported by the MIC, Korea, under the ITRC support program
supervised by the IITA.
Corresponding author.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part IV, LNCS 3994, pp. 970–978, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

Design of a Fast Handoﬀ Scheme for Real-Time Media Application

971

Wireless LAN STA (Station) is the most basic component of the wireless
network[2] and it means any device that contains the functionality of the 802.11
protocol. BSS (Basic Service Set) is the basic building block of an 802.11 WLAN,
and each BSS consists of any number of stations. As a SSID (Service Set IDentiﬁer) is a unique identiﬁer that distinguishes one WLAN from the others, all
APs (Access Points) and STAs attempting to join a speciﬁc WLAN must have
the same SSID. A WLAN handoﬀ is performed at the MAC layer when a mobile
STA moves beyond the radio range of the current AP and enters another BSS[3].
During the handoﬀ, management frames are exchanged between the STA and
the AP. The handoﬀ procedure essentially requires the transfer of STA information such as authentication, authorization, and accounting information, from
the old AP to the new AP.
Previous research results show that the probe phase overwhelms the total
handoﬀ latency while the variation in the probe-wait time also causes the large
variations in the overall handoﬀ latency. For the client, the service is ceased
during the handoﬀ. Because the STA must scan the channel to which an AP
may belong for the maximum scanning period, and it must repeat iteratively
for all channels, the probe time occupies the biggest part of the handoﬀ latency.
Thus any handoﬀ scheme built upon the techniques/heuristics that either cache
or deduce AP information without having to actually perform a complete active
scan deﬁnitely should cope with the dominating cost of the scan process.
To solve such a problem by reducing AP scanning delay of handoﬀ latency at
MAC layer, this paper proposes and analyzes a fast handoﬀ scheme that exploits
the overallocated bandwidth necessarily accompanied in providing QoS guarantee to real-time multimedia stream. Using the reserved but not used network
time, AP and STA can exchange RTS (Request To Send)/CTS (Clear To Send)
to negotiate when to send a probe message, making AP immediately respond
to the probe request with matching probe response message in the next CFP. In
addition, by making the priority of the probe frame higher than any other data
frames, collision between probe response messages and ordinary data frames can
be eliminated, and dynamic adjustment of the channel scan time further improves AP scanning time. With the reduced AP scan time, a seamless handoﬀ
process is performed, minimizing the deadline miss ratio.
This paper is organized as follows: After issuing the problem in Section 1,
Section 2 introduces the related works. With the description on the handoﬀ
procedure in IEEE 802.11 WLANs in Section 3, Section 4 proposes the fast
handoﬀ scheme. Section 5 shows and discusses the performance measurement
results and then Section 6 ﬁnally concludes this paper with a brief summarization
and the description of future works.

2

Related Works

A lot of works have been already carried out to reduce the handoﬀ latency for
the roaming client station. However, existing handoﬀ schemes are not suitable
for meeting requirements of real-time multimedia application due to its long

972

M. Kang et al.

and occasionally unbounded delay. The sequence of messages being exchanged
during the handoﬀ process can be categorized into three groups, namely, probe,
authentication, and association. Accordingly, existing works are also classiﬁed
by the delay element to reduce.
First, the researches to improve the probe delay are as follows: Kim et al. proposed a selective scanning algorithm using the neighbor graphs[4]. This approach
forces changes in the network infrastructure and use of IAPP (Inter Access Point
Protocol) though it narrows the search space with neighbor graphs. Moreover,
this scheme does not consider the time amount required by the client to process
the received probe responses. Shin et al. proposed a new handoﬀ procedure which
reduces the MAC layer handoﬀ latency, in most cases, to a level where VoIP
communication becomes seamless using both selective scanning algorithm and
caching mechanism[2]. It needs just an insigniﬁcant modiﬁcation in the clientside wireless card driver such as channel mask and improved cache dimensioning.
According to the analysis result by Jain[5] and Mishra[3], there are remarkable
variations in handoﬀ latencies with change in SSID and channel of APs, and
probe delay is the major malicious factor to the total handoﬀ performance.
Second, to improve the authentication delay, Pack et al. proposed a fast InterAP handoﬀ scheme using the predictive authentication method based on IEEE
802.1x model [6][7]. The IEEE 802.1x authentication delay is reduced by using
the FHR (Frequent Handoﬀ Region) selection algorithm that makes the candidate APs selected by the predictive algorithm, perform the pre-authentication,
directly taking into account traﬃc patterns and user characteristics, which are
collected and managed in the centralized system.
Third, to improve the association delay, Mishra et al. focused on reducing
the reassociation delay[8]. The reassociation delay is reduced by using a caching
mechanism on the AP side. This caching mechanism is based on the IAPP protocol in order to exchange the client context information between neighboring
APs. The cache in the AP is built by observing the information contained in an
IAPP Move-Notify message or in the reassociation request sent to the AP by the
client. By exchanging the client information with the old AP, the new AP prevents the client from sending its context information, resulting in the reduction
of the reassociation delay.

3
3.1

Backgrounds
IEEE 802.11 WLAN

The wireless LAN operates on both CP (Contention Period) and CFP (Contention Free Period) phases alternatively in BSS as shown in Fig. 1(a). Each
superframe consists of CFP and CP, which are mapped to PCF (Point Coordination Function) and DCF (Distributed Coordination Function), respectively[9].
Though PCF is optional, QoS guarantee cannot be provided without PCF. Recently, the PCF-enabled schemes are increasingly being applied to the WLAN
showing a reasonable throughput. Moreover, previous researches based on the

Design of a Fast Handoﬀ Scheme for Real-Time Media Application

973

DCF can not avoid both the collision between the probe messages and normal
data frames, and the probe delay according to the backoﬀ time of DCF.
Fig. 1(a) shows the operation of polling procedure as well as the allocation
of capacity vector. The DCF exploits collision-based CSMA/CA (Carrier Sense
Multiple Access with Collision Avoidance) protocol for non-real-time messages,
and RTS/CTS clearing technique to further reduce the possibility of collisions
as shown in Fig. 1(b).
Superframe
CFP

Superframe
CP

CFP

DIFS

RTS
Source

CP

Data
SIFS

CTS
Beacon

Start CFP

1
0
0
1
H1
0
1
0
1

1
0
0
1
0H2
1
0
1

Poll

1
0
0
.... 1
0Hn
1
0
1
End CFP

SIFS

SIFS

ACK

Destination

NRT

Other

Start CFP

(a) Time axis of wireless LAN

DIFS

NAV(RTS)
NAV(CTS)
Data Access

Backoff Window

Backoff after Defer

(b) RTS/CTS frame exchange

Fig. 1. IEEE 802.11 WLAN operations

PC (Point Coordinator) node, typically AP, sequentially polls each station during CFP. AP maintains the polling list ordered by a polling sequence. The PC
attempts to initiate CFP by broadcasting a Beacon at regular intervals derived
from a network parameter of CFPRate. The polled node transmits its message
for a predeﬁned time interval, and it always responds to a poll immediately
whether it has a pending message or not. Only after the medium is idle the
coordinator will get the priority due to the shorter IFS (InterFrameSpace).
3.2

The Handoﬀ Procedure in WLAN

The handoﬀ process can be divided into two logical steps of discovery and reassociation[3]. The discovery process involves handoﬀ initiation and scanning
phases. As signal strength and signal-to-noise ratio from a station’s current AP
get weaker, STA loses connectivity and initiates a handoﬀ. Then the client is not
able to communicate with its current AP, so the client needs to ﬁnd the other
APs available. This scan function is performed at a MAC layer, and the station
can create the available AP list ordered by the received signal strength.
For the scan phase, STA can perform scan operation either in passive or active
mode. In passive scan mode, using the information obtained from beacon frames,
STA listens to each channel of the physical medium to try and to locate an AP.
In the active mode (the wireless NICs do by default), as shown in Fig. 2(a),
STA broadcasts additional probe packets on each channel and receives responses
from APs. Thus the STA actively probes for the APs, and the actual number of
messages varies from 3 to 11. Fig. 2(b) shows the sequence of messages typically
observed during a handoﬀ process. The handoﬀ process starts with the ﬁrst probe
request and ends with a reassociation response from the new AP.

974

M. Kang et al.
Station performing a handoff

All Aps within range on all channels

(broadcast)
Probe Request

DIFS

SIFS

Probe
Request

Time
Contention
Window

DIFS

Access
Point

Old AP

Authentication
Authentication Request
Delay
Authentication
Response

ACK

Client

Probe Response
Discovery Phase
Probe Request
New AP
Probe Response

Reassociation Request
Reassociation
Delay

Probe
Response

Time
MinChannelTime

IAPP: Send security block
IAPP: Ack security block
IAPP: Move Request
IAPP: Move Response

Reassociation Response

Reassociation Phase

Contention
Window

Total Handoff Latency

Probe Delay

MaxChannelTime

(a) Active Scan

(b) WLAN Handoﬀ Procedure
Fig. 2. Handoﬀ procedures

The probe function follows the IEEE 802.11 MAC active scan function and
the standard speciﬁes a scanning procedure as follows[2][3]:
1. Using CSMA/CA, acquire the access right to the medium.
2. Transmit a probe request containing the broadcast address as destination,
SSID, and broadcast BSSID (Basic SSID).
3. Start a ProbeTimer.
4. If medium is not busy before the ProbeTimer reaches MinChannelTime, scan
the next channel. Otherwise, process all received probe responses.
5. Move to next channel and repeat the above steps.
After all channels have been scanned, informations received from probe response
are scrutinized by STA to select a new AP. Once the STA decides to join a
speciﬁc AP, authentication messages are exchanged between the STA and the
selected AP, and after a successful authentication, the STA sends a reassociation
request and expects a reassociation response back from the AP.

4
4.1

Proposed Scheme
AP Channel Management

Real-time guarantee is provided based on the worst case available transmission
time, so a stream can meet extra slots in some periods. Moreover, as Ci is usually
just the upper bound of message size in multimedia applications, some period,
Pi , has message to send less than Ci . As a result, a node possibly has no pending
message when it receives a poll. Though there have been plenty of bandwidth
allocation schemes for the real-time message stream or sensor data stream, we
exploit Lee’s scheme, as it completely conforms to WLAN standard[10].
To begin with, let δ denote the total overhead of a superframe including
polling latency, IFS and the like, while Dmax the maximum length of a data

Design of a Fast Handoﬀ Scheme for Real-Time Media Application

975

Convert Channel
Broadcast P.Req.

P.Req.?

CTS?

YES

YES

Add to PL

Update PL

OAT?

NO

STA sent CTS
in PL?
Probe Request = P.Req.
Probe Response = P.Res.
OverAllocationTime = OAT
ProbeList = PL
MinChTime = MCT
ProbeWaitMode = PWM

Busy during
MCT?

Send RTS
and Wait

YES

YES

Wait

NO
NO

RTS?

Empty?

YES

P.Res.?

YES

OA>=MCT?

NO

YES

Send P.Res.
and Delete

!PWM?
YES

No P.Res. NO
during MCT?

YES

Process and Wait
& Set !PWM

YES

YES

Send CTS &
Set PWM

CP Time

(a) AP Process

(b) STA Process
Fig. 3. AP and STA processes

packet. For each superframe, at least a time amount as large as Dmax , should
be reserved for a data packet so as to keep compatibility with WLAN standard.
The capacity vector, Hi , is large enough to exchange RTS/CTS. If Pmin is the
smallest element of set {Pi }, the requirement for the superframe time, F , can
be summarized as follows:
Hi =
Hi =

(

Ci
−1)

Pi
F
Ci
Pi
F

if (Pi −

Pi
F

Otherwise

· F ) ≤ Dmax

(1)

By this, we can determine the length CFP period (TCF P ) and that of CP (TCP )
as follows:
Hi + δ, TCP = F − TCF P ≥ Dmax
(2)
TCF P =
For detailed description, refer to [10].
4.2

AP Scanning Procedure

In general, it takes more time to perform a passive scan than active scan in collecting the necessary information. Thus current WLAN equipments use active
scan mode in order to reduce handoﬀ delay. In the standard active scanning
procedure, though the probe phase of one channel can be terminated before the
ProbeTimer reaches MaxChannelTime, the STA has to wait during the MaxChannelTime. In addition, the probe response messages and other ordinary data
frames contend for the shared channel, so they can collide with one another. To
minimize the collision using active scan mode, we will assign the higher priority
to the probe response message, and also provide variable scan time.
As shown in Fig. 3, the proposed AP scanning scheme is performed through
the unused slots. AP can not only send RTS message to the STA which waits
for probe response message, but also STA can respond with CTS message to
the appropriate AP which will transmit the probe response message. Once the
RTS/CTS messages are exchanged, the priority to send probe response message

976

M. Kang et al.

is assigned to the AP, and other APs can not receive the CTS message until the
selected AP sends probe message to the STA.
The procedure of the proposed scheme using adaptive scan time is as follows:
1. Using CSMA/CA, STA acquires the access right to the medium.
2. STA transmits a probe request frame containing the broadcast address as destination, SSID, and broadcast BSSID, to all APs in the reachable channels.
And AP is informed the existence of a STA that waits to join.
3. Start a ProbeTimer.
4. If medium is not busy before the ProbeTimer reaches MinChannelTime, STA
scans the next channel. Otherwise, following steps are applied.
5. Using the unused slot, AP sends RTS to STA specifying the ID submitted
in step 2.
6. STA responses with CTS if it still wants to receive the probe response.
7. AP sends probe response to STA if overallocated slot time amount is large
enough to send the probe message. Otherwise, probe response is postponed
until AP meets such a slot.
8. If the number of RTS messages is equal to the number of probe responses,
and if SSID of being transmitted packet is equal to that of already received
probe response during the MinChannelTime, that is, after sensing that the
probe response doesn’t arrive at STA any more, STA scans the next channel.

5

Performance Measurements

This section will show performance measurement results performed via simulation. The experiments are based on some assumptions to concentrate on the
major performance parameters, namely, the amount of overallocation and the
number of pending handoﬀ request. Every stream has equal period and communication time, while each time variable is aligned to F and total number of streams
is set to 5 for simplicity. However, these assumption can be easily generalized
into the more realistic circumstances. Finally, we compared the handoﬀ time of

0.7

0.72
0.7
0.68

"Proposed"
"Precedence"

0.6

AP Scan Time (F)

AP Scan Time (F)

0.65

0.55
0.5

0.66

"Proposed"
"Precedence"

0.64
0.62
0.6
0.58
0.56

0.45

0.54
0.4

0.52
0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0.3

Amount of overallocation

Fig. 4. Scan time vs. overallocation

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

Average number of simultaneous requests

Fig. 5. Scan time vs. # of requests

Design of a Fast Handoﬀ Scheme for Real-Time Media Application

977

the proposed scheme with that of a scheme which just gives the precedence to
the packets relevant to handoﬀ procedure.
Fig. 4 shows the eﬀect of overallocated bandwidth to the AP scan time. The
i
probability of unused slot due to overallocation can be estimated as ( HFi − C
Pi ).
The eﬃcient usage of overallocated bandwidth can speed up the handoﬀ time
by 16 % when the overallocation value is 0.1. Fig. 5 also plots the AP scan
time according to the number of simultaneous requests. The performance gap
gets narrow when more handoﬀ requests are submitted to the network as the
proposed scheme can expect the improvement only if CFP has an overallocation
larger than the handoﬀ procedure. The total AP scan time can be calculated
by the sum of time needed to scan a used channel and time to scan on empty
channel.

6

Conclusion and Future Work

This paper proposes and analyzes a fast handoﬀ scheme that exploits the overallocated bandwidth inevitably generated to guarantee the QoS requirement of
real-time multimedia stream on the IEEE 802.11 Wireless LANs. Using the reserved but not used network time, AP and STA can exchange RTS/CTS to
negotiate when to send probe message, making AP immediately respond to the
probe request with probe response message in the next CFP. In addition, by
making the priority of the probe frame higher than any other data frames, collision of probe response messages and ordinary data frames can be minimized.
Simulation results show that the proposed scheme improves the AP scan time
according to the amount of overalloation and average number of simultaneous
requests.
The channel with the best signal is not necessarily the best channel to connect
to because it could be much more congested than a channel with a lower signal
strength. Because of this, a heuristic which considers bit rate information together with signal strength can achieve optimal performance. As a future work,
we consider an error control mechanism as well as a heuristic algorithm that
signal strength can achieve optimal performance.

References
1. Mao, S., Lin, S., Wang, Y., Panwar, S. S., Li, Y.: Multipath video transport over
wireless ad hoc networks. IEEE Wireless Communications (2005)
2. Shin, S., Rawat, A., Schulzrinne, H.: Reducing MAC Layer Handoﬀ Latency in
IEEE 802.11 Wireless LANs. ACM MobiWac’04 (2004)
3. Mishra, A., Shin, M., Arbaugh, W.: An Empirical Analysis of the IEEE 802.11
MAC Layer Handoﬀ Process. ACM Computer Communications Review, Vol. 33,
No.2 (2003) 93-102
4. Kim, H. Park, S. Park, C, Kim, J., Ko, S.: Selective channel scanning for fast
handoﬀ in wireless lan using neighbor graph. International Technical Conference
of Circuits/Systems, Computer and Communications (2004)
5. Jain, A.: Handoﬀ Delay for 802.11b Wireless LANs, Project Report (2003)

978

M. Kang et al.

6. Pack, S., Choi, Y.: Fast Inter-AP Handoﬀ using Predictive-Authentication Scheme
in a Public Wireless LAN. IEEE Networks (2002)
7. Pack, S., Choi, Y.: Pre-Authenticated Fast Handoﬀ in a Public Wireless LAN based
on IEEE 802.1x Model. IFIP TC6 Personal Wireless Communications (2002)
8. Mishra, A., Shin, M., Arbaugh, W.: Context Caching using Neighbor Graphs for
Fast Handoﬀs in a Wireless Network. IEEE INFOCOM (2004)
9. IEEE Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer
(PHY) Speciﬁcations. IEEE Standard 802.11 (1999)
10. Lee, J., Kang, M., Jin, Y., Kim, H., Kim, J.: An eﬃcient bandwidth management
scheme for a hard real-time fuzzy control system based on the wireless LAN. Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Vol. 3642. Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg
New York (2005) 644-659

