Multiscale Characteristics of Human Sleep EEG
Time Series
In-Ho Song1,2 , In-Young Kim2 , Doo-Soo Lee1 , and Sun I. Kim2
1

2

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Hanyang University
Department of Biomedical Engineering, College of Medicine, Hanyang University
Haengdang-dong, Seongdong-ku, Seoul, 133-791, South Korea
sunkim@hanyang.ac.kr

Abstract. We investigated the complexity of ﬂuctuations in human
sleep electroencephalograms (EEGs) by multifractals. We used human
sleep EEG time series taken from normal, healthy subjects during the
four stages of sleep and rapid eye movement (REM) sleep. Our ﬁndings
showed that the ﬂuctuation dynamics in human sleep EEGs could be adequately described by a set of scales and characterized by multifractals.
Multifractal formalism, based on the wavelet transform modulus maxima, appears to be a good method for characterizing EEG dynamics.

1

Introduction

Since Babloyantz et al. reported that human sleep EEG signals had chaotic
attractors during stage 2 and stage 3 sleep, nonlinear dynamic methods based
on the concept of chaos have been used to analyze sleep EEG signals [1]. Fell et al.
analyzed sleep EEG signals using the largest Lyapunov exponent (LLE) during
sleep stages 1-4 and rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, and found signiﬁcant
diﬀerences in the values of LLE between the four stages and REM sleep [2] [3].
Kobayashi et al. found signiﬁcant decrements in the mean correlation dimensions
of EEGs from being awake to stage 3 sleep, and an increment during REM
sleep [4]. However, these methods require a relatively large number of stationary
data points to obtain reliable results [5] [6]. Indeed, it is diﬃcult to meet this
requirement in sleep EEGs, as well as in practical physiological systems [5] [6].
Recent research suggests that EEGs can be characterized in some situations by
a single dominant timescale, indicating timescale invariance and a 1/f fractal
structure [7] [8]. However, many physiological time series ﬂuctuate in a complex
manner and are inhomogeneous, suggesting that diﬀerent parts of the signal
have diﬀerent scaling properties [9] [10]. A new method is needed to analyze
sleep EEG signals, and one potential candidate is multifractal analysis based
on wavelet transform modulus maxima (WTMM), which is a suitable method
for obtaining information about dynamic systems without requiring a relatively
large number of stationary data points [10] [11].
The aim of this study was to investigate the possibility that human sleep
EEG signals can be characterized by a multifractal spectrum using WTMM. To
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part I, LNCS 3991, pp. 164–171, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

Multiscale Characteristics of Human Sleep EEG Time Series

165

investigate whether physiological brain states according to sleep stages aﬀect
the phenomenon of multifractality in human sleep EEG dynamics, we compared
the multifractal properties of sleep EEG signals obtained during the four sleep
stages and REM sleep. Additionally, we used a surrogate data method to assess
whether human sleep EEGs have long-range correlations.

2
2.1

Materials and Methods
Materials

The sleep EEG data ﬁles used in this study were selected from the sleep-EDF
database consisting of physiological data obtained from four subjects with horizontal EOG, EEG, submental-EMG, oronasal airﬂow, etc. Fpz-Cz EEGs were
sampled at 100 Hz, 12 bits per sample [12]. Sleep stages were scored according
to the standard criteria of Rechtschaﬀen and Kales on 30 s epochs [12]. The ﬁle
names used were sc4002e0, sc4012e0, sc4102e0 and sc4112e0. From these, 150
segments (30 awake, 30 stage 1, 30 stage 2, 30 slow wave sleep (SWS), and 30
REM) with a duration of 30 s (3000 points) were used. Band-pass ﬁlter settings
were 0.53-40 Hz (12 dB/octave).
2.2

WTMM-Based Multifractal Formalism

As stated above, many physiological time series, including human sleep EEGs,
have inhomogeneity and ﬂuctuate in an irregular manner. To characterize sleep
EEG signals and to extract local Hurst exponents from them, we used a WTMMbased multifractal formalism. The wavelet transform of sleep EEG signal, f (x),
is deﬁned as
1 ∞
x − x0
)dx
(1)
f (x)ψ(
Tψ [f ](x0 , a) =
a −∞
a
where x0 is the position parameter, a is the scale parameter, and ψ(t) is the
mother wavelet function [11]. In this study, the third derivative of the Gaussian
function was used as the analyzing wavelet.
A partition function Zq (a) was deﬁned as the sum of the power of order q of
the local maxima of | Tψ [f ](x0 , a) | at scale a [11].
| Tψ [f ](x0l (a), a) |q

Zq (a) =

(2)

l∈L(a)

where L(a) is the set of the maxima lines l existing at the scale a, and x0l (a) is
the position, at the scale a, of the maximum belonging to the line l.
For small scales, it was expressed as
Zq (a) ∼ aτ (q)

(3)

where τ (q) is is the multifractal spectrum. For monofractal signals, τ (q) is a
linear function: τ (q) = qh(q) − 1, where h(q) = dτ (q)/dq = constant, and is

166

I.-H. Song et al.

the global Hurst exponent [9] [10]. For multifractal signals, τ (q) is a nonlinear
function and h(q) = dτ (q)/dq = not constant [9] [10]. For positive values of q,
Zq (a) characterizes the scaling of the large ﬂuctuations and strong singularities,
whereas for negative values of q, Zq (a) characterizes the scaling of the small
ﬂuctuations and weak singularities.
Using a Legendre transform, the singularity spectrum D(h) can be expressed
as [9] [10] [11].
D(h) = q

dτ (q)
− τ (q)
dq

(4)

D(h) can quantify the statistical properties of the diﬀerent subsets characterized
by diﬀerent exponents, h. Nonzero D(h) and h = 0.5 imply that the ﬂuctuations
in signal exhibit uncorrelated behavior. h > 0.5 corresponds to correlated behavior, while values of h in the range 0 < h < 0.5 imply anticorrelated behavior
[9] [10].
2.3

Surrogate Time Series and Statistical Analysis

To assess the presence of a long-range correlation in the human sleep EEG
time series, we generated a surrogate time series by shuﬄing and integrating
the human sleep EEG signal. The surrogate time series that was generated lost
the long-range correlation; however, the distribution of the original human sleep
EEG signal was preserved. To examine the diﬀerences between the mean values
of the local Hurst exponents with maximum D(h) for all sleep stages, one-way
analysis of variance (ANOVA) and post-hoc analyses were performed. A pairedsample t test was used to compare the mean values of the original data and the
surrogate data for each sleep stage. The signiﬁcance level was 0.05.

3

Results

Multifractal spectra and singularity spectra were computed using the WTMM for
the four sleep stages, REM sleep, and surrogate data. Ensemble averaged multifractal spectra, τ (q), for the four sleep stages, REM sleep and surrogate data were
computed, and each singularity spectrum D(h) was computed through a Legendre transform from the ensemble-averaged τ (q). Figure 1 shows the ensembleaveraged multifractal spectra for the awake stage and REM sleep with surrogate
data. The spectra for the awake stage and its surrogate data are shown in the
ﬁrst panel of Fig. 1(a), and the spectra for REM sleep and its surrogate data
are shown in the second panel of Fig. 1(b). The two shapes of τ (q) for the awake
stage and its surrogate data, and for REM sleep and its surrogate data were
diﬀerent (p < 0.0001) in the range q > 3.
Likewise, Figure. 2 shows the ensemble-averaged multifractal spectra for the
other sleep stages and their surrogate data. The spectra for stage 1 sleep and
its surrogate data are shown in the ﬁrst panel of Fig. 2(a). The second panel

Multiscale Characteristics of Human Sleep EEG Time Series

167

of Fig. 2(b) shows the spectra for stage 2 sleep and its surrogate data, and the
third panel of Fig. 2(c) shows the spectra for SWS and its surrogate data. The
two shapes of τ (q) between stage 1 sleep and its surrogate data, between stage
2 sleep and its surrogate data, and between SWS and its surrogate data, were
all diﬀerent (p < 0.0001) for q (−10 < q < +10).

Fig. 1. Ensemble-averaged multifractal spectra for the awake stage and REM sleep
with surrogate data. (a) τ (q) for the awake stage and its surrogate data. (b) τ (q) for
REM sleep and its surrogate data.

Fig. 2. Ensemble-averaged multifractal spectra for the other sleep stages and their
surrogate data. (a) τ (q) for stage 1 sleep and its surrogate data. (b) τ (q) for stage 2
sleep and its surrogate data. (c) τ (q) for SWS and its surrogate data.

The singularity spectra for the four sleep stages, REM sleep and their surrogate data are shown in Fig. 3 and 4. The two shapes of D(h) between each
sleep stage and its surrogate data, and between REM sleep and its surrogate
data, were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent. The range of local Hurst exponents with D(h)
greater than 0.75 was 0.24 < h < 1 for each sleep stage and for REM sleep.
However, the local Hurst exponents in the range 0.48 < h < 0.7 corresponded
to a D(h) greater than 0.75 for the surrogate data.
Singularity spectra for the awake stage and its surrogate data are shown in the
ﬁrst panel of Fig. 3(a), and singularity spectra for REM sleep and its surrogate

168

I.-H. Song et al.

Fig. 3. (a) Sigularity spectra, D(h), for the awake stage and its surrogate data. (b) Singularity spectra for REM sleep and its surrogate data. The diﬀerent shape of D(h) for
the surrogate data reﬂects diﬀerent ﬂuatuations associated with long-range correlation.

Fig. 4. (a) Sigularity spectra, D(h), for stage 1 sleep and its surrogate data. (b) Singularity spectra for stage 2 sleep and its surrogate data. (c) Singularity spectra for
SWS and its surrogate data. The diﬀerent shape of D(h) for the surrogate data reﬂects
diﬀerent ﬂuatuations associated with long-range correlation.

data are shown in the second panel of Fig. 3(b). The mean values of local Hurst
exponents with maximum D(h) for the awake stage and for REM sleep were 0.39
and 0.46, respectively. The singularity spectra for stage 1 sleep and its surrogate
data are shown in the ﬁrst panel of Fig. 4(a). The second panel of Fig. 4(b)
shows the singularity spectra for stage 2 sleep and its surrogate data, and the
third panel of Fig. 4(c) shows the singularity spectra for SWS and its surrogate
data. The mean values of local Hurst exponents with maximum D(h) for stage
1, stage 2, and SWS were 0.39, 0.52 and 0.80, respectively. The results of the
ANOVA are shown in Table 1.

Multiscale Characteristics of Human Sleep EEG Time Series

169

Fig. 5. Comparison of singularity spectra for each sleep stage, REM sleep and the
surrogate data
Table 1. Comparison of local Hurst exponents with maximum D(h). The results are
presented as mean values ± SD. ANOVA was performed, followed by Sidak post hoc
analysis.
Sleep stages and REM sleep Mean ± Std
a) Awake
b) Stage 1
c) Stage 2
d) SWS
e) REM

4

Sidak post hoc analysis

0.39 ± 0.29 a < c (p < 0.01); a < d (p < 0.001)
0.39 ± 0.05 b < c (p < 0.01); b < d (p < 0.0001)
0.52 ± 0.08 c > a, b (p < 0.01); c < d (p < 0.001)
0.80 ± 0.11
d > a, b, c, e (p < 0.0001)
0.46 ± 0.12
e < d (p < 0.0001)

Discussion and Conclusion

Figure 1 and 2 show the shapes of τ (q) for the four sleep stages and REM sleep
were nonlinear, and Fig. 5 shows the shapes of D(h) for the four sleep stages
and REM sleep were broad, indicating that human sleep EEGs could not be
characterized as monofractal and are therefore multifractal.
The subsets characterized by local Hurst exponents in the range
0.24 < h < 0.63 were statistically dominant for the awake stage, stage 1 sleep,
and REM sleep. We found that the dynamics of human sleep EEGs taken during
the awake stage, stage 1 sleep, and REM sleep exhibited anticorrelated behaviors, indicating that large values are more likely to be followed by small values
and vice versa. Statistically dominant subsets were characterized by local Hurst
exponents of 0.38 < h < 0.71 for stage 2 sleep. We found that the dynamics
of human sleep EEGs during stage 2 sleep exhibited anticorrelated, correlated,
and uncorrelated behaviors. For SWS, the subsets characterized by local Hurst
exponents in the range 0.66 < h < 1 were statistically dominant. We found that

170

I.-H. Song et al.

the dynamics of human sleep EEGs during SWS exhibited correlated behaviors.
Therefore, we suggest that physiological brain states according to sleep stages
aﬀect the phenomenon of multifractality in human sleep EEG dynamics.
ANOVA showed a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the mean value of the local Hurst
exponents with maximum D(h) (F (4, 145) = 35.17, p < 0.0001). Post-hoc analysis showed that the mean value of the local Hurst exponents with maximum D(h)
for SWS diﬀered signiﬁcantly (p < 0.0001) from that of all other sleep stages,
including REM sleep. However, there was no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the mean
values of the local Hurst exponents with maximum D(h) for the awake stage,
stage 1 sleep, and REM sleep. The mean value of the local Hurst exponents
with maximum D(h) for stage 2 sleep did not diﬀer from that for REM sleep;
however, it diﬀered signiﬁcantly (p < 0.01) from that for all other sleep stages.
These ﬁndings indicate that as the sleep stage changes from stage 1 to SWS, the
dynamics of human sleep EEGs change from anticorrelated dynamics to correlated dynamics. These ﬁndings are consistent with previous studies that show
the activity of the human brain may become low as SWS sleep occurs.
The results observed after the surrogate test showed signiﬁcant changes in the
shape of D(h) and in the values of the local Hurst exponents with maximum
D(h) for the four sleep stages and the REM sleep. The paired-sample t test
showed signiﬁcant diﬀerences between the awake stage and the surrogate data,
and between the REM sleep and the surrogate data, for the range q > 3. These
ﬁndings indicate that the scaling of the small ﬂuctuations and weak singularities
in human sleep EEGs during the awake stage and during REM sleep is similar
to that in a simple random walk. However, the scaling of the large ﬂuctuations
and strong singularities in human sleep EEGs during the awake stage and REM
sleep diﬀer signiﬁcantly from that in a simple random walk. The results of the
paired-sample t test showed signiﬁcant diﬀerences between stage 1 sleep and the
surrogate data, between stage 2 sleep and the surrogate data, and between SWS
and the surrogate data, for all q (−10 < q < +10). These ﬁndings indicate that
there are diﬀerent ﬂuctuations and diﬀerent characteristics for the singularities
between stage 1 sleep and the surrogate data, between stage 2 sleep and the
surrogate data, and between SWS and the surrogate data. Therefore, we suggest
that human sleep EEGs taken during the four sleep stages and REM sleep have
long-range correlations because the surrogate data preserve the distributions of
the original time series and remove long-range correlations.
In summary, we investigated the possibility that human sleep EEGs exhibit
higher complexity than 1/f scaling. Our ﬁndings show the existence of inhomogeneities and multifractalities in human sleep EEGs during the four sleep stages
and REM sleep. We found that human sleep EEGs taken during the awake
stage and during REM sleep exhibited anticorrelated behaviors and had longrange correlations, whereas SWS EEGs exhibited correlated behaviors and had
long-range correlations. We suggest that the complexity of human sleep EEGs
can better be described by a set of scales rather than a single dominant scale.
Acknowlegements. This study was supported by a Nano-bio technology development project, Ministry of Science & Technology, Republic of Korea (2005-01249).

Multiscale Characteristics of Human Sleep EEG Time Series

171

References
1. Acharya U, R., Faust, O., Kannathal, N., Chua, T., Laxminaryan, S.: Non-linear
analysis of EEG signals at various sleep stages. Comput. Meth. Prog. Bio. 80
(2005) 37–45
2. Fell, J., R¨
oschke, J., Beckmann, P.: Deterministic chaos and the ﬁrst positive Lyapunov expoent: a nonlinear analysis of the human electroencephalogram during
sleep. Boil. Cybernet. 69 (1993) 139–146
3. Fell, J., R¨
oschke, J., Mann, K., Sch¨
aﬀner, C.: Discrimination of sleep stages: a
comparison between spectral and nonlinear EEG measures. Electroencephalogr.
Clin. Neurophysio. 98 (1996) 401–410
4. Kobayashi, T., Misaki,K., Nakagawa, H., Madokoro, S., Ihara, H., Tsuda, K.,
Umezawa, Y., Murayama, j., Isaki, K.: Non-linear analysis of the sleep EEG. Psychiatry Clin. Neurosci. 53 (1999) 159–161
5. Thomasson, N., Hoeppner,T.J., Webber Jr, C.L., Zbilut, J.P.: Recurrence quantiﬁcation in epileptic EEGs. Phys. Lett. A. 279. (2001) 94–101
6. Song, I.H., Lee, D.S., Kim, Sun.I.: Recurrence quantiﬁcation analysis of sleep electroencephalogram in sleep apnea syndrome in humans. Neurosci. Lett. 366 (2004)
148–153
7. Watters, P.A.: Time-invariant long-range correlations in electroencephalogram dynamics. Int. J. Sys. Sci 31 (2000) 819–825
8. Linkenkaer-Hansen, K., Nikulin, V.V., Palva, S., Ilmoniemi, R.J., Palva, J.M.:
Long-range temporal correlations and scaling behavior in human brain oscillations.
J. Neurosci. 21 (2001) 1370–1377
9. Ivanov, P.Ch., Amaral, Lu´ıs A.N., Goldberger, A.L., Havlin, S., Rosenblum, M.G.,
Struzik, Z.R., Stanley, H.E.: Multifractality in human heartbeat dynamics. Nature.
399 (1999) 461–465
10. Ivanov, P.Ch., Amaral, Lu´ıs A.N., Goldberger, A.L., Havlin, S., Rosenblum, M.G.,
Stanley, H.E., Struzik, Z.R.: From 1/f noise to multifractal cascades in heartbeat
dynamics. Chaos, 11 (2001) 641–652
11. Muzy, J.F., Bacry, E., Arneodo, A.: The multifractal formalism revisited with
wavelet. Int. J. Bifurc. chaos. 4 (1994) 245–302
12. Mourtazaev, M.S., Kemp, B., Zwinderman, A.H., Kamphuisen, A.C.H.: Age and
gender aﬀect diﬀerent characteristics of slow waves in the sleep EEG. Sleep 18
(1995) 557–564

