An Error Control Scheme for Multicast Video
Streaming on the Last Hop Wireless LANs
Junghoon Lee1 , Mikyung Kang1 , Gyungleen Park1,
Hanil Kim2 , Choelmin Kim2 , and Seongbaeg Kim2
1

Dept. of Computer Science and Statistics,
2
Dept. of Computer Education,
Cheju National University, 690-756, Jeju Do, Republic of Korea
{jhlee, mkkang, glpark, hikim, cmkim, sbkim}@cheju.ac.kr

Abstract. This paper proposes and analyzes the performance of an
error control scheme for multicast video streaming over IEEE 802.11
WLAN. The proposed scheme makes all packets include the ﬁeld indicating the number of packets of the message to which they belong,
the receiver nodes report errors in a best-eﬀort manner through contention period, and ﬁnally access point retransmits the requested packets
through the overallocated slot that is unavoidably brought by QoS guarantee. Simulation results show that the proposed scheme can not only
eﬃciently utilize the network bandwidth by reusing the wasted bandwidth for error control but also reduce the deadline miss ratio by 23 %
compared with ﬁxed length-based error control scheme without aﬀecting
other streams.

1

Introduction

The great success of IEEE 802.11 technology for WLANs (Wireless Local Area
Networks) is creating new opportunities for the deployment of advanced multimedia services such as video conferencing, video multicast, and so on[1]. Audio/video streaming will be a critical part of the wireless communication, as
multicast streaming oﬀers an eﬃcient paradigm for transmitting video from a
sender to a group of receivers using mobile devices such as PDA, telematics, and
so on, with lower network and end-system costs. Unlike the general data traﬃc,
video traﬃc is delay-sensitive and somewhat tolerant to packet loss through the
use of error concealment technique at the video decoder. However, the use of
WLANs for the transport of video accompanies some problems resulted from
the strict delay constraints of the video traﬃc and the inherent unpredictability
of the wireless link[2].
The streaming service on WLAN requires a certain type of QoS (Quality of
Service) guarantee and run-time error control to provide an acceptable video
quality. QoS guarantee means a reservation of resources that can meet the delay
This research was supported by the MIC, Korea, under the ITRC support program
supervised by the IITA.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part IV, LNCS 3994, pp. 962–969, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

An Error Control Scheme for Multicast Video Streaming

963

constraint of video stream[3]. The guarantee mechanism inevitably depends on
the underlying MAC (Medium Access Control) layer and IEEE 802.11 WLAN
standard consists of a basic DCF (Distributed Coordination Function) and an
optional PCF (Point Coordination Function)[4]. Due to packet collisions intrinsic to CSMA/CA (Carrier Sense Multiple Access with Collision Avoidance),
DCF is not appropriate for video streaming. The QoS guarantee cannot be provided without developing a deterministic access schedule on top of collision-free
PCF[5]. However, DCF cannot be totally excluded from WLAN operation because the standard demands that the DCF should be at least long enough to
transmit one maximum data unit, to prevent starvation of stations that are not
allowed to send during the PCF.
Meanwhile, lost packets constitute one of the main causes of video quality
degradation, while the wireless channel error is characterized as bursty and location dependent[6]. Due to the delay constraints, the number of retransmission
that can be used is limited and usually small. In case of multiple clients, each
client will have diﬀerent channel conditions, processing capabilities, and only
limited feedback channel capabilities. The error control scheme for multicast
video is not aiming at recovering all lost packets but recovering as many packets
as possible. Most importantly, the error control procedure should not aﬀect the
other guaranteed traﬃcs in WLAN.
The real-time guarantee inevitably generates overallocation during PCF as
the time constraints of message stream are usually described with the maximum
value of message size. Retransmission via this overbooked bandwidth does not
interfere the transmission of other guaranteed messages. In the other hand, if we
let error report containing retransmission request be delivered via the DCF period in a best-eﬀort manner, the entire error control procedure can be carried out
without any inﬂuence to other real-time messages. Finally, though the variable
message size makes it hard to decide when to report the error list, the receivers
can determine the completion of message transmission by counting Beacon frame
AP (Access Point) generates periodically in WLAN. Based on the requirements
described previously, this paper will propose and analyze the performance of an
error control scheme for multicast video stream on IEEE 802.11 WLAN. We
focus on the video streaming scenario in the last mile network, namely, between
AP and the mobile devices.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: After reviewing some related
works in Section 2, Section 3 describes the background of this paper including
network, error, and message models. Section 4 proposes an error control scheme
and Section 5 shows the result of performance measurement. Finally, Section 6
summarizes and concludes this paper.

2

Related Works

Error control in wireless network has been intensively studied for both unicast
and multicast. Most of the approaches use ARQ (Automatic Retransmission
reQuest), FEC (Forward Error Correction), or a combination of both[7]. Pure

964

J. Lee et al.

ARQ-based schemes are less appropriate for the multicast case due to ACK
explosions and the requirement to retransmit diﬀerent packets to the respective
users. For signiﬁcant packet loss rates, each user will require frequent packet
replacement, and diﬀerent receivers are most likely to require diﬀerent packets.
To respond to requests by multiple users, we may have to resend a signiﬁcant
fraction of the original data even for small loss rates. For a packet network
with dynamic bandwidth, a diﬀerent class of the source coding technique called
progressive coding is better suited. However, this method has the problem in
deciding optimal coding parameter on wireless channel.
As a hybrid ARQ mechanism, Majumdar et al. have proposed a method that
combines the reliability and ﬁxed delay advantage of forward error control coding with bandwidth-conserving channel-adaptive properties of ARQ protocol[2].
Masala has also proposed a multicast scheme that aims at globally optimizing
the parameters involved in a real-time video transmission, ranging from video
encoding and packetization to the 802.11 MAC interface parameters[3]. These
schemes are mainly built on top of DCF, so they didn’t consider the eﬀect of
QoS reservation.
Lu et al. have proposed a timestamp-based content-aware adaptive retry
mechanism where MAC dynamically determines whether to send or discard a
packet by its retransmission deadline, which is assigned to each packet according
to its temporal relationship and error propagation characteristics with respect to
other video packets within the same group of pictures[7]. However, their scheme
is too complex to be exploited in the WLAN standard, as it crosses the protocol
layer boundaries.

3
3.1

Background
Network Model

We consider a wireless-cum-wired network scenario as shown in Fig. 1[8]. A ﬁxed
node is connected with an AP through a wired link which is overprovisioned so
that no packets are dropped at its end. This model enables us to concentrate on
the behavior of inside WLAN part as it assumes ideal environment of no packet
loss or jitter for outside WLAN part. Each cell is assumed to consist of an AP
and multiple MSs (Mobile Stations), while each ﬂow is either uplink (from MS

MS
MS
Video Server

Wired link

AP
MS
MS

802.11b WLAN

Fig. 1. Network model

An Error Control Scheme for Multicast Video Streaming
Superframe
PCF
Beacon

Start CFP

Superframe

DCF

1
0
0
1
H1
0
1
0
1

965

1
0
0H2
1
0
1
0
1

PCF

1
0
0
1
0
1

0Hn
.... 1
End CFP

DCF

NRT
Start CFP

Fig. 2. Time axis of wireless LAN

to AP) or downlink (from AP to MS). Most ﬂows are downlink, and the stream
ﬂow arrives periodically from the remote server outside the cell via reliable wired
link. The multicast on WLAN prevents the automatic ACK transmission from
the receiver.
The IEEE 802.11 was developed as a MAC standard for WLAN[4]. The standard divides the time axis into the series of superframes, and each of them consists of CFP (Contention Free Period) and CP (Contention Period), as shown
in Fig. 2. In CFP, AP polls each stream once a polling round, providing a predictable access to each delay sensitive streams. For simplicity, this paper assumes that the polling round coincides with a superframe, but this assumption
can be easily generalized. Appropriate time amount is allocated to each multicast stream, and the length of time interval is calculated according to the QoS
requirement. The multicast stream is also an instance of message stream that
ﬂows from AP to WLAN. On the contrary, during CP any station can send
non-real-time message after contending the shared medium via CSMA/CA.
3.2

Error Model

WLANs may experience location-dependent channel errors, now that some MSs
can correctly communicate with the AP, while at the same time others may
suﬀer packet drops due to errors on the channel. Therefore, given N MSs, there
are also N independent error models. An 802.11 radio channel is modeled as a
Gilbert channel[8], where two states, good and bad, linked with a Marcov chain,
represent the state of channel during an 802.11 slot time. A MAC protocol data
unit is received correctly if the channel is in state good for the whole duration of
transmission, otherwise, it is received in error. We denote the transition probability from state good to state bad by p and the probability from state bad to
state good by q. The pair of p and q representing a range of channel conditions,
has been obtained by using the trace-based channel estimation. After all, the
average error probability, denoted by , and the average length of a burst of
p
and 1q , respectively.
errors are derived as p+q
3.3

Message Model

The video stream traﬃc occupies the network as a form of streaming-speciﬁc
packets. For example, H.264 standard decouples the coding aspect from the bit

966

J. Lee et al.

stream adaptation needed to transmit over a particular channel such as WLAN.
Such multimedia traﬃc is typically isochronous (or synchronous), consisting of
message streams that are generated by their sources on a continuing basis and
delivered to their respective destinations also on a continuing basis[9]. The QoS
requirement is submitted to AP and the most important traﬃc characteristics
of each stream are its period and message size. If we assume that there are n
multicast video streams in a cell, namely, S1 , S2 , ..., and Sn , each stream can be
modeled as follows: A message arrives at the beginning of its period and it must
be transmitted by the end of period. The deadline is soft in that some delayed
packets are permissible and transmission jitter is absorbed by a playback buﬀer
in the video player. The period of Si , is denoted as Pi , and the maximum length
of a message as Ci .

4
4.1

Error Control Scheme
Bandwidth Allocation

By allocation, we mean the procedure of determining capacity vector, {Hi }, for
the given superframe time, F , and message stream set described as {Si (Pi , Ci )}.
Fig. 2 also illustrates that the slot size is not ﬁxed, namely, Hi = Hj for diﬀerent
i and j. At this ﬁgure, a message of size up to Ci is generated and buﬀered at
regular intervals of Pi , and then transmitted by Hi every time the node is polled.
This subsection brieﬂy describes the allocation scheme of Lee’s work[5].
Let δ denote the total overhead of a superframe including polling latency, IFS,
exchange of beacon frame, and the like, while Dmax the maximum length of a
non-real-time data packet. In addition, Pmin denotes the smallest element of set
{Pi }. Then the requirement for the superframe time, F , can be summarized as
in Ineq. (1). Within this range, the scheme can select F and slightly modify Pi ’s
such that they are harmonic[9].
Hi + δ + 2 · Dmax ≤ F ≤ Pmin

(1)

In addition, the least bound of Hi that can meet the time constraint of Si is
calculated as in Eq. (2).
Hi =
Hi =

(

Ci
−1)

Pi
F
Ci
Pi
F

if (Pi −

Pi
F

· F ) ≤ Dmax

Otherwise

(2)

The allocation vector calculated by Eq. (2) is a feasible schedule if the vector
meets Ineq. (1). Finally, we can determine the length of CFP (TCF P ) and that
of CP (TCP ) as follows:
TCF P =

Hi + δ,

TCP = F − TCF P ≥ Dmax

(3)

This scheme is based on the analysis of the worst case available time. Since such
an allocation usually considers the upper bound of message size, especially in
multimedia applications, unused bandwidth degrades the network throughput.
For detailed description of bandwidth allocation, refer to [5].

An Error Control Scheme for Multicast Video Streaming

4.2

967

Error Report

A message is divided into packets of size Hi , hence, for a message to be correctly
assembled at a receiver, the receiver should receive all packets successfully. If
a packet experiences an error during transmission, additional explicit messages
should be sent to request the retransmission of that packet. Per-packet response
to the receiver increases overhead, but if the receiver reports the list of damaged
packets after it estimates the end of delivery of one message, this waste can
be eliminated. It is desirable to send error report via the contention period
in order not to interfere the transmission of other stream. If the size of every
message is ﬁxed and known in advance, the receiver can easily decide the end
of one message transmission. However, the size varies message by message in
multimedia streams. Hence, we make all packets include a ﬁeld specifying the
number of packets of the message to which they belong so that the receiver can
decide when to report error packet list as long as it receives at least one packet.

P1

CP

P2

CP

P3

CP

set counter as 3

Pu

CP
error report

Fig. 3. An example of error reporting

To construct the error report message, the receiver initializes the error packet
list when it receives a packet arrives. If the sequence number of this packet is not
1 but k, the receiver appends the numbers of 1 through (k − 1) to the list. From
then, the receiver appends each number of the erroneously received packets. As
the receiver also hears Beacon and a stream sends a packet per a polling round,
it knows the end of transmission even if the last message is omitted. Fig. 3 shows
the example, where a message is transmitted with u packets and each of them
has an information that speciﬁes u as well as its sequence number and message
identiﬁer. At ﬁrst, a packet numbered as 3 (not 1) arrives. Then the receiver
initializes and adds 1 and 2 to error list as well as sets counter to 3. The counter
increases each time the receiver hears Beacon frame. When the counter reaches
u, receiver sends error report back to the sender via contention period.
4.3

Retransmission

AP receives error report containing error packet list from the receivers of multicast via CP each time it completes a message transmission until it begins a new
transmission. AP builds a retry list sorted by the frequency of appearance in the
set of error reports. A new error list arrival reorders the list. Then AP resends
the packet according to the order in the retry list when it meets an extra slot
for the corresponding video stream. The retransmission scheme can be extended
to consider the priority of packet given by the coding scheme performed at the
upper layer.

968

5

J. Lee et al.

Performance Analysis

This section begins with the description of analytic model for the recovered error
for the proposed scheme. The average extra bandwidth for a message, Ri , can
be calculated as shown in Eq. (4).
C¯i
Hi
−
) · Pi
(4)
Ri = (
F
Pi
Then the average number of extra access time, w, can be approximated as
Ri /Hi . If there are w extra frames for a message composed of k frames, the probability of successful transmission of a message, T (k, w), is calculated recursively.
Namely,
m
k Ci

T (k, w) =

· i (1 − )k−i · T (i, w − i), T (0, w) = 1, T (k, 0) = (1 − )k (5)

i=0

where m is the smaller of k and w while denotes the frame error rate.
Now we will show the performance measurement results obtained via simulation using ns-2[10]. To begin with, we assume that there are 10 MSs in a cell,
3-5 video streams exist simultaneously. Each video stream has the same traﬃc
requirement for simplicity such as bit rate, error characteristic, video packet size,
and the number of receivers. Fig. 4 and Fig. 5 plots the average deadline meet
ratio observed at each receiver according to BER (Bit Error Rate) and peakaverage ratio. In these ﬁgures, the number of messages not packets is counted.
The curve denoted as ﬁxed length is for the case where the receiver only knows
the maximum length of message. Fig. 4 exhibits that the proposed scheme can
reduce the deadline miss ratio by 23 % compared with ﬁxed length scheme and
by 48 % compared to no error control case, respectively, when BER is around
10−6 . In Fig. 5, when the peak-average ratio of the message is 1 (all message
sizes are equal), both proposed and ﬁxed length schemes show same performance as expected. However, the proposed scheme improves the deadline meet
ratio due to the eﬃcient error report mechanism when the ratio increases over
1.0. Other results are omitted due to space limitation. After all, the simulation
results demonstrate that overbooked bandwidth can be eﬃciently used for error
recovery of multicast video stream.
1

1
"Proposed"
"FixedLength"
"NoControl"
"Analysis"

0.9

0.8

Deadline Miss Ratio

Deadline Miss Ratio

0.8

"Proposed"
"FixedLength"
"NoControl"

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.1
0

0
-8

-7.5

-7

-6.5
Log (BER)

-6

-5.5

Fig. 4. DMR vs. BER

-5

1

1.2

1.4
1.6
Peak-Average Ratio

1.8

2

Fig. 5. DMR vs. Peak-average ratio

An Error Control Scheme for Multicast Video Streaming

6

969

Conclusion

In this paper, we have proposed and analyzed the performance of an error control
scheme for multicast video streaming over IEEE 802.11 WLAN. The proposed
error control scheme makes the receiver node report errors in a best-eﬀort manner via CP, and also makes AP retransmit the requested packets through the
overallocated slot that is unavoidably brought by QoS guarantee in CFP. Therefore, this scheme is able to eliminate the interference to the guaranteed stream
transmission, while the message size contained in each frame enables the timely
report of error list as long as a packet of message arrives at the receiver. A continuous trace of each video stream channel shows that the proposed scheme can
not only eﬃciently utilize the network bandwidth, but also reduce the deadline
miss ratio by 23 % compared with ﬁxed length scheme and by 48 % compared
with no error control case, respectively, for the given simulation parameters. As a
future work, we are planning to develop a video streaming on dual wireless links
focusing on the guarantee scheme and transmission schedule that can eﬃciently
cope with network errors based on the temporarily redundant channel.

References
1. Mao, S., Lin, S., Wang, Y., Panwar, S. S., Li, Y.: Multipath video transport over
wireless ad hoc networks. IEEE Wireless Communications (2005)
2. Majumdar, A., Sachs, D., Kozintsev, I., Ramchandran, K.: Multicast and unicast
real-time video streaming over wireless LANs. IEEE Trans. Circuit and Systems
for Video Technology, 12 (2002) 524-534
3. Masala, E., Chiasserini, C., Meo, M., De Martin, J.: Real-time transmission of
H.264 video over 802.11-based wireless ad hoc networks. Proceedings of Workshop
on DSP in Mobile and Vehicular Systems (2003)
4. IEEE 802.11-1999: Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control
(MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Speciﬁcations (1999) also available at
http://standards.ieee.org/getieee802
5. Lee, J., Kang, M., Jin, Y., Kim, H., Kim, J.: An eﬃcient bandwidth management
scheme for a hard real-time fuzzy control system based on the wireless LAN. Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Vol. 3642. Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg
New York (2005) 644-659
6. Shah, S., Chen, K., Nahrstedt, K.: Dynamic Bandwidth Management for Singlehop Ad Hoc Wireless Networks. ACM/Kluwer Mobile Networks and Applications
(MONET) Journal. 10 (2005) 199-217
7. Lu, A., Chen, T., Steenkiste, P.: Video Streaming over 802.11 WLAN with Contextaware Adaptive Retry. IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and Expo
(2005)
8. Bottigliengo, M., Casetti, C., Chiaserini, C., Meo, M.: Short term fairness for TCP
ﬂows in 802.11b WLANs. Proc. IEEE INFOCOM (2004)
9. Carley, T., Ba, M., Barua, R., Stewart, D.: Contention-free periodic message scheduler medium access control in wireless sensor/actuator networks. IEEE Real-Time
Systems Symposium (2003)
10. Fall, K., Varadhan, K.: Ns notes and documentation. Technical Report, VINT
project, UC-Berkeley and LBNL (1997)

