Three-Dimensional Virtual Anatomic Fit Study for an
Implantable Pediatric Ventricular Assist Device
Arielle Drummond1, Timothy Bachman2, and James Antaki1
1

Department of Biomedical Engineering,
Carnegie Mellon University,
700 Technology Drive, Pittsburgh PA 15219
{adrummon, antaki}@andrew.cmu.edu
2
Department of Bioengineering, University of Pittsburgh,
749 Benedum Hall, Pittsburgh, PA 15213
tbachman@engr.pitt.edu

Abstract. An innovative pediatric ventricular assist device (PVAD) is being
developed to treat young patients (2.5kg-15kg) with severe heart failure that
otherwise have very few options due to their small size. To optimize the design
of the PVAD for the target patient population, three-dimensional anatomical
compatibility studies must be conducted. The aim of this project was to evaluate
the utility of three dimensional reconstructions to obviate fit studies in human
subjects. Serial CT scans of the thorax of one child were obtained as part of
routine treatment. The images were enhanced by adjusting the contrast of the
images and segmented semi-automatically prior to 3-D reconstruction. The
results were visualized as surface renderings of the rib cage and heart. This data
was then amended with solid models of the implantable hardware, including the
PVAD and cannulae. Manipulation of the relative orientation of the components
revealed surgical challenges that may be anticipated and motivated design
modifications to improve the anatomic compatibility. Unique challenges
associated with these data sets include the availability of pediatric CT images
and difficulty of segmentation due to the small scale of the anatomic features as
compared to the resolution of the images.

1 Introduction
The limited options to treat ventricular failure in children with congenital heart
disease has motivated the development of a highly reliable and biocompatible
ventricular assist device (VAD) for chronic support (up to six months) for children
2.5kg to 15kg. An innovative pediatric VAD (PVAD) is being developed by a
consortium from the University of Pittsburgh, Carnegie Mellon University, World
Heart Corporation (Oakland, CA) and LaunchPoint Technologies (Goleta, CA) based
on a miniature axial flow pump with magnetic levitation. Design requirements to
assure biocompatibility include minimization of blood trauma and anatomic
compatibility of the implanted components, including the pump, cannulae sets, and
drive line (See Figure 1).
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part IV, LNCS 3994, pp. 855 – 861, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

856

A. Drummond, T. Bachman, and J. Antaki

Fig. 1. Pediatric patient with an implanted pediatric ventricular assist device

Various decisions must be made concerning the placement of the VAD in addition
to the decision on cannula length, diameter and angle of insertion. Advanced
computer simulations are being conducted to assure compatibility with the blood;
however the typical method for determining anatomic fit is usually through physical
experiments on cadavers or living subjects.1 While cadaver studies allow direct
anatomical dimensions to be taken; there are several disadvantages of such an
approach. The major disadvantages include the limited availability of subjects and the
inability to rapidly modify the implanted hardware. Additional complications due to
tissue fixation, lung deflation and myocardial compression prevent accurate
representation of the anatomy of living subjects.1 Intra-operative studies addresses
some of these limitations but are extremely constrained in time, subject availability,
and extent of manipulations that are permissible.
The purpose of this project therefore is to employ a geometric computer model to
facilitate both the design and the surgical strategy to provide the optimal fit for as
wide a range of patient sizes and diagnosis as possible. The anatomic data for young
patients is rather sparse in the literature. Therefore an additional goal of this study is
to develop a database of thoracic and abdominal measurements, similar to that
developed by Mussivand et al.2 Additional advantages of 3D reconstruction include
the ability to obtain anatomical measurements from live subjects, minimal
invasiveness, and the ability to generate a CAD solid model manipulated for fit and
cannulae design. However, there are also few challenges to using this method, which
are addressed herein.

Three-Dimensional Virtual Anatomic Fit Study for an Implantable PVAD

857

2 Methods
2.1 Acquisition of Image Data
Retrospective images were acquired from a patient (male, 8 years of age) who
underwent a high resolution gated CT scan of the chest with a 64 detector GE CT
scanner (GE Medical Systems, Waukesha, WI) at the Children’s Hospital of
Pittsburgh. Image slice thickness was limited to 2mm due to radiation dosage
concerns in pediatric patients. The images were re-sliced by interpolation to 1.25mm
slick thickness using conventional post-processing software.
2.2 Three-Dimensional Reconstruction
The serial CT data were imported as DICOM files into visualization software, Mimics
(Materialise, Ann Arbor, MI), to generate a 3-D surface model of the chest cavity.
The raw images were manipulated by pre-processing enhancement, followed by
segmentation, reconstruction and visualization, illustrated in Figure 2.

a

b

c

d

Fig. 2. 3-D reconstruction process, (a) Images are imported into Mimics and contrast-enhanced
(b) Segmentation of bone by thresholding, (c) Reconstruction of ribs, heart, vessels, and
bronchi (d) Introduction of solid models of implanted hardware: pediatric VAD and cannulae

2.3 Enhancement
Images acquired from the CT scan were enhanced to differentiate anatomical
structures from each other. The DICOM files, a standard medical image file format,

858

A. Drummond, T. Bachman, and J. Antaki

produced by the CT scanner were imported to the data visualization software,
Mimics. A project file of the images was created to view the images in the software.
During automatic segmentation, the surrounding structures pixels are often classified
as soft tissue leading to undesirable result, therefore the images were enhanced by the
manual contrast adjustment tool, through a histogram equalization method, to
differentiate surrounding tissue from the heart muscle.
2.4 Segmentation
The cardiac boundaries were identified using a combination of methods, specifically:
a thresholding tool was used to select the desired organ for reconstruction. This tool
selects the organ based on the density of the pixels; generally the tool selects
surrounding tissues as well. Additional editing of the boundaries was made to a
number of image slices to eliminate outlier data and patch dropout regions.
2.5 Reconstruction
Following the segmentation of each image slice in the data series a 3D surface
rendering was generated. Boundaries were merged to produce a continuous surface
rendering. Finally, a surface contour tool was used to smooth extraneous structures
from the reconstructed geometry.
2.6 Visualization
The final step to 3D reconstruction is visualization of the 3D image. There are various
ways to manipulate the image. SolidWorks (Concord, MA), a CAD modeling
software was used to visualize reconstructed anatomy. The Mimics software has the
ability to export files in IGES and STL format to this modeling software. In
SolidWorks, various visualization tools can be used to adjust the section view,
rotation, lighting, and coloring.
2.7 Measurements
Anatomic measurements of pediatric patients are needed for the development of the
implantable VAD in order to develop a pump that has the ability to fit in patient
ranging from 2.5kg to 15kg. Anatomic landmarks relevant to the insertion and
positioning of the PVAD were recorded within Mimics. Landmarks included the
position of the ribcage in reference to left ventricular apex as well as the diameter of
the aorta. Using Mimics as well as SolidWorks, the described measurements were
taken to prove feasibility of the measurement tool.
Additional critical measurements can be recorded using Mimics to develop a
database of anthropometric data of pediatric patients in the target patient population,
specifically:1, 2
1.
2.

Volume ratio of the device with respect to vital organs: liver, heart, and lung.
Distances between organs:
a. Distance between the left ventricular apex and diaphragm.
b. Distance between the aortic arch and ventricular apex.
c. Distance between left ventricular apex and chest wall.
d. Diameter of descending aorta.

Three-Dimensional Virtual Anatomic Fit Study for an Implantable PVAD

859

3 Results
A three-dimensional model of and 8 year old male subject was constructed as shown
in Figure 3. The modeled anatomy includes the chest wall (ribs, sternum and
vertebrae), heart and descending aorta. Measurements of the cardiac anatomy yielded
an estimated inner diameter of the aorta of 13.7mm. This will affect the choice of
cannula used for the outlet of the VAD. The distance between the left ventricular apex
to the chest was measured at 12.1mm. This affects the ability to access the heart by
the inflow cannula.

Inflow Cannula

PediaFlow Pump
Outflow Cannula

Fig. 3. 3-D reconstruction of the chest, heart, PVAD (gold) and cannula (white). Measurement
of internal diameter of the descending aorta was 13.7mm.

Various locations were considered for locating the implanted pump. The x, y, z
locations as well as the “patch”, “yaw”, & “roll” angles were varied to achieve
quantitatively and compromise between:
•
•
•
•

Length of cannula, hence pressure drop (minimize)
Compression/ abrasion of organs (minimize)
Target sites conveniently assessable.
Kinks or sharp bends that might obstruct or disturb flow.

Figure 3 depicts one preferred configuration with the pump positioned below the
diaphragmatic margin. Due to the relative size of the current VAD with respect to
chest cavity, the preferred location of the VAD will be in the abdomen with cannula
penetrating the diaphragm. Hence both abdominal and thoracic surgery will be
required.

860

A. Drummond, T. Bachman, and J. Antaki

Cannulae constructed in SolidWorks were modified to connect the VAD from the
LV apex to the ascending aorta. The outflow cannula was designed to be 70 mm in
length and diameter of 5mm.

Fig. 4. Anterior measurement of distance between the left ventricular apex and the ribcage

4 Discussion
Using Mimics and SolidWorks, it was possible to generate a three-dimensional solid
assembly to simulate the implantation of a Pediatric VAD in the chest of a young
patient. These models can be easily measured and manipulated for the anatomical fit
studies as described by Warriner et al.5 The models have proven helpful for
development of the cannulae, specifically to determine the proper insertion angle into
the LV chamber and anastomosis location at the aorta.6 These results will enable
future computational fluid dynamic simulations to optimize the geometry according to
flow requirements.
However there are still several challenges to pursuit of 3D reconstruction of
pediatric patients. Foremost, the spatial resolution required for accurate representation
necessitates CT data series with very fine slice thickness, ideally less than 1mm.
Additional cardiac gating is needed to obtain temporal accuracy and avoid geometric
distortion throughout the cardiac cycle. Obtaining these data however would require
radiation dosage exceeding levels that would typically be indicated.
Secondly, segmentation, a perennial problem, is exacerbated in these very small
patients due to limited resolution and contrast. Manually editing is almost always
necessary, and it is unlikely that the process will be fully automated.

Three-Dimensional Virtual Anatomic Fit Study for an Implantable PVAD

861

Future work will entail collection of additional data as well as utilization of the
current data set for subsequent simulation studies. Future image collection will
include a prospective study of brain dead patients which will enable slice thickness
down to 0.63mm. By collecting data over a statistical sampling of patients, it will be
possible to develop an anthropometric database of thoracic and abdominal anatomy
that may be made available for a variety of purposes. Validation of accuracy for the
generation of 3D models by a human expert will be accomplished by obtaining
cadaveric measurements shortly after the brain dead patients are withdrawn from
ventilator support. The cadaveric measurements will be compared to the
measurements acquired from the 3D models. Ongoing research with the current data
set includes flow visualization experiments based on transparent replicas of the fluid
geometry. Combined with computational fluid dynamics simulation, these studies will
collectively be used to optimize the biocompatibility efficacy, and overall safety of
the pediatric ventricular assist device.

References
1. Zhang, B.M., T. Tatsumi, E. Taenaka, Y. Uyama, C. Takano, H. Takamiya, M., ThreeDimensional Thoracic Modeling for an Anatomical Compatibility Study of Implantable
Total Artificial Heart. Artificial Heart, 1999. 23(3): p. 229-234.
2 Mussivand, T., et al., Critical anatomic dimensions for intrathoracic circulatory assist
devices. Artif Organs, 1992. 16(3): p. 281-5.
3. Fujimoto, L.K., et al., Human thoracic anatomy based on computed tomography for
development of a totally implantable left ventricular assist system. Artif Organs, 1984. 8(4):
p. 436-44.
4. Fujimoto, L.K., et al., Anatomical considerations in the design of a long-term implantable
human left ventricle assist system. Artif Organs, 1985. 9(4): p. 361-74.
5. Warriner, R.K., et al., Virtual anatomical three-dimensional fit trial for intra-thoracically
implanted medical devices. Asaio J, 2004. 50(4): p. 354-9.
6. May-Newman, K.D., Hillen, B.K, Sironda, C. S, Dembitsky, W., Effect of LVAD outflow
conduit insertion angle on flow through the native aorta. Journal of Medical Engineering &
Technology, 2004. 28(3): p. 105-109.

