An Approximate Algorithm for the Minimal Cost
Gateways Location, Capacity and Flow Assignment
in Two-Level Hierarchical Wide Area Networks
Przemyslaw Ryba and Andrzej Kasprzak
Wroclaw University of Technology, Chair of Systems and Computer Networks
Wybrzeze Wyspianskiego 27, 50-370 Wroclaw, Poland
{przemyslaw.ryba, andrzej.kasprzak}@pwr.wroc.pl

Abstract. In the paper the problem of designing two-level hierarchical structure
of wide area network is considered. The goal is to select gateways location,
channel capacities and flow routes in order to minimize total cost of leasing
capacities of channels of 2nd level network, subject to delay constraint. An
approximate algorithm is proposed. Some results following from computational
experiment are reported.

1 Introduction
Process of designing large wide area networks (WAN) containing hundreds of hosts
and communication links is very difficult and demanding task. Conventional design
procedures are suitable for small and moderate-sized networks. Unfortunately, when
applied directly to large networks, they become very costly (from computational point
of view) and sometimes infeasible. Problems with computational cost of huge wide
area network design can be alleviated by building WAN as a hierarchical network [1].
In hierarchical networks, nodes are clustered using some nearness measures like
geographical distance, traffic and reliability requirements. Communication networks
of each cluster (1st level network) can be designed separately. In each cluster special
communication nodes (gateways) are chosen. Function of gateways is to handle the
traffic between nodes from the cluster they are located and nodes from other clusters.
Gateways, with channels connecting them, form 2nd level network. Two-level
networks can be grouped in 3rd level clusters and so on. Traffic between nodes in the
same cluster uses paths contained in local communication network. Traffic between
nodes in different 1st level networks is first sent to local gateway, then via 2nd level
network of gateways is sent to gateway located in destination 1st level network to
finally reach the destination node. Example of structure of hierarchical wide area
network is presented in the Fig. 1.
In this paper problem of designing the two-level hierarchical wide area network
connecting existing networks in order to minimize total cost of leasing capacities of
channels of 2nd level network subject to delay constraint is considered. The Gateways
Location, Capacity and Flow Assignment problem with cost criterion is formulated as
follows:
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part I, LNCS 3991, pp. 100 – 107, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

An Approximate Algorithm for the Minimal Cost Gateways Location, CFA

101

given:

topology of 1st level networks and 2nd level network, sets of potential
gateways locations, set of potential 2nd level network channels capacities
and costs (i.e. discrete cost-capacity function), traffic requirements,
minimize: leasing cost of channel capacities of 2nd level network,
over:
gateways locations, 2nd level network channel capacities,
multicommodity flow (i.e. routing),
subject to: multicommodity flow constraints, channel capacity constraints, delay
constraint in hierarchical network.
Discrete cost-capacity function considered here is most important from the practical
point of view for the reason that channels capacities can be chosen from the sequence
defined by ITU-T (International Telecommunication Union – Telecommunication
Standardization Section) recommendations. Such formulated problem is NP-complete
as more general than the CFA problem with discrete cost-capacity function which is
NP-complete [2, 3].

2nd level cluster

1st level nodes
2nd level nodes
- gateways
1st level channels
2nd level channels

1st level clusters

Fig. 1. Structure of the two-level hierarchical wide area network

Some algorithms for hierarchical network design can be found in [4, 5]. However,
problem presented in [5] is limited to tree topology of hierarchical network.
Algorithm for router location minimizing total cost of the network without constraints
on quality indices and without assigning capacities to channels is presented in the
paper [4]. Also, in algorithm for interconnecting two WANs presented in [6]
assigning capacities to channels connecting the networks is not considered.
The problems considered in the literature presented above, do not take into account
that the gateways location problem and capacity assignment problem should be
considered simultaneously. Solving this problem is important from practical point of
view due to the fact that it results in significant reduction of network exploitation cost.
This paper joins problem of locating gateways in hierarchical wide area network with
capacity assignment problem to minimize network cost and to satisfy quality
demands. Thus, problem considered in the paper is more general and more important
from practical point of view than problems, which can be found in the literature.

102

P. Ryba and A. Kasprzak

2 Problem Formulation
Consider a hierarchical WAN consisting of K networks on 1st level of hierarchy, each
denoted by S1l , l = 1,..., K , and one 2nd level network denoted by S2. Let N 1l be set
of nodes and L1l set of channels of 1st level network S1l . Let n be the total number of
nodes in hierarchical network. Set of nodes N2 consists of selected gateways and L2 is
set of channels connecting them. Let m be number of channels in 2nd level of
hierarchical WAN and let p be total number of channels. For each channel in 2nd
level network capacity must be chosen from the set of available capacities
C i = {c1i , ... , c si (i ) }. Capacities in each set C i are ordered in the following way:

c1i > c 2i > ... > c si (i ) . Let d ki be the cost of leasing capacity c ki for channel i.
Let x ki be the discrete variable for choosing one of available capacities for channel
i defined as follows: x ki = 1 , if the capacity c ki is assigned to channel i and x ki = 0
otherwise. Since exactly one capacity from the set C i must be chosen for channel i,
the following condition must be satisfied:
s(i )

∑ x ki = 1 for

i = 1, ..., m

(1)

k =1

Let denote by H l set of gateways to place in network S1l and by Jg set of possible
locations for gateway g. Let y ag be the discrete variable for choosing one of available
locations for gateway g defined as follows: y ag = 1, if gateway g is located in node a
and y ag = 0, otherwise. Each gateway must be placed in exactly one node, thus it is
required to satisfy following condition:

∑ y ag = 1,

g ∈ H l , l = 1,..., K

a∈J g

(2)

The cost d ki of leasing capacity c ki for channel i is defined as follows:
d ki =

∑ ∑ y ag

1

a∈J g1 b∈J g 2

ik
y bg 2 d ab

(3)

ik
where g1 and g2 are gateways adjacent to channel i, d ab
is cost of leasing capacity c ki
of channel i between nodes a and b, which are possible locations of gateways g1 and
g2 respectively.
Let X r' be the permutation of values of variables x ki , i = 1,..., m for which the
condition (1) is satisfied, and let Xr be the set of variables which are equal to 1 in
X r' . Similarly, let Yr' be the permutation of values of all variables y ag for which
condition (2) is satisfied and let Yr be the set of variables which are equal to 1 in
Yr' . The pair of sets ( X r , Yr ) is called a selection. Each selection ( X r , Yr )

An Approximate Algorithm for the Minimal Cost Gateways Location, CFA

103

determines locations of gateways and channels capacities in the 2nd level of
hierarchical WAN. Let ℜ be the family of all selections.
Let d ( X r , Yr ) be the total cost of leasing capacities of channels of 2nd level
network of hierarchical network, in which values of channels capacities are given by
X r and locations of gateways are given by Yr .
d ( X r , Yr ) =

∑x d
i
k

x ik ∈X r

i
k

(4)

Then, the considered gateway location, flow and capacity assignment problem in
hierarchical wide area network can be formulated as follows:
min d ( X r , Yr )

(5)

( X r , Yr ) ∈ ℜ

(6)

T ( X r , Yr ) ≤ T max

(7)

( X r ,Yr )

subject to:

where T ( X r , Yr ) denotes total average delay per packet in hierarchical network,
given by Kleinrock’s formula [7] and T max its maximal acceptable value of that delay.

3 Algorithm
In this chapter we present an approximate algorithm for gateways location and
capacity assignment minimizing cost of leasing capacities of channels of 2nd level
network, subject to constraint on maximal admissible value of average delay per
packet in hierarchical network.
Initially set Y1 is calculated in such a way that total cost of leasing channels of
2nd level network is minimal. All channel capacities are set to maximal available
values. If for such constructed network constraint (7) is violated, then one of
gateways location is changed. Choice of gateway to change location is performed
using exchange operation. After each change of gateway location new value of
average delay per packet is compared with one already found. Location with higher
value of average delay per packet is abandoned and removed from set of potential
gateway locations. Operation is repeated until constraint (7) is satisfied. After that,
capacities of selected channels is decreased to obtain network with lower leasing
cost satisfying constraint (7) and value d ( X r , Yr ) is compared with already found
best solution d *. If current cost of leasing channels capacities is lower, then d * is
updated. When constraint (7) is violated then operation of changing gateway
locations is repeated. Algorithm terminates, when, for each gateway, the set of
possible locations is empty or there is no channel which capacity can be decreased.
K
m
Algorithm finds heuristic solution after no more than ⎛⎜ ∑l =1 ∑ g∈H l J g ⎞⎟⎛⎜ ∑i =1 s (i ) ⎞⎟
⎝
⎠⎝
⎠
iterations.

104

P. Ryba and A. Kasprzak

3.1 Exchange Operations

The purpose of exchange operation is to find a pair of variables x ki or variables y ag
for substitution to generate a network with the least possible value of criterion (4). To
take into account the constraint (7) we propose the auxiliary local criterion:
d ( X r , Yr ) + α ⋅ T ( X r , Yr ) , where coefficient α converts value of average packets
delay to cost expressed in [€€ /month]. Choice of variables x ki and x ij to exchange is
made using modified criterion Δikj usually used in classical CFA problem, formulated
as follow [2, 8]:

Δikj

⎧α ⎛ f
f i ⎞⎟
i
⎪⎪ ⎜
−
+ d ki − d ij
= ⎨ γ ⎜ c ki − f i c ij − f i ⎟
⎝
⎠
⎪
⎩⎪∞ otherwise

(

)

for f i < c i

(8)

g
.
Choice of variables y ag and y bg to exchange may be evaluated by criterion δ ab

g
δ ab

⎧α
⎪⎪
= ⎨γ
⎪
⎩⎪∞

⎞
⎛ ~
ij
ij
⎜ fi ~ − fi ⎟ +
− d ea
d eb
i
i
⎟
⎜c − f
c
f
−
l
g
i ⎠ i: g , g 2 ∈V
i
i∈L1 ⎝

∑(

∑

) for

~
fi ≤ ci

(9)

otherwise

The second term of the sum estimates change of the leasing cost of channels adjacent
~
to the gateway g of which location changes. The flow f is constructed as follows: the
flow from all nodes in network S1l sent through gateway located in node a is moved
from the routes leading to node a to the routes leading to node b . If the conditions
~
~
f i ≤ c i are satisfied for every channel in the network S1l the flow f is feasible.
To exchange should be chosen the pair of variables for which the value of criterion
g
δ ab
or Δikj is minimal.

3.2 Calculation Scheme of the Approximate Algorithm

Let J gr be the set of possible locations for gateway g in r-th iteration of the
approximate algorithm. Let J 1g = J g for each gateway g. Let Y1 = ∅ , d * = ∞ , r = 1 .

Perform
x1i = 1
d ( X 1 , Y1 ) = min d ( X 1 , Yr )

Step

1.

for

i = 1, ..., m .

Compute

Y1,

Yr

Step 2. Compute flow f using FD method [9], next compute T ( X r , Yr ) .

If T ( X r , Yr ) > T max then go to step 3. Otherwise go to step 4.

such

that

An Approximate Algorithm for the Minimal Cost Gateways Location, CFA

105

Step 3. If J gr = ∅ for every g then go to step 6. Otherwise select the pair of variables

y ag ∈ Yr and y bg : b ∈ J gr for which with the value of expression (9) is the greatest.

( { }) { }

Perform Yr +1 = Yr − y ag ∪ y bg . Next compute T ( X r , Yr +1 ) .

If T ( X r , Yr +1 ) > T ( X r , Yr ) then perform J gr = J gr − {b} and go to step 2.

Otherwise perform J gr +1 = J gr − {a} and r = r + 1. Next go to step 2.
Step 4. If d ( X r , Yr ) < d ∗ then perform d ∗ = d ( X r , Yr ) and ( X * , Y* ) = ( X r , Yr ) .
Step 5. If k = s (i ) for every x ki ∈ X r then go to step 6. Otherwise select variable

x ki ∈ X r , such that k ≤ s (i ) − 1 , with greatest value of expression (8) and perform

(

{ }) { }

X r +1 = X r − x ki ∪ x ki +1

and r = r + 1 . Go to step 2.

Step 6. Algorithm terminates. If d * = ∞ then problem has no solution. Otherwise the
selection ( X * ,Y* ) associated with current value d * is the near-optimal solution
satisfying the constraints (6) and (7).

4 Computational Results
The presented approximate algorithm was implemented in C++ code. Extensive
numerical experiments have been performed with this algorithm for many different
hierarchical network topologies and for many possible gateways number and
locations. The experiments were conducted with two main purposes in mind: first, to
examine the impact of various parameters on solutions to find properties of the
problem (5-7) important from practical point of view and second: to test the
computational efficiency of proposed algorithm.
The dependence of the cost of leasing channel capacities d on maximal acceptable
value of average delay per packet in hierarchical network T max has been examined. In
the Fig. 2 the typical dependence of d on the value T max is presented for different

d

45000
h = 0,1

35000

h = 0,2

25000

h = 0,3

15000
5000
0,026

T max
0,030

0,034

0,038

Fig. 2. The dependence of criterion function d on value Tmax

106

P. Ryba and A. Kasprzak

values of the average packet rates from external sources transmitted between each pair
of nodes of the hierarchical network, which are denoted by h. It can be observed that
the dependence of leasing cost of channel capacities d on T max is decreasing function
and that there exists such value Tˆ max , that the problem (5-7) has the same solution
for each T max greater or equal to Tˆ max .
Let G be the number of gateways, which must be allocated in some 1st level
network of the hierarchical WAN. It has been examinated how number of gateways G
influences on the criterion function d. In the Fig. 3 typical dependence of leasing cost
of channel capacities d on number of gateways G is presented.
40000

d

Tmax = 0,028
30000

Tmax = 0,029
Tmax = 0,032

20000

10000

G
1

2

3

4

5

6

Fig. 3. The dependence of criterion function d on number of gateways G

Fig. 3 indicates that higher quality demands (lower values of constraint T max)
imply allocating higher number of gateways. For small number of gateways feasible
solution cannot be found.. It can be also observed, that there exists such value of G for
which the function d(G) is minimal. Number of gateways G, for which value d is
minimal, is higher for tighter constraint on T max.
60%

Θ [%]
40%
20%

χ [%]

0%
[0-5]

(5-10]

(10-15]

(15-20]

(20-30]

(30-60] (60-100]

>100

Fig. 4. The distance between obtained solutions and optimal solutions

Let dapp be the solution obtained by approximate algorithm and let dopt be the
optimal value of the problem (5−7). Let χ be the distance between approximate
and optimal solutions: χ = d app − d opt

d opt ⋅ 100% . The value χ shows how

An Approximate Algorithm for the Minimal Cost Gateways Location, CFA

107

the results obtained using the approximate algorithm are worse than the optimal
solution.
Let

Θ[a, b] =

number of solutions for which χ ∈ [a, b]
⋅100%
number of all solutions

denotes the fraction of solutions obtained from the approximate algorithm which are
greater than optimal solutions between a % and b%. The dependence Θ on divisions
[0% - 5%], (5% - 10%), [10% - 15%), etc. is shown in the Fig. 4.

5 Conclusions
The approximate algorithm for solving the gateway location and network topology
assignment problem in hierarchical network to minimize total cost of leasing channel
capacities is presented. The considered problem is more general than the similar
problems presented in the literature. It follows from computational experiments
(Fig. 4) that more than 50% approximate solutions differ from optimal solutions at
most 5%. Moreover, we noticed that the cost of the hierarchical WAN depends on the
number of gateways. The presented approximate algorithm may be used whenever an
optimal solution is not necessary and for large hierarchical networks.
This work was supported by a research project of The Polish State Committee for
Scientific Research in 2005-2007.

References
1. Kleinrock L., Kamoun F.: Optimal Clustering Structures for Hierarchical Topological
Network Design of Large Computer Networks. Networks 10 (1980) 221-248
2. Kasprzak, A.: Topological Design of the Wide Area Networks. Wroclaw University of
Technology Press, Wroclaw (2001)
3. Markowski M., Kasprzak A.: An exact algorithm for host allocation, capacity and flow
assignment problem in WAN. WITASI 2002, Kluwer Academic Publ. (2002) 73-82
4. Liu Z., Gu Y., Medhi D.: On Optimal Location of Switches/Routers and Interconnection.
Technical Report, University of Missouri-Kansas City (1998)
5. Saha D. and Mukherjee A.: On the multidensity gateway location problem for multilevel
high speed network. Computer Communications 20 (1997) 576-585
6. Liang S.C., Yee J.R.: Locating Internet Gateways to Minimize Nonlinear Congestion Costs.
IEEE Transactions On Communications 42, (1994), 2740-50
7. Fratta, L., Gerla, M., Kleinrock, L.: The Flow Deviation Method: an Approach to Storeand-Forward Communication Network Design. Networks 3 (1973) 97-133
8. Markowski M., Kasprzak A.: The Web Replica Allocation and Topology Assignment
Problem in Wide Area Networks: Algorithms and Computational Results. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science 3483 (2005) 772-781
9. Walkowiak K.: A New Method of Primary Routes Selection for Local Restoration,
Lectures Notes in Computer Science 3042 (2004) 1024-1035

