Route Optimization in NEMO Environment
with Limited Preﬁx Delegation Mechanism
Jungwook Song, Sunyoung Han , and Kiyong Park
College of Information and Communication
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Konkuk University
1 Hwayang, Gwangjin, Seoul 143-701, Korea
{swoogi, syhan, kypark}@cclab.konkuk.ac.kr

Abstract. The 4G network will must be ALL-IP network and IPv6 is
destiny. Already IPv6 has extended as Mobile IPv6 for host mobility and
Mobile IPv6 is extending for whole network mobility. There are many
possible mobile networks, and they would be nested as they change locations. Most serious problem in a nested mobile network is the complexity
of routing path of packets, and the complexity grows as the level of nesting increases. In this paper, we propose ‘limited preﬁx delegation mechanism’, which delivers packets through the optimized path even though
mobile networks are nested. We show the eﬀectiveness of our mechanism
by solved problems.

1

Introduction

As information and communication technologies are rapidly progressed, there are
increasing sorts of informative devices that can access wireless network while they
move their locations. There are many researches on wireless and mobile network.
When IPv6 is widely deployed, almost electronic devices will be connected to
the Internet. These two key cores the ‘Mobile Access Network’ and ‘IPv6’, are
necessary for the ‘Ubiquitous Computing’.
If IPv6 prevails and mobile access network is established, it would be a
common case that tens or hundreds of mobile nodes change their locations
at the same time. Because existing Mobile IPv6 has been designed to support
host mobility only[1], they do not smoothly support the current movement of
many hosts, i.e. movement of network that consisted with two or more hosts
or PANs(Personal Area Networks) or network in moving vehicles. To support
movement of whole network, IETF nemo WG is making study an extension of
Mobile IPv6 and already has the protocol standard that called the ‘NEMO Basic
Support Protocol’[2].
This research was supported by the MIC(Ministry of Information and Communication), Korea, under the ITRC(Information Technology Research Center) support
program supervised by the IITA(Institute of Information Technology Assessment).
Corresponding author.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part I, LNCS 3991, pp. 936–939, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

Route Optimization in NEMO Environment

937

In general situation, however, any networks and hosts can change their location simultaneously, and they can be nested. Direct application of [2] to the
nested mobile network causes complicated routing path from MNN(Mobile Network Node) to the CN(Correspondent Node). Therefore, it is important to optimize the routing path of packets in nested mobile network. The route optimization problem is a part of main issues that working progress[3, 4]. The problems
of nested mobile network are described in [3].
In this paper, we try to solve the route optimization problem in nested mobile
network using the ‘limited preﬁx delegation mechanism’. Instead of by opening
bi-directional tunnel between the MR(Mobile Router) and its HA(Home Agent),
the packet routing path can be optimized by opening tunnel directly from the
MR to the CN. And the CN sends packet with the routing header. Our mechanism opens one or two tunnels, and we can optimize the routing path in both
directions.

2

Limited Preﬁx Delegation Mechanism

The ‘limited preﬁx delegation mechanism’ we propose in this paper diﬀers from
[2]. Our mechanism sends all packets directly through tunnel between the MR
and the CN. The packet from MNN to the CN is tunneled on MR, and the CN
sends the packet to the MNN with the routing header. To achieve this, we add
new RA(Router Advertisement) option on MR. And we also modiﬁed Binding
Update process and tunneling process on MR.
2.1

Addition of New Router Advertisement Option

To all MRs in nested mobile network open just one tunnel to the CN directly,
delegating access router’s preﬁx is required. The MR that attached access router
directly, it is simple that delegating preﬁx. But, the nested MRs cannot recognize
access router’s preﬁx. So, Upper link MR must notify access router’s preﬁx to
nested MRs. To achieve this, we add new RA option called ‘delegated preﬁx
option’ as shown in Fig. 1.
If the MR does not receive this option, MR delegating preﬁx from uplink
router’s(access router’s) original RA message, and install new care-of address on

Type

Length

Prefix Length
Valid Lifetime
Preferred Lifetime
Reserved2

Delegated Prefix

Fig. 1. Delegated Preﬁx Option

L A R D Reserved1

938

J. Song, S. Han, and K. Park

its egress interface. And the MR adds delegated preﬁx option to its RA message.
The new RA message consists of preﬁx option that has preﬁx of home link, and
delegated preﬁx option that has delegated preﬁx from access router.
If the MR receives delegated preﬁx option, MR delegating preﬁx from this
delegated preﬁx option, and then same as before case. So, all nested MR can
have care-of address that is subnet address of visited access router on top of
nested mobile network. And, all other MNNs silently ignore delegated preﬁx
option from RA message, thus there are no changes on MNNs.
2.2

Modiﬁcation of Tunneling on Mobile Router

In our mechanism, the MR sends packet through direct tunnel to the CN instead
of sending through the tunnel to its HA. If outgoing packets have source address
with mobile network preﬁx(from home link preﬁx), the MR should open direct
tunnel to the CN. In this scheme, the MRs do not care about the types of MNN,
whether it is plain host or not: it applies the same scheme on all packets passing
by that have source address with mobile network preﬁx.
2.3

Modiﬁcation of Binding Update Process

When a MR detects its movement, it performs Binding Update process. In the
same way, the MR sends Binding Update to the CN when a MNN sends packets
to a CN or a CN sends packets to a MNN. The CN that received Binding Update
can send packets to the MR directly. The MR maintains the ‘CN table’ to keep
the information if Binding Update was sent to the CN or not. The MR must
initialize this table when it moves to another location.
2.4

Processing Routing Header on Mobile Router

If the CN was enabled Mobile IPv6 and received Binding Update from the MR,
the CN sends packet to the MR’s care-of address with the routing header type
2, that has the MNN’s original address. When the MR receives this packet, it
examines that packet has the routing header, and if exists, the MR forwards
packet to the MNN that is original destination.

3

Solved Problems

There are many cases of routing problem in nested mobile network environment.
With our mechanism proposed in this paper, we can solve many problems. The
mobile network conﬁgurations and its problems are described in [3], so you must
refer ‘Appendix B’ of that document parallel with this section.
When apply our mechanism to the Case A, MR3 opens tunnel to CN directly,
so packets from LFN to CN are passing by optimized path. And there is no
mobility functions on CN, so CN sends packets to MR3 HA, and MR3 HA can
open tunnel to MR3 directly. We can achieve near-optimized path. When apply
our mechanism to the Case B, MR3 opens tunnel to CN directly, so packets

Route Optimization in NEMO Environment

939

from LFN to CN are passing by optimized path. And CN has mobility function; CN sends packets to MR3 directly with the routing header. Thus, we can
achieve optimized path in both directions. The Case C, after Mobile IPv6 route
optimization, the rest are same processes as Case A.
The Case D is similar to Case A. When apply our mechanism in this- case,
MR3 try to opening tunnel to CN directly, and MR5 HA receives and forwards it
via bi-directional tunnel between MR5 HA to MR5. When MR5 receives packet
from MR3, MR5 send Binding Update to MR3. So, MR3 sends packet directly
to MR5 with the routing header. The same process occurs on reverse direction.
Thus, we can achieve optimized path in both directions with only two tunnels.
The Case E is similar to Case B and The Case F is similar to Case C. After
Mobile IPv6 route optimization, the rest are same processes as Case D.
The Case G is similar to Case A. Same process occurs as Case D. And the
Case H, same process occurs as Case E. The Case I, as for Case C and Case
F, Mobile IPv6 Route Optimization cat not performed. But, MR3 and MR5
perform Route Optimization like Case D.
The Case J, no special function is necessary for optimization of their communication. The Case K is similar to Case H. Two nodes may initiate Mobile IPv6
route optimization. Same as Case J, no special function is necessary. The Case
L, Mobile IPv6 Route Optimization cannot be preformed. With our mechanism,
similar to Case D, MR3 and MR5 send Binding Update to each other. Thus, we
can achieve optimized path in both directions.

4

Concluding Remarks

In this paper, we proposed the ‘limited preﬁx delegation mechanism’ which optimizes the routing path in nested mobile network environment. From previous
section, almost problems in [3] could be solved by our proposed mechanism.
The ‘limited preﬁx delegation mechanism’ opens just one or two tunnels, and
it establishes direct path bypassing MRs’ HAs. To achieve the optimized path,
we add new ’delegated preﬁx option’ on the MR’s RA message, modify tunneling
target on the MR, modify Binding Update process on the MR. We just add or
modify small functions on the MR only. So, we can get much better results with
little changes.

References
1. D. Johnson, C. Perkins, J. Arkko: Mobility Support in IPv6: RFC3775, IETF, 2004
2. V. Devarapalli, R. Wakikawa, A. Retrescu, P. Thubert: Network Mobility (NEMO)
Basic Support Prototol: RFC3963, IETF, 2005
3. C. Ng, P. Thubert, M. Watari, F. Zhao: Network Mobility Route Optimization
Problem Statement: IETF nemo WG Draft, 2005
4. C. Ng, F. Zhao, M. Watari, P. Thubert: Network Mobility Route Optimization
Solution Space Analysis: IETF nemo WG Draft, 2005

