An Implementation of Real Time-Sentential KSSL
Recognition System Based on the Post Wearable PC
Jung-Hyun Kim, Yong-Wan Roh, and Kwang-Seok Hong
School of Information and Communication Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University,
300, Chunchun-dong, Jangan-gu, Suwon, KyungKi-do, 440-746, Korea
{kjh0328, elec1004}@skku.edu, kshong@skku.ac.kr
http://hci.skku.ac.kr

Abstract. Korean Standard Sign Language (hereinafter, “KSSL”) is a complex
visual-spatial language that is used by the deaf community in the South Korea.
Wire communications net and desktop PC-based a traditional study on sign language linguistics with small vocabulary (words) have several restrictions (e.g.
limitation of the motion, conditionality in the space) and general problems (e.g.
inaccuracy in measuring, necessity of complex computation algorithm) according to using of vision technologies with image capture and video processing
system as input module of sign language signals. Consequently, in this paper
we propose and implement ubiquitous-oriented wearable PC-based sentential
KSSL recognizer that improve efficiency of KSSL input module according to
wireless sensor network, recognizes and represents continuous KSSL with
flexibility in real time, and analyze and notify definite intention of user more efficiently through correct measurement of KSSL gestures using wireless haptic
devices. The experimental result shows an average recognition rate of 93.7%
for continuous 44 KSSL sentences.

1 Introduction
Human beings usually interact with each other either by natural language channel
such as speech and writing, or by body language channel such as hand gesture, head
gesture, facial expression, lip motion and so on. Thus, the study on the perception
model of body language, the information fusion of body language channel and natural
language channel is very important for the improvement of computer’s human language understanding and the increase of human-computer interaction applicability. As
a part of natural language understanding, sign language recognition is very important:
on one hand, it is one of the main methods of human-computer interaction in VR
(Virtual Reality); on the other hand, it is an auxiliary tool for a deaf-mute to communicate with ordinary people through computer [1]. The related studies about recognition and representation of sign language are progressing actively by numerous researchers in the many countries. Especially, "standard sign language translation system" developed jointly by the professors of the KIST (The Korea Institute of Science
and Technology) and the Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd. in the South Korea is sign
language translation system that recognizes and represents small vocabulary-based
sign language. And, the Hitachi Ltd. in the Japan announced "Japanese - sign language translation technology" that a sign language animation is created automatically
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part IV, LNCS 3994, pp. 886 – 893, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

An Implementation of Real Time-Sentential KSSL Recognition System

887

if input the Japanese sentence [2]. Also, Wu jiangqin et al. implemented 26 wordlevel sign language recognition system using neural network and HMM hybrid
method in the China [1]. However, usually, wire communications net and desktop PCbased these traditional studies on sign language recognition and representation with
small vocabulary(words and morpheme) have not only several restrictions such as
limitation of representation, conditionality on space, complexity between transmission
mediums and limitation of motion but also some problems such as variation of recognition performance, uncertainty of measurement and necessity of complex computation algorithms according to using of image capture system or video processing system with changing of background’s colors and illumination condition as acquisition of
sign language signals.
Accordingly, we propose and implement real time-sentential KSSL recognizer using blue-tooth module, wireless haptic devices and fuzzy logic based on the post
wearable PC platform(embedded i.MX21 board) for embedded-ubiquitous computing
that guarantee mobility of portable terminal. The advantages of our approach are as
follows: 1) it improves efficiency of KSSL input module according to wireless sensor
network and contributes to user's the convenience. That is, it recognizes and represents continuous sign language of users with flexibility in real time, and 2) because
the ability of communication and representation of sentential sign language recognizer are very superior more than word (morpheme)-level sign language recognizer, it
is possible more effective and free interchange of ideas and information between the
hearing-impaired and hearing person.
The composition of this paper are 1) regulation of components the KSSL in
Section 2, 2) KSSL input module using wireless haptic devices, and training and
recognition models using RDBMS in Section 3, 3) fuzzy max-min module for the
KSSL recognition in Section 4, and 4) experiments and results in Section 5. Finally,
this study is summarized in Section 6 together with an outline of challenges and
future directions.

2 The Regulation of the KSSL
The phonemic systems of oral languages are primarily sequential: that is, the majority
of phonemes are produced in a sequence one after another, although many languages
also have non-sequential aspects such as tone. As a consequence, traditional phonemic writing systems are also sequential, with at best diacritics for non-sequential
aspects such as stress and tone [3]. In this paper, to implement sentential KSSL recognition system in real time, this study selected 25 basic KSSL gestures according to
the "Korean Standard Sign Language Tutor(hereinafter, “KSSLT”)[4]" and a point of
reference of 'sign language morpheme'. And 23 hand gestures necessities of KSSL
gestures are classified as hand shapes, pitch and roll degree. Consequently, we constructed 44 sentential KSSL recognition models according to associability and presentation of hand gestures and basic KSSL gestures. The example of basic KSSL gestures and hand gestures for “the date (numbers-day-month)” in sentential KSSL recognition models are shown in Table 1.

888

J.-H. Kim, Y.-W. Roh, and K.-S. Hong
Table 1. The example of sign language about “the date (finger numbers-day-month)”

Object Language
Description of the KSSL
Finger-Number 1~30(or 31) : Signing of numbers
Represent signing of numbers that correspond to “1(one)” with a
Month
left hand (indication of month), and draw crescent with thumb,
index finger of a right hand
Spread out thumb, index fingers of a both hands and rises on in
Day
front of chest.

Necessary
Hand Gestures

3 KSSL Input Module and Recognition Models Using RDBMS
Virtual reality sensors provide a powerful technology for human-computer interaction
(HCI) and have been applied to many fields such as medical and on-line game service. Their particularly useful feature is that the user may use the technology easily
and routinely by using ready-to-wear articles of clothing e.g. headsets or data gloves.
Also the VR sensors could be simply plug into a computer system and allow the user
uninhibited control and interaction with both the local computer system [5].
To implement real time-sentential KSSL recognizer, we used 5DT company's wireless 2 data gloves to acquire structural information of hands and fastrak® for motion
tracking which are one of popular input devices in the haptic application field, and
blue-tooth module for wireless sensor network as KSSL input module. The data glove
is basic gesture recognition equipment that can capture the degree of finger stooping
using fiber-optic flex sensor and acquires data through this. The structural motion
information of each finger in data glove are captured by f1=thumb, f2=index,
f3=middle, f4=ring and f5=little in regular sequence. Each flexure value has a decimal
range of 0 to 255, with a low value indicating an inflexed finger, and a high value
indicating a flexed finger. Also, the fastrak® is electromagnetic motion tracking system, a 3D digitizer and a quad receiver motion tracker. And it provides dynamic, realtime measurements of six degrees of freedom; position (X, Y, and Z Cartesian coordinates) and orientation (azimuth, elevation, and roll) [6] [7].
The captured continuous KSSL data of various users is transmitted to embedded
i.MX21 board and database server for training and recognition models through bluetooth module. The KSSL data that transmitted to server is used to as a training data
for KSSL recognition models by analytic function of RDBMS SQL. And, KSSL data
that transmitted to embedded i.MX21 board is used as input variables of
fuzzy recognition module for significant KSSL recognition. The architecture and
composition of KSSL input module is shown in Fig. 1.

An Implementation of Real Time-Sentential KSSL Recognition System

889

Fig. 1. The architecture and composition of KSSL input module

The RDBMS is the main stream database management system that maintains data
records and indices in tables and their relationships may be created and maintained
across and among the data and tables [8][9]. The RDBMS is used to classify and
segment KSSL data that are transmitted from KSSL input module to database server
by valid gesture record set and invalid record set (that is, invalid record set is status
transition record set) and to analyze valid record set efficiently. A rule to segment
valid gesture record set and invalid record-set is shown in Fig. 2.

Fig. 2. The segmentation rule and record set. If the difference between preceding average (preceding 3 and 1) and current row value is over 5, the current value is regarded as transition
KSSL record. Also, if one of KSSL data values of data gloves and motion tracker is over 5,
current KSSL data is also regarded as transition KSSL record. According to the logic in source
code, even though a record set is, based on the above process, decided as valid, the record set is
regarded as a status transition KSSL record set.

4 Fuzzy Max-Min Composition for KSSL Recognition
The fuzzy logic is a powerful problem-solving methodology with a myriad of applications in embedded control and information processing, and is a paradigm for an alternative design methodology which can be applied in developing both linear and nonlinear systems for embedded control and has been found to be very suitable for embedded control applications [6][10]. The Fuzzy Logic System (hereinafter, “FLS”)
will be demonstrated that the use of fuzzy systems makes a viable addition to the field

890

J.-H. Kim, Y.-W. Roh, and K.-S. Hong

of artificial intelligence, and perhaps more generally to formal mathematics as a
whole, and including fuzzy logic and fuzzy set theory, provide a rich and meaningful
addition to standard logic [10 ]. This FLS is consisted of the fuzzy set, fuzzy rule
base, fuzzy reasoning engine, fuzzification, and defuzzification. Fuzzy sets can be
modified to reflect this kind of linguistic refinement by applying hedges. Once a
hedge has been applied to a fuzzy set, the degrees of membership of the members of
the set are altered. Also, fuzzification is the process of decomposing a system input
and/or output into one or more fuzzy sets. Many types of curves can be used, but
triangular or trapezoidal shaped membership functions are the most common because
they are easier to represent in embedded- controllers [6]. The fuzzy max-min CRI for
fuzzy relations that is proposed in this paper is defined in Fig. 3.

Fig. 3. Fuzzy Max-Min CRI (Direct Method)

Fig. 4. The fuzzy membership functions. Fig. 4 describes the formula (1) pictorially (because
fuzzy input variables are very various, we represent membership functions partially: "YOU" in
KSSLT). If compare easily, sign language "YOU" in KSSLT consist of hand gesture that correspond to "paper" in “the game of paper, stone and scissors” and hand motion that correspond to
"point at a person with one’s finger". We prescribe gesture behavior such as the shape of one's
hand (fingers) and the direction of back of the hand by ‘Hand Gesture', and classified by three
types of “Bad_HAND, Normal_HAND and Best_HAND” according to accuracy in “(a) Hand
Gesture”. Also, we prescribe hand's position and gesture in spatial dimensions by “Sign Language Gesture”, and classified by three types of “Bad_YOU, Normal_YOU and Best_YOU”
according to accuracy in “(b) Sign Language Gesture” in spatial dimensions.

An Implementation of Real Time-Sentential KSSL Recognition System

891

The training and recognition model using the RDBMS is used as an independent
variables for comparison and reasoning with input variables(KSSL data) in fuzzy
logic (fuzzy max-min composition), and recognizes user's dynamic KSSL through
efficient and rational fuzzy reasoning process. Therefore, we decide to take the characteristics of KSSL input data as the average value over repeated experiment result
values, where the repetition number is controlled by several parameters. Input scale
factors transform the real inputs into normalized values, and output scale factors
transform the normalized outputs into real values. The proposed membership function
of fuzzy set is defined as in the following formula (1) and the fuzzy membership functions are shown in Fig. 4.

1 (x − s)+1, p < x ≤ s ; Slopes - up ⎤⎥
⎥
⎥
(s− p)
⎥
⎥
μ =
1
, s < x ≤ t ; Horizontality ⎥⎥
tz
⎥
− 1 (x−t)+1, t < x ≤ q ; Slopes - down ⎥⎥
⎥
(q−t)
⎥
⎦
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣

(1)

5 Experiments and Results
Our experiment environment is consisted of blue-tooth module, wireless haptic devices and i.MX21 board based on embedded LINUX operating system for embeddedubiquitous computing. That is, data gloves transmits 14 kinds of hand’s structural
motion data (10 fingers gesture data, 4 pitch & roll data) and motion tracker transmits
12 kinds of hand’s spatial motion data with both hands to embedded i.MX21 board
via blue-tooth module. The proposed whole file size of sentential KSSL recognizer is
283 Kbytes (including images and composite sounds for visual and auditive representation) and it can process and calculate 200 samples per seconds on i.MX21 board.
Overall process of sentential KSSL recognizer consists of three major steps. In the
first step, while the user inputs prescribed the KSSL to i.MX21 board using 2 data
gloves, motion tracker and blue-tooth module, the KSSL input module captures user's
sign language data. And, in the second step, the KSSL recognizer changes characteristics of inputted KSSL data by parameters for fuzzy recognition module. In the last
step, it calculates and produces fuzzy value for user's dynamic KSSL through a fuzzy
reasoning and composition, and we decide to give a weight to each parameter. KSSL
recognizer decides user's dynamic KSSL according to degree of the produced fuzzy
value. The process (flow-chart) of automatic real time-sentential KSSL recognizer is
shown in Fig. 5.
The experimental set-up is as follows. The distance between KSSL input module
and embedded i.MX21 board for KSSL recognition processing is about radius 10M's
ellipse form. The reagents take KSSL motion moving 2 wireless data gloves and 2
receivers of the motion tracker to prescribed position. For every 20 reagents, we repeat this action 15 times. Experimental results, Fig. 6 shows an average recognition
rate of 93.7% with fuzzy recognition module for 44 KSSL recognition models. Also,
the user interface for visual representation using HMD (Head Mounted Display) of
the KSSL recognition is shown in Fig. 7.

892

J.-H. Kim, Y.-W. Roh, and K.-S. Hong

Fig. 5. The flow-chart of the fuzzy sign language recognition system

Fig. 6. The average recognition rate

Fig. 7. The GUI for visual representation

6 Conclusions
Wearable computing is an active topic of study, with areas of study including user
interface design, augmented reality, pattern recognition, using of wearable for specific
applications or disabilities. Depending on the application, the primary input to a wearable might be a chording keyboard, gesture, speech recognition or even just passive
sensors (context awareness). Output might be presented via speech, audio tones, a
head-mounted display or haptic output.
As preliminary study for recognition and representation of KSSL, our researchers
implemented hand gesture recognition system that recognize 19 hand gestures according to shape and stoop degree of hand. Accordingly, with this preliminary study in
this paper, we implemented real time-sentential KSSL recognition system that ana-

An Implementation of Real Time-Sentential KSSL Recognition System

893

lyzes user's intention between hearing-impaired and hearing person more efficiently
and recognizes and represents 44 continuous KSSL sentences with flexibility more
accurately based on the post wearable PC platform. Also, we clarify that this study is
fundamental study for implementation of multi modal recognition system to take the
place of traditional uni-modal recognition system in sign language recognition.
Furthermore, we would like to develop advanced multi-modal HCI technology
through integrating of sign language recognition system and other haptics such as
smell, taste, hearing and sight.

Acknowledgement
This research was supported by the MIC (Ministry of Information and Communication), Korea, under the ITRC (Information Technology Research Center) support
program supervised by the IITA (Institute of Information Technology Assessment)"
(IITA-2005- C1090-0501-0019).

References
1. Wu jiangqin et al.: A Simple Sign Language Recognition System Based on Data Glove.
ICSP98. IEEE International Conference Proceedings (1998) 1257-1260
2. H.-Y.Jang. et al.: A Study on Hand-Signal Recognition System in 3-Dimensional Space.
Journal of IEEK, Vol. 2004-41CI-3-11. IEEK (2004) 103-114
3. S.-G.Kim.: Standardization of Signed Korean. Journal of KSSE, Vol. 9. KSSE (1992)
4. S.-G.Kim.: Korean Standard Sign Language Tutor. 1st edn., Osung Publishing Company,
Seoul (2000)
5. Y SU et al.: Three-Dimensional Motion System (“Data-Gloves”): Application for Parkinson’s Disease and Essential Tremor. Virtual and Intelligent Measurement Systems. IEEE
International Conference Proceedings (2001) 28-33
6. J.-H.Kim. et al.: Hand Gesture Recognition System using Fuzzy Algorithm and RDBMS
for Post PC. FSKD2005. Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 3614. SpringerVerlag, Berlin Heidelberg New York (2005) 170-175
7. 5DT Data Glove 5 Manual and FASTRAK® Data Sheet.: http://www.5dt.com
8. Relational DataBase Management System.: http://www.auditmypc.com/acronym/
RDBMS.asp
9. Oracle 10g DW Guide.: http://www.oracle.com
10. C.H.Chen, Fuzzy Logic and Neural Network Handbook. 1st edn., McGraw-Hill, New
York (1992)

