A GIS Based Virtual Urban Simulation Environment
Jialiang Yao1, Hissam Tawfik2, and Terrence Fernando1
1

Future Workspaces Research Centre, University of Salford,
Salford, M5 4WT, UK
2
Information Management & Communication, Liverpool Hope University College,
Liverpool, L16 9JD, UK

Abstract. This paper presents the development of a virtual reality urban
planning tool based on GIS and Virtual Environments to facilitate scenario
generation and collaborative urban design. Our system provides an open
structure for users to support various visualisation and simulation modules, for
the prototyping of urban designs. An Urban Scene Generation module is used
within this urban planning system for generating the urban layout, on which the
various collaborative planning tasks are carried out. A 3D urban model is
generated from a GIS database by extracting features such as landscape, roads,
and buildings. The system allows the users to place CAD models within the
virtual environment. Various statistical data related to population, crime, and
employment are also visualised in this virtual environment. A VR based user
interface is provided to handle urban simulation data, query information and
discuss urban simulation scenarios.
Keywords: Urban Planning, Virtual Reality, GIS.

1 Introduction
Urban planning is a complex and multidisciplinary process requiring the consideration
of a number of economical, sociological, transportation and environmental issues. A
successful urban planning project requires the satisfactory combination of cost,
environmental and cultural requirements.
It is important at the early urban planning stage, to consider how a plan will affect
the urban area [1]. Hence an urban plan, which is simulated and evaluated thoroughly
at an early stage, would improve the urban regeneration project in terms of cost,
efficiency and productivity. Therefore urban planning is a multi-objective decision
making task which aims to plan the urban environment in terms of its physical, social,
legal, economical, visual and environmental elements, and could achieve many
benefits from systems that can help demonstrate and evaluate various aspects of urban
planning at an early stage to key stakeholders and the local community. The adoption
of a virtual prototyping design concept can bring decision makers and stakeholders
together to exchange ideas, quickly assess alternative and build consensus.
Traditional urban planning uses basic tools, such as 2D-maps and text based
documents, to deliver a satisfactory urban design solution to all the stakeholders.
More recently, databases, computer graphics, photogrammetry and geographic
information system (GIS) technology have been adopted to support the process of
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part III, LNCS 3993, pp. 60 – 68, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

A GIS Based Virtual Urban Simulation Environment

61

urban planning [2]. Such tools have proved to be effective for professionals
performing urban planning tasks. However, they still lack the capabilities for
satisfying the increasing need for collaborative urban planning to allow a wide range
of professionals involved in the process to exchange and discuss ideas and problems
by visualising and interacting with complex data. The aim of our Collaborative
Urban Planning Support System is to provide an intuitive and collaborative urban
planning environment to enhance participation of stakeholders in urban planning
through the use of innovative IT tools.

2 Related Work
Numerous information and communication technologies have been developed to aid
the urban planning process in recent years, in response to the need for supporting
urban planning through visualisation, urban simulation and public participation.
Chan et al. [3] presented an urban simulation system which combines VR, GIS and
database technology, to establish a 3D urban simulation environment (Los Angeles
Basin, USA). Bourdakis et al. [4] created a Bath model from 1992 using an industry
standard CAD package, AutoCAD, that covers several square kilometres of the
historic centre of Bath which is accurate to the sub-metre level. A considerable
amount of realism in terms of geometrical representation has been modelled using
geometry and texture mapping. City planners have used the model to test the visual
impact of a number of proposed developments for the city’s future. The Adelaide
Model [5] demonstrated that the 3D GIS could provide an effective way to model the
urban environment by extruding the third dimension from 2D maps. Although
realistic 3D urban visualisation and simulation make the presentation of ideas and
proposals at planning meetings more interesting and understandable for the public, the
passive presentation of impressive “realistic” rendering is not enough for scenario
simulation which is essential for collaborative urban planning and design [6]. Further
research is still needed on the implications of realistic 3D urban models used in
different stages of the negotiation and design process [7]. GIS is one of the commonly
used methods in urban planning [5, 8], but the current systems only provide a way to
visualise cities, and do not provide functions for manipulating the models, limiting
their use in the collaborative design process.
Some research work also attempted to engage public participation in the planning
process at every stage, such as the Woodberry Down Project [9]. It used VRML to
deliver urban plans to the public in a visual form, but the feedback collected from the
public was still in text form in bulletin boards, which may lose information [2] and
cause misunderstandings during the collaborative planning procedure [10].
Very little research has been carried out to develop software environments to
support urban planning using emerging technology such as virtual reality, 3D
interaction and simulation. Addressing these issues requires the presentation of large
and complex urban data types. U-Plan aims to facilitate more natural interaction with
these datasets in a VR environment and provides an open architecture to facilitate
scenario simulation and evaluation.

62

J. Yao, H. Tawfik, and T. Fernando

3 A Virtual Urban Planning Support Environment
3.1 Design Requirements
The aim of our VR Urban Planning Support System is to provide a virtual
urban planning environment on which urban planners and stakeholders are able to
visualise, manipulate and discuss urban planning issues in real time. This requires the
system to have an intuitive interface for multi-user interaction and have the ability to
quickly generate urban models and visualise various types of urban planning related
datasets such as population, crime, employment and transport. The main user
requirements for our system can be summarised as follows:
• Urban models and urban planning scenario generation: The system should have
the ability to quickly generate an accurate, detailed and realistic 3D layout of an
urban environment on which stakeholders can analyse urban planning issues.
• Effective User Interface: The system should have the ability to interact effectively
within virtual environments to perform urban planning analysis, such as
performing information query, object creation and removal in order to explore
various options.
• Collaborative capability: Multi-user interaction within the virtual environment is
needed to support the collaborative urban planning process.
• Supporting different visualisation platforms: The collaborative urban planning
environment is required to run on different visualisation platforms, such as a
standard workstation, workbench and Reality Room, in order to suit various
decision-making and design prototyping purposes.
3.2 System Architecture
The proposed system architecture has a software framework that supports distributed
interactive visualisation and simulation. The system utilises the Hydra distributed
architecture, a microkernel for collaborative visualisation of dynamic simulations. In
this environment, the servers are used for generating and managing the urban planning
scenarios on which the various collaborative planning tasks and simulation data
generation such as traffic network analysis can be carried out. A VR based user
interface is provided to handle urban simulation data, query information and urban
simulation scenarios. The user interface has been designed to run on a range of displays
such as Workbench, Reality Room and standard workstation display (Figure 1).
Hydra is a software framework for distributed, multi-user interactive visualisation
and simulation applications. It is designed around a lightweight core that assimilates
plugins into the framework at runtime and manages the node layers and shared
memory. An API layer enables application developers to interact with these data
structures through a system of proxies. These proxies enable Hydra to manage the
application requirements against the distribution of services across the network. No
specific functionality is defined within the core. Instead, functionality is defined at
runtime through the provision of user definable plugins, which play a variety of roles
from functional adapters to generic service providers.

A GIS Based Virtual Urban Simulation Environment

63

There are several visualisation clients for urban planning and simulation in the
system. The client in the client-server architecture, typically, is an application that
runs on a PC or workbench and relies on servers to perform some operations, as
shown in Figure 2.
A World Manager module [11] is used to manage the Scene graph, viewer for
scene graph visualisation and input layer for processing user inputs. The World
Manager gets user input from input devices such as a head tracker and Wand which is
a hand position tracker with programmable control buttons and passes corresponding
data to the Viewer and Task Manager for visual feedback and input processing.
The 3D Widgets Module is a set of libraries, which provide a consistent interface
from the desktop VR platform to a workbench. It is necessary to be able to interact
with the system on a standard desktop system consisting of a monitor, keyboard,
mouse and Spacemouse, to a workbench environment which consisting of headtracker and wand. The Widget also provides cross dimensional support allowing tasks
to be completed via 2D and 3D styles of interaction, along with gesture and voice
based interaction. To enhance the usability of the system, a combination of WIMP
techniques and 3D interaction techniques are supported by 3D Widgets.
This system architecture provides a consistent environment to support development
of a distributed visualisation system such that different urban planners can share the
same virtual urban scenario at different visualisation platforms and manipulate objects
in this virtual urban environment. Further more, the framework provides an open
architecture in which system functions can be defined at runtime through the
provision of user definable modules.

Reality Room

WorkBench

Visualisation

WorkStation

Head Tracker
Wand
SpaceMouse

platforms
Input
Layer

Collaborative Layer

Scenario
Management Server

GIS
Database

Workbench (V-Desk)
Reality Room
PC Workstation

CAD model
Database

Simulation
Server

Scenario
Database

Internet

Hydra:
Communicatiom

Fig. 1. The system architecture

Viewer

World Manager:
Scene Manager,
Interactive facilities, etc.

Application
program

Task Manager:
Events and callback

3D Widgets

Fig. 2. Client Architecture

4 GIS Based Urban Model Generation
The generation of large-scale 3D urban models, using existing 3D modelling tools,
such as AutoCAD and Realax, consumes a great deal of time and effort. In this
system, ArcGIS is used to manage GIS database, and an urban generation model was
developed using C++ and ArcObject to extract geometry and attribute features of the

64

J. Yao, H. Tawfik, and T. Fernando

landscape, roads, and buildings from ArcGIS database and generate 3D urban models
for urban planning in virtual environments.
The 3D landscape model is generated from GIS TIN (Triangular Irregular
Network) [12] Layer in which landscape geometry is defined using a group of 3D
triangles. Aerial photos are used as texture data to increase the visual realism of the
generated landscape.
The 3D Building model is generated according to the building’s footprint and
height information in the GIS. The building’s footprint data is a 2D polygon geometry
model [13]. The 3D building model is generated by extruding the polygon according
to its height. The building base height is calculated based on its position on the
landscape.
The 3D road model is generated using the road central line data from the GIS. A
triangle strip generated from the road central line and its width is used to describe the
3D road. The height calculation of road is for the road’s triangle strip model, and the
method to calculate the height of road is similar to that for buildings.
The 3D urban models use the same coordinate system as that used in GIS. In order
to visualise urban models in virtual environments and carry out urban planning, a
series of transforms are applied to urban models.
Urban Scene Graph

Background

Urban Models
A

Landscape

Buildings

Roads

…

…

Building
Models

Road segment
Models

Fig. 3. Urban Scene Graph Organisation

B

Fig. 4. (a) 3D Urban model and (b) urban
model on WorkBench

A tree-like structural organisation method is used to manage and manipulate 3D
objects in this system. The main objects include grids for sea-level ground reference,
background objects for the surrounding environment and urban models which consists
of the landscape, buildings and roads (Figure 3). The ID notations used for the 3D
objects within the urban models are identical to their GIS database ID’s, making
information query of the GIS system straightforward. Figure 4 shows the urban model
of Chapel Street in Salford, UK.
The urban models generated from the GIS dataset can be modified through a user
interface by adding extra models or removing existing models and saving them as
different urban planning scenarios.

A GIS Based Virtual Urban Simulation Environment

65

5 The User Interface
Based on collaborative urban planning process and a real urban regeneration project,
we summarise the requirements for interaction within a virtual environment as
follows:
1. Intuitive navigation is vital for collaborative urban planning. Users need the ability
to explore any part in the virtual urban scene. This would help users to easily
evaluate how a new developing plan affects the surrounding environment, such as
how a new tall building affects the skyline of its surroundings and how a newly
built supermarket affects the living or working of nearby residents.
2. The ability to create new objects, move and remove existing objects within a
virtual urban environment to explore various design options.
3. The ability to mark or highlight an area within the urban environment to focus
analysis and discussion around a particular area.
4. The ability to support the user to query information about objects within the urban
environment, such as function of a building, highlight particular type of buildings
in the area etc.
5.1 Implementation of Interaction Within Virtual Environments
Urban Planning scenarios are collaboratively presented on display platforms, where
users are provided with series of functions to navigate, manipulate objects in virtual
urban environment through interactive user interface.
The implementation of interaction facilities within the virtual environments is
based on the world manager, the task manager and the widget manager which provide
a consistent interface from the desktop VR to a immersive workbench. The main part
of interaction includes system control, navigation and object selection and
manipulation.
• System Control
In order to enable users to carry out necessary operations, the system uses a 3D
Widgets Set [14] to provide a 3D form of WIMP-style user interface for the virtual
environment. The 3D widgets set provide a series of tools, such as windows, menus
(such as cascading menu and cube menu), buttons, text box and scroll list, and are
used in virtual environments to facilitate operations such as information query,
objects creation, object removal, and information display.
System interaction is conducted through the wand and SpaceMouse input devices.
The wand, a tracked hand held device, is used for navigation, object selection, object
manipulation and to execute system controls. The SpaceMouse is used for exocentric
control of the 3D scene and perform same task as wand. In practice, the wand is more
convenient in the Immersive Virtual Environment, while SpaceMouse is the tool used
in the standard workstation.
The use of 3D widgets makes it possible to provide the user with a consistent
interface between different platforms, and offers flexibility for users to perform
information query, distance measuring, and buildings removal and creation.

66

J. Yao, H. Tawfik, and T. Fernando

• Navigation
An important aspect in developing the urban planning environment is to provide
users with flexible navigational options to explore the urban environment and review
urban development plan easily. Two navigational modes are used in this system,
namely a world navigation mode and a target-based navigation mode. The World
navigation mode, which uses birds-eye view method, is the default navigation mode
that is used to allow users to navigate around the entire virtual space. Once an object
is selected, the navigation mode will be changed to target based navigation mode
(Figure 5), where the selected object will be kept in the centre of the screen.
A virtual compass is provided in this system to aid navigation and object
manipulation. It is especially useful when users are unfamiliar with the virtual urban
environment.
• Selection and manipulation
Object selection and manipulation are supported through direct interaction using
manipulators. The Virtual Ray and virtual hand, which are controlled by input devices
are used to conduct direct manipulation operations.
The Virtual Ray is used to select objects, measure distances, mark areas and
manipulate widgets as most objects in virtual urban environment are out of reach of
users’ hands. In the default mode, once the virtual ray hits a selectable object, a
bounding box of this object is displayed. If this object is selected using wand or
SpaceMouse, the object’s colour is changed and system changes its operation mode
into Target Based Navigation. When measuring distances, the intersection point of the
virtual ray with virtual urban models is traced. A polyline is used to show the path of
measured place, and the measured distance is displayed on the toolbar (Figure 6).

World
Navigation

Select Object
Unselect Object

Target
Based
Navigation

Manipulate
Object

Object
Manipulation

Finish
Manipulation

Fig. 5. Operation mode transition during

Popup
window

3D pointer
and virtual
Ray

Virtual hand
is used to
manipulate
object in
virtual urban
environment

Menu Bar
Measured
Distance

Fig. 6. Information query and distance measureing using virtual ray

Fig. 7. Object creating, moving using virtual
hand

A GIS Based Virtual Urban Simulation Environment

67

The virtual hand is used to place objects, such as buildings, at a proper position.
The hand’s movement and orientation is used to control the object’s movement and
orientation. In the case of rotating buildings, only one parameter of the orientation –
the rotation around Y-axis, is used to control the building’s orientation. (Figure 7).

6 Summary
This work investigates the development of a Collaborative Urban Planning Support
System that aims to enhance the urban planning procedure by enabling urban planners
to collaboratively make, manipulate and evaluate urban development plans. Urban
models are generated using GIS and displayed on Workbench, Reality Room and
standard workstation platforms. An intuitive interface using 3D Widgets is provided
for users to perform navigation, building manipulation, and information query
operations. Initially user evaluation has shown that this system, especially when
operating on the Workbench environment, provides an appropriate virtual urban
planning platform.
Further development of this system will involve designing an analytical model for
traffic network analysis and developing user interfaces suitable for multi-user
operation.

Acknowledgement
This research forms part of the Virtual Urban Laboratory Computer Aided Network
(VULCAN) project supported by the Salford local Council. The authors also
acknowledge the contribution of S. Bee to the Hydra part and N. Murray to the 3D
Widgets part of the system.

References
1. Jepson, W., Friedman, S.: A Real-Time Visualization System for Large Scale Urban
Environments, White Paper (1998)
2. Goodfellow, D.: Collaborative Urban Design through Computer Simulations, A senior
honours essay prepared for the School of Urban and Regional Planning, University of
Waterloo, Ontario, Canada (1996)
3. Chan, R., Jepson, W., Friedman, S.: Urban Simulation: An Innovative Tool for Interactive
Planning and Consensus Building. in Proceedings of the 1998 American Planning
Association National Conference, Boston, MA, USA (1998) 43-50
4. Bourdakis, V.: From CAAD to VRML: London Case Study. in The 3rd UK VRSIG
Conference Full Paper Proceedings, De Montfort University, UK (1996)
5. Kirby, S.D., Flint, R., Murakami, H., Bamford, E.: The Changing Role of GIS in Urban
Planning: The Adelaide Model Case Study. International Journal for Geomatics, 11 (8)
(1997) 6-8
6. Pietsch, S., Radford, A., Woodbury, R.: Making and Using a City Model, Adelaide,
Australia. in 19th Conference of Education for Computer Aided Architectural Design in
Europe, Helsinki, Finland (2001) 442-447

68

J. Yao, H. Tawfik, and T. Fernando

7. Bourdakis, V.: Making Sense of the City. in CAAD Futures 97, (1997) 663-678
8. Batty, M., Dodge, M., Jiang, B.: GIS and Urban Design. Geographical Information and
Planning: European Perspectives (1999) 43 - 65
9. Hudson-Smith, A., Evans, S.: Wired Regeneration: GIS in the third dimension
GIS@development (2001)
10. Al-Kodmany, K.: Using Visualization Techniques for Enhancing Public Participation in
Planning and Design: Process, Implementation, and Evaluation. Landscape and Urban
Planning, 45 (1) (1999) 37-45
11. Marcelino, L., Murray, N., Fernando, T.: A User Interface for Virtual Maintainability in
Immersive Environments. in HCI International conference, (2003)
12. Fowler, R.J., Little, J.J.: Automatic extraction of irregular network digital terrain
modelsAutomatic extraction of irregular network digital terrain models. Computer
Graphics, 13 (2) (1979) 199-207
13. ESRI: Modeling Our World, The ESRI Guide to Geodatabase Design. Environmental
Systems Research Institute, Inc. (1999)
14. Murray, N., Goulermas, J.Y., Fernando, T.: Visual Tracking for a Virtual Environment. in
HCI International conference, (2003)

