On Modelling Reliability in RED Gateways
Vladimir V. Shakhov1 , Jahwan Koo2 , and Hyunseung Choo2,
1

2

Institute of Computational Mathematics and Mathematical Geophysics of SB RAS,
Prospect Akademika Lavrentjeva, 6, Novosibirsk 630090, Russia
shakhov@skku.edu
School of Information and Communication Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University
Chunchun-dong 300, Jangan-gu, Suwon 440-746, South Korea
jhkoo@songgang.skku.ac.kr, choo@ece.skku.ac.kr

Abstract. In this paper we investigate the reliability of Random Early
Detection (RED) gateway. For the RED buﬀer behavior a new model
based on Markov chains is oﬀered. The reliability of RED gateway is
deﬁned by an average rate of accepted packets. We examine the impact of
RED tuning on the reliability by taking into account stick-slip nature of
traﬃc intensity. The goal of the proposed model is to improve RED buﬀer
management by using a technique of traﬃc intensity change detection.

1

Introduction

Congestion occurs on a communication link whenever the amount of traﬃc injected on that link exceeds its capacity. This excessive traﬃc causes queueing
delays of packets based on buﬀer ﬁll up, and in extreme cases packets are lost due
to buﬀer overﬂow. To avoid such a extreme situation eﬀectively, IETF has recommended Random Early Detection (RED) as the default queue management
scheme for the next generation Internet gateways [1].
The RED mechanism is ﬁrst described in [2]. The basic idea of RED is that
a gateway employing RED detects congestion earlier by computing the average
queue length and drops randomly the packets in buﬀer if the computed length
remains between minimum and maximum thresholds conﬁgured manually by
network administrators. Although RED has some merits points, the selection
of optimal values on parameters is still an open issue according to network
and traﬃc situation. Moreover, it is shown that a static RED cannot provide
better results than tail drop in general [3]. Thus, a dynamic RED mechanism
is the recent focus of investigations. We present our vision of dynamic RED
implementation and RED schema quality in this paper.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides the
basic notation and proposed reliability modelling approach. For the RED buﬀer
This research was supported by the MIC(Ministry of Information and Communication), Korea, under the ITRC(Information Technology Research Center) support
program supervised by the IITA(Institute of Information Technology Assessment),
IITA-2005-(C1090-0501-0019).
Corresponding author.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part I, LNCS 3991, pp. 948–951, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

On Modelling Reliability in RED Gateways

949

behavior a new model based on Markov chains is oﬀered. The reliability of RED
gateway is deﬁned by an average rate of accepted packets. In Section 3 we examine the impact of RED tuning on the reliability by taking into account stick-slip
nature of traﬃc intensity. The reason of RED gateway management modiﬁcation by a point-of-change detection technique is discussed. Section 4 is a brief
conclusion.

2

RED Gateway Reliability Modelling

Let us consider a RED scheme in detail. RED utilizes two thresholds, min
threshold h and max threshold H, and a exponentially-weighted moving average (EWMA) formula to estimate the average queue length, Qavg (t) = (1 −
Wq )Qavg (t − 1) + Wq Q, where Qavg (t) is average queue length at time t, Q is
instantaneous queue length at time t and Wq is a weight parameter, 0 ≤ Wq ≤ 1.
A gateway implementing RED accepts all packets until the queue reaches h, after
which it drops a packet with a probability as follows π(Qavg ) = maxp (Qavg −
h)/(H −h), where maxp is the maximal packet drop probability. When the queue
length reaches H, all packets are dropped with a probability of one.
Let us note that a low traﬃc load has a little relevance to the reliability
problem. The focus will be on the case of high traﬃc intensity. Therefore, it is
reasonable to take Wq = 1. Actually, if the oﬀered load is excessive, then the
probability of buﬀer overﬂow is high. Hence, we have to use an aggressive strategy
of packet rejection. Assume that packet arrivals form a Poisson process with rate
λ. The processing times of the packets in gateway are independent exponentially
distributed random variables with mean 1/μ. These are generally accepted in the
literature. Packets are processed in their order of arrivals. Probability of Q equals
n, n = 0 . . . H − h we denote by pn .
The state diagram is given by Figure 1 where the number Q is the state
index. As the state diagram shows, when Q exceeds the min threshold h, a part
of incoming traﬃc should be dropped. Thus, the buﬀer enters state h + i with
probability αi−1 , i = 2...H − h. Let us remark αi = 1 − π(h + i). Writing down
and solving the steady-state balance equations, we get
pi = ρi p0 , i = 1 . . . h + 1,
ph+1+i = ρh+1+i α1 α2 . . . αi p0 , i = 1 . . . H − h + 1,
where ρ = λ/μ and p0 = ((ρh+2 − 1)/(ρ − 1) + i=1
ρh+1+i α1 . . . αi )−1 .
Let us now deﬁne a reliability of RED gateway. The rate of packets dropping
before threshold H depends on Q. Then Average Drop Rate is calculated by
H−h−1

H

π(i) ∗ pi .

ADR =
i=h+1

Here π(H) = 1, that means total-lot blocking of packets.

950

V.V. Shakhov, J. Koo, and H. Choo

Fig. 1. Markov chain for RED gateway buﬀer

Actually, we have estimated an unreliability of the gateway. The packets are
normally (but not always) assumed to be rejected with rate ADR. It is reasonable
to deﬁne that a reliability R of gateway equals 1−ADR. It is a metric of successful
packet acceptance or quality of RED schema. As we can see the considered
reliability drastically depends on traﬃc intensity. Thus, the choice of appropriate
RED parameters depends on the arrival rate.

3

Improving the Reliability of RED Gateway

It is often convenient to assume that the external packet traﬃc entering a RED
gateway can be modelled by stationary stochastic process that has a constant
packets arrival rate. This approximates a situation where the arrival rate changes
slowly with time and constitutes what we refer to as the quasistatic assumption.
When there are jumps of oﬀered load intensity, this assumption is violated. In
this case a behavior of packet arrivals remains quasistatic property on separate
time durations. Using results of previous section, the optimal RED parameters
can be calculated for concrete packets arrival rate. But produced RED tuning
can be the worst for other packets arrival rate. In other words, if probability
of gateway buﬀer overﬂow is very small, then it is not reasonable to worsen
reliability (packets acceptance) by RED using. Drop Tails approach is more
preferable. On the other hand, if incoming ﬂow has got a hard rate (for example,
because of DDoS attack) then protection policy should be aggressive.
Please refer to Figure 2. Calculations of reliability are made under h=2,
H=128. The ﬁgure shows that the RED gateway reliability degrades along with
traﬃc load increase. It was expected. But we can see the pattern of reliability
behavior is also changed. If ρ = 1.2 then preferable maxp = 0.6. But optimal
maxp value is diﬀer under other ρ. If a change of traﬃc intensity is detected
then use of optimal parameters maxp gives a reliability improvement from 0.5
percent (case of ρ = 1.1) to 3.8 percent (case of ρ = 1).
Thus, reliability of the RED gateway can be improved if RED parameters are
recalculated for diﬀer packets arrival rates. For this purpose, a mechanism of
incoming ﬂow intensity detection can be applied. The estimation of a moment
of random process parameter changing is known as point-of-change problem
(discard problem). Appropriated algorithm for discard detection under Poisson
process had been proposed in [4].

On Modelling Reliability in RED Gateways

951

1
ρ=1
ρ = 1.1
ρ = 1.2

0.98
0.96

Reliability (R)

0.94
0.92
0.9
0.88
0.86
0.84
0.82

0

0.1

0.2

0.3
maxp

0.4

0.5

0.6

Fig. 2. Reliability behavior for RED parameter maxp

4

Conclusion

On of the key network technologies is RED gateway management. For these reasons, it is important to consider the nature of RED parameters, and the manner
in which it depends on the reliability of the RED gateway. In this paper the model
of RED buﬀer behavior is oﬀered. Its use requires simplifying assumptions but
the proposed model provides a basic for adequate reliability estimations. We
have shown that the stick-slip nature of traﬃc intensity has an essential impact
on the reliability of RED gateway. Thus, dynamical tuning of RED parameters
has an advantage. By this reason we oﬀer to include point-of-change detection
technique in RED gateway management.

References
1. B. Braden, et al., “Recommendations on queue management and congestion avoidance in the Internet,” RFC 2309, IETF, April 1998.
2. S. Floyd and V. Jacobson, “Random early detection gateways for TCP congestion
avoidance,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 397-413,
August 1993.
3. M. May, C. Diot, B. Lyles, and J. Bolot, “Reasons not to deploy RED,” Seventh
International Workshop on 31 May-4 June 1999, IWQoS ’99, pp. 260 - 262, 1999.
4. V. Shakhov, H. Choo, Y.-C. Bang, ”Discord model for detecting unexpected demands in mobile networks,” Future Generation Comp. Syst. 20(2), pp. 181-188,
2004.

