Computational Math, Science, and Technology
(CMST): A Strategy to Improve STEM
Workforce and Pedagogy to Improve Math and
Science Education
O. Ya¸sar, L. Little, R. Tuzun, K. Rajasethupathy, J. Maliekal, and M. Tahar
CMST Institute, State University of New York, College at Brockport, NY 14420
{oyasar, llittle, rtuzun, kraja, jmalieka, mtahar}@brockport.edu

Abstract. Integrated approach to education in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) has recently become a common
practice. Technologies such as wireless graphing calculators, electronic
whiteboards, and computers help engage students in classroom activities. Modeling and simulation software allow experimentation without
usual prerequisites while enabling a pedagogical approach to display interconnectedness of math and science. Controlled simulations and layered
approach to learning seem to oﬀer long-sought support for inquiry-based
curricula in public schools. Today’s jobs require multiple skills, necessitating a broader college education. While students with multiple majors
can be seen on college campuses, the overall number of degree holders
in technical ﬁelds has gone down steadily. A handful of institutions have
established multidisciplinary programs to adjust to these concerns and
to better serve diverse interests of students.

1

Introduction

Estimates of the size of the STEM workforce in the USA varies between 3-10
million individuals, depending on the deﬁnition and perspective used. For the
period from 2000 to 2010, Bureau of Labor Statistics predict that employment
in science and engineering occupations will increase about 3 times faster than
the growth rate for all occupations [1]. The economy as a whole is expected
to provide approximately 15 % more jobs over this decade, with employment
opportunities for STEM jobs expected to increase by 2.2 million jobs, or about
47 percent. Approximately, 86 percent of the projected increase in STEM jobs
is in computer-related occupations.
This projected trend is supported by the current and past data released by
the American Institute of Physics [2] and the U.S. National Science Foundation. According to AIP survey, physics graduates indicated that the three most
important skills in their jobs were scientiﬁc problem solving, synthesizing information, and mathematical skills. The importance of math and computer skills
Authors acknowledge support by National Science Foundation’s Math and Science
Partnership grant (EHR-0226962) and Cyberinfrastructure grant (SCI-0520036).
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part II, LNCS 3992, pp. 169–176, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

170

O. Ya¸sar et al.

is also evidenced in National Science Board’s 1996 report [3]: 74 % of math and
computer science doctorates worked in the same ﬁeld as their degree versus 57
% in physical sciences. A similar trend is seen at the bachelor’s level (35 % versus 22 %). While there is a great demand for math and computer skills, this
data also shows the importance of a science education that may open doors to
a variety of jobs. An education combining math and computer skills with a science or an engineering ﬁeld would be a valuable investment. This is particularly
important for undergraduate students because the likelihood of being employed
outside of one’s ﬁeld is high for most disciplines. Over the past several years,
some science and engineering disciplines have added more math and computing
courses in their curricula while math and computer science disciplines increased
student exposure to areas of applications (see the ABET accreditation requirements for Computing programs). A more dramatic approach, yet still in infancy,
has been creation of a new interdisciplinary ﬁeld, namely computational science
and engineering, which oﬀers an integrated approach to STEM education.
While there seems to be a great demand for STEM workers, there is a fundamental problem with STEM education within the USA. The percentage of
bachelor’s degrees in STEM has steadily gone down; from 35% in 1966 to 31%
in 2001 [4]. The same trend is seen with master’s (29% to 21% ) and doctoral
(64% to 62% ) degrees. When one looks at the pre-college student achievement
in math and science, the lack of interest in STEM becomes obvious. The United
States ranks at the bottom of the 12th grade TIMSS (Trends in International
Mathematics and Science Study) exam. Math and science are perceived to be
diﬃcult topics and only 3% of boys and 1% of girls in grade schools go on to
pursue a STEM-related education in college. To make matters worse, there is
a shortage of high school students nationwide [5]. Several reports have been issued to draw attention to this crisis. The Business-Higher Education Forum [6]
declared that competence in mathematics and science are essential to all individuals. Realizing the seriousness of the crisis, NSF created a new program [7] to
promote a strong partnership of stakeholders (college faculty and school teachers) and subject areas. A recent report [8] by President Bush’s Science Advisor
introduced Computational Science as one of the most important disciplines of
the 21st Century. It further stated that progress in Computational Science is
seen as a way to ensure America’s Competitiveness in a new world of increasing
global competition.

2

CMST Pedagogy: Secondary Schools

The CMST Institute promotes a strong partnership of higher education and
school districts as well as of subject areas (math, science, and technology). While
colleges demand better students from school districts (SD), school districts demand better teachers. Their success is interdependent. The partnership of subject areas comes from their interconnectedness as intended by nature. Through
computation, one can see the interplay of math, science, and technology to run
controlled simulations and scientiﬁc inquiries.

Computational Math, Science, and Technology (CMST)

171

At secondary school level, students cannot be expected to construct mathematical and computer models to run scientiﬁc simulations, unless there are tools
to make transparent the underlying mathematics, programming, and the detailed
scientiﬁc content of the experiment. Latest technologies have brought powerful
tools to the aid of researchers and educators. It is now possible, indeed, to
construct simulations without usual tedious task of programming (FORTRAN,
C++, or JAVA) and advanced mathematics. We have used tools such as Interactive Physics [9], AgentSheets [10], Stella [11], Geometer’s SketchPad [12], Excel,
Project Interactivate (www.shodor.org) and graphing calculator software along
with laptops, TI-84 graphing calculators [13] and electronic smartboards [14].
Since 2003, we oﬀered CMST training to more than 265 teachers, with majority being from Rochester City and Brighton Central School Districts. 148 teachers received summer training once (60 hours), 42 teachers twice (108 hours),
and 15 teachers three times (156 hours). We also oﬀered, through collaboration with Texas Instruments, TI-certiﬁcation training (60 hours) to 38 MST
teachers. Following the summer workshop, teachers are assigned coaches among
college faculty and experienced teachers. They implement CMST-based lessons
during the academic year and also participate with their students in the CMST
Challenge program. We hold bi-monthly meetings for all faculty, teachers and
coaches. CMST Teachers receive laptops, graphing calculators, viewscreens and
share electronic smartboards and LCD projectors. Testimonies from teachers
show that electronic smart-boards are very eﬀective, as are LCD projectors. According to teacher testimonies, while it usually takes 6 months for a student to
come to a blackboard for an in-class demonstration, it only takes 6 hours with
the smart board.
Although we rely on teacher and faculty training to impact classroom learning, we reach out directly to middle and high school students as well. In 2005,
we reached more than 347 students through Interactive Physics Week and the
Challenge Competition. A ceremony was held to display project posters and
demonstrations. Outside evaluators judged the projects and selected projects
were presented and displayed during the 2005 summer institute. These projects
set good examples for CMST integration into classroom teaching as well as how
modeling can be applied to solution of real world problems. Evidence thus far
has shown that students even at middle school can indeed learn modeling tools
and use them to further their knowledge of science and appreciation of math.
Our project evaluators have found a correlation between the number of CMST
Teachers in a school and the improvements in student achievement. At the same
time, there seems to be a strong correlation between the amount of teacher training and student achievement. As part of institutionalizing our project activities,
these trainings are now formalized as credit-bearing college courses and oﬀered
outside the summer institute. The CMST training has also been integrated into
the professional development days in school districts. Hundreds of CMST-based
lesson plans posted on project web site [15] are enhancing our outreach eﬀorts,
as they enable CMST teachers to demonstrate to others the eﬀectiveness of the
new pedagogy. Instructors from our suburban partner [16] helped us train our

172

O. Ya¸sar et al.

urban school [17] teachers. Integration of CMST approach and tools has been
promoted within the context of NSF-supported Connected Math [18] and Core
Plus [19] curricula.
Student achievement improved considerably at Rochester City School District (RCSD) since the beginning of our project in 2003. The district average
passing rate reached 90% in Math-A Regents exam, a 39-point jump from June
2003. Similarly, the district passing rate in state 8th grade math exam improved
by 8 percentage points, from 11% (2003) to 19% (2004). In 2005, the district
maintained the gains made since 2003.
Findings from RCSD show a consistent multi-year trend, including: a) students receiving instruction from multiple CMST teachers outperformed students
receiving instruction from only one CMST teacher, b) data suggest a correlation
between the number of CMST teachers in a given school and the performance of
participating students, c) teachers indicate with greater frequency that student
performance is improving throughout the school year in their classrooms, d) student performance in technology classrooms exceeded performance in science and
math, which probably indicates that students in technology classes have higher
access and exposure to CMST tools than others in theoretical math and science
classes, e) students taught by beginner-level teachers in 2004 did better than
those in 2003, which supports other data that the quality of summer institute
got better as years passed as a result of several factors including faculty experience as well as inclusion of peer-teaching, f) academic performance of students
participated in the Challenge activity exceeded those who did not, g) attendance
of students increased with exposure to CMST pedagogy, and h) dropout rates
were lower for students exposed to CMST pedagogy.
Technology access is not a problem at Brighton, contrary to RCSD. A stark
contrast between these two districts is that the number of courses and the curriculum seem to be ﬁxed at BCSD while there are many variations and courses
within RCSD schools. A similarity between BCSD and RCSD is that Brighton
technology treatment classrooms had the highest acceptable grade rate, followed
by science and math. This again points out the fact that treatment is maximized
in classrooms with adequate technology infrastructure. Another similarity is that
although the acceptable grades (A/B/C) rate among the suburban-based staﬀ
far exceeded that for the urban staﬀ, the trend of the more comprehensively
trained teachers from the cohort having more successful students continued.
The achievement by students in the Challenge Program in BCSD also exceeded
other peer groups within the same school. Three Brighton students [20] in the
2005 Challenge program wrote the following in their report:
Our motivation to prove Kepler’s laws has historical signiﬁcance. As 9th graders,
we have not taken any physics course and we are not fully knowledgeable about
laws of universe that govern planetary motion. That is not diﬀerent from the situation of Kepler; as no one quite knew how gravitational forces worked until Newton came. Kepler had access to data compiled by Tycho Brahe and he looked for
patterns. We had access to CMST tools and experienced teachers and we looked
for miracles! We learned how to transfer visuals images from Interactive Physics

Computational Math, Science, and Technology (CMST)

173

into Geometer’s Sketchpad, which was a tough endeavor all throughout. We also
understood better, through Excel, the physical laws and the computational steps
involved in Interactive Physics simulations. While we did not make a discovery in
physics, we certainly discovered that physics is not a threatening or boring subject
after all. The foreboding nature of complicated physics was abolished as we worked
on this project and now we look forward to taking AP physics classes oﬀered in
our school.

3

CMST Education: Workforce Preparation

SUNY Brockport launched the ﬁrst Computational Science (CPS) undergraduate degree program in the USA in 1998. The department has developed BS,
MS, and combined BS/MS degrees in this area, the curricula of which integrate math, computer science, and application sciences. The department has
also played an active role in the establishment of other similar programs in the
United States and elsewhere. The CPS department has generated workers with
practical knowledge and problem solving skills in 3 technical ﬁelds (math, science, and technology) to raise quality, adaptability, and versatility of our regional
and national workforce. Recruiting and sustaining a sizable student body in a
multidisciplinary STEM program is a tough challenge. Thus far, however, the
department graduated more than 35 students with both BS and MS degrees; all
gainfully employed.
The CPS program is built on seven (7) student learning outcomes, including
computational tools, high performance computing, applied and computational
math, simulation and modeling, visualization, application sciences, and technical
communication [21-31]. It seeks high parameter students who are interested in
modeling, programming, and applied mathematical skills in industrial, governmental, and academic settings. Through the minor, the department also seeks
students who are interested in learning these skills but not necessarily making
them the major focus of their careers. Through general education courses the
department seeks to educate the more general college population about the applications and relevance of computational modeling. Through the CMST Institute
the department seeks to teach high school and middle school teachers the use of
computational modeling software in the classroom, in order to help bring up a
more science- and math-literate population.
Preparing a student to credibly learn 3 subject areas (mathematics, computing, and sciences) in 4 years has been a tough challenge. Advising a student body with a broad education base is a challenge for faculty members.
The department has gone through 3 major revisions to balance its diversiﬁed
course work. Even though there is no accreditation in this new ﬁeld, the department sought peer review from local, regional, and national communities
via presentations in conferences and articles in journals [21-31]. Within just 7
years, the department developed and taught 27 new courses, including Introduction to Computational Science, Computational Science Tools I-II, Internet
and Technology Ethics, Forensic Computing, History of Science and Technol-

174

O. Ya¸sar et al.

ogy, High Performance Computing, Simulation and Modeling, Computational
Mathematics, Embedded Computing, Computational Chemistry, Computational
Physics, Computational Finance, Scientiﬁc Visualization, Computational Fluid
Dynamics, Computational Biology, Computational Methods for Teachers I-II-III,
Advanced Software Tools, Computational Methods in the Physical Sciences, Deterministic and Dynamical Systems, Supercomputing Applications, and Society,
Technology, and Science.
Recognizing the diﬃculties student might face in a multidisciplinary program, the department sought to oﬀer scholarships and internships for students,
which created a pipeline of high quality students with internship experiences,
employment opportunities, and doctoral assistantships in places such as Harvard, Carnegie-Mellon, Lockheed Martin, Ford, Renselear Polytechnique Institute, George Mason, Sandia National Labs, Eastman Kodak, to name a few.
Department faculty members have been very active in recruitment, both domestically and internationally. They developed brochures, posters, and other promotional materials using personal time and took a program from 3 undergraduate
students in its ﬁrst semester to a steady enrollment of 50 undergraduate and
graduate students over several years.
As described earlier, the department formed a multi-disciplinary (CMST)
institute in 2002, with members from eight departments and two school districts. The institute sponsored funds and team work, and provided a platform
for close collaboration between departments and between the college faculty and
school teachers. CMST faculty developed several in-service courses for teachers
and teacher candidates. These include four natural science courses, two liberal
studies courses, and three General Education courses (Internet Ethics, Forensic
Computing, and History of Science and Technology). Courses such as Computational Chemistry and Computational Biology (Bioinformatics) are now being
taught by their respective departments.
Besides 27 new courses in the department, CPS faculty also taught 15 courses
outside the department, particularly in math, computer science, education, and
liberal studies programs. The department has continuously and consistently
strived to serve the entire college community, and beyond, through curriculum
development in which computational modeling is used as a vehicle for understanding. Institute activities led to modiﬁcations in more than 20 existing courses
in the college, including Forensic Computing, History of Science and Technology,
College Geometry, College Algebra, Pre-calculus, Calculus I-II-III, Business Calculus, Finite Math, Math for Elementary Teaching I-II, History of Math, College
Physics I-II, Field Methods in Earth Sciences, and Anatomy and Physiology.
Through the grants and equipment donations, the CPS department provided
access to supercomputers, high-performance servers, laptops, LCD projectors,
graphing calculators, and electronic smart boards for more than 15 faculty
members in support of their professional development, scholarly activities, bestpractices, and teaching methodologies. The multidisciplinary aspect of the computational science program attracted large scale funding from the government
agencies. The CPS faculty brought the largest single grant ($ 3.8 million) in the

Computational Math, Science, and Technology (CMST)

175

history of our college. Although the CPS department is rather small (3 faculty
members), it has provided sponsored funding for more than 12 faculty members in math, computer science, physics, chemistry, earth sciences, biology, and
education departments.
CMST, or brieﬂy computational science, has gone through several stages of
development as witnessed from the history of our program at Brockport. Leading the nation in CMST education, Brockport program was ﬁrst to introduce
computational science as a discipline of its own, raising it from a mere overlap of
mathematics, computer science, and sciences as depicted in [25]. Availability of
high performance computer power and wide use of computational techniques in
many ﬁelds in later stages led to creation of subﬁelds within the computational
science community such as computational physics, ﬁnance, and others. Today,
as witnessed from our own experience, computational science has become a core
for many new scientiﬁc ﬁelds; a role similar to the one played by mathematics.
From a new pedagogy to teach math and science to tools for industrial design
and to a methodology to perform scientiﬁc research, computational science has
proven to be a high-return investment area for academia, industry, and public
education.

4

Conclusion

CMST education is an innovative approach to prepare new generations for the
challenges of the information age. The amount of new knowledge is doubling
every year and it is a challenge to manage exabytes of digital information created every year. Today’s jobs require multiple skills and multiple domains of
knowledge. Professionals no longer are specialized in one domain, but in multiple domains. How do we ﬁlter this tremendous amount of information and
present it in a hierarchical way? The growth of Google (a search engine) is a
good indication that ﬁltering and presentation of volumes of data to those who
need it is very important. How do we educate new generations?
Technology has changed the way we learn and teach. Campuses nowadays
discuss about ’active learning’ and seek ways to deliver more content with less
cost. We need to better prepare students with general mathematical and computational skills as well as disciplinary knowledge. We need to constantly assess
whether we are preparing tomorrow’s workforce and leaders. College faculty
needs to constantly renew itself in the sea of information. The best way to deal
with this is to have a mechanism that will deal with newly created multi-faceted
knowledge in a collaborative way. In our CMST experience, we have seen concrete results, ranging from faculty/student quality and quantity in STEM to
teacher/student quality in public schools. However, we also recognize a major
diﬃculty to be the lack of necessary human capacity on a single campus. Courses
that integrate CMST tools into application ﬁelds (science, engineering, business,
and humanities) need to be fully developed. Development of student learning outcomes and well-designed assessment strategies, a well-deﬁned curriculum, and a
collection of tools and application courses is essential to successfully implement

176

O. Ya¸sar et al.

a CMST program. Computational science programs need to engage more disciplinary faculty in their campuses or collaborate with each other via distance
learning and other digital repositories to enrich resources oﬀered locally.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.

Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2001, http://www.bls.gov/emp/home.htm
Courtesy The American Institute of Physics, http://www.aip.org
National Science Board, Science and Engineering Indicators, National 1996 Report
National Science Foundation, http://www.nsf.gov/statistics
New York Times, Feb 5 (2005)
Responding to the Crisis in Mathematics & Science Education, The BusinessHigher Education Forum, http://www.bhef.com
NSF Math and Science Partnership Program, http://www.ehr.nsf.gov/msp
PITAC Report, Computational Science: Ensuring America’s Competitiveness,
http://www.nitrd.gov/pitac.
Interactive PHysics Website, http://www.interactivephysics.com
AgentSheets Website, http://www.agentsheets.com
Stella Website, http://www.iseesystems.com
Geometer’s Sketchpad Website, http://www.keypress.com/sketchpad
Texas Instruments Website, http://www.ti.com
Blue Ribbon Learning Sites on the Web, http://www.kn.sbc.com/wired/bluewebn
CMST Website, http://www.brockport.edu/cmst
Brighton School District, http://www.bcsd.org
Rochester City School District, http://www.rcsdk12.org
NSF-supported Connected Math Project, http://www.math.msu.edu/cmp
NSF-supported Core Plus Project, http://www.wmich.edu/cpmp
S. Kashyap, J.P. Ya¸sar, R. Ravago, http://www.brockport.edu/cmst
O. Ya¸sar, J. Maliekal, L. J. Little, D. Jones, Computational Technology Approach
to Math and Science Education, IEEE CiSE (to appear)
H. Dag, G. Soykan, S. Piskin, and O. Ya¸sar, CSE Education at Istanbul Technical
University. IEEE Comp. in Sci. & Eng (2005), Vol. 7 (1), 72-77
O. Ya¸sar, CMST Pedagogical Approach to Math and Science Education. LNCS,
Vol. 3045 (2004), 807-816
H. Dag, G. Soykan, S. Piskin, O. Ya¸sar, CSE Education, LNCS, Vol. 3045 (2004),
795-806
O. Ya¸sar and R. Landau, Elements of CSE Education. SIAM Review (2003), Vol.
45 (4), 787-805
O. Ya¸sar and R. Landau, Elements of Computational Science Education. Proceedings of SIAM CSE Conference, Feb 2003, San Diego, CA.
O. Ya¸sar, The Bachelor of Science Degree in Computational Science at SUNY
Brockport. Proceedings of SIAM CSE Conference. Feb 2003, San Diego, CA.
L. Little, The Computational Science Major at SUNY Brockport. FGCS (2003),
Vol. 19 (8), 1285-1292
O. Ya¸sar, Computational Science Education: Standards, Learning Outcomes and
Assessment. LNCS, Vol. 2073 (2001), 1159-1169
O. Ya¸sar, K. Rajasethupathy, R. Tuzun, A. McCoy, and J. Harkin, A New Perspective on Computational Science Education. IEEE CiSE (2000), Vol. 5 (2), 74-79
O. Ya¸sar, Computational Science Program at SUNY Brockport. Proceedings of
the First SIAM CSE Conference, September 21-24 (2000), Wash, D.C., http://
www.siam.org/meetings/cse00

