A Load Balance Based On-Demand Routing Protocol
for Mobile Ad-Hoc Networks
Liqiang Zhao1, Xin Wang2, Azman Osman Lim3, and Xiangyang Xue2
1

School of Software, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
2
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering,
Fudan University, Shanghai, China
{zhaolq, xinw, xyxue}@fudan.edu.cn
3
Dept. of Computer Science, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan
alvin1973@hotmail.co.jp

Abstract. Since the existing ad hoc routing protocols lack of load balance
capabilities, they often fail to provide satisfactory performance in the presence
of a large volume of traffic. In this paper, we propose a new load balance
mechanism and a novel bandwidth estimation method for ad hoc on-demand
routing protocols. Destination chooses the optimal path via the route
information carried by RREQ, whilst congested intermediate nodes dropped
RREQs to avoid RREQ storm. Simulation shows that our new scheme improves
packet delivery ratio, reduces end-to-end latency and decreases routing
overhead.

1 Introduction
A Mobile Ad hoc Network (MANET) is a self-configuring network of mobile hosts
connected by wireless links. Due to its unique character of self-organization, quick
deployment and infrastructure-free, MANET has a wide range of applications which
include battlefield command and control, emergency disaster relief, mine site
operations.
Currently, on-demand routing protocol is the dominant routing protocol in
MANET. As the typical on-demand routing protocols, AODV [7] and DSR [2] select
the shortest routes as the optimum routes. However, due to the special characters of
ad hoc network, many researches realize that the shortest route may not be the best
criteria of route selection [9,14].
Meanwhile, researchers have been focusing on network load balance. Due to the
constrained ad hoc network bandwidth resource, routing protocols are required to
properly distribute the traffic flow over the network. Otherwise, the overloaded
nodes may cause network congestion and long delay. In considering the
significance of network traffic balance, we propose a load balance mechanism,
which can virtually be applied to any on-demand routing protocol. In this paper, we
combine this mechanism with AODV, forming a new routing protocol called load
balance based AODV (LBB-AODV).
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces some related
work about load balance routing in ad hoc network. In section 3, we propose a novel
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part IV, LNCS 3994, pp. 9 – 16, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

10

L. Zhao et al.

residual bandwidth estimation model and a new load balance mechanism, both of
which are incorporated into the routing protocol LBB-AODV. Section 4 is the
simulation and analysis. Finally, section 5 concludes this paper.

2 Related Work
Multiple paths schemes, such as [10] and [13], are fully exploited to provide better
load-balancing capabilities. The underlying idea of the scheme is to distribute the
traffic among multiple paths, which are maintained at nodes and used for routing.
However, maintaining alternative paths requires more routing table space and
computational overhead while selecting the best route among several discovered paths
[11]. Moreover, multiple routes schemes are effective only if the alternate multi-path
are disjoint, which is difficult to achieve in MANET [6]. Ganjali et al.[8] further
demonstrates that the load distribution of multi-path routing is almost the same as that
of single path routing.
DLAR [3], a single-path load balance mechanism, is proposed. The RREQ records
queue occupancy information of each node it traverses. The destination chooses the
optimal path based on the load information kept in RREQs. However, to utilize the
most up-to-date load information, DLAR prohibits intermediate nodes from replying
to RREQ, which may result in RREQ storm when there are a large number of nodes
in the mobile ad hoc network.
In [4], a new scheme is presented that each node forward RREQs selectively
according to the load status of the node, preventing the new routes set up through
overloaded nodes. This may alleviate the possibility of RREQ storm, but since it
works in a fully distributed manner, the route selected may not be the best one due to
the lack of comparison of candidate routes.

3 Load Balance Based-AODV
LBB-AODV is an enhanced version of AODV based on load balance, which enable
nodes to forward RREQ selectively during route discovery stage. When a node
receives route request, it first checks its available bandwidth. The node forwards the
RREQ only if it is not CONGESTED. After the destination receives all the route
information via RREQ, it picks the best route. The detail description of bandwidth
estimation and LBB-AODV are presented as follows.
3.1 Bandwidth Estimation
To guarantee the network load balance, it is necessary to know each node’s available
bandwidth. The end-to-end throughput is a concave parameter [5], which is
determined by the bottleneck bandwidth of the intermediate nodes along the route.
Therefore, estimating available bandwidth of a specific route can be simplified into
finding the minimal residual bandwidth available among the nodes in the route.
We propose a simple and effective available bandwidth estimation model in ad hoc
network. In the new scheme, each the node is set to promiscuous mode, so it can

A Load Balance Based On-Demand Routing Protocol

11

perceive any frame sent by its neighboring nodes. Every node accumulates the size of
the perceived frames within a predefined period of time, and adds it to the size of
frames the node sends itself during the time, the throughput of the small area
centering the node within the time window is gained. By examining the activities of
both the node itself and its surrounding neighbors, we are able to obtain a good
approximation of the bandwidth usage. The available bandwidth of a node is:

Bavail = Braw - Btran - Brecv

(1)

Bavail is the available bandwidth of the node, while Braw is ad hoc network pure
channel bandwidth. Btran is the consumed bandwidth of the node by sending frames,
including data and routing control frames and 802.11MAC layer RTS/CTS/ACK
control frames. Brecv is the bandwidth took up by neighboring nodes.
Btran and Brecv can be represented as follows:
B tran = TH tran / t

(2)

Brecv = TH recv / t

(3)

Here, t is the predefined period of time , when THtran and THrecv are the size of
frames transmitted and received, respectively, within t by the node.
Taking into consideration the channel fading, physical error, the frame collision ,
as well as the burst nature of control packets overhead, factorθ (0,1) is used to adjust
Bavail. Combine function (1), (2) and (3), we get:

∈

Bavail = ( Braw - (TH tran + TH recv ) / t ) ⋅ θ

(4)

At the beginning of the simulation, THtran and THrecv of every node are set to 0
while the timeout is set to t. When it timeouts, the available bandwidth can be
calculated by (4). Store it in the cache. Then reset THtran and THrecv to 0, calculate the
bandwidth of next period.
The calculation of the period time t is critical; it should not be too big or too
small. If it is set too small, there might be no node to send packet during that
short period. In this case, the function only reflects transit bandwidth utilization,
and it might not be the stable bandwidth consumption condition. Moreover, short
period means frequent calculation, which will consume a batch of CPU time and
battery power. If t is set too big, because of the movement of the node and change
of link state, the function might not be able to reflect the real bandwidth usage.
Moreover, t should be proportional to density of the whole network, since the
higher the node’s density is, the higher chance of packet collision, and the larger t
should be [12].
To smooth bandwidth estimation, we define a smoothing constant β (0,1).
Suppose the last bandwidth is Bavail(n-1) and the bandwidth measured in the current
sampling time window is Bavail. Then, the current bandwidth Bavail(n) is given as:

∈

Bavail(n) = β ⋅ Bavail(n-1) + (1-β ) ⋅ Bavail

(5)

12

L. Zhao et al.

3.2 LBB-AODV

For our purpose, a new field Bmin is added in RREQ format to record the minimum
bandwidth along the path it traverses. When a source node decides to launch a
RREQ, it first estimates its bandwidth using mechanism described above, and records
it in Bmin.
When an intermediate node first receives a RREQ, it will collect its load
information in order to define present network condition. According to the network
condition, routing layer determines whether to forward or just drop the RREQ. The
network has two conditions: CONGESTION and NORMAL, which is defined by
ratio of the current available bandwidth (Bavail) and the total channel bandwidth (Braw)
withφ being the congestion factor:
CONGESTION: Bavail / B raw ≤ φ
NORMAL: Bavail / B raw > φ

(6)
(7)

When an intermediate node is in the CONGESTION mode, the node will no longer
process any route request; it simply discards RREQ, making itself impossible to be an
intermediate node for other traffic. Each node begins to allow additional traffic flows
whenever its congested status is dissolved.
A new field Bt is added to the route table of each node to record the so-fardiscovered-biggest route bandwidth from the source to the node. When the node is in
NORMAL condition, if it is the first time receiving RREQ from the source node with
the broadcast id, Bt will be set as Bmin for the corresponding entry in the route table.
Then compare Bmin and the node’s available bandwidth, keep the smaller one in the
Bmin and forward RREQ. If the node has already received RREQ from the same
source node with the same broadcast id, it compares Bmin with the corresponding Bt. If
the former is not bigger, simply discard the RREQ. Otherwise, update the route table
entry to replace Bt with Bmin and redirect the previous node index to the node where
the RREQ is from. Finally, discard the RREQ rather than forwarding it to avoid
RREQ storm.
After receiving the first RREQ, the destination waits for an appropriate amount of
time to learn all possible routes. After receiving duplicate RREQ from different
previous nodes, the destination chooses the route with the largest Bmin and sends
RREP.
By rejecting route request at the individual congested nodes, the network is able to
reduce the large volume of routing requests and alleviate the burden brought by the
broadcasting. On the other hand, choosing the best route at the destination node
provide the best route along light-loaded nodes.
When the local congestion occurs, since the congested nodes refuse to forward
routing request, it is possible to fail the route discovery. To cope with this scenario,
after the first round route discovery failure, the original AODV will be effective to
find the route from the second round.

A Load Balance Based On-Demand Routing Protocol

13

4 Numerical Simulation
In this section, we evaluate the performance of LBB-AODV compared to the
conventional AODV. The simulation environment, metrics and results are presented.
4.1 Simulation Environment

We evaluate LBB-AODV and AODV by using the network simulator ns-2. In ns-2
simulator, we use the default value of AODV to demonstrate a fair comparison of
LBB-AODV. The distribution coordination function (DCF) of IEEE 802.11 standard
is used as the MAC protocol with a data rate of 2Mbps.
A network consists of 100 nodes with 250 m transmission range spread randomly
800 m. The nodes uniformly choose velocity from 0 m/s
over an area of 2400 m
to 5 m/s following the random-waypoint model. Each simulation runs for 200 s with
pause time set to 50 s.
Source and destination node pairs are randomly selected and each source generates
CBR packets with packet size of 512 bytes. We use 40 traffic flows and gradually
increase the data rate of each flow from 3 to 9 packets/second (or 480 to 1440 Kb/s).
The traffic load represents the combined throughput of the data sources. By adjusting
the frequency of sources sending packets, we eventually control the traffic load of the
network.
After several simulation comparisons, we choose the following parameter values
used for LBB-AODV, which are specified in Table 1.

×

Table 1. Parameters Used for LBB-AODV

Parameter
t
θ
β
φ

Value
1s
0.9
0.2
0.1

4.2 Simulation Metrics

The following three metrics are considered to evaluate the performance of the
protocols:
1. Packet delivery ratio – the ratio of the total number of data packets received by
destinations over the total number of data packets transmitted by sources. It
captures the network throughput.
2. End-to-end delay –the average of delays for all received data packet from the
sources to destinations. It includes all possible delays caused by buffering during
route discovery, queuing at the interface queue, retransmission delays at the
medium access control layer, and propagation and transfer time.
3. Normalized routing overhead – the total number of routing control packets (RREQ,
RREP and RERR) normalized by the total number of received data packets. It
evaluates the efficiency of the routing protocol.

14

L. Zhao et al.

4.3 Simulation Results

Fig.1 plots the packet delivery ratio versus traffic load for both AODV and LBBAODV protocols. Numerical results reveal that LBB-AODV achieves a larger packet
delivery ratio compared to AODV, especially when the traffic load increases. This is
because LBB-AODV chooses the least congested route for data transmission, which
indirectly increases the overall network throughput. On the other hand, AODV
without load-balancing mechanism suffers the high probability of the route failure and
the data retransmission as the network traffic load becomes larger.
As can be seen in Fig.2, LBB-ADOV outperforms AODV in terms of average endto-end delay. The largest fall of average end-to-end delay is up to 17.3%. Delay is
mainly due to queuing in heavily loaded buffers. Even though the route path may be
longer than that of AODV, LBB-ADOV tries to route packets along a less congested
path to avoid overloading nodes, thereby minimizing path congestion and in turn
reducing the overall queuing delay.
1800

0.9
LBB-AODB
AODV

)
%0.8
(
o
i
t
a0.7
R

)1600
c
e
s
m1400
(
y
a
l1200
e
D
d1000
n
E
- 800
o
t
d
n 600
E
e
g 400
a
r
e
v
A 200

y
r
e
v
i0.6
l
e
D
t
e
k
c0.5
a
P
0.4
480

640

800

960

1120

1280

LBB-AODV
AODV

0
480

1440

Traffic Load (Kb/s)

640

800

960

1120

1280

1440

Traffic Load (Kb/s)

Fig. 1. Packet delivery ratio

Fig. 2. Average end-to-end delay

8
LBB-AODV
AODV

d
a7
e
h
r
e
v6
O
g
n
i
t5
u
o
R
d
e
z4
i
l
a
m
r
o
N3
2
480

640

800

960

1120

1280

1440

Taffic Load (Kb/s)

Fig. 3. Normalized routing overhead

In Fig.3, LBB-AODV demonstrates up to 16.2% reduction of the routing overhead
against AODV. This is mainly due to the suppression of forwarding RREQs at the
intermediate nodes, as the forwarding RREQs make up about 90% of the routing

A Load Balance Based On-Demand Routing Protocol

15

packets in AODV [8]. Because LBB-AODV prevents those over-loaded nodes from
forwarding RREQs, the overall routing overhead is dramatically decreased.
Moreover, LBB-AODV can establish routes more stable than AODV. As a result,
LBB-AODV reduces link breakage and routing overhead, which is mainly caused by
the route reconstruction. When the traffic load increases, the overall normalized
routing overhead of both protocols decreases because of the source can send more
data packets to its corresponding destination by using the discovered route.

5 Conclusions
In this paper, we proposed the load balance mechanism for the conventional AODV
by considering the available bandwidth at each node. According to the local
bandwidth status, each node has the right to re-broadcast the RREQ message in order
to avoid network congestion and RREQ broadcast storm. Beside that, we also
proposed that the RREQ message should contain an additional field to allow nodes to
exchange the route bandwidth information among themselves. Moreover, we
proposed a simple and effective bandwidth estimation approach based on the
perceived bandwidth consumption of a node and its neighboring nodes.
Numerical simulations reveal that LBB-AODV significantly improves the packet
delivery ratio and reduces the average end-to-end latency as well as the routing
overhead in the presence of large traffic volume. The new scheme successfully
balances the network load among nodes, and it can easily be incorporated in the
existing on-demand routing protocol.
To facilitate practical implementation of our proposal, further research is required
to investigate the optimal parameter under different network settings for LBB-AODV.
Furthermore, we will look into how the proposed load balance mechanism can be
incorporated in other on-demand routing protocols and make a fair comparison with
other load balance schemes, like [3] and [4], in order to further improve the
performance of LBB-AODV.

Acknowledgement
This work was supported in part by Shanghai Municipal R&D Foundation under
contracts 035107008, 04DZ15021-5A, 055115009, Shanghai Key Laboratory of
Intelligent Information Processing (IIPL) and LG Electronics.

References
1. Y. Ganjali, A. Keshavarzian. Load balancing in ad hoc networks: single-path routing vs.
multi-path routing. INFOCOM 2004. Twenty-third Annual Joint Conference of the IEEE
Computer and Communications Societies Volume 2, Page(s):1120 - 1125 vol.2., March
2004.
2. D. Johnson and D. Maltz. Dynamic source routing in ad hoc wireless networks. Mobile
Comput., pp. 153–181, 1996.
3. S. J. Lee, M. Gerla. Dynamic load-aware routing in ad hoc networks. Communications,
2001. ICC 2001. IEEE International Conference on Volume 10, Page(s):3206 - 3210
vol.10., June 2001.

16

L. Zhao et al.

4. Y. J. Lee, G. F. Riley. A workload-based adaptive load-balancing technique for mobile ad
hoc networks. Wireless Communications and Networking Conference, 2005 IEEE Volume
4, Page(s):2002 - 2007 Vol. 4., March 2005.
5. P. Mohapatra, J. Li, and C. Gui. QoS in mobile ad hoc networks, IEEE Wireless Commun.
Mag. (Special Issue on QoS in Next-Generation Wireless Multimedia Communications
Systems), pp. 44–52, 2003.
6. A. Nasipuri, R. Castaneda, and S. Das. Performance of multipath routing for on-demand
protocols in ad hoc networks. ACM/Kluwer Mobile Networks and Applications (MONET)
Journal, Vol. 6, No. 4, pp. 339-349, August 2001.
7. C. Perkins and E. Royer. Ad-Hoc On-Demand Distance Vector Routing (AODV). July
2003. RFC 3561.
8. C. Perkins, E. Royer, S. Das, M. Marina. Performance comparison of two on-demand
routing protocols for ad hoc networks. Personal Communications, IEEE. Volume 8, Issue
1, Page(s):16 – 28., Feb. 2001.
9. D. D. Perkins, H. D. Hughes, C. B. Owen. Factors affecting the performance of ad hoc
networks. Communications, 2002. ICC 2002. IEEE International Conference on Volume
4, Page(s):2048 - 2052 vol.4, May 2002.
10. P. Pham and S. Perreau, Multi-path routing protocol with load balancing policy in mobile
ad hoc network. IFIP Int’l Conference on Mobile and Wireless Communications Networks
(MWCN 2002), September 2002.
11. P. Pham and S. Perreau. Performance analysis of reactive shortest path and multi-path
routing mechanism with load balance. IEEE Conference on Computer Communications
(INFOCOM 2003), March 2003.
12. Liang Zhang, Yantai Shu, Yan Liuand Guanghong Wang, Adaptive Tuning of Distributed
Coordination Function (DCF) in the IEEE 802.11 to Achieve Efficient Channel utilization.
Future Telecommunication Conference 2003. Beijing, china, Dec. 2003.
13. Lingfang Zhang, Zenghua Zhao, Yantai Shu, Lei Wang, Yang, O.W.W. Load balancing of
multipath source routing in ad hoc networks. Communications, 2002. ICC 2002. IEEE
International Conference on Volume 5, Page(s):3197 - 3201 vol.5., May 2002.
14. Xiaofeng Zhong, Youzheng Wang, Shunliang Mi, Jing Wang. An Experimental
Performance Study of Wireless ad hoc System Utilizing 802.11a Standard Base on
different Routing Protocols. Asia Pacific Optical and Wireless Communications, October
2002.

