A Service Management Architecture for NEMO
in IPv4 and IPv6 Networks
Jin Ho Kim, Choong Seon Hong , Dae Sun Kim
Department of Computer Engineering, Kyung Hee University,
Seocheon, Giheung, Yongin, Gyeonggi, 449-701, Korea
jhkim@networking.khu.ac.kr, cshong@khu.ac.kr, dskim@networking.khu.ac.kr

Abstract. The current design of Mobile IPv4 and Mobile IPv6 protocols doesn’t provide the compatibility between networks of diﬀerent
versions. A Network Mobility(NEMO) protocol also provides the limited mobility in IPv6 networks. However, we can easily expect that the
current IPv4 network will coexist with IPv6 network in the near future
internet environment. So, in this paper, we propose the architecture of
mobility between networks of diﬀerent versions which is supported the
NEMO basic protocol. This new mechanism can manage the mobility
through a Tunnel Agent(TA). And the TA maintains a NEMO tunnel
when a Mobile Router(MR) moves from IPv6 to IPv4 network.

1

Introduction

With the rapid development of the radio communication technology, users tend
to exchange all kinds of data through wireless internet. It increases the desire
that users want to access the internet from anywhere, at anytime and the connection is expected to be seamless. As the solutions for these requirements, Internet
Engineering Task Force Working Group(IETF WG) made an eﬀort to standardize the method to support mobility of terminals. In particular, the speciﬁcation
of the Mobile IPv6[1] has been standardized as RFC 3775. Recently, the support
for mobility of network such as buses, airplanes, cars and trains as well as that
of terminal unit is discussed actively. Discussion about supporting network mobility method is progressing vigorously in IETF NEMO WG[2]. First, NEMO
WG established the extended Network Mobility(NEMO) basic protocol[3] from
the Mobile IPv6 in RFC 3963. It can oﬀer the seamless connectivity of internet
for terminals in mobile network. Furthermore, they have plans to standardize
the extended NEMO such as route optimization and multihoming.
The most distinguished feature of network mobility is that the mobile router,
not each node, is wholly responsible for maintaining the mobility. In other words,
whenever the point of internet connection is changed, only one signal of the MR
can replace several signals processed by each terminal. So, the signaling overhead of network is decreasing. Also, usual IPv6 appliances which don’t support
IP mobility can still use the internet even if the internet connection point is
changed. But, if the introduction of IPv6 can’t provide interoperability with
This work was supported by MIC and ITRC Project.
corresponding author.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part II, LNCS 3992, pp. 1016–1023, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

A Service Management Architecture for NEMO in IPv4 and IPv6 Networks

1017

existing IPv4 environment, it isn’t useful. Therefore, conversion technologies between IPv4 and IPv6 are essential. IETF Network Generation Transition Working Group(NGTrans WG) had already established transition technologies of dual
stack, tunneling, translator for ﬁxed hosts as its standard. But, mobility support
isn’t considered in these mechanisms.
If session connectivity is supported, mobile nodes and MNNs(Mobile Network
Nodes)[4] can move from IPv6 to IPv4 network. But, the session connectivity
for supporting mobility in the protocols such as Mobile IPv6 and NEMO isn’t
guaranteed because it isn’t compatible with the networks of diﬀerent versions.
Therefore, in this paper, we propose the architecture that guarantees to retain
session connectivity of the NEMO tunnel by the Tunnel Agent(TA) in case where
mobile network moves to the IPv4 network.

CN

When MR moves to IPv4 network, the
session between CN and MNN
is not maintained.

IPv4 Network
IPv6 Network

HA

BR

MR

MR
FN MNN

FA

Roaming

FN MNN

MR : Mobile Router
FA : Foreign Agent
BR : Border Router
HA : Home Agent
CN : Correspondent Node
FN : Fixed Node(Mobile Network)
MNN : Mobile Network Nodes

Fig. 1. Roaming scenario of Mobile Network

This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces some related works
such as dual stack, Doors mechanisms and IPv4 Care-of Address(CoA) Registration scheme. In section 3, we describe the operation of the TA and the MR.
Then we show the result of performance evaluations in section 4. Finally, we
conclude in section 5.

2

Related Works

The simplest mechanism for transition between Mobile IPv4[5] and Mobile IPv6
is a dual stack structure[6]. But, a designer must implement the dual stack
of the Mobile Node(MN) supporting each version of two mobility protocols.
When the terminal moves to other links, it needs to send signal to the Home
Agent(HA)[1][3][5] of IPv4 and IPv6 networks to keep connectivity. For example, when terminals move to the network of another version, they have the burden which must process all Registration Request[5] and Registration Reply[5]
messages in Mobile IPv4, Binding Update(BU)[1] and Binding Acknowledgement(BA)[1] messages in Mobile IPv6.
Doors mechanism[7] suggests using a ‘Doors Router’ between IPv4 and IPv6
networks. In this mechanism, when an MR moves to a Private IPv4 network as
well as a Public IPv4 network, sessions of each network are maintained. But,
when the MR roams to the IPv4 network, MNNs carry tunneled packet of IPv4IPv6-IPv6 headers to an HA. Then tunnel overhead increases additionally.
IPv4 CoA Registration mechanism[8] is introduced to reduce tunnel overhead
compared with tunnel in the Doors mechanism. When the MR moves to IPv4
network, it adds an option including the IPv4 CoA in the BU message. And the

1018

J.H. Kim, C.S. Hong, and D.S. Kim

MR registers the IPv4 CoA of the MR to the HA which carries packets with a
reduced IP header, IPv4-IPv6, to the MNNs. So, the tunnel overhead decreases.

3

Proposed Architecture

This paper proposes an architecture for supporting mobility through a TA when
an MR including MNNs move to an IPv4 network. That is, as the TA relays
tunnel end point of IPv6 and IPv4 networks, a NEMO tunnel is kept to work.
Basically, the TA and the MR are dual stack(IPv4/IPv6) structure, and the MR
must include the minimal Mobile IPv4 protocol function which can process an
Agent Advertisement[5] message to compose an IPv4 CoA in the IPv4 network
environment. In other words, the signaling overhead of the proposed architecture
decreases as compared to the other proposed scheme using the dual stack which
has all functions of Mobile IPv4 and Mobile IPv6 protocols.
Obtaining the Tunnel End Point Address. We assume that an HA already
knows TA’s IPv4/IPv6 addresses. For instance, when the HA gets tunnel end
point address automatically, it gets IPv4/IPv6 addresses of the TA in current
network using DSTM[9]. But, if the HA cannot use the DSTM, it can use conﬁgured address. Figure 2 is a proposed message format of Home Agent Address
Discovery Request/Reply[3] messages which has a “V” ﬂag and a Tunnel Agent
Information(TAI) option additionally. If the MR moves to the IPv4 network, and
wants to maintain its session from the TA, it sets the “V” ﬂag and sends the
Home Agent Address Discovery Request message by an Anycast address. Then,
the HA knows the tunnel end point address and responds the Home Agent Address Discovery Reply message which includes the TAI option with the “V” ﬂag
to the MR. At this time, the TAI option must include the TA’s IPv4/IPv6 addresses necessarily, and the MR must store this information.
0

7

15

Type

Code
R V

Identifier
0

7

15

Type

Code
Identifier

R V

23
Checksum
Reserved

31

23
Checksum
Reserved

31

Home Agent Addresses

Type

Length
Reserved
Tunnel Agent IPv4 Address

[ Home Agent Address
Discovery Request ]

[ Home Agent Address Discovery Reply /
Tunnel Agent Information Option ]

Tunnel Agent IPv6 Address

Fig. 2. Home Agent Address Discovery Request/Reply and Tunnel Agent Information(TAI) option message format

Movement Detection of IPv4 Networks and Home Registration. If we
use the mechanism deﬁned in the NEMO basic protocol standard, mobility of
the MNNs in the MR which roams only in the IPv6 network can be supported
without any problem. If the MR already knows the TA’s address through Home
Agent Address Discovery mechanism[3], mobility can be supported in the IPv4
network. This paper assumes that the MR has dual stack and has the minimum
functionality to compose the IPv4 CoA for detecting movement in the IPv4

A Service Management Architecture for NEMO in IPv4 and IPv6 Networks
0

15

7

A H L KM R V

Reserved

23
Sequence #

Lifetime

Mobility options
[ Binding Update Message with “V” Flag ]

31

0

7

15

23
31
K R V Reserved

Status
Sequence #

1019

Lifetime
Mobility options

[ Binding Acknowledgement Message with “V” Flag ]

Fig. 3. Binding Update/Acknowledgement messages format

Fig. 4. Home Registration process and Tunnel Agent architecture

network. That is, the MR can detect movement in the IPv4 network by receiving
the Agent Advertisement message and compose the IPv4 CoA.
If the MR detects its movement in the IPv4 network, then the MR sends the
BU message with the “V” ﬂag to the HA in order to register the information.
Figure 3 shows BU and BA messages format having the “V” ﬂag.
Figure 4 shows the address mapping table of the TA, the HA’s binding cache
table architecture and the BU message format which the MR sends to the HA.
The MR composes the source address of the BU message as own CoA in the
NEMO basic protocol. But, in this paper, when the MR moves to the IPv4 network, it sends the BU message to the HA, its source address is decided by the
tunnel end point’s IPv6 address which is known by the MR already. And the
MR sends the encapsulated the IPv4 header to the TA. In other words, an IPv4
protocol number in the BU header ﬁeld must be 41 to inform that it is the IPv6
packet, source address is the MR’s IPv4 CoA, and destination address is the TA’s
IPv4 address. After the TA receives the BU message, it decapsulates the IPv4
header and forward it to the HA. The HA receives the BU from the TA registers
the MR’s CoA moving to the IPv4. Therefore, as the source address of the BU
message is the TA’s IPv6 address, the HA makes the MR’s IPv6 CoA to the TA’s
IPv6 address and updates binding cache[3]. The HA sends all packets to the TA
while the MR moves to the IPv4 network. The reason is that the CoA which is
mapped to an MR’s home address[3] in binding cache had the TA’s IPv6 address.
NEMO Tunnel Setup. If BU and BA messages are exchanged successfully
between the HA and the TA, the NEMO tunnel is established. In the NEMO
basic protocol, when the MNNs communicate with a Correspondent Node(CN),
packets are always transmitted through an HA-MR tunnel[3]. Therefore, it is the
most important that the NEMO tunnel is maintained. In case the MR moves

1020

J.H. Kim, C.S. Hong, and D.S. Kim

to the IPv4 network, because an HA-MR tunnel cannot be kept continuously,
the TA must manage tunnel cache so that NEMO tunnel between the HA and
the MR can be kept. In dual stack structure and Doors mechanism, three IP
headers, IPv4-IPv6-IPv6 are created. But, in this paper, the MR establishes an
eﬃcient a TA-MR(IPv6 in IPv4) tunnel considering handoﬀ to other links in the
IPv4 network. The HA makes a IPv6-IPv6 tunnel between the HA and the TA
because the MR’s CoA is established to the TA’s address. And the TA ﬁnishes
the home registration processes of the MR after creating a IPv4-IPv6 tunnel
with the MR. If the MR moves to another link within the IPv4 network, the
MR sends the BU message and the TA receives this message. Then we need to
only set the TA-MR tunnel. That is, only the TA’s tunnel end point is changed
and the HA-TA tunnel(IPv6-IPv6) isn’t changed. Therefore, additional signaling
between the TA and the HA can be reduced.
CN Communicates with MNN. When the CN communicates with the MR’s
MNNs which move to the IPv4 network, packets are transmitted like ﬁgure 5.
First, if the CN sends a packet to the MNNs, the HA intercepts the packet because the destination address is an MR’s mobile network preﬁx[4]. After searching the binding cache entry, the HA forwards the packet to the TA using the
HA-TA tunnel because registration of the MR’s IPv6 CoA to the TA’s IPv6 address. If the TA receives the packet from the HA, it transmits the packet to the
MR’s IPv4 CoA which is the tunnel end point of the TA-MR tunnel. Simultaneity, the TA searches mapping table and translates IPv6 and IPv4 headers. This
process uses methods such as header translation mechanism of NAT-PT[11] and
SIIT[12]. If the MR receives all packets through the TA-MR tunnel it decapsulates a packet of them for removing its IPv4 header. Finally, the MR forwards the
packet to the MNNs. On the contrary, the packet transmitted from the MNNs
to the CN is the format that the source address is changed to the destination
address as ﬁgure 5 shows.
IPv4 CoA De-registration. If the MR returns from the IPv4 network to the
IPv6 network, it sends the BU message of which the “V” ﬂag isn’t sets to the
TA. After that, the TA must release the TA-MR tunnel and remove the tunnel
cache. And the TA forwards the BU message to the HA. If the HA receives the
BU for de-registration, it updates the CoA with actual the MR’s CoA instead

IPv6 Network
CN

IPv4 Network

HA

TA

IPv6 Network
MR

MNN

Packet Forward
IPv6 : CNv6

→ MNNv6

CN : Correspondent Node
HA : Home Agent
TA : Tunnel Agent
MR : Mobile Router
MNN : Mobile Network Nodes
CoA : CareCare-of Address

Intercept the packet
for Mobile Network
HA-TA Tunnel
IPv6 : HAv6
TAv6
IPv6 : CNv6
MNNv6

→
→

IPv6 Header
Translation

CNv6 : CN’
CN’s IPv6 Address
MNNv6 : MNN’
MNN’s IPv6 Address
HAv6 : HA’
HA’s IPv6 Address
TAv6 : TA’
TA’s IPv6 Address
TAv4 : TA’
TA’s IPv4 Address
MR CoAv4 : MR’
MR’s IPv4 CoA

TA-MR Tunnel
IPv4 : TAv4
IPv6 : CNv6

→ MR CoAv4
→ MNNv6
IPv4 Header
Decapsulation
IPv6 : CNv6

→ MNNv6

Fig. 5. Communication process ﬂowchart between CN and MNN

A Service Management Architecture for NEMO in IPv4 and IPv6 Networks

1021

of the TA’s address in the binding cache. The handoﬀ in IPv6 network is similar
to the operation deﬁned in the NEMO basic protocol standard. In other words,
communication between the MNNs and the CN uses the HA-MR tunnel.

4

Performance Measures and Analysis

We can show that the proposed architecture is eﬃcient by measuring the handoﬀ
signaling and the packet delay. Figure 6 is the network topology for measurement of the delay. Figure 6(a) shows one scenario of the MR’s handoﬀ in an
IPv4 network after the node roams from the IPv6 to the IPv4 network. And
ﬁgure 6(b) shows another scenario that MNNs which move to the IPv4 network
communicates with the network which includes an HA and a CN in other IPv6
networks. The following ﬁgure 6(c) and equation is referred from [12]. Figure
6(c) shows parameters that indicate meaning and value of each symbol for measuring the performance.
Handoﬀ Signaling Delay. As the MR goes away from the HA in the IPv4
network, an HD measures the value of handoﬀ delay. In other words, we calculate
the handoﬀ delay as the hop count is increasing in the IPv4 network(The hop
count of the IPv6 network isn’t changed). The delay of handoﬀ signaling in the
two mechanisms is shown in ﬁgure 6(a):
• In Doors mechanism, the MR should communicate BU/BA messages with
the own the HA directly when it handoﬀs in the IPv4 network.
HD = 2(

+L
)·H6−H
LF A−M R ·H4−M
(L
LF A−M R
)+ T A−HABWHA−T A
+2( BW
)
BWwired
wired
wireless

(1)

+4Lwired +2Lwireless

• Because a TA handles BU/BA messages in the handoﬀ of the proposed
architecture, it is more eﬃcient than the Doors mechanism.
HD=2(

LF A−M R ·H4−M
LF A−M R
)+2(
)+2Lwired +2Lwireless
BWwired
BWwireless

Symbol

Meaning

LCN − TA
LT A − H A

IP header + payload length of the packet from CN to TA

L HA − TA
LTA − FA

IP header + payload length of the packet from HA to TA

Value

IP header + payload length of the packet from TA to HA

IP header + payload length of the packet from TA to FA

LFA − MR

IP header + payload length of the packet from FA to MR

LMR − MNN

IP header + payload length of the packet from MR to MNN

BWwired

Bandwidth of wired links

BWwireless

Bandwidth of wireless links

L w ired

Propagation delay + link layer delay of wired links

Lwireless

Propagation delay + link layer delay of wireless links

H
H

Number of hops belong to HA’s IPv6 Networks

6−H

(2)

6−C

Number of hops belong to CN’s IPv6 Networks

H 4− M

Number of hops belong to MR’s IPv4 Networks

100 Mb/s
11 Mb/s
0.5 ms
2 ms

(c) Parameters for measuring performance
(b) The End-to-End Packet Delay

Fig. 6. Network topology, scenario and parameters for delay evaluation

1022

J.H. Kim, C.S. Hong, and D.S. Kim
40

Handoff Delay (ms)

Packet Delay (ms)

Doors
Proposed Schme

35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
2

3

4

5
6
7
8
9
Number of Hops

90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

10 11 12

(a) Handoff Signaling Delay

Doors
Proposed Scheme

40

60

80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Payload Length (bytes)

(b) The End-to-End Packet Delay

Fig.7. Performance measures and analysis

Figure 7(a) shows the result of handoﬀ signaling delay. It means that the proposed architecture provides fast handoﬀ when the MR moves within the IPv4
network.
End-to-End Packet Delay. A PD measures the values of the packet delay
when the CN communicates with the MNNs in the MR which roam from the IPv6
to the IPv4 network. We calculated the values of the packet delay by increasing
the payload length. The delay of end-to-end packet in the two mechanisms is the
shown in ﬁgure 6(b):
• In Doors mechanism, the packet delay of the IPv6 network which includes
the HA is occurred because the MNNs communicates with the CN through
the HA.
PD =

LCN −T A ·H6−C (LT A−HA +LHA−T A )·H6−H LT A−F A ·H4−M
+
+
BWwired
BWwired
BWwired
LF A−M R +LM R−M N N
+
+4Lwired +2Lwireless
BWwireless

(3)

• The proposed architecture forwards packets to the MR directly through a
TA-MR tunnel without relaying. So we can reduce the packet delay in the
IPv6 network which includes the HA because the packet cannot be carried
to the HA.
PD =

LCN −T A ·H6−C LT A−F A ·H4−M LF A−M R +LM R−M N N
+
+
BWwired
BWwired
BWwireless
+2Lwired +2Lwireless

(4)

Figure 7(b) shows the result of the end-to-end packet delay. We can see that
packet delay decreases as the packet length increases in the proposed architecture
compared with Doors mechanism.

5

Conclusion and Future Work

In this paper, we proposed an eﬃcient method to support the seamless mobility
to IPv4 network through a TA in NEMO protocol supporting the mobility only in
IPv6 network. We reduced the signaling overhead by minimizing the Mobile IPv4
protocol stack which compared with dual stack mechanism. When a CN carries

A Service Management Architecture for NEMO in IPv4 and IPv6 Networks

1023

packets to the IPv4 network, the tunnel overhead is decreased by using IPv4-IPv6
headers through a TA-MR tunnel. Also, we decreased additional binding message
between HAs by registering to the TA. Results of Performance measurement
show that the proposed mechanism minimizes the handoﬀ and the packet delay.
The TA is used with 6to4 Router, DSTM-TEP, ISTAP and NAT-PT. So, The
TA supports transitions to mobile routers and mobile nodes as well as static
hosts between IPv4 and IPv6 networks. In future work, we will implement and
verify the proposed architecture of this paper.

References
1. D. Johnson, C. Perkins, J. Arkko, “Mobility Support in IPv6”, IETF RFC 3775,
June 2004.
2. IETF NEMO Working Group, “http://ietf.org/html.charters/nemo-charter.html”.
3. V. Devarapalli, R. Wakikawa, A. Petrescu, P. Thubert, “Network Mobility (NEMO)
Basic Support Protocol”, IETF RFC 3963, January 2005.
4. T. Ernst, H-Y. Lach, “Network Mobility Support Terminology”, draft-ietf-nemoterminology-04, October 2005.
5. C. Perkins, “IP Mobility Support for IPv4”, IETF RFC 3220, January 2002.
6. H. Soliman, G. Tsirtsis, “Dual Stack Mobile IPv64”, draft-soliman-v4v6-mipv4-02,
July 2005.
7. P. Thubert, P. Molteni, P. Wetterwald, “IPv4 traversal for MIPv6 based Mobile
Routers”, draft-thubert-nemo-ipv4-traversal-01, May 2003.
8. R. Wakikawa, C. Williams, K. Uehara, J. Murai, “IPv4 Care-of Address Registration”, draft-wakikawa-nemo-v4tunnel-01, February 2005.
9. J. Bound, L. Toutain, JL. Richier, “Dual Stack IPv6 Dominant Transition Mechanism (DSTM)”, draft-bound-dstm-exp-04, October 2005.
10. G. Tsirtsis, P. Srisuresh, “Network Address Translation Protocol Translation
(NAT-PT)”, IETF RFC 2766, February 2000.
11. E. Nordmark, “Stateless IP/ICMP Translation Algorithm (SIIT)”, IETF RFC
2765, February 2000.
12. N. Banerjee, “Mobility Support in Wireless Internet”, IEEE Wireless Commun.,
vol.10, no.5, pp.54-61, October 2003.

