Construction of Small World Networks Based on
K-Means Clustering Analysis
Jianyu Li1 , Rui Lv1 , Zhanxin Yang1 , Shuzhong Yang2 ,
Hongwei Mo3 , and Xianglin Huang1
1

3

School of Computer Science and Software,
Communication University of China, Beijing, China
{lijianyu, lvrui, yangzx, huangxianglin }@cuc.edu.cn
2
School of Computer and Information Technology, Beijing
Jiaotong University, 100044 Beijing, China
yangshuzhong@163.com
School of Automation, Harbin Engineering University, 150001 Harbin, China

Abstract. In this paper we present a new method to create small world
networks based on K-means clustering analysis. Because of the close relationship between the small world networks and the data with clustering
characteristics, the resulting networks based on K-means method have
many properties of small world networks including small average distance, right skewed degree distribution, and the clustering eﬀect. Moreover the constructing process also has shown some behaviors including
networks formation and evolution of small world networks.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the discovery of small-world, scale-free and community properties
of many natural and artiﬁcial complex networks has stimulated a great deal
of interest in studying the underlying organizing principles of various complex
networks, which has led to dramatic advances in this emerging and active ﬁeld
of research [1, 2, 3, 4, 5].
Considering the features of complex networks, a novel idea about how to
construct the networks is to ﬁnd the relationship between networks and data
with clustering features. Unlike the model of Watts and Strogatz [1], we ﬁnd
an alternate route to generate the complex networks, especially to construct the
small-world networks based on k-mean cluster analysis.
Many data sets from nature and society have the clustering characteristics.
Like most data sets, most real networks also have the clustering property, especially in social networks [1]. In social networks, there are usually some groups of
nodes (also called communities or modules), where nodes in each group are more
likely connected with each other than to the rest of the networks [6]. One question could be given: ”Could clustering analysis be used to construct relationships
between them? Could networks be generated using data cluster analysis? From
the above analysis, cluster analysis method (K-means method) could serve as
a bridge exploring the relationship between them, and construct the networks
based on the given data.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part I, LNCS 3991, pp. 997–1000, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

998

2

J. Li et al.

The New Method Based on KM Algorithm

Procedure of our method based on k-means algorithm is given as below:
1. Place k points into the space represented by the objects that are being
clustered. These points represent initial group centroids;
2. Assign each point to the group that has the closest centroid;
3. When all points have been assigned, recalculate the positions of the k centroids. Find the points nearest to the centroids and connect the nearest
points obtained at the ith and the (i + 1)th step in the same cluster. The
measurement used here is Euclidean distance;
4. Repeat Steps 2 and 3 until the centroids no longer move. This produces a
separation of all the points into groups from which the metric to be minimized can be calculated;
5. Repeat Steps 1, 2, 3 and 4 until all the possible and diﬀerent initial Cnk cases
are carried out.
Remark 1. There exist many factors, which aﬀect the clustering analysis results
such as number of clusters, the algorithm (k-means or fuzzy k-means method
may be used), the data distribution, and the measurement of the data. Since the
resulting complex networks are generated by the K-means method, the structure
and topology of the networks will be aﬀected by these factors.

3

Properties of the Resulting Networks

The properties of the clustering path
In order to analyze the networks in detail, all the clustering paths are to be
divided into two classes. One is called local clustering path whose vertices belong
to the same cluster, the other is called global clustering path whose vertices
come from diﬀerent clusters, see Fig.1. Generally the local paths are relatively
short and won’t ﬂuctuate remarkably, at the end it terminates near the same
cluster centroid. The global paths are long and they will go through the points
which belong to other clusters, but later it will become stable and stop near one
cluster centroid. From above analysis, we can conclude the paths show clustering
properties. In any cases, because of the feature of K-means method, all paths
avoid the long range connections and the global paths play the role of shortcuts
to connect diﬀerent clusters.
Statistics properties of the networks
In this part we will investigate properties of the resulting networks. We quantify
the structural properties of these networks by their characteristic path length L,
clustering coeﬃcient C, and degree distribution P (k). The characteristic path
length, L, is the path length averaged over all pairs of nodes. The path length
d(i, j) is the number of edges in the shortest path between nodes i and j. The
clustering coeﬃcient is a measure of the cliqueness of the local neighborhoods.
For a node with k neighbors, then at most k(k − 1)/2 edges can exist among

Construction of Small World Networks

999

2
start point
1
local path

0
global path
−1
start point
−2
−2

0

2

4

6

8

10

Fig. 1. The resulting clustering paths. Here the data consist of two classes of points
which are represented by the plus (+) and circle (o) sign.

them. The clustering of a node is the fraction of these allowable edges that occur.
The clustering coeﬃcient, C, is the average clustering over all the nodes in the
graph. The degree of a vertex in a network is the number of edges incident on
(i.e., connected to) that vertex. We deﬁne P (k) to be the fraction of vertices in
the network that have degree k.
Example 1
The data (x, y) was generated from two bivariate independent Gaussian distributions (X1 , X2 ), Xi ∼ N (μi , σi ) and (Y1 , Y2 ), Yi ∼ N (μi , σi ), i = 1, 2 with
diﬀerent means μ1 = 0, μ2 = 3, and same variances σ1 = σ2 = 1. Half of the data
was generated from (X1 , X2 ), (Y1 , Y2 ) respectively.Hence the number of clusters
is two.
The average path length L of the resulting networks is close to that of a
random graph with the same size and average degree, 2.4 compared with 3.07,
but its clustering coeﬃcient C is more than 20 times higher than a random
graph, 0.4005 vs. 0.0175. From the analysis, the resulting networks show small
world feature.
In Fig.2(a), we show the networks’ degree distributions. The degree distributions of the networks are often highly skewed and diﬀers from the Poisson
distribution. It’s at the border between Poisson and power law distribution.
Example 2
The Data (x1 , x2 ) was generated from independent bivariate Gaussian distributions (X1 , X2 ), Xi ∼ N (μ, σ) with diﬀerent means μ = 5 and variances σ = 1,
and independent bivariate standard Cauchy distributions (Y1 , Y2 ), the probability density function of is
1
0 2
πγ[1 + ( x−x
γ ) ]
where x0 = 0, γ = 1. The data has 400 points, and 200 points was obtained from
(X1 , X2 ),(Y1 , Y2 ) respectively.

1000

J. Li et al.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 2. (a)The degree distribution of the data with 600 points shown in example 1,
(b)The degree distribution of the data with 600 points shown in example 2

This resulting graph has a small world structure, with: C = 0.5004 >>
Crand = 0.04, and L = 2.9270 and Lrand = 3.3219 are very close.
The degree distribution in Fig.2(b) showed Poisson distribution feature with
a long tail.

4

Conclusion and Research in the Future

In this paper we presented the method based on k-means clustering analysis to
create the networks. Although it is easy to understand the method, the idea is
novel. We use the clustering thought which may be the nature of the universe and
construct the relationships between data and networks. The experiments show
that the generating networks has many properties which distinguishes itself from
other existing complex networks. The generating networks can describe many
phenomena of complex networks such as small world eﬀect, and the evolution
behavior. Moreover, a good and proper explanation for the formation of the small
world networks topology is presented due to the given data’s clustering feature.
Finally, in future work, the factors that inﬂuence the formation and topology of
the resulting networks will be discussed.

References
1. D. J. Watts et al: Collective dynamics of ‘small-world’ networks. Nature 393, 440-442
(1998).
2. S. N. Dorogovtsev et al: Evolution of networks. Advances in Physics 51, 1079-1187.
3. M. E. J. Newman: The structure and function of complex networks. SIAM Review
45, 167-256 (2003).
4. A.L. Barab´
asi and R. Albert: Emergence of scaling in random networks. Science ,
286, 509-512 (1999).
5. A. R. Barab´
asi, A.L. and H. Jeong: Scale-free characteristics of random networks:
The topology of the World Wide Web. Physica A 281, 69-77 (2000).
6. M. E. J. Newman and M. Girvan: Finding and evaluating community structure in
networks. Phys. Rev. E 69:026113 (2004).

