Pedestrian Modelling: A Comparative Study
Using Agent-Based Cellular Automata
Nicole Ronald and Michael Kirley
The University of Melbourne
Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia
{naron, mkirley}@csse.unimelb.edu.au

Abstract. In this paper, we examine pedestrian population dynamics
using agent-based cellular automata models. Each pedestrian is treated
as an agent, mapped onto a 2-dimensional grid. The behaviour of each
agent is modelled as a sequence of speciﬁc choices reﬂecting diﬀerent levels of autonomy. Simulations of bi-directional agent movement for four
behaviours in diﬀerent environments (corridors of diﬀerent widths with
permanent blocks such as walls) are conducted in order to identify outcomes of the behaviours and recommend a strategy. The results suggest
that the “lookahead” behaviour, whilst similar to the “deterministic” behaviour, was strategically the best. Little diﬀerence was found between
the “ﬂoor ﬁelds” and “random walk” behaviours.

1

Introduction

Creating simulations of pedestrian behaviour is diﬃcult [1]. Walking behaviour is
largely unconscious, less constrained and consequently less predictable than vehicle traﬃc. However, predictions of pedestrian behaviour are required for making
decisions about the design of pedestrian facilities or creating management plans
for pedestrian events.
Many approaches have been developed for modelling pedestrian behaviour
at both macroscopic/aggregate levels and microscopic/disaggregate levels [2].
Agent-based cellular automata (CA) represent one class of model, which encapsulate fundamental movement rules at the microscopic level. These models have
been used mainly for experimenting with detailed design of pedestrian areas by
modelling operational (ie. stepping) decisions. The rules developed for models
of pedestrian behaviour are reﬁned with the macroscopic behaviour in mind
(such as lane formation) and are not accurately based on real-life operational
behaviour [3].
In this paper, we investigate some common behavioural rules used in agentbased CA models of pedestrian behaviour and identify similarities between simple rulesets and more complex and ‘realistic’ rulesets. Each pedestrian is treated
as an agent, mapped onto a 2-dimensional grid of a CA. Here, the behaviour
of each agent is modelled as a sequence of speciﬁc choices reﬂecting diﬀerent
levels of autonomy. An important contribution of this work is the comparative analysis of alternative agent behaviours. We limit our investigations to: (a)
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part III, LNCS 3993, pp. 248–255, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

Pedestrian Modelling

249

bi-directional agent movement in diﬀerent environments (corridors of diﬀerent
widths with permanent blocks such as walls), and (b) examining the eﬀects of
pedestrian density and resulting macroscopic properties of the model. In the
next section, the simulation environment is outlined, followed by a description
of the behaviours modelled. In section 3, experimental results are presented. We
conclude with a summary of the paper and the implications of this work.

2
2.1

Simulation Model Framework
Agent-Based CA approach

The main components in the model are the environment (CA grid) and the
pedestrians (agents). This segregation between environment and agents provides
the necessary ﬂexibility to model individual pedestrian behaviour independently,
and subsequently complex interactions can be captured. The environment can
have global properties or cell properties. The cell properties form a ﬁeld over the
environment - that is, the Moore-neighbourhood cells can have an eﬀect on a
cell. In this study, we are dealing in abstract time and space, however, we could
assign real-world sizes to the cell dimensions and time steps based on current
pedestrian design theory. Agents occupy cells in the CA grid. They attempt to
move towards their destination by selecting an unoccupied neighbouring site.
Agents require a direction (either up or down) and the developer can create
properties as they like (such as speed, familiarity, current cell). These properties
are manipulated when the agent moves.
The simulation model has been developed in Java using object-oriented principles. It is essentially a framework, which permits the developer to create and manipulate their own environment and pedestrian properties. As such, it is similar
to the geosimulation framework developed for geographic automata systems [1].
2.2

Modelling Pedestrian Behaviours

Many rules have been developed for agent-based CA models of pedestrian behaviour. In this study, we focus on four behaviours to compare their performance.
Is the simple model as good as the more ‘realistic’ model?
Random walk. The simplest behaviour is a random walk. This involves randomly selecting a neighbouring existing cell (ie. one that is not blocked or outside the environment). This behaviour was included as a “base” case to compare
against.
Deterministic. The next behaviour uses a deterministic rule-based agent. This
agent tries to move forward. If the cell is occupied or does not exist (ie. it is
outside the environment or is blocked), it tries forward right or forward left. If
neither of these cells exist, it tries immediate left or immediate right.

250

N. Ronald and M. Kirley

Lookahead. This behaviour uses a “lookahead” procedure to determine whether
to continue in the same lane or change lanes [4]. In short, the pedestrians look
ahead a number of cells in their current lane and the lanes to their left and
right. If there is someone ahead of them moving in the same direction, then the
gap distance is set at the actual distance to that pedestrian. If there is someone
ahead of them who is moving in the opposite direction, then the gap distance
is set to half the actual distance. The pedestrian then chooses the lane with the
maximal gap and ties between gap distance are broken randomly.
Floor fields. This behaviour [5] uses the concept of static and dynamic ﬂoor
ﬁelds to guide the pedestrians. The static ﬂoor ﬁeld consists of the distance to
a speciﬁc activity or exit. The dynamic ﬂoor ﬁeld consists of the number of
pedestrians who have passed through the cell on the way to a speciﬁc activity
of exit. Each agent has a parameter that dictates whether they follow the static
ﬂoor ﬁeld more (representing those who are familiar with the environment) or
the dynamic ﬂoor ﬁeld more (representing those unfamiliar with the environment
who will follow other pedestrian going to the same destination).
This behaviour has also been developed by [6] and we partially adopted a
variation from this work. In crowded situations, the agents are surrounded by
other agents, therefore all cells returned a probability of 0. This meant the agent
did not attempt to move, leading to total gridlock.
The crux of the behaviour is shown in equation 1, which shows the calculation
of the transition probability from the current cell i to a neighbouring cell j.
Contributions to the probability are the static ﬂoor ﬁeld S, the dynamic ﬂoor
ﬁeld D, the pedestrian’s preference for moving in that direction M , whether the
cell is occupied or not n (which is always 1 – unoccupied – in this model) and
whether the cell exists or not e. The probabilities are normalised by the factor N .
pij = N Mij Dij Sij nj ej

(1)

In each time step, each agent chooses their next cell. If two or more agents
have chosen the same cell, the collision rules decide who moves to that cell and
who stays in their current cell. The rules are based on the principles in [7],
however for this set of results the friction parameter was set to 0.

3
3.1

Experiments and Discussion
Model Parameters

Two diﬀerent environment sizes were used in this study. The environment was
200 cells long (L) and the width was either 15 or 20 cells (W ). For some runs, a
permanent blockage was introduced in the form of two doors at L/2. Four density
values (D) were used to vary to the volume of agents (V ): D = {0.1,0.3,0.5,0.7}
and V = D×W ×L. These densities provide conditions ranging from free-ﬂowing
to very congested. Half of the agents started at the top of the environment and
half at the bottom. The agents were randomly assigned entry times between 0
and L/2 and a starting cell in the ﬁrst row.

Pedestrian Modelling

251

60

Distance/L

50

Distance
Time

40
30
20
10
0
0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7
Random Deterministic Lookahead Floor fields

500
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0

Time/L

Time and Distance
Varying Density

Fig. 1. Time and distance travelled divided by the length L of the environment

Movement and collision resolution was synchronous and all agents moved
at most one cell per timestep. A simulation trial was run until all pedestrians reached their destination or L × 100, whichever occurred ﬁrst. Each scenario (environment-agent behaviour) was run several times with diﬀerent random seeds.
3.2

Results

A range of simulation model outputs were recorded during each trial, including
the distance covered by each agent, the time they were in the model, the number
of collisions, and entropy. All results presented are an average over all trials.
The time and distance plots (Figure 1) show that the agents using the random
and ﬂoor ﬁelds behaviours take longer to move through the environment. The
deterministic and lookahead behaviours are more eﬃcient.
The stops due to collisions plots (Figure 2) show that the agents using the random and ﬂoor ﬁelds behaviours are delayed due to collisions a similar amount.
The deterministic behaviour performs well at low densities. However, this degrades quickly at higher densities. The lookahead behaviour appears to be approaching a maximum.
The snapshots (Figure 3) show the diﬀerences between the behaviours at the
same point in time. The random and ﬂoor ﬁeld behaviours cluster in the centre,
whilst the deterministic agents have all moved to the right and out of each other’s
way. Given their rule set, which is to move right before left, this is expected. The
lookahead behaviour is also clustered, but in one large cluster. The diﬀerences
between densities for the same behaviour (lookahead) are also clear. At the time
for the lowest density, the agents have almost reached their destinations. At the
higher densities, a cluster has formed, but agents are still moving.
In order to investigate the population dynamics in more detail, the Shannon
entropy [8] of agent movement throughout a trial were recorded. This was used to
compare the similarity of behaviours. An inspection of the entropy plots (Figures

252

N. Ronald and M. Kirley
Stops Due To Collisions
2500

Stops

Stops/Pedestrian

2000
1500
1000
500
0
0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7
Random
Deterministic Lookahead
Floor fields

Fig. 2. The average number of times a pedestrian stops due to a collision

4 and 5) reveals that the peaks of the plots occur when the types of movement
are evenly split ie. half the agents are moving and half are stopped. The troughs
correspond to the situation where the agents are mostly doing the same thing
ie. all moving or all stopped. The results for deterministic behaviour and the
lookahead behaviour are similar, while the random and the ﬂoor ﬁelds behaviours
are similar to each other. In this simple environment, the ﬂoor ﬁeld behaviour
is essentially an ‘intelligent’ random choice. The entropy plots also show that
the behaviours go through similar phases throughout their run. Model runs with
a larger number of pedestrians have similar peaks and troughs, but translated
along the time axis.
For densities 30% and above, the deterministic and lookahead behaviours
have a trough around t=100 and a peak around t=150 (Figure 4). At t=100,
the agents who entered the model ﬁrst have reached the centre. Up until this
point, they could move freely as they were surrounded by pedestrians moving in
their direction. However, at the centre they encounter pedestrians moving in the
other direction and therefore collisions start occurring. At t=150, the two middle
quarters are full of pedestrians, with very few pedestrians in the end quarters.
The agents who entered the model ﬁrst are encountering the last of the agents
heading in the other direction. After this time, agents start to move freely again.
For the random and ﬂoor ﬁelds behaviours, there is a peak at t=250. As these
behaviours are more likely to move sideways than the other behaviours, they
take longer to reach the centre of the environment.
There are other peaks later on for some model runs. This usually occurs when
a crowd has formed that has impeded a lot of pedestrians, however pedestrians
are slowly making their way through. The peak occurs when there are more
pedestrians free of the crowd and making their way to the exit than in the
crowd still. The slight increase in width had minimal eﬀect on the behaviour.
From the simulation results, it is clear that in this simple rectangular environment the ﬂoor ﬁeld behaviour provides little advantage over the random
behaviour. The ﬂoor ﬁeld behaviour is more suited to a more complex situation

Pedestrian Modelling

253

Fig. 3. Modelled crowds at the same time (t=250) for diﬀerent behaviour and densities. The dark grey pedestrians are moving upwards, the light grey downwards. From
left: random-30%, ﬂoor ﬁelds-30%, deterministic-30%, lookahead-30%, lookahead-10%,
lookahead-50%, lookahead-70%.

254

N. Ronald and M. Kirley

Entropy

Entropy - Density 0.3
Area 3000, no blockages
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Random
Determinstic
Lookahead
Floor fields
0

200

400

600

800

1000 1200 1400 1600

Time

Fig. 4. Entropy plots for diﬀerent behaviours with density 30%

Entropy

Entropy - Lookahead behaviour
Area 3000, no blockages
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

V = 300, D = 0.1
V = 900, D = 0.3
V = 1500, D = 0.5
V = 2100, D = 0.7
0

200

400

600

800

1000 1200 1400 1600

Time

Fig. 5. Entropy plots for the lookahead behaviour at diﬀerent densities

with many choices for exits and/or activities. The deterministic and lookahead
behaviours were similar, however the lookahead behaviour performed better for
collisions at higher densities and the diﬀerences between distance and time travelled were negligible.

4

Conclusion

The main contribution of this paper was the presentation of a comparative analysis of agent-based CA models of pedestrian behaviour of varying complexity.
Simulation experiments using diﬀerent agent behaviours and environments
(bidirectional corridors with varying traﬃc volume) suggest that the lookahead
behaviour is the best strategy when moving through a simple environment, in
terms of the travel time and delays. The deterministic behaviour is also a good
strategy. The ﬂoor ﬁelds behaviour was the most complicated and ‘realistic’

Pedestrian Modelling

255

behaviour, however the random and ﬂoor ﬁeld behaviours do not perform as
well in simple environments. Similarities were identiﬁed in the outputs between
lookahead and deterministic and between random and ﬂoor ﬁelds, by investigating the entropy plots.
In future work, we aim to increase the complexity of the model (both the
environment and range of agent behaviours). The model will be populated with
agents exhibiting heterogeneous behaviours. Variable speed can also be introduced to the model. Assigning real-world values to the cell sizes and speeds and
validation (obviously at a smaller scale) will also be investigated.

References
1. Benenson, I., Torrens, P.N.: Geosimulation : automata-based modelling of urban
phenomena. John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ, USA (2004)
2. Harney, D.: Pedestrian modelling: current methods and future directions. Road &
Transport Research 11 (2002) 2–12
3. Hoogendoorn, S., Bovy, P.H.L.: Normative pedestrian behaviour theory and modelling. In Taylor, M.A.P., ed.: Proceedings of the 15th International Symposium on
Transportation and Traﬃc Theory. (2002)
4. Blue, V.J., Adler, J.L.: Cellular automata microsimulation of bi-directional pedestrian ﬂows. Transportation Research Record 1678 (2000) 125–141
5. Schadschneider, A.: Cellular automaton approach to pedestrian dynamics - theory. In Schreckenberg, M., Sharma, S., eds.: Pedestrian and Evacuation Dynamics.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin (2001)
6. Henein, C.M., White, T.: Agent-based modelling of forces in crowds. In Davidsson,
P., Gasser, L., Logan, B., Takadama, K., eds.: Multi-Agent and Multi-Agent-Based
Simulation. Volume 3415 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer-Verlag
(2004) 173–184
7. Kirchner, A., Nishinari, K., Schadschneider, A.: Friction eﬀects and clogging in a
cellular automaton model for pedestrian dynamics. Physical Review E 67 (2003)
8. Boschetti, F., Prokopenko, M., Macreadie, I., Grisogono, A.M.: Deﬁning and detecting emergence in complex networks. In Khosla, R., Howlett, R.J., Jain, L.C.,
eds.: Knowledge-Based Intelligent Information and Engineering Systems: 9th International Conference, KES 2005. Volume 3684 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science.
Springer-Verlag (2005) 573–580

