Multi-scale Modeling of Trauma Injury
Celina Imielinska1, Andrzej Przekwas2, and X.G. Tan2
1

Dept. of Biomedical Informatics and Dept. of Computer Science,
Columbia University,
701 W. 168th Str. HHSC 201, New York, NY 10032
ci42@columbia.edu
2
CFD Research Corp., 215 Wynn Drive, Huntsville, AL 35505
{ajp, xgt}@cfdrc.com

Abstract. We develop a multi-scale high fidelity biomechanical and
physiologically-based modeling tools for trauma (ballistic/impact and blast)
injury to brain, lung and spinal cord for resuscitation, treatment planning and
design of personnel protection. Several approaches have been used to study
blast and ballistic/impact injuries. Dummy containing pressure sensors and
synthetic phantoms of human organs have been used to study bomb blast and
car crashes. Large animals like pigs also have been equipped with pressure
sensors exposed to blast waves. But these methods do not anatomically and
physiologically biofidelic to humans, do not provide full optimization of body
protection design and require animal sacrifice. Anatomy and medical image
based high-fidelity computational modeling can be used to analyze injury
mechanisms and to optimize the design of body protection. This paper presents
novel approach of coupled computational fluid dynamics (CFD) and
computational structures dynamics (CSD) to simulate fluid (air, cerebrospinal
fluid) solid (cranium, brain tissue) interaction during ballistic/blast impact. We
propose a trauma injury simulation pipeline concept staring from anatomy and
medical image based high fidelity 3D geometric modeling, extraction of tissue
morphology, generation of computational grids, multiscale biomechanical and
physiological simulations, and data visualization.

1 Introduction
Primary blast injury (PBI) results from an interaction of pressure wave with the
human body, and gas filled organs, ear, lungs, and gastrointestinal track. A typical
explosion creates a shock wave traveling at three to five times the speed of sound.
Temperature across the shock wave can increase over 1000 degrees Celsius near the
explosion and pressure can increase abruptly to more than 20 atmospheres, Fig. 1.
Closed spaces such as rooms and street canyons cause reflections and shock wave
interference patterns that can amplify pressure changes. A large percentage of fatal
blast injuries result from PBIs, in which the shock wave directly damages the lungs
through violent, localized pressure changes. Because a shock wave travels faster in
liquids and solids than air, organs like the lungs, intestines, and inner ear are damaged
by shear stresses when a shock wave reaches tissue-gas interfaces. The lungs are most
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part IV, LNCS 3994, pp. 822 – 830, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

Multi-scale Modeling of Trauma Injury

823

vulnerable to PBIs because they contain large surface areas of fragile alveoli where
oxygen is exchanged for carbon dioxide. Differences in wave propagation mechanics
at the interface between air and blood in alveolar membranes cause large
deformations of lung tissue that collapse alveolar sacs, tear alveolar membranes and
rupture blood vessels. The extent of lung injury is a decisive parameter for mortality
in victims surviving an explosion. Because the symptoms of primary blast injury are
often delayed, victims may not receive timely treatment.

Fig. 1. Blast wave dynamics – injury potential

We are seeking to mathematically model blast wave interaction with human body
and ballistic/impact injury to the vital human organs. This modeling effort requires a
combination of diverse disciplines including gas and human body dynamics, tissue
biomechanics, and the pathophysiology of organ damage.

2 Material and Methods
We demonstrate a 3D modeling pipeline starting with acquisition of data from various
imaging modalities that can provide the most detailed anatomy, to high fidelity FEM
modeling. This high-fidelity simulation combining right mathematical models
describing body dynamics, tissue biomechanics, and injury pathophysiology requires
detailed geometry and material properties of the organs (torso/lung, head/brain). Such
information has to be extracted from anatomical data and multimodal medical
imaging. Computational models have to be calibrated and validated against available
experimental models such as physical surrogates and animal “models”. The
computational model will be invaluable in better understanding of injury mechanisms,
in better planning of experimental study, and in optimized design of personnel
protection armor.
2.1 Design of Imaging System for Organ Injury
We define a 3D imaging pipeline that provides image acquisition, processing,
segmentation, and modeling of 3D anatomy of human anatomical structures. The
images come from CT, MR patient scans and also from CT and color cryosections of
the Visible Human datasets. Methods for function and physiology are applied to
depict, assess and classify the full extent of brain, spine, and lung injury under
trauma. The structure are later used for FEM impact and biomechanics simulations.

824

C. Imielinska, A. Przekwas, and X.G. Tan

2.2 Modeling Head Anatomy
We use two sets of data depicting head anatomy:
(a) the Visible Human Male color cryosection data segmented, Fig. 2, and
reconstructed/rendered with 3D Vesalius Visualizer [1], Fig. 3.
(b) Visible Human Male CT, Fig. 4, segmented with hybrid segmentation method
[2,3], Fig. 5., and reconstructed with t-shells [4], Fig. 6.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 2. (a) Visible Human data with (a) brain and (b) skull regions segmented

Fig. 3. Selected 3D models from the Visible Human Make data visualizes with 3D Vesalius
Visualizer [1]

Fig. 4. Visible Human Male CT input data

Multi-scale Modeling of Trauma Injury

825

Fig. 5. Visible Human Male CT segmented data

Fig. 6. Visible Human Male skull reconstructed with t-shells. [3].

2.3 Geometry Preserving Automated Coarsening of Triangulated Surfaces
High resolution medical images and image processing software generate large number
of surface triangles. This is desired for the image visualization but is not practical for
FEM biomechanics modeling. It is not uncommon to see millions of triangles on the
cranium and brain surfaces. A FEM tetrahedral volume mesh generated from such
number of surface mesh would have hundreds of millions elements. We have
developed a novel algorithm and a software module for automated coarsening of
triangulated surfaces while preserving the geometrical fidelity. We have tested it on
automated coarsening of the surface triangle meshes for a human head depicted in
Fig. 7. Figures 6a-c present the original human head mesh with 950,000 triangles and
two levels of coarsened grids. The algorithm provides very powerful capability of
generating coarse tessellation which can be used directly for tetrahedral meshing or as
a surface geometry for generation of NURB surfaces and further high quality
structured FEM grids. In the future, we plan to implement this module into a data
processing software framework for semi-automated generation of high quality FEM
grids for human body, with emphasis on human head, neck, and spine.

826

C. Imielinska, A. Przekwas, and X.G. Tan

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 7. (a) original model with 950,000 triangles (too fine to see) and rendered solid model, (b)
coarsened mesh with 95,000 triangles and rendered resultant solid model, (c) coarsened mesh
with 37,500 triangles and rendered resultant model

2.4 Adaptation of FEM Model for Ballistic Injury
CFDRC is developing software tools FEM-Bi, for multiscale modeling of blast
injuries to thorax, lungs, brain, and spine coupled to physiological trauma injury
model CoBi. We are adapting FEM-Bi for modeling ballistic impact of head
protective gear materials in proximity to animal/human head and for modeling head
injury. The FEM model can be validated on existing experimental data of mechanical
behavior of material used in the protective gear and protection padding.
2.5 Explicit Dynamics Systems
In the current helmeted head model, larger number of finite elements (100K or more)
is needed to properly resolve the complex geometry and stress/strain localization. As
a result, the solution time for the implicit FEM solution for large grid counts (>100K)
will increase dramatically and become prohibitively expensive. To speed up the
computations and take less computer memory, we developed an explicit solver for the
FEM equations. For large-scale high-speed event, it is advantageous to use the
conditional-stable explicit solver because:
1) A small time step is required to track the high-frequency portion of the response
anyway, making it impossible to take advantage of the large time steps
permitted by implicit methods;

Multi-scale Modeling of Trauma Injury

827

2) Time integration of the discrete momentum equations does not require the
solution of any equations due to the use of diagonal mass matrix. The construction and solving of linear system in the implicit method in each iteration of time
step is very time-consuming, especially for the large finite element model;
3) Robustness for the nonlinear problem compared to the Newton iterations in
nonlinear implicit solver, in which the convergence failure can often occur due
to ‘rough’ events such as contact-impact or the large time step.
2.6 Explicit Solution of Frictional Contact Problem
The development includes the virtual work and contact searching, which appears to be
highly desirable for the general robustness of explicit finite element techniques. Since
the explicit formulation has no convergence problem caused by the nonlinear
iterations, the resulting frictional contact model is suitable for applications displaying
significant non-linear behavior. An important aspect of contact problems is the
method used to convert the associated variational inequality to an equality suitable for
finite element solution. In the explicit analysis we still adopt the penalty method since
it offers distinct advantages on the integration algorithm for the frictional tractions,
compared to the Lagrange multipliers method. At beginning of each time step, the
estimate for an appropriate choice of the penalty parameter is based on the material
properties and geometric size of the shell element. The increasing of the default
penalty parameter becomes necessary if the results show visible penetration, and thus
does not fulfill the constraint equation in a correct way. On the other hand, the larger
penalty parameter may decrease the explicit time step size.
The most important practical aspect of computing the contact force vector is
acquisition of the projection for the finite element node, i.e., the contact searching.
Briefly stated, the algorithm consists of the following three phases: 1) Identification
of the closest target node for the FE node; 2) Among all target elements sharing the
closest node, identify the element containing the projection; 3) Calculate the
coordinates of the projected point. In the current implementation, we calculate the
closest target node once at the beginning of each global time step, which is used for the
fluid domain in the fluid-structure interaction (FSI) simulation. During one global time
step the local search for the projection is conducted for each FE explicit time step.
2.7 Parametric Simulations
We will use in the future the medical imaging data and resulting 3D models to set-up
parametric model of the head, spine and other anatomical regions. We will perform
ballistic impact FEM simulations and analyze the dynamics of protective gear in
contact with underlying anatomy, the material-structure impact loads and potential
injury to the anatomical structure(s).

3 Results
In the following we show examples to verify the correctness of the new developed
explicit finite element solver, and the newly developed truss model used in the gear
protected head under impact.

828

C. Imielinska, A. Przekwas, and X.G. Tan

3.1 Test on Explicit Finite Element Solver
We have implemented the explicit solver of the finite element model for the FSI
applications, in addition to the existing implicit solver. Here are some preliminary
results to show the effectiveness of the developed explicit solver.
The key features of the current explicit solver implementation include:
1)
2)
3)
4)

Optimal explicit time step size to maintain numerical stability and accuracy,
Global/local search algorithm for the contact problem,
Full-integrated element to avoid the hourglassing modes,
Numerical dissipation for the central difference time stepping.

The new explicit formulation for the structures calculations was then tried out on a
large model with 44,791 eight-node solid element (155,394 dofs) as shown in Fig. 8.
We made the FE mesh from the geometry data provided by [5]. The FE takes into
account the cerebrum, cerebellum, falx and tentorium, CSF, dura, 3 layered cortical
and trabecular skull bone, scalp, and facial bone. Table 1 shows the CPU time and
computer memory needed for the test case, in which the head is moving forward with
an initial velocity. The stable time step size for the explicit algorithm is calculated
internally and adjusted.

Fig. 8. The head-spine FE model and explicit solution for the head-spine model at t=0.12ms
Table 1. CPU time and Memory requirements of explicit FE solvers for one time step

3.2 2 D Head-Spine Model under Blunt Impact
To test the computational method a 2D multi-body test problem comprised of a
helmet-head-cervical spine under rear impact has been setup. A rigid projectile is
impacting the outer surface of the helmet with initial velocity of 30m/s. The helmet,
protection pad, head and C0-T1 spine are approximately modeled with 2D solid
elements. The neck muscle and the ligament between vertebrae are modeled with the
viscoelastic truss element. The bottom surface of T1 vertebrate is fixed. In Fig. 9, as
the projectile is decelerated and rebounded during the impact on the helmet, both the

Multi-scale Modeling of Trauma Injury

829

helmet and the protection pad are deformed and rotated along the skull, and part of
the absorbed energy by the helmet is transferred to the entire head in the form of
rapid, typically angular acceleration of the head. Severe injuries of the skull, brain and
cervical spine can be identified under this impact based on certain head injury criteria
(HIC) such as the critical strain/strain rate at the tissue level.

Fig. 9. Solid-Truss multi-body system under impact at time 1) 0ms, 2) 0.5 ms, 3) 1.2 ms, 4)
1.8 ms

It is noted that since we model the cerebrospinal fluid between the skull and the
brain as the solid elements, the motion of the brain may be more constrained than in
the real situation. We will report in the near future how the brain deforms surrounded
by CSF modeled with the fluid elements.

4 Discussions
We demonstrated a simulation pipeline for modeling trauma to head and spine. We
plan to develop robust, generic advanced modeling tools and experimental procedures
for modeling trauma under ballistic and explosion blast injury. We would like to
develop streamlined procedure to generate good quality FEM (volumetric) meshes for
human organs from medical images. Databases are needed with examples of
parametric head/neck geometries, and tissue specific material properties. The overall
goal is to develop of tightly coupled FEM-CFD software tool for modeling a wide
range of trauma cases.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Autodesk for generous donation of Maya Software, and Dr.
Udupa from University of Pennsylvania for letting us use 3DVIEWNIX to model
head anatomy.

References
1. Imielinska, C., Molholt, P., “Incorporating 3D Virtual Anatomy into the Medical
Curriculum”, CACM, pp.49-54,Feb. 2005.
2. Imielinska C., Udupa, J.K., Metaxas, D., Jin, Y., Angelini, E., Chen, T., Zhuge, Y.,“Hybrid
Segmentation Methods”, book chapter in “Insight into Images: Principles and Practice for
Segmentation, Registration, and Image Analysis”, edited by T. Yoo, A.K. Peters, March 2004.

830

C. Imielinska, A. Przekwas, and X.G. Tan

3. Bathe, K.-J., “Finite Element Procedures”, Prentice Hall, New Jersey, 1996.G.J.
4. Grevera, G.J., Udupa, J.K., Odhner, D., “An Order of Magnitude Faster Isosurface
Rendering in Software on a PC than Using Dedicated, General Purpose Rendering
Hardware”, IEEE Trans. on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 6 (4), pp. 335-345,
2000.
5. Horgan, T.J., Gilchrist, M.D., The creation of three-dimensional finite element models for
simulating head impact biomechanics. International Journal of Crashworthiness, 8 (4), pp.
353-366 (2003).

