A New Fairness Guaranteeing Scheme in Optical Burst
Switched Networks
In-Yong Hwang, SeoungYoung Lee, and Hong-Shik Park
Information and Communications University
103-6 Munji-Dong, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, Korea
{iyhwang, seoungyoung, hspark}@icu.ac.kr

Abstract. Optical burst switching (OBS) paradigm has been proposed to
achieve the packet switching level throughput in the all optical domains. To
meet the recent OBS commercialization requirement, we study the edge/core
node combined (ECNC) OBS networks where the core node performs the edge
node function as well. In this type of networks, the fairness problem occurs because the remaining offset-time decides the priority under the JET-based OBS.
To solve this problem, we propose a fairness guaranteeing scheme by grouping
bursts based on the destination and the remaining offset-time and assigning
them to each wavelength group. Also, we propose a new burst generating and
scheduling scheme for the ingress node and analyze the networks throughput.
Keywords: OBS, fairness, QoS, JET, wavelength grouping, offset-time, mesh
networks.

1 Introduction
The emergence of wavelength division multiplexing (WDM) technology is considered
as a solution to satisfy the tremendously increasing demands of transmission bandwidth driven by the growth of IP-based data traffic. At the same time, the necessity to
make the next-generation optical Internet architecture is augmented, which can transport IP packets directly over the optical layer without opto-electro-optic (O/E/O)
conversions, like optical packet switching (OPS). Although OPS which can achieve
higher utilization is attractive, there are practical limitations such as optical buffer and
all optical processing to implement OPS by using today’s technology. Presently, optical burst switching (OBS) technology is under study as a solution for the optical
Internet backbone in the near future since OBS technology can cut-through data messages without O/E/O conversion and guarantee the Class of Service (CoS) without
any buffering.
In the JET-based OBS, several schemes have been proposed to provide CoS differentiation by assigning different offset-times [1]. To differentiate CoS, the source node
assigns different offset-time according to the traffic classes. However, in a mesh network, the length of offset-time will be different due to the remaining number of hops
even though data burst (DB) have the same class. Different offset-time among the
same class invokes fairness problems in OBS networks.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part I, LNCS 3991, pp. 1018 – 1021, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

A New Fairness Guaranteeing Scheme in Optical Burst Switched Networks

1019

Recently, researches about OBS commercialization have been arisen for the real
network, i.e. mesh-type network. To meet this trend, we design the edge/core node
combined (ECNC) OBS networks, where the OBS nodes can generate data burst,
perform the wavelength grouping and assign Transit Data Bursts (TDB) that are
bursts from previous nodes to wavelength groups to solve fairness problems. Then,
we propose a burst scheduling scheme, which does not interrupt the TDB and analyze
the network throughput. The analytic results show that the network throughput increases when the offset-time of transit bursts is sufficiently large. The remainder of
the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents the fairness problem and fairness
guaranteeing scheme in OBS networks. Section 3 provides the throughput analysis
and results of ECNC networks, and the conclusion follows in Section 4.

2 Fairness Guaranteeing Scheme
In the mesh network, every node has the ability of edge and core nodes. To transmit
data in OBS networks, the source node assembles packets to make a DB [2] and the
DB follows a Burst Control Packet (BCP) after the some offset-time [1]. The offsettime is determined by the number of hops between the source and destination and
QoS of the bursts. Therefore, the offset-times of BCPs deciding a priority are not the
same in OBS nodes even though the DB has the same CoS, which may incur the fairness problem. To solve this fairness problem, we design the OBS node in Figure 1.
BCP from node 1

…
BCP from node N

O/E

O/E

To node 1

BCP
Router

…
To node M

OBS Switch
Input traffic

From node 1

From node N

buffer

{

1-hop passed Burst
Burst with offset 1

{

1-hop passed Burst
Burst with offset 1

Burst Gen

SHG bursts

…

Burst with several offset
Burst with offset 1

…

Offset 1

Burst with offset k

}

To node 1

…

Burst with offset k

…
…

Burst with offset k

Burst with several offset
Burst with offset 1

Offset k

OHG burst

…

Burst with offset k

}

To node M

Fig. 1. The Architecture of ECNC OBS node for mesh networks

Entry bursts to the network are assorted to the one-hop-going (OHG) bursts and several-hop-going (SHG) bursts. The SHG bursts are transmitted to the next hop through
the exclusive wavelength group. Thus, SHG bursts do not influence the performance of
TDB. In case of OHG bursts, it can be inserted between TDBs due to the ability of
knowing the void interval among TDBs. One-hop passed (OHP) bursts, which traveled
only one-hop with exclusive wavelengths with the several offset-times, are classified
according to the offset-time and QoS and then compete with TDBs under the equal
condition. After competing and bursts grouping process, the bursts are assigned to the

1020

I.-Y. Hwang, S. Lee, and H.-S. Park

corresponding wavelength group. Thus, the QoS level of bursts can be kept the same
because the offset-times within the same wavelength is equal.

3 Throughput Analysis
We consider the network throughput as the channel utilization of the wavelength
groups and assume traffic load is equally distributed among wavelength group. There
are several researches to utilize the void interval between bursts [3-4]. If the information contained in the BCP is used proprerly, the network utilization can be dramatically improved. Ideally, OHG bursts can utilize the remaining bandwidth of output
channels if OHG bursts were fully inserted in the void intervals between TDB. But
the available bandwidth cannot be utilized to the maximum because there is a limitation to predict available void intervals among TDBs as explained later.
The void filling scheme is illustrated in Figure 2. We can estimate the available
void intervals among TDBs exactly with information the size of OHG bursts contained in the BCP.
t o ffs e t

t o ffs e t

t o ffs e t

(a)

(b)

Fig. 2. Void-filling scheme for OHG bursts

To insert a burst between TDB, the node classifies void intervals of TDBs into two
cases. The first case is that the length of void interval of TDB is smaller than the offset-time of TDB as shown in Fig 2 (a). In this case, the node exactly knows the length
of void interval of TDB because the BCP for the next TDB has already been arrived
before the current time due to the property of the equal offset-time within wavelength
group. However, when the length of void intervals is larger than the offset-time of the
TDB, the size of OHG bursts cannot be longer than the offset-time of TDB because
the node does not know the arrival time of the next TDB at the current time as illustrated in Fig 2 (b). Therefore, if the void interval is greater than the offset-time of
TDB or the BCP does not arrive until the end of current DB, the burst length of the
OHG bursts should be limited to the size of offset-time. This is the reason why we do
not utilize void intervals to the maximum. To verify the performance of the proposed
burst scheduling scheme, we compare the network throughput through the simulation.
Also, to investigate the relationship between the network throughput and the offsettime of TDBs, we change the offset-time of TDB.
The simulation results are shown in Fig 3, where the number 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10 in the
legend mean the ratio of the offset-time to the mean burst length of TDBs. If the ratio
is large, the offset-time increases accordingly. As shown in the simulation results, the
network throughput improves when the offset-time increases as expected in Fig 2.

A New Fairness Guaranteeing Scheme in Optical Burst Switched Networks

1021

1.0
0.9
0.8

Throughput

0.7
0.6
0.5

10
8
6
4
2

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Offered Load of the TDB

Fig. 3. Network throughput vs. offset-time of TDBs

4 Conclusion
We designed ECNC OBS node and proposed the fairness guaranteeing scheme, and
the void filling scheme for ECNC OBS networks. The simulation results show that
the network throughput is improved when the ratio of the offset-time to the size of
TDBs is large. This means that the burst size should be minimized and the offset-time
should be large sufficiently to maximize the throughput. The mathematical analysis is
needed to analyze the accurate network throughput as a further work.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by the MIC and IITA through the ITRC support
program and by the KOSEF through its ERC program.

References
1. M. Yoo and C. Qiao.: A New Optical Burst Switching Protocol for Supporting Quality of
Service. Proc. SPIE All Optical Comm. Syst.: Architecture, Control Network Issues, Vol.
3531, 1998, pp.395-405.
2. Ge, A., Callegati, F., and Tamil, L.S.: On Optical Burst Switching and Self-similar Traffic.
IEEE Communications Letters, Volume 4, Issue 3, March 2000, pp. 98 – 100.
3. S. Y. Lee., I. Y. Hwang. and H. S. Park.: The Influence of Burst Length in Optical Burst
Switching System with Completely Isolated Classes. IEEE, ICACT 2005, Vol. 1, 2005,
pp.303-306.
4. Barakat N. and Sargent E.H., The Influence of Low-class Traffic Load on High-class Performance and Isolation in Optical Burst Switching, IEEE ICC 2004, Vol 3, 2004, pp. 15541558.

