A New Energy Efficient Target Detection Scheme
for Pervasive Computing*
Thanh Hai Trinh and Hee Yong Youn**
School of Information and Communication Engineering,
Sungkyunkwan University, 440-746, Suwon, Korea
hai9381@skku.edu, youn@ece.skku.ac.kr

Abstract. Energy is one of the critical constraints for the applications of sensor
network. In the earlier target detection and tracking algorithm power saving is
achieved by letting most of the non-border sensor nodes in the cluster stay in
hibernation state. However, the border sensor nodes consume a significant
amount of energy since they are supposed to be on all the time for target detection. In this paper we propose a new target detection scheme which lets the border sensor nodes be on shortly one after another in a circular fashion to minimize the energy consumption. Computer simulation shows that the proposed
scheme can significantly reduce the energy consumption in target detection and
tracking compared to the earlier scheme.
Keywords: Cluster, energy saving, target detection, pervasive computing,
wireless sensor network.

1 Introduction
With advances in computation, communication, and sensing capabilities, large scale
sensor-based distributed environments are emerging as a predominant pervasive computing infrastructure. One of the most important areas where the advantages of sensor
networks can be exploited is tracking mobile targets. The scenarios where the network
may be deployed can be both military (tracking enemy vehicles and detecting illegal
border crossings) and civilian [1]. In developing the sensor networks for target tracking, battery power conservation is a critical issue.
In the sensor network a large number of sensor nodes carry out a given task. In [2],
a distributed, randomized clustering algorithm was given to organize the sensors in
the wireless sensor network into a hierarchy of clusters with an object of minimizing
the energy spent for the communication with the information center. The problem of
tracking the targets using the sensor network has received attention from various
angles. In [5], the authors consider the case where a set of k targets need to be tracked
with three sensors per target from the viewpoint of resource requirement. They identified that the probability that all targets can be assigned three unique sensors shows
*

**

This research was supported in part by the Ubiquitous Autonomic Computing and Network
Project, 21st Century Frontier R&D Program in Korea and the Brain Korea 21 Project in
2006.
Corresponding author.

V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part IV, LNCS 3994, pp. 1 – 8, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

2

T.H. Trinh and H.Y. Youn

phase transition properties as the level of communication between the sensors increases. In [7], the information driven sensor collaboration mechanism is proposed. In
this mechanism the measures of information utility are used to decide future sensing
actions. Collaborative signal processing aspects for target classification in sensor
networks is addressed in [8]. The techniques for locating targets using a variety of
mechanisms have been proposed in [9-11]. In [3], the authors present a prediction
based approach, called localized predictive, for power efficient target tracking. In [4],
tracking based on a distributed and scalable predictive algorithm called the distributed
predictive tracking algorithm (DPT) is proposed. The DPT algorithm divides the
sensor nodes in a cluster into border sensor nodes and non-border sensor nodes, and
achieves power saving by letting most of the non-border sensor nodes stay in hibernation state. The border sensor nodes are awake all the time to detect the targets.
In this paper we propose a scheme detecting the targets in the sensor network,
which can save the energy of border sensor nodes as well. One after another in the
circular fashion, the border sensor nodes are activated to detect the target moving into
the sensing area and then returns to hibernation mode. Consequently, the energy spent
for detecting the target with the proposed scheme is much smaller than that of the
DPT algorithm. If there exist several targets simultaneously moving into the sensing
area, several messages will be sent to the cluster head. Therefore, we consider the
relation between the processing time in the cluster head and velocity of the target
movement to model the target detectability and tracking capability of a sensor
network. Computer simulation shows that the proposed scheme can significantly
reduce the energy consumption compared to the DPT algorithm for the targets of
typical speeds.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the following section we present a
review of the DPT algorithm to identify the power problem. Section 3 presents the
proposed detection scheme, and Section 4 discusses the simulation results. Finally,
Section 5 presents the concluding remarks and future work.

2 The Related Work
The distributed predictive tracking (DPT) [4] algorithm employs the distributed and
scalable prediction based approach to accurately track mobile targets using a sensor
network. The fundamental guideline followed throughout the design of the DPT algorithm was to keep it as simple as possible. The DPT algorithm uses a cluster-based
architecture for scalability and robustness. Given a target to track, the protocol provides a distributed mechanism for locally determining an optimal set of sensors for
tracking. Only the nodes are then activated to minimize the energy consumption. Most
of the sensors stay in hibernation mode until they receive an activation message from
their cluster head. This is made possible by predicting the target’s next location.
The DPT algorithm distinguishes the border sensor nodes from the non-border sensor nodes in terms of their operation. While the border sensors are required to be
awake all the time in order to detect any target entering the sensing region, the nonborder sensors hibernate unless they are asked to wake up by their cluster head.
Hence, the energy of border sensor nodes will decrease quickly, while the task of
border sensor nodes is critical for target detection. Therefore, an approach saving the
energy of border sensor nodes as much as possible without reducing the target detectability is needed.

A New Energy Efficient Target Detection Scheme for Pervasive Computing

3

3 The Proposed Scheme
In this section we present the proposed scheme allowing energy efficient target detection and tracking with a sensor network. The scheme allows the border sensor nodes
to minimize the energy consumption on target detection.
3.1 Assumptions
We first discuss the assumptions made by the proposed scheme. It assumes a clusterbased architecture for the sensor network [2,6]. Initially, all the border sensor nodes
have information on their neighboring sensor nodes for their identity, location, and
energy level. Each cluster head also has such information on the sensor nodes belonging to its cluster. When tracking a moving target, it decides which border sensor nodes
detect the presence of a target. The assumptions on the sensor nodes are given below.
•
•
•

•

Each border sensor is activated for ΔT time, and then returns to hibernation mode.
The border sensor nodes are assumed to be uniformly distributed over the sensing
region and the number of sensor nodes is large.
Let d be the distance between two neighboring border sensors. d is smaller or
equal to the radius of the sensible area of a sensor, r. If d is larger than r, the intersecting area between two neighboring sensors will become small and the detection probability decreases accordingly. (Refer to Figure 1.)
The targets originate outside the sensing area and then move into the area with
constant velocity.

θ

Fig. 1. Intersection of two sensing areas

Fig. 2. The structure of a cluster

3.2 The Detection Algorithm
When targets move into the sensing area, the border sensors detect the presence of
them and then inform the cluster head on it. The proposed mechanism is explained
using the parameters listed in Table 1.

4

T.H. Trinh and H.Y. Youn
Table 1. The parameters used in the proposed mechanism (Refer to Figure 2)
Parameter
V
T
N
r
d
R
D
θ
S

λ

Description
The velocity of target
The period a border sensor is turned on and off
The number of border nodes
The radius of the sensing area of a sensor node
The distance between two neighboring border sensor nodes
The distance from the cluster head to the edge of detection area
The radius of the cluster, which is R+2r
The angle at the cluster head made by two neighboring border sensors
The detection area covered by the border nodes
The sensor density

The proposed scheme divides the detection period, T, into equal interval of ΔT
given by: ΔT =T/N. In other words, every border node turns on for ΔT time in every T
time unit. In the DPT algorithm, all the border sensor nodes are activated to detect the
targets. If there is only one target moving into the sensing area, a significant amount
of energy will thus be wasted. Therefore, we propose to let only one border sensor is
activated during ΔT and others are put in hibernation mode. Once a border sensor
wakes up during ΔT, it then stays in hibernation mode during (N-1)∆T. This process
repeats continuously with a period of T. By letting the border sensor nodes on and off
fast enough, any target penetrating the border can be detected regardless of the entering direction. However, if a target moves faster than a certain threshold, it cannot be
detected since the border sensor node in charge of it might still be in hibernation
mode. Therefore, we need to decide the time T of one round of detection period according to the maximum velocity of target movement, Vmax.
Assume that the border sensors are deployed with Poisson distribution with a parameter λS. In Figure 2, since the number of border sensors is very large, θ is very
small and
sin θ ≈ θ =

2π
d
=
N r+R

(1)

For conservative modeling, assume that the target moves into the sensing area in
the right angle and proceeds in the straight line (thus shortest path). Let us denote xmin
the length of the path the target takes. Since the target has a constant velocity, the
period, T, can be calculated in the following equation.

T =

x min
Vmax

(2)

As shown in Figure 1, the minimum length xmin results in when the target moves
through the intersection area of two neighboring border sensors. If the intersection
area is small, the target detection probability will be low accordingly. To guarantee a
reasonably high detection probability, we assume that the length of intersection, xmin,
is equal to the radius of the sensing area of a sensor. Thus, d ≤ r 3 . According to
Equation (1),

A New Energy Efficient Target Detection Scheme for Pervasive Computing

d=

(

2π (r + R )
N

5

(3)

)

N = λS = λπ (D 2 − R 2 ) = λπ (R + 2r )2 − R 2 = λπ (4 Rr + 4r 2 ) = λπ 4r (R + r )

(4)

Putting Equation (4) into Equation (3),

λ≥

1
2r

2

3

and λ =
min

1
2r

2

(5)
3

If all the border sensor nodes are activated during T, the consumed energy, E, is
given by

E = N × T × Eactive

(6)

Here Eactive is the energy consumed by an active sensor and given by 727.5 mW
[12]. In the proposed scheme, the energy consumed, Ep, is given by

[

E p = N × ΔT × E active + ( N − 1)× ΔT × E sleep

]

(7)

Esleep is the energy consumed by a sensor in sleep mode and given by 416.3mW
[12]. The energy saved by the proposed scheme compared to the DPT algorithm becomes

ΔE = E − E p = ( N − 1) × T × (Eactive − Esleep )

(8)

Here N is given by Equation (4) and T is given by Equation (2) with xmin= r, and
thus

× (Eactive − Esleep )

(9)

⎡ 2 × π × (R + r ) − r × 3 ⎤
ΔEmin = ⎢
⎥ × (Eactive − E sleep )
Vmax × 3
⎦
⎣

(10)

ΔE = [λ × π × 4 × r × (R + r ) − 1] ×

r
Vmax

From Equations (5)

In Equation (10), the difference between E and Ep is the function of target velocity,
Vmax, radius of the sensing area of a sensor, r, and radius of tracking area, R. In Section 4, the relation between Vmax and the detection probability, p, will be identified.
We consider only one target above. There might be several targets, however, moving into the sensing area with different velocities and directions. We assume that
distribution of the number of targets is Poisson with the rate of η. The rate the targets
are detected in time T is given by

μ = p ×η

(11)

If several border sensors detect the presence of a target, several messages are sent
to the cluster head simultaneously. The cluster head then has to put the messages into
its queue for processing them sequentially. Table 2 summarizes the parameters used
in the model for the process of multiple targets.

6

T.H. Trinh and H.Y. Youn
Table 2. The parameters used in the process of multiple targets
Parameter

η
μ
γ
M
t
tq

Description
The rate of targets moving into the sensing area
The rate of targets detected during T
The target processing rate
The average number of messages in the system
The average target processing time
The waiting time in the queue for each message

Assume that arrival rate of the messages in the queue is constant and it is equal to
the target detection rate, μ. Since only one cluster head processes the target information, this model represents a single server. Using a birth-death system of M/M/1
queue, the birth rate is μ and the death rate is the processing rate γ. We also assume
that the death rate is constant and target population is infinite for the arrival process.
To calculate the probability that the queue is in state-k (i.e., has k messages waiting
including the one in service), we use the general birth-death formulas.

⎛ μ⎞ ⎛μ⎞
pk = ⎜⎜1 − ⎟⎟ × ⎜⎜ ⎟⎟
⎝ γ ⎠ ⎝γ ⎠

k

(μ < γ)

(12)

The average number of messages in the system, M, is
1

μ

2
δ , (δ = μ ),
M = μ × t , t = γ , tq = γ
M =
1−δ
γ
1− δ
1−δ

(13)

4 Performance Evaluation
In this section we present the simulation results evaluating the performance of the
proposed scheme. The simulation study mainly focuses on the energy saved by the
proposed scheme compared to the DPT algorithm, the detection probability, and the
message processing time (delay time) as the number of targets varies.
We simulated a scenario where a target moves with random velocity. The simulator
was developed to detect the target, considering the detection probability and energy
consumed. The simulation program is a discrete-event simulator developed using C
language. In the simulation we distribute the sensors uniformly over a cluster with D
= 120m and r = 10m. The velocity of target movement varies randomly from 0m/s to
60m/s in order to evaluate its impact on the performance of the proposed scheme.
Figure 3 shows the energy saved by the proposed scheme compared to the DPT
scheme obtained using Equation (10). The amount of energy saved decreases as the
velocity of target increases. This is because the border sensor nodes need to fastly on
and off if the target moves fastly, and thus energy consumption increases compared to
the case of slow target. Note, however, that the velocity here is up to 100 meter per
second. For typical targets of below the 20 or 30m/s speed, the energy saving is very
significant.

30000

1.4

25000

1.2
Detection probability

S aved energy (mW )

A New Energy Efficient Target Detection Scheme for Pervasive Computing

20000
15000
10000
5000

Vmax=10m/s
Vmax=30m/s
Vmax=50m/s

7

Vmax=20m/s
Vmax=40m/s

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

0
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

0

90 100

0

Vmax(m/s)

Fig. 3. The amount of energy saved by the
proposed scheme as the target speed varies

10

20

30 40 50 60 70
The number of targets

80

90

100

Fig. 4. Detection probability vs. number of
targets

Figure 4 presents the relationship between the detection probability and the number
of targets. As the threshold velocity of target increases from 10m/s to 50m/s, the detection probability increases. When the velocity of the target is smaller than the
threshold velocity, the number of missed targets decreases since the rotation time T is
small and the period that the border sensors are activated is short. However, the
amount of energy saved becomes small for high threshold velocity. Hence, we need to
choose a proper period so that the detection probability is high while energy saving at
the border sensor nodes is substantial.
0.08
Vmax=10m/s
Vmax=30m/s
Vmax=50m/s

0.07

Vmax=20m/s
Vmax=40m/s

Delay time

0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90 100

The number of targets

Fig. 5. The relationship between the delay time and the number of targets

In Figure 5, the relationship between the delay (processing time) and velocity of
the target is shown. As the velocity changes from 10m/s to 40m/s, the delay increases
slowly. For V=50m/s, the delay increases rapidly when the number of targets becomes
larger than 90. The reason for this is the ratio between the death rate and birth rate,
δ=μ/γ, becomes close to 1.

8

T.H. Trinh and H.Y. Youn

5 Conclusion and Future Work
We have proposed a new scheme for target detection with a sensor network. The
border sensors detect the targets moving into the sensing area and inform the cluster
head in their cluster. The proposed scheme allows significant energy saving by letting
the border sensors awake shortly one after another in a circular fashion. As a result,
the lifetime of the sensors can be prolonged. Additionally, in case of multiple-target
tracking, we have found the relationship between the processing time at the cluster
head and the number of targets.
In this paper we have assumed that there exists only one cluster head. In the future
we will consider the case of multiple clusters in energy efficient target detection. We
will also investigate the impact of other parameters on the target detectability.

References
[1] J. Nemeroff, L. Garcia, D. Hampel, and S. DiPierro. Application of sensor network communications. In military Communications Conference, 2001.
[2] S. Bandyopadhyay and E.J. Coyle. An Energy Efficient Hierarchical Clustering Algorithm for Wireless Sensor Networks. INFOCOM 2003. Twenty-Second Annual Joint

Conference of the IEEE Computer and Communications Societies. IEEE.
[3] Y. Xu and W. C. Lee. On localized prediction for power efficient object tracking in sensor networks. In Proceeding 1. st. International Workshop on. Mobile Distributed Computing (MDC), Providence, Rhode Island, May 2003.
[4] H. Yang and B. Sikdar. A protocol for tracking mobile targets using sensor networks.
Proceedings of IEEE Workshop on Sensor Network Protocols and Applications, 2003.
[5] B. Krishnamachari, S. B. Wicker and R. Berjar. Phase transition phenomena in wireless
ad-hoc network, proceeding of IEEE GLOBECOM, San Atonio, TX, November 2001.
[6] S. Banerjee and S. Khuller. A clustering scheme for hierarchy control in multi-hop wireless networks. Proceedings of IEEE INFOCOM, April 2001.
[7] F. Zhao, J. Shin and J. Reich. Information-driven dynamic sensor coloration for target
tracking, IEEE signal processing maganize, vol. 19, no. 2, pp 61-77. March 2002.
[8] D. Li, K. Wong, Y.H. Hu and A. Sayeed. Detection, classification and tracking of targets
in distributed sensor networks. IEEE Signal Processing Maganize, vol 9, no.2, March
2002.
[9] L.M. Kaplan, Q. Le, and P. Molnar. Maximum likehood methods for bearing-only target
localization. Proceedings of IEEE ICASSP, pp. 554-557, May, 2001.
[10] J.S. Scholl, L.P. Clare, and J.R. Agre. Wavelet packet-based target classification
schemes. Meeting of IRIS Specialty Group on Acoustic and Seismic Sensing, laurel, MD,
September, 1998.
[11] K. Yao, et. al., Estimation and tracking of an acoustic/seismic source using a beamforming array based on residual minimizing methods. Proceedings of IRIA-IRIS, pp. 153-163,
January 2001.
[12] V. Raghnathan, et. al., Energy aware wireless microsensor networks. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, March 2002.

