Synonymous Codon Substitution Matrices
Adrian Schneider, Gaston H. Gonnet, and Gina M. Cannarozzi
Computational Biology Research Group,
Institute for Computational Science, ETH Z¨
urich,
Universit¨
atstrasse 6, 8092 Z¨
urich, Switzerland
cgina@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract. Observing diﬀerences between DNA or protein sequences and
estimating the true amount of substitutions from them is a prominent
problem in molecular evolution as many analyses are based on distance
measures between biological sequences. Since the relationship between the
observed and the actual amount of mutations is very complex, more than
four decades of research have been spent to improve molecular distance
measures. In this article we present a method called SynPAM which can
be used to estimate the amount of synonymous change between sequences
of coding DNA. The method is novel in that it is based on an empirical
model of codon evolution and that it uses a maximum-likelihood formalism to measure synonymous change in terms of codon substitutions, while
reducing the need for assumptions about DNA evolution to an absolute
minimum. We compared the SynPAM method with two established methods for measuring synonymous sequence divergence. Our results suggest
that this new method not only shows less variance, but is also able to capture weaker phylogenetic signals than the other methods.

1

Introduction

Measures of synonymous substitution are fundamental for many analyses in
molecular evolution such as in the calculation of dN/dS to provide information about the degree of selection operating on homologous sequences, in the
construction of phylogenetic trees, and for molecular dating. Measuring synonymous change between coding DNA sequences requires a model of evolution at the
codon or nucleotide level. Because DNA evolution has properties such as unequal
transition (purine-purine or pyrimidine-pyrimidine mutation) and transversion
(purine to pyrimidine and vice versa) rates and unequal nucleotide and codon
frequencies, modeling of DNA evolution is not trivial. The ﬁrst methods to estimate the amount of synonymous mutations were introduced more than two
decades ago [1, 2] and have since then continuously been improved [3, 4, 5, 6].
Usually, a 4 × 4 or a 64 × 64 Markovian model is employed with varying numbers of rate constants and/or nucleotide or codon frequencies. These models are
used to estimate the real number of substitutions from the observed number of
This work was supported by the intramural research program of the National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part II, LNCS 3992, pp. 630–637, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

Synonymous Codon Substitution Matrices

631

substitutions. The models diﬀer in the number of variables needed to describe
transitions between nucleotides, the equilibrium frequencies and the deﬁnition
of ’synonymous site’ used.
Two measures of synonymous sequence divergence are the dS metric that estimates the ratio of synonymous substitutions per synonymous site and the NED
or TREx metric, based on mutations at the third position of two-fold redundant
codons at conserved amino acid sites. The most commonly used implementation
of dS is found in the PAML software package [7] and is based on the maximumlikelihood method by Yang and co-workers [3, 8]. NED was developed by Benner
and co-workers [5, 6] to model the decay of the two-fold redundant amino acids
at conserved sites with a ﬁrst-order rate equation. This method has the advantage that it is very simple and can easily be applied in any molecular analysis.
The use of only two-fold codons makes it independent of all the complications
introduced by transition/transversion rate diﬀerences or mutations at the ﬁrst
base positions. However, the drawback is that there are often not enough of this
speciﬁc type of mutation to yield statistically signiﬁcant results.
The SynPAM method presented here employs a 64 × 64 Markov model with
transition rates measured from empirical data to estimate the amount of synonymous change between two sequences of coding DNA using maximum-likelihood.
SynPAM is diﬀerent from the other methods in two aspects: Instead of a parameterized model of codon evolution, an empirically determined matrix [9] is
used to assign likelihood scores to all the synonymous mutations in an alignment. Maximum-likelihood scoring matrices in the tradition of Dayhoﬀ [10] are
then employed to estimate the synonymous distance of the two sequences. Additionally, the SynPAM method directly measures synonymous change in the form
of codon substitutions. This makes it unnecessary to identify the sites that are
synonymous (which always introduces additional uncertainty).

2

Methods

Synonymous Substitution Matrix. The synonymous substitution probabilities are derived from an empirical codon matrix M where every entry Ma,b is
the probability that codon b mutates to codon a [9]. Starting with a codon substitution matrix for a particular evolutionary distance, the probabilities of all
nonsynonymous substitutions are set to 0. The remaining probabilities are then
rescaled such that all possible codon substitutions between codons coding for a
given amino acid sum to 1:
∗
=
Ma,b

Ma,b

syn(b) Mx,b

x∈

0

if a ∈ syn(b)
otherwise

(1)

with syn(x) being the set of all codons that are synonymous to x.
From the the empirical codon substitution matrix, a wide range of matrices
approximating diﬀerent evolutionary distances are extrapolated through matrix
exponentiation [11], thereby providing substitution matrices representing diﬀerent evolutionary distances that can all be converted to synonymous substitution

632

A. Schneider, G.H. Gonnet, and G.M. Cannarozzi

matrices. It is important to state that the exponentiation has to be executed
on the full mutation matrix and only then the transformation described above
and the computation of the scores should be performed. The reason is that the
reduced substitution matrix no longer describes the full Markovian process of
codon evolution. E.g. some codons have a larger chance to undergo nonsynonymous mutations than others, but this information would be lost, if only the
synonymous matrices were exponentiated. In addition, by including all elements
of the substitution matrix until the time of reduction, all alternative pathways,
back mutations and multiple hits are taken into consideration.
Analogous to the deﬁnition of 1 PAM as the amount of evolution in which
1 percent of the amino acids are expected to undergo mutations, 1 SynPAM
is deﬁned as the amount of evolution in which 1 percent of the synonymous
positions are subject to a codon substitution.
The substitution matrix M (t) (and derived from it also M ∗ (t)) represents t
times the distance of 1 SynPAM and is computed as M (1)t , where M (1) is the
full substitution matrix corresponding to 1 SynPAM (which was derived from
the original M in an iterative process).
Likelihood Scores. In almost the same way that log-likelihood scores are computed for amino acid scoring matrices, they can be calculated for the synonymous
substitution matrices. In addition to the codon frequencies, π, also the synonymous frequencies, π ∗ , are needed, which is the codon distribution for given amino
acids. This means that the sum of all πx∗ which encode the same amino acid is
1. The scores are computed from the ratio of the probabilities of two synonymous codons having mutated from a common ancestor during time t compared
to being paired by random chance (which corresponds to t = ∞):
Si,j (t) = 10 log10

∗
∗
πj · Mi,j
(t)
Mi,j
(t)
=
10
log
10
∗
∗
πi · πj
πi

(2)

Synonymous codon scores are only deﬁned for synonymous substitutions. Because amino acid altering mutations should have no inﬂuence on the synonymous
scores, all of these mutations are assigned a score of 0.
Given a codon-wise alignment of two coding DNA sequences and a SynPAM
matrix for a given distance t, the synonymous score of the entire alignment is
obtained by adding up the scores, Si,j , for all synonymous codon positions in
the alignment. The alignment is scored with a range of SynPAM matrices, the
highest-scoring matrix can be determined and the distance of this matrix is chosen as the SynPAM distance of the alignment. This corresponds to a maximumlikelihood estimation of the synonymous distance.
Implementations of NED and dS. The dS values were computed using the
codeml program from the PAML software package [7]. Version 3.14 of the program was used with nine free parameters used to account for codon frequencies
(F3x4). Using other models of codon frequencies did not appreciably change the
results. Since only pairwise sequence comparisons were done, the parameters
were set as follows: runmode=−2 (pairwise comparisons) and the dN /dS ratio

Synonymous Codon Substitution Matrices

633

was not allowed to vary between sites (NSsites = 0). The other parameters have
no inﬂuence when pairwise comparison is chosen.
The NED method was implemented in Darwin [12]. Given a codon-wise alignment, the fraction f 2 of conserved codons for all amino acids encoded by two
codons is computed. Then the fraction of conserved codons is modeled as an
2 −b
where b is
exponential decay to equilibrium via the equation: NED = −ln f1−b
the codon bias [6] and was originally taken from the Codon Usage Database [13].
Here, the equilibrium fraction of conserved codons was calculated from the codon
frequencies from the codon substitution matrix and was found to be .5136.
Databases. The complete genome databases are from ENSEMBL [14] (H. sapiens, P. troglodytes, C. familiaris, B. taurus, G. gallus, X. tropicalis, B. rerio, T.
rubripes, T. nigroviridis, C. intestinalis, D. melanogaster, A. gambiae, A. mellifera, C. elegans and C. briggsae).

3

Results and Discussion

Distance estimation methods can be assessed either using simulations or real data.
Simulations have the advantage that many parameters can be chosen and a detailed analysis of the method can be performed. However, the use of simulations
is not appropriate in this case because distance measures are based on a model of
evolution while at the same time such a model is needed to create simulated data.
Therefore simulations can not be a fair way of comparing distance measures.
The drawback with real data is that the true distance between sequences
cannot be known. But at least two criteria can be used when comparing diﬀerent
distance measures: the variance of the estimates and the range in which they yield
valid and reliable results.
An unbiased estimation of the variance can be found using each method to
measure the distances between many pairs of genes with the same divergence
time and then calculating the variance of these diﬀerent estimates. Sets of gene
pairs that fulﬁll this criteria of equal divergence times are the sets of orthologs
between two species. Here, we used the metazoan set from the OMA orthologs
project [15], a large-scale cross-comparison of complete genomes with the goal
of systematically identifying groups of orthologous proteins.
3.1

Variance of the Estimates

The variation of the diﬀerent time estimates between the diﬀerent methods was
compared. Because the time metrics of the diﬀerent methods are on diﬀerent
scales, the variances can not be compared directly. Instead, the ratio of the standard deviation to the average value can be used, which is called the coeﬃcient
of variance (CV).
It is clear that since DNA mutations are a stochastic process, diﬀerent sequence pairs are likely to have diﬀerent amounts of synonymous mutations. Also,
selection pressure on synonymous mutations can not be ruled out [16, 17]. Therefore, although we are looking at orthologous sequences between the same two

634

A. Schneider, G.H. Gonnet, and G.M. Cannarozzi

Table 1. Ratio of the standard deviation to mean for date estimates between human
and animals using diﬀerent dating methods

Canis familiaris
Mus musculus
Gallus gallus
Xenopus tropicalis
Brachydanio rerio
Ciona intestinalis
Drosophila melanogaster
Caenorhabditis elegans

# values SynPAM NED dS
13235
0.29 0.32 0.38
13316
0.23 0.28 0.30
8515
0.26 0.32 0.62
8288
0.26 0.30 1.61
5845
0.26 0.33 1.07
1696
0.59 0.32 0.56
1643
1.95 0.38 0.44
1038
1.60 0.33 0.48

species, it is in the nature of these sequence pairs to already have a certain
amount of variation in the true sequence divergence. But when this sequence
divergence is measured, an additional random component is added because the
models of evolution and the ways to estimate the divergence can never precisely
reﬂect the real pattern of molecular evolution.
Since in this comparison the same set of sequence pairs was used for all the
tested methods, the inherent variance due to these stochastic (and possibly selection) eﬀects are exactly the same for all methods. The only diﬀerence is how
much additional noise is introduced by the model of evolution and the measurement technique used.
Table 1 displays these values for distance estimates of human against some
other metazoans. For each pair, the coding DNA was aligned using local dynamic
programming [18, 19] with the codon substitution matrices. Only alignments
with at least 100 synonymous positions were considered in order to gain some
signiﬁcance in the results. For f 2 values lower or equal to the codon bias b, no
NED estimate can be computed. Alignments with this problem were discarded
for all methods, therefore the comparison is done on the same set of alignments
for all three methods. In addition, for each method, the 10% of alignments with
the highest distance estimate were discarded to exclude obvious outliers. The
number of sequence pairs used is also shown in Table 1 and decreases with
increasing distance because there are less orthologs between distant species. Also,
as the distance increases, the synonymous mutations approach their equilibrium
values and produce more invalid results.
Table 1 shows that the SynPAM method consistently causes the least amount
of variation for species up to the human-ﬁsh divergence. Since SynPAM is the estimator with the least amount of variance, it is the preferred method to estimate
distances within this time range.
It is remarkable that the CV for dS clearly decreases after the human-frog
distance and that it becomes very small for the longer distances. In order to
explain this unexpected behavior, we plotted the histograms for all the pairwise
values between any two species. A selection of those are shown in Figure 1. There,
the explanation of this artifact can be seen: Gene pairs, where the synonymous
substitutions are close to saturation, are assigned a seemingly arbitrary dS value
around 65. Since this high amount of substitutions per site is impossible to

Synonymous Codon Substitution Matrices

635

Fig. 1. Histograms for SynPAM (left) and dS (right) of values for the alignments of
orthologs between human and other metazoans. There are 9130 alignments of human
with with chicken, 7647 with zebraﬁsh and 2512 with C. elegans.

estimate with conﬁdence, this is clearly a limitation in the calculation of dS.
Already at the primate-ﬁsh distance, a signiﬁcant number of dS values are in
this nonsense range, while the SynPAM distribution still forms a sharp curve.
For distances larger than primate-ﬁsh (i.e. approximately 450 million years),
all methods tend to suﬀer from saturation eﬀects and the single gene estimates
become very unreliable. In the SynPAM histograms, many values of 1000 can
be found, which corresponds to the highest matrix used and means that the
synonymous mutations have reached an equilibrium state.

4

Conclusions

A new method called SynPAM for the estimation of the amount of synonymous
change between two codon sequences has been introduced which is unique in its
use of empirical codon transition probabilities combined with a maximum likelihood formalism in the tradition of the Dayhoﬀ scoring matrices. This method
has the property that it is works well without estimating mutational parameters.
Due to the Markovian model of evolution, multiple hits, alternative pathways
and back mutations are not only included in the model, but are also based on
empirical observations. Since the distance is expressed in the form of expected
number of synonymous codon substitutions, no individual nucleotide sites have

636

A. Schneider, G.H. Gonnet, and G.M. Cannarozzi

to be assigned as ’synonymous’ or not. The direct way of obtaining the synonymous distance makes it faster than other methods while still employing the
strength of maximum likelihood estimation.
As the codon mutation matrix was built from vertebrate DNA, its usable
range is for the vertebrates and may be extendable to other metazoans. Tests
with plants, yeasts and bacteria have so far not been successful, although mutation matrices more speciﬁc to speciﬁc species sets are under consideration and
could improve the performance for these subgroups. The creation of all new
matrices for only pairs of species would allow for the incorporation of speciesspeciﬁc substitution patterns without the need to adjust parameters to the actual
sequences.
A comparison of SynPAM with dS and NED using large sets of orthologous
genes revealed that the SynPAM estimates have lower variances than those from
the other methods. Also, their behavior with increasing time is favorable compared to other methods since it captures also weak signals where the synonymous
substitutions are close to saturation.
Because synonymous substiutions are under less functional selection pressure
than amino acid mutations, they are expected to happen more regularly and are
therefore often used for molecular dating, in which clock-like distance measures
and known divergence times are used to extrapolate actual time estimates for
unknown divergences. Since the SynPAM method presented here for measuring
synonymous divergence shows advantages over previous such distance metrics,
we propose the use of SynPAM also for dating purposes in the realm of vertebrates and are currently investigating this topic in more detail.

References
1. Miyata, T., Yasunaga, T.: Molecular evolution of mRNA: a method for estimating
evolutionary rates of synonymous and amino acid substitutions from homologous
nucleotide sequences and its application. J. Mol. Evol. 16 (1980) 23 – 36
2. Perler, F., Efstratiadis, A., Lomedico, P., Gilbert, W., Kolodner, R., Dodgson, J.:
The evolution of genes: the chicken preproinsulin gene. Cell 20(2) (1980) 555–566
3. Goldman, N., Yang, Z.: A codon-based model of nucleotide substitution for proteincoding DNA sequences. Mol. Biol. Evol. 11(5) (1994) 725–736
4. Yang, Z., Nielsen, R., Goldman, N., Pedersen, A.M.K.: Codon-substitution models
for heterogeneous selection pressure at amino acid sites. Genetics 155 (2000)
432–449
5. Benner, S.A.: Interpretive proteomics– ﬁnding biological meaning in genome and
proteome databases. Advances in Enzyme Regulation 43 (2003) 271–359
6. Caraco, M.D.: Neutral Evolutionary Distance: A New Dating Tool and its Applications. PhD thesis, ETH Z¨
urich, Z¨
urich, Switzerland (2002)
7. Yang, Z.: Paml: A program package for phylogenetic analysis by maximum likelihood. CABIOS 13 (1997) 555 – 556
8. Yang, Z., Nielsen, R.: Estimating synonymous and nonsynonymous substitution
rates under realistic evolutionary models. Mol. Biol. Evol. 17(1) (2000) 32 – 43
9. Schneider, A., Cannarozzi, G.M., Gonnet, G.H.: Empirical codon substitution
matrix. BMC Bioinformatics 6(134) (2005)

Synonymous Codon Substitution Matrices

637

10. Dayhoﬀ, M.O., Schwartz, R.M., Orcutt, B.C.: A model for evolutionary change in
proteins. In Dayhoﬀ, M.O., ed.: Atlas of Protein Sequence and Structure. Volume 5.
National Biomedical Research Foundation (1978) 345–352
11. Cox, D., Miller, H.: The Theory of Stochastic Processes. Chapman and Hall,
London (1965)
12. Gonnet, G.H., Hallett, M.T., Korostensky, C., Bernardin, L.: Darwin v. 2.0: An
interpreted computer language for the biosciences. Bioinformatics 16(2) (2000)
101–103
13. Nakamura, Y., Gojobori, T., Ikemura, T.: Codon usage tabulated from the international DNA sequence database. Nucleic Acids Res. 28 (2000) 292
14. Hubbard, T., Andrews, D., Caccamo, M., Cameron, G., Chen, Y., Clamp, M.,
Clarke, L., Coates, G., Cox, T., Cunningham, F., Curwen, V., Cutts, T., Down,
T., Durbin, R., Fernandez-Suarez, X.M., Gilbert, J., Hammond, M., Herrero, J.,
Hotz, H., Howe, K., Iyer, V., Jekosch, K., Kahari, A., Kasprzyk, A., Keefe, D.,
Keenan, S., Kokocinsci, F., London, D., Longden, I., McVicker, G., Melsopp, C.,
Meidl, P., Potter, S., Proctor, G., Rae, M., Rios, D., Schuster, M., Searle, S.,
Severin, J., Slater, G., Smedley, D., Smith, J., Spooner, W., Stabenau, A., Stalker,
J., Storey, R., Trevanion, S., Ureta-Vidal, A., Vogel, J., White, S., Woodwark, C.,
Birney, E.: Ensembl 2005. Nucleic Acids Res. 33(suppl-1) (2005) D447–D453
15. Dessimoz, C., Cannarozzi, G., Gil, M., Margadant, D., Roth, A., Schneider, A.,
Gonnet, G.: OMA, a comprehensive, automated project for the identiﬁcation of
orthologs from complete genome data: Introduction and ﬁrst achievements. In
McLysath, A., Huson, D.H., eds.: RECOMB 2005 Workshop on Comparative Genomics. Volume LNBI 3678 of Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics., Springer-Verlag
(2005) 61 – 72
16. Bielawski, J.P., Dunn, K.A., Yang, Z.: Rates of nucleotide substitution and mammalian nuclear gene evolution: Approximate and maximum-likelihood methods
lead to diﬀerent conclusions. Genetics 156 (2000) 1299–1308
17. Dunn, K.A., Bielawski, J.P., Yang, Z.: Substitution rates in drosophila nuclear
genes: Implications for translational selection. Genetics 157 (2001) 295–305
18. Waterman, M.S., Smith, T.F., Beyer, W.A.: Some biological sequence metrics.
Advances in Mathematics 20 (1976) 367–387
19. Gotoh, O.: An improved algorithm for matching biological sequences. J. Mol. Biol.
162 (1982) 705–708

