Nagel-Schreckenberg Model of Traﬃc – Study of
Diversity of Car Rules
Danuta Makowiec and Wieslaw Miklaszewski
Institute of Theoretical Physics and Astrophysics, Gda´
nsk University,
ul. Wita Stwosza 57, 80-952 Gda´
nsk, Poland

Abstract. The Nagel-Schreckenberg model of traﬃc is modiﬁed by the
assumption that each car has an individual velocity limit. By simulations, the eﬀect of supplementary rules is checked: (a) a speed limit of
the slowest car is changed and/or (b) a speed limit of a car with zero
gap behind is increased . It is shown that both rules increase the mean
velocity; (b) rule inﬂuences the character of congested traﬃc – cars move
though at low velocity.

1

Introduction

Recently a number of cellular automata models have been proposed in order
to investigate the dynamical aspects of the traﬃc system [1, 2]. There are two
basic cellular automata models describing single lane traﬃc ﬂow: the NagelSchreckenberg (NaSch) model [3] and the Fukui-Ishibashi one [4]. The cellular
automata traﬃc models, although they suﬀer from some limitations (see [5] for
details), reproduce important real life traﬃc phenomena such as spontaneous
formation of jams [6], explain the impact of global traﬃc light control strategies
[7] and conditions for car accidents [8, 9]. In the framework of NaSch model,
several very speciﬁc real life observations have been attempted to simulate. Let
us mention the German highway rules [10], diﬀerent rules for overtaking [1] or
even an individual driver reaction to traﬃc [11].
The road network is rather poor in Poland — the network is sparse and roads
are often in a bad condition. Plenty of diﬀerent vehicles: bikes, horse carts,
farming or construction machines and all kinds of modern cars meet together
on the same road. Since usually there is no chance for overtaking, then a driver
going behind slowly moving vehicles, is getting nervous and often forces the
vehicle ahead to change its driving. Then usually such a hindrance vehicle (a)
pulls over to let another vehicle to pass or (b) speeds-up. By this paper we
implement (b) behavior by advanced NaSch model. To model car diversity we
propose to violate of the common speed limit. However, when we only relax
the speed limit then, obviously, a stationary state is determined by the slowest
vehicles. There is a need to supplement the model by rules which inﬂuence the
slowly moving cars. The extra rules proposed by us are again related to Polish
drivers common habits. The ﬁrst rule eﬀects in hanging the speed limit of the
slowest car. The second rule increases the speed limit of each car which distance
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part III, LNCS 3993, pp. 256–263, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

Nagel-Schreckenberg Model of Traﬃc

257

to a following one is 0. Here the velocity adjustment is based on the distance to
a car that follows – a looking behind rule [12].
In the next Section we repeat the deﬁnition of the basic model, since details
of NaSch model may inﬂuence results [13]. Section 3 describes the simulation
procedure. We report our results concerning time development and properties of
stationary states in Section 4. The ﬁnal section contains summary and propositions for further model development.

2

NaSch Model

The probabilistic cellular automata model of traﬃc represents a lane as onedimensional lattice of L cells. Each cell is either occupied by one of N cars or is
empty. A car can move with the velocity determined by integer values bounded
(t)
by a speed limit vmax . At time t a car is identiﬁed by a cell number xi occupied
(t)
by the car and its velocity vi . The number of empty cells before the car is called
(t)
(t)
(t)
a gap and denoted gi = xi+1 − xi − 1. The cars move along the lane according
to rules related to the driving habits:
—
—
—
—

(t+1)

(t)

acceleration: vi
= min(vi + 1, vmax );
(t+1)
(t) (t)
deceleration: vi
= min(vi , gi );
(t+1)
(t)
randomization: if random < p then vi
= max(vi − 1, 0);
(t+1)
(t)
(t+1)
= xi + vi
.
movement: xi

At each discrete time step t → t + 1 the positions and velocities of all cars are
synchronously updated.
The relation to empirical results is established by the notion of mean traﬃc ﬂow
J = vρ for a given car density. In case of NaSch model, this ﬂow depends on car
density and deceleration probability J = J(ρ, p). Relation between vehicle density
ρ and ﬂow J is called the fundamental diagram. At low density, ρ
1, the ﬂow
is characterized by a linear dependence on vehicle density – a free ﬂow state. At
high densities, the ﬂow decreases with increasing density. Vehicles are said to be in
a congested state – stop-and-go waves dominate in dynamics of the system.

3

Simulation Procedure

Our simulations are performed on one-dimensional lattice of length L = 10 000
sites with periodic boundary conditions. Such a system size is large enough to
reduce ﬁnite-size eﬀects [5]. If N denotes a number of cars then car density
ρ is deﬁned as ρ = N/L. Each simulation starts at random initial conditions:
random localization of cars on a lane and random initial velocities. For each
initial conﬁguration, we update the individual vehicle velocity and position in
accordance with the update rules described in the previous section. By observing
ﬁrst L time steps we obtain a picture of the development in time of a given system
property while averaging over next L time steps we get the mean value of the

258

D. Makowiec and W. Miklaszewski

property in a stationary state. Each simulation experiment is repeated for a
number (100) of diﬀerent realizations.

4
4.1

Individual Velocity Limit
Definitions of Supplementary Rules

Let us assign an individual speed limit to each driver: vmax (i), i = 1, . . . , N and
vmax (i) ∈ 1, 2, . . . , vlim . Let us denote this model as (0, 0). The car ﬂow J(ρ, p)
is determined by slowly moving vehicles due to the hindrance eﬀect of other cars.
It means that in a stationary state, all cars are moving in a few clusters which
are led by cars with the speed limit equal to 1. Therefore we modify the model:
at each time step one car chosen from of all cars driving with the smallest actual
velocity, obtains a new maximal velocity at random. Let us denote this rule as
(1, 0).
In Fig. 1 the resulting ﬂow is shown for all values of ρ and p simulated by us.
The fundamental diagrams having the usual form, for two particular values of the
randomization parameter p (important for further simulations), are presented in
Fig. 2. The linear dependence of traﬃc ﬂow on car density is observed in one
third of the density interval. But the mean velocity of the traﬃc is reduced
considerable, as if the basic NaSch model with vmax = 1 was simulated.
The following modiﬁcations are proposed to accelerate traﬃc:
(2, 0): a new velocity limit, assigned to the slowest car, must be greater than the
car previous limit
(0, 1): if a gap between two subsequent cars is equal to 0, then the speed limit
of the car ahead is increased by 1. The new speed limit cannot excess the overall
limit vlim .

Fig. 1. Traﬃc ﬂow when each vehicle has its own speed limit vmax (i) chosen at random
from 1, . . . , 10 (left panel) and from 1, . . . , 90 (right panel) where the slowest driving
vehicle changes the speed limit to a new one — model (1, 0).

Nagel-Schreckenberg Model of Traﬃc

259

Fig. 2. The fundamental diagram for (1, 0) model in case vlim = 10 and vlim = 90 for
p = 0.05 and p = 0.5. Note that in case of the NaSch model with vmax = 1, ρ = 0.5,
resulting ﬂow corresponds to maximal ﬂow.

The combination of the above notations means that the corresponding combination of the rules is applied simultaneously. For example, (1, 1) means that
the slowest driving car changes the speed limit and all vehicles, which distance
to a car behind is zero, have their speed limit increased by 1.
4.2

Results

Starting from random initial states with individual velocity limits taken at random from the interval 1, 2, . . . , vlim , we observe the development of mean velocity
and mean maximal velocity. The model parameters are chosen in a way which
allows us to investigate diﬀerent aspects of road conditions:
(A) – basic traﬃc: ρ = 0.01 p = 0.05 and vlim = 10,
(B) – high car density: ρ = 0.1 p = 0.05 and vlim = 10,
(C) – high car diversity: ρ = 0.01 p = 0.05 and vlim = 90,
(D) – high randomization: ρ = 0.01 p = 0.5 and vlim = 10.
The time evolution of the mean velocity and changes of the average maximal
velocity are shown in Fig. 3. The time axis is logarithmic to better visualize
diﬀerent features of subsequent time intervals.
When the car density is low, the supplementary rules accelerate the traﬃc in
short times what, after many time steps, lead to mean velocities higher than (0, 0)
rule provides. However, this occurs to all rules except one: (1, 0) rule. After many
time steps only this rule leads to the mean speed limit smaller than in (0, 0) model.
In general, it appears that the mean maximal velocity increases for all rules except
(1, ∗) rules. This is caused by our update conﬁguration algorithm. The most left
Of slowest cars on a lane is chosen to alter its sleep limit. After many time steps,
cars drive with the same speed in jammed clusters. Since the most left car is often
a car from a tail of a cluster, it should have a high speed limit. Therefore, a random
change means here the exchange of a high speed limit to some other one, probably

260

D. Makowiec and W. Miklaszewski

Fig. 3. Time development of the mean velocity v (t) and mean maximal velocity
(t)
vmax ) when each vehicle has its own maximal velocity vmax (i). The label at a curve
indicates the rule applied.

lower. After long evolution, the decrease of the mean speed limit is observable. Our
simulations show that in the case (D) vmax does not stabilize within 105 time
steps though the mean velocity stabilizes after 104 time steps.
The rules: (∗, 1), independently on the car density, lead to the mean traﬃc
velocity higher than (0, 0) model. When a car density is small then also (2, 0)
rule is eﬃcient in establishing faster traﬃc.

Nagel-Schreckenberg Model of Traﬃc

261

Fig. 4. Distribution of small gaps for diﬀerent road conditions (A) – (D) and diﬀerent
rules

In all road cases: (A)–(D) and for (2, 1) and (0, 1) rules, the mean speed limits
signiﬁcantly increase to values close to vlim . However, this high mean speed limits
only little inﬂuence mean velocities. (This property is present also in the model
with (2, 0) rule at low car density). Thus, although drives are allowed to go
fast, they drive at about one fourth of a speed limit. To ﬁnd explanation of this
discrepancy we examine the structure of a stationary conﬁguration. In particular,
we concentrate one a distribution of small gaps: gi = 0, 1, 2, 3. The series of plots
in Figs. 4 present mean percentages of small gaps in stationary conﬁgurations.
Gaps 0 and 1 are crucial in establishing the stop-and-go state of congested
traﬃc. The two rules: (0, 0) and (1, 0), independently on road conditions, lead to
a state where more than 60% of vehicles are trapped in the stop-and-go phase;
only few cars are separated more than 3 empty cells.
The rules (∗, 1) stabilize on conﬁgurations where stopped cars occur rarely.
It meanss that the (0, 1) part of this rules is applied rarely. Thus there are no
2-cell clusters on a lane ﬁlled by two cars. Note that in all road condition the
system stabilizes on conﬁgurations in which more than 90% cars are separated
by empty cells. It means that even in case (B) of high car density, almost all
vehicles are moving.
In case of high randomization (D) only about 25% of vehicles are separated
by small gaps. It appears that the distribution of large gaps exibits a powerlaw dependence on a gap size, see Fig. 5(a). Each time one meets a power-law

262

D. Makowiec and W. Miklaszewski

Fig. 5. (a) Log-log plot of distribution of large gaps in case of a model with (1, 1)
rule and (D) parameters. (b) Histograms of actual car velocity and speed limits for a
model with (1, 1) rule and (D) parameters. Subsequent bars correspond to subsequent
2000-time-step counting started after 10000 initial time steps. (log scale)

dependence, a suggestion is born that a stable conﬁguration is critical in some
sense[14]. In Fig. 5(b) a distribution of actual car velocities is confronted with
a distribution of speed limits. Note that the speed limit for more than 80%
of cars is 2. Hence the slow mean traﬃc velocity is related to the speed limit
distribution. The criticality emerges from a delicate balance between eﬀects of
the parts of (1,1) rule which act oppositely to the speed limit: after many time
steps, (1,0)-part works systematically on decreasing < vmax > while (0,1)-part
at high p is eﬀective in increasing < vmax >.

5

Summary

In the presented paper we investigated eﬀectiveness of rules mimicing habits
popular among drivers on Polish roads. Computer experiments were performed
on the base of NaSch traﬃc model. The car diversity was achieved by violation
of the car speed limit. The ﬁrst speciﬁc supplementary rules (∗, 0) were examples
of global rules – the speed limit of a single slowest car was modiﬁed, while the
second ones (∗, 1) were a kind of local rules – the speed limit is changed to each
car which stopped another car.
Simulations exemplify the basic expected result – slowly moving vehicles determined traﬃc. While eﬀect of (∗, 0) rules on the mean traﬃc velocity was small
but the insistence of the car behind in speeding-up of a slow vehicle (rules: (∗, 1)),
increased the mean velocity. We also found that the character of congested traﬃc
was diﬀerent in case of (∗, 1) rules – the stop-and-go waves were absent. Cars
were driving permanently though at low velocity.
Long runs magniﬁed some details of our algorithms. For example, in case of
(1, 1) rule we could observe emerging of properties which are characteristic for
dynamical systems being in a critical state.
In future simulations, the algorithm of changing a speed limit of one of the
slowest cars, should be modify in a way to avoid decrease of maximal velocity,

Nagel-Schreckenberg Model of Traﬃc

263

e.g., a car located as most right on a lane should alter its limit. On the other
hand, this slowest car could be shifted to the end of a cluster behind to imitate
pulling over of a hindrance to let other vehicles to pass.

Acknowledgments
We acknowledge the support of Gda´
nsk University – project BW-5400-5-0166-5
and Academic Computer Centre in Gdansk for CPU access.

References
1. Chowdhury, D., Santen, L., Schadschneider, A.: Statistical physics of vehicular
traﬃc and some related systems. Phys. Rep. 329 (2000) 199–329
2. Helbing, D.: Traﬃc and related self-driven many-particle systems. Rev. Mod. Phys.
73 (2001) 1067–1141
3. Nagel, K., Schreckenberg, M.: A cellular automaton model for freeway traﬃc. J.
Phys. I France 2 (1992) 2221–2229
4. Fukui, M., Ishibashi, Y.: Traﬃc ﬂow in 1d cellular automaton model including cars
moving with high speed. J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 65 (1996) 1868–1870
5. W. Knospe, L. Santen, A.S., Schreckenberg, M.: An empirical test for cellular
automaton models of traﬃc ﬂow. Phys. Rev. E 70 (2004) 016115–1–016115–25
6. Knospe, W., Santen, L., Schadschneider, A., Schreckenberg, M.: Towards a realistic
microscopic description of highway traﬃc. J. Phys. A 33 (2000) L477–L485
7. Brockfeld, E., Barlovic, R., Schadschneider, A., Schreckenberg, M.: Optimizing
traﬃc lights in a cellular automaton model for city traﬃc. Phys. Rev. E 64 (2001)
056132
8. Boccara, N., Fuk´s, H., Zeng, Q.: Car accidents and number of stopped cars due to
road blockage on a one-lane highway. J. Phys. A 30 (1997) 3329–3332
9. Moussa, N.: Car accidents in cellular automata models for one-lane traﬃc ﬂow.
Phys. Rev. E 68 (2003) 036127
10. Ebersbach, A., Schneider, J., Morgenstern, I.: Simulation traﬃc on german highways based on the nagel-schekenberg-model. Int. J. Mod. Phys. C 12 (2001) 1081–
1089
11. Moussa, N.: Cellular automata for traﬃc ﬂow with ”slow-to-start” rule: Eﬀect of
randomization. Int. J. Mod. Phys. C 15 (2004) 29–43
12. Nakayama, A., Sugiyama, Y., Hasebe, K.: Eﬀect of looking at the car that follows
in an optimal velocity model of traﬃc ﬂow. Phys. Rev. E 65 (2001) 016112–1–
06112–6
13. Xue,Y., Dong,L., Li, L., Dai, S.: Eﬀects of changing ordres in the update rules on
traﬃc ﬂow. Phys. Rev. E 71 (2005) 026123–1–026123–6
14. Bak,P., Tang,C., Wiesenfeld, K.: Self-organized criticality. Phys. Rev. A 38 (1988)
365–374

