Monte Carlo Grid Application for Electron
Transport
Emanouil Atanassov, Todor Gurov, Aneta Karaivanova, and Mihail Nedjalkov
IPP - Bulgarian Academy of Sciences,
Acad. G. Bonchev St., Bl.25A, 1113 Soﬁa, Bulgaria
emanouil@parallel.bas.bg, gurov@parallel.bas.bg, anet@parallel.bas.bg,
mixi@parallel.bas.bg

Abstract. In this paper we present a Grid application developed for
electron transport problems called SALUTE (Stochastic ALgorithms
for Ultra-fast Transport in sEmiconductors). We consider a physical
model of a femtosecond relaxation of optically excited electrons which interact with phonons in an one-band semicondoctor. The electron-phonon
interaction is switched on after a laser pulse creates an initial electron
distribution. The Barker-Ferry equation is utilized as a quantum-kinetic
model of the process under consideration. Two cases of this process are
investigated - with and without an applied electric ﬁeld. The electric ﬁeld
causes shift in the replicas, population of the semiclassically forbidden
regions and inﬂuences the broadening and retardation of the electron
distribution. The paper describes Grid implementation of these CPUintensive algorithms. Using this application innovative results for different materials can be obtained. Here we present the ﬁrst version of
SALUTE which is used to obtain innovative results for GaAs materials.
The results from a number of tests on MPI-enabled Grid are shown and
disscussed.
Keywords: Monte Carlo methods, electron transport, Markov chains,
parallel computing, Grid applications.

1

Introduction

Monte Carlo Methods (MCMs) are based on the simulation of stochastic processes whose expected values are equal to computationally interesting quantities.
MCMs oﬀer simplicity of construction, and are often designed to mirror some process whose behavior is only understood in a statistical sense. However, there is a
wide class of problems where MCMs are the only known computational methods
of solution. It is well known that MCMs form the computational foundation for
many ﬁelds including transport theory, quantum physics, computational chemistry, ﬁnance, etc.
Supported by the Ministry of Education and Science of Bulgaria under Grant No.
I1405/04, by Austrian Science Fund under FWF Project START Y247-N13 and by
FP6 INCO Grant 016639/2005 Project BIS21++ .
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part III, LNCS 3993, pp. 616–623, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

Monte Carlo Grid Application for Electron Transport

617

In this paper we describe a Grid application, which solves a computationally
intensive problem arising from semiconductor physics (see Section 2). The underlying stochastic algorithms are of Monte Carlo type. The application is called
SALUTE for simplicity.
When using a MC method, a set of computational random numbers has to be
generated and used to statistically estimate a quantity of interest. The probabilistic convergence rate is known to be approximately O(N −1/2 ), where N is the
number of underlying random samples. A serious drawback of the MC methods
is the slow rate of convergence. In order to accelerate the convergence rate of the
MC methods several techniques have been developed. Variance reduction methods, like antithetic varieties, stratiﬁcation and importance sampling [1], reduce
the variance which is a quantity to measure the probabilistic uncertainty. Another way to improve the convergence is to use quasi-random sequences instead
of pseudorandom. While pseudorandom numbers are constructed to imitate the
behavior of the truly random numbers, quasi-random sequences are deterministic
and constructed to be as uniform as possible at the cost of correlation.
Parallelism is an alternative way to accelerate the convergence of a MC computation. If n processors execute n independent copies of a MC computation,
the accumulated result has a variance n time smaller than that of a single copy.
Due to the nature of MC methods, it is sometimes appropriate to have as many
executions as possible to reduce the statistical error. On the other hand, for a
distributed MC application: once a distributed task starts, it can usually be executed independently with almost no inter-process communications. Therefore,
MC applications are widely perceived as computationally intensive but naturally parallel. The subsequent growth of computer power, especially that of the
parallel computers and distributed systems, made distributed MC applications
possible to carry out more and more ambitious calculations [2, 3]. Actually, many
MC applications and software packages in science and engineering, for example,
CHARMM [4] for macromolecular dynamics simulation implemented using MPI,
PMC [5] for nuclear physics simulation on Livermore Message Passing System,
and MESYST for simulation of 3D tracer dispersion in atmosphere running on
a CRAY T3E parallel machine, have already taken advantage of the power of
parallel systems to achieve a more accurate understanding of the problem or
better performance of the computation.
Compared to the parallel computing environment, a large-scale distributed
computing environment or a Computational Grid [6, 7, 8] has tremendous amount
of computational power. Let us mention the EGEE Grid which today consists of
over 18900 CPU in 171 Grid sites1 .
1

The Enabling Grid for E-sciencE (EGEE) project is funded by the European Commission and aims to build on recent advances in grid technology and develop a secure
grid infrastructure which is available to scientists 24 hours-a-day. The project aims
to provide researchers in both academia and industry with access to major computing resources, independent of their geographic location. the EGEE project identiﬁes
a wide-range of scientiﬁc disciplines and their applications and supports a number of
them for deployment. For more information see http://public.eu-egee.org/.

618

E. Atanassov et al.

There are already MC applications running on the Grid (see some of the EGEE
applications), and also publications like [9, 10, 11], for example, considering
MCMs and large distributed computing paradigms.
Eﬀectively exploring the power of distributed MC application requires that
the underlying random number streams in each subtask are independent in a statistical sense. The main techniques used in parallel random number generators to
distribute sequentially generated random number sequence among diﬀerent processors include sequence splitting and leapfrog. One problem with the sequence
splitting and leapfrog techniques is that we must either assume that the number
of nodes is ﬁxed or at least bounded which will restrict the scalability of the
distributed MC computations. Another way to generate parallel random number sequences is to produce independent sequences by properly parameterizing
pseudorandom generators [12]. The SPRNG (Scalable Parallel Random Number Generators) library [13] was designed to use parameterized pseudorandom
generators to provide independent random streams. Some generators in SPRNG
can generate up to 231 − 1 independent random number streams with suﬃciently
long period and good quality [13]. These generators meet the requirements of
the most grid-based MC applications.
The intrinsically parallel aspect of MC applications makes them an ideal ﬁt for
the grid-computing paradigm. In general, grid-based MC applications can divide
the MC task into a number of subtasks (called jobs in EGEE Grid) by the tasksplit service and utilize the grid’s Workload Management Service (also called
Resource Broker in EGEE) to dispatch these independent subtasks to diﬀerent
nodes [14]. The connectivity services are provided using the gridftp protocol.
The execution of a subtask takes advantage of the Storage Elements to store the
executable, intermediate results, and to store each subtask’s ﬁnal (partial) result.
When the subtasks are done, the EGEE Workload Management Service and the
Logging and Bookkeeping Service are used to collect the information about the
results and then the task-gathering service gets the results of the successfully
executed subtasks. We have prepared a task-split service and a task-gathering
service using the SQL language. The paper is organized as follows: After an
overview (the Introduction) we describe the application (section 2), then we
discuss the parallel and Grid implementation of SALUTE, and, ﬁnally, we give
some conclusions and directions for future work.

2

Description of the Application

Many problems of interest in transport theory and related areas can be cast as
a Fredholm integral equation of the second kind [1]. It is instructive to rewrite
such equation as:
f = Kf + ϕ,
(1)
where K is an integral operator, and f , ϕ are functions in a Banach space of
integrable functions.
The equation (1) shows that the kernel, K, appears as a linear operator.
MCMs are merely probabilistic ways of applying linear operators. The formal

Monte Carlo Grid Application for Electron Transport

619

35

0 kV/cm
6 kV/cm
12 kV/cm
inital d.f.

Distribution function [a.u.]

25

15

5

−5

0

1000

2000
|k| x |k|

3000

4000

Fig. 1. MC solution at positive direction on the z axe (t=200 femtoseconds)

solution of the equation is presented as a Neumann series with terms obtained
by consecutive application of K. The general MCM problem is to calculate linear
functionals of the solution:
J(f ) =

D

h(x)f (x)dx = (h, f ),

(2)

where h a given function. In particular, the MCM approach consists of the
following steps (1) to deﬁne a suitable random variable whose mathematical
expectation is equal to the solution, (2) to determine appropriate initial and
transition probability densities by using the kernel of the integral operator after
some necessary transformations for the chosen random process, (3) to apply
various variance reduction techniques to reduce the statistical error, and, ﬁnally,
to formulate the appropriate statistical estimator.
MCMs for quantum transport in semiconductors and semiconductor devices
have been actively developed during the last decade [15, 16]. If temporal or
spatial scales become short, the evolution of the semiconductor carriers cannot
be described in terms of the Boltzmann transport [17] and therefore a quantum description is needed. We note the importance of active investigations in
this ﬁeld: nowadays nanotechnology provides devices and structures where the
carrier transport occurs at nanometer and femtosecond scales. As a rule quantum problems are very computationally intensive and require parallel and Grid
implementations.
A Wigner equation for the nanometer and femtosecond transport regime has
been derived from a three equations set model based on the generalized Wigner
function [18]. The full version of the equation poses serious numerical challenges.
A simpliﬁed version of the equation (in the homogeneous case - the Levinson
or Barker-Ferry equation, [19]) is analyzed in the framework of SALUTE. The
physical model describes a femtosecond relaxation process of optically excited

620

E. Atanassov et al.
35

inital d.f.
0 kV/cm
6 kV/cm
12 kV/cm

Distribution function [a.u.]

25

15

5

−5

0

1000

2000
|k| x |k|

3000

4000

Fig. 2. MC solution at negative direction on the z axe (t=200 femtoseconds)

electrons which interact with phonons in single-band semiconductor. The interaction with phonons is switched on after a laser pulse creates an initial electron
distribution.
Experimentally, such processes can be investigated by using ultra-fast spectroscopy, where the relaxation of electrons is explored during the ﬁrst hundred
femtoseconds after the optical excitation. In our model we consider a low-density
regime, where the interaction with phonons dominates the carrier-carrier interaction. Two cases are studied using SALUTE: electron evolution in presence and
in absence of electric ﬁeld. The electric ﬁeld causes shift in the replicas population of the semiclassically forbidden regions and inﬂuences the broadening and

4

3

2

1

0

200

−1

100
0

−2
−5000

−4000

−3000

−2000

−1000

−100
0

1000

2000

3000

4000

−200
5000

Fig. 3. Distribution of optically generated electrons in a quantum wire

Monte Carlo Grid Application for Electron Transport

621

retardation of the electron distribution (see Figures 1-3). The intracollisional
ﬁeld eﬀect is clearly demonstrated as an eﬀective change of the phonon energy,
which depends on the ﬁeld direction and the evolution time.
Another formulation of the Wigner equation considers inhomogeneous case
when the electron evolution depends on the energy and space coordinates. The
problem is relevant e.g. for description of the ultrafast dynamics of conﬁned
carriers. Particularly we consider a quantum wire, where the carriers are conﬁned
in the plane normal to the wire by inﬁnite potentials. The initial condition is
assumed both in energy and space coordinates. Grid implementations have been
used to obtain the space and energy dependence of the evolution in the zero ﬁeld
case (see Figure 3).
SALUTE integrates a set of Monte Carlo algorithms for simulation of ultrafast carrier transport in semiconductors considered in above mentioned versions
of the Wigner equation. A detailed description of the algorithms can be found
in [20, 21, 22].

3

Grid Implementation

SALUTE solves an NP-hard problem concerning the evolution time using Monte
Carlo algorithms which are inherently parallel. Thus, SALUTE is a very good
candidate for implementations on MPI-enabled Grid sites. It is proved [20, 22]
that stochastic error has order O(N −1/2 ), where N is the number of samples
of the MC estimator for a given evolution time t. When t is ﬁxed and N → ∞
the error decreases, but for N ﬁxed and t large, the factor for the error looks
ominous. That is why the problem of estimating the electron energy distribution
function for long evolution times with small stochastic error requires combining
both MC variance reduction techniques and distributed or parallel computations.
By using the Grid environment provided by the EGEE project middleware, we
were able to reduce the computing time of Monte Carlo simulations of ultra-fast
carrier transport in semiconductors.
The numerical results discussed in the Figures 1-3 are obtained for zero temperature and GaAs material parameters: the electron eﬀective mass is 0.063, the
optimal phonon energy is 36meV , the static and optical dielectric constants are
s = 10.92 and ∞ = 12.9. The initial condition at t = 0 is given by a function
which is Gaussian in energy, scaled in a way to ensure, that the peak value is
equal to unity [22].
Successful tests of the application were performed at the Bulgarian EGEEGRID sites using the South Eastern Europe Resource Broker at the IPP-BAS.
Table 1. CPU times for SALUTE execution on MPI-enabled Grid site

Number of CPU
Time

2

4

6

9790 4896 3262

622

E. Atanassov et al.

The MPI implementation was MPICH 1.2.6, and the execution is controlled
from the Computing Element via the Torque batch system. The timing results
for evolution time t = 100 femtoseconds are shown in Table 1. The parallel
eﬃciency can clearly be seen from the results - with 4 CPUs, the running time
is half less than the running time with 2 CPUs, with 6 CPUs the running time
is 3 times less than with 2 CPUs.

4

Conclusion and Future Work

A Grid application that solves important problems in the ﬁeld of nanotechnologies has been developed, studied and tested on MPI-enabled Grid sites. The
test results show excellent parallel eﬃciency. Obtaining results for larger evolution times requires more computational power, which means that the application
should run on larger sites or on several sites in parallel. The application can provide results for other types of semiconductors like Si or for composite materials.
The SALUTE application is able to fully utilize the computational power of
Grids.

References
1. Kalos, M.A. and P.A. Whitlock: Monte Carlo Methods. Volume 1: Basics,
Wiley, New York, 1986.
2. Karaivanova, A.: Monte Carlo Methods for Parallel Processing. PhD dissertation,
IPP-BAS, 1996.
3. L. Smith and M. Bull: Development of mixed mode MPI/OpenMP applications.
Scientific Programming, series 9 (2/3), 2001, 83–98.
4. B. R. Brooks, R. E. Bruccoleri, B. D. Olafson, D. J. States, S. Swaminathan, and M. Karplus: CHARMM: A Program for Macromolecular Energy,
Minimization, and Dynamic Calculations. J. Comp. Chem., 4, 1893, 187–217.
5. J. A. Rathkopf: PMC: A shared short-cut to portable parallel power. Lawrence
Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, CA, UCRL-112311, 1992.
6. J. Foster and C. Kesselmann: The Grid: Blueprint for a New Computing Infrastructure. Morgan Kaufmann, 1999.
7. J. Foster, C. Kesselmann and S. Tuecke: The Anatomy of the Grid. International Journal of Supercomputer Applications, 15(3), 2001.
8. Globus website, http://www.globus.org .
9. Entropia: PC Grid Computing. http://www.entropia.com, 2002.
10. F.Solms and W.H.Steeb: Distributed Monte Carlo integration using CORBA
and Java. International Journal of Modern Physics, 9(7), 1998: 903-915.
11. M. H. Zhou: A Scientific Computing Tool for Parallel Monte Carlo in a Distributed
Environment. PhD dissertation, School of Mathematics, University of Southern
Mississippi, 2000.
12. M. Mascagni, D. Seperley and A. Srinivasan: SPRNG: A Scalable Library for
Pseudorandom Numbar Generation. ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software,
2000.
13. SPRNG website, http://sprng.cs.fsu.edu.

Monte Carlo Grid Application for Electron Transport

623

14. R. Buyya, S. Chapin, and D. DiNucci: Architectural Models for Resource
Management in the Grid. In: R. Buyya, M. Baker (Eds.): Grid Computing, GRID
2000, LNCS, vol. 1971, Springer Verlag, 2000: 18–35.
15. R. Rossi, C. Jacoboni, M. Nedjalkov: A Monte Carlo Solution of the Wigner
transport Equation. Semiconductor Science Technology, 9, 1994: 934-940.
16. M. Nedjalkov, I. Dimov, F. Rossi, C. Jacoboni. Convergent of the Monte
Carlo Algorithms for the Solution of the Wigner Quantum-Transp. Equation. J.
Math. Comp. Mod., Vol. 23 (8/9), 1996: 159–166.
17. J. Rammer: Quantum transport theory of electrons in solids: A single-particle
approach. Reviews of Modern Physics, series 63(4), 1991, 781–817.
18. M. Nedjalkov, R. Kosik, H. Kosina, and S. Selberherr: A Wigner Equation
for Nanometer and Femtosecond Transport Regime. In: Proceedings of the 2001
First IEEE Conference on Nanotechnology, IEEE, 2001.
19. J. Barker and D. Ferry: Self-scattering path-variable formulation of high
ﬁeld time-dependent quantum kinetic equations for semiconductor transport in
the ﬁnite-collision-duration regime. Physical Review Letters, series 42 (26), 1979:
1779–1781.
20. T.V. Gurov, M. Nedjalkov, P.A. Whitlock, H. Kosina and S. Selberherr:
Femtosecond relaxation of hot electrons by phonon emission in presence of electric
ﬁeld. Physica B, 314, 2002: 301–304.
21. T.V. Gurov and I.T. Dimov: A Parallel Monte Carlo Method for Electron
Quantum Kinetic Equation. LNCS, 2907, Springer-Verlang, 2004: 153–160.
22. T.V. Gurov, P.A. Whitlock: An eﬃcient backward Monte Carlo estimator
for solving of a quantum kinetic equation with memory kernel. Mathematics and
Computers in Simulation, 60, 2000: 85–105.

