The Optimal Subchannel and Bit Allocation
Problem for OFDM
Taehyung Park1, and Sungbin Im2
1

Department of Industrial and Information Systems Engineering,
Soongsil University, Seoul, Korea
tpark@ssu.ac.kr
2
School of Electrical Engineering, Soongsil University, Seoul, Korea
sbi@nuri.net

Abstract. The advantages of the orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (OFDM) are high spectral eﬃciency, resiliency to RF interference, and lower multi-path distortion. To further utilize vast channel
capacity of the multiuser OFDM, one has to ﬁnd the eﬃcient adaptive
subchannel and bit allocation among users. In this paper, we propose
an 0-1 integer programming model formulating the optimal subchannel and bit allocation problem of the multiuser OFDM. We provide an
eﬃcient Lagrangian dual formulation with fast solution approach. Simulation results are provided to show the eﬀectiveness of the 0-1 integer
programming model. MATLAB simulation on a system employing Mary quardarature amplitude modulation (MQAM) assuming a frequencyselective channel consisting of ﬁve independent Rayleigh multipaths are
carried with the optimal subchannel and bit allocation solution generated
by 0-1 integer programming model.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider the optimal subchannel and bit allocation problem
in the multiuser OFDM (Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing) network.
Multicarrier modulation technique is utilized for reducing intersymbol interference. Assuming that the transmitter knows the instantaneous channel transfer
functions of all users, signiﬁcant performance improvement is achieved if adaptive modulation is used with OFDM. Specially, subchannels with large channel
gains carry more bits/OFDM symbol, while subchannels with deep fade carry
one or zero bits/symbol.
Previous research on adaptive subchannel assignment and bit allocation problem are references [1], [3], [4], [5], and [7]. These research can be divided into two
groups; In [1], [3], and [7], the problem is deﬁned as minimizing the total channel
power with the constrains of satisfying all user’s data transmission demand and
exclusive channel assignment for each user; In [4] and [5], the problem is maximizing the minimum of user’s throughput subject to the power constraints. In
Both authors are supported by the research fund from Soongsil University, Seoul,
Korea.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part II, LNCS 3992, pp. 992–995, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

The Optimal Subchannel and Bit Allocation Problem for OFDM

993

[1] and [7], the optimization problem is mainly formulated as a convex nonlinear
programming while our model explicitly incorporates the integrality of the bit
loading and channel assignment.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we
introduce the assumptions underlying our model and formulate the adaptive
subchannel assignment and bit loading problem into an equivalent 0-1 integer
linear programming problem. In Section 3, we compare our solution with a static
assignment approaches via Monte Carlo simulation.

2

Problem Formulation

We assume that there are m users and the ith user has a data rate of Ri bits
per OFDM symbol. In the transmitter, the serial data from the m users are
fed into subchannel and bit allocation blocks which allocate bits from diﬀerent
users to diﬀerent subchannels. We assume that there are n subchannels. The
instantaneous channel information on all the subchannels of all the users is
assumed to be available at the transmitter. It is also assumed that the subchannel
and bit allocation information is sent to each user by a separate channel. The
complex symbols at the output of the modulators are transformed into the time
domain samples by inverse fast Fourier transform. Cyclic extension of the time
domain samples, the guard interval, is then added to ensure orthogonality among
the subchannels. The transmit signal is then passed through diﬀerent frequency
selective fading channels to diﬀerent users.
To formulate the problem into an optimization problem, we introduce the decision variables xij and yij . xij denotes the number of bits/symbol of the ith user
that are assigned to the jth subchannel and has values in C = {0, 1, . . . , M }.
0-1 variable yij is one if user i is assigned to subchannel j and zero, otherwise. Since each user’s data transmission requirement must be satisﬁed, we have
j xij = Ri ∀i. Also, each subchannel cannot be shared by more than one user,
we have i yij ≤ 1 ∀j. Since the allocated number of bits xij = 0 if user i
is not assigned to subchannel j, and if yij = 1, xij can be positive, we have
xij ≤ M yij ∀i, j.
The transmission power allocated to user i’s subchannel j is assumed to be a
convex nonlinear function fi (xij )/α2ij where fi (xij ) denotes the required power
supporting xij bits/symbol at a given bit per error(BER) when the channel gain
is equal to unity, and αij the instantaneous channel gain that is assumed to be
known to the transmitter. The speciﬁc form of fi (xij ) used is found on page
1752 in [7].
Instead of using a general integer variable xij , we can represent xij in terms
of 0-1 varibles xijk with constraints xij = k∈C kxijk ∀i, j, k xijk = 1 ∀i, j,
and xijk integer ∀i, j, k. Since fi (xij ) ∈ {0, fi (1), . . . , fi (M )}, the transmission
power term fi (xij )/α2ij has value cijk = fi (k)/α2i,j ∀i, j and k ∈ {0, 1, 2, . . . , M }.
Now the optimization problem becomes the following 0-1 integer linear programming problem.

994

T. Park and S. Im

OFDM:

Minimize

i

j

k cijk xijk

(1a)

∀i
j
k kxijk = Ri
∀i, j
k xijk ≤ yij

(1b)
(1c)

yij ≤ 1 ∀j
xijk ≥ 0 ∀i, j, k

(1d)
(1e)

yij ≥ 0 ∀i, j
xijk integer ∀i, j, k

(1f)
(1g)

subject to

i

∀i, j.

yij integer

(1h)

Note that if m = 1, problem (1) becomes a Generalized Upper Bounded (GUB)
constrained knapsack problem and [2] contains a specialized algorithm for the
linear programming relaxation of formulation (1) when m = 1.
If we discard the integrality constraints upon xijk and yij from the formulation
(1) and dualize the constraints (1b) employing dual variables μ = (μi ), the
Lagrangian subproblem has
(cijk + kμi )xijk −
i

j

μi Ri
i

k

as the objective function and has constraints (1c) - (1f). Since the Lagrangian
subproblem is separable with respect to j, we have the following Lagrangian
dual problem LD.
LD: Maximizeμ

θj (μ) −

θ(μ) =
j

μi Ri
i

where θj (μ) ≡ Minimum{ i k (cijk + kμi )xijk | k xijk ≤ yij ∀i; i yij ≤
1; xijk ≥ 0 ∀i, k; yij ≥ 0 ∀i}.
It can be easily proved that θj (μ) = min {mini,k {cijk + kμi }, 0}, so we have
θ(μ) = j min {mini,k {cijk + kμi }, 0} − i μi Ri . The Lagrangian dual LD is
nondiﬀerentiable concave maximization problem and the subgradient maximization approach such as the Variable Target Value Method(VTVM) [6] can be
applied.

3

Simulation Result and Summary

In this section, we present simulation results to show the performance of the
proposed algorithm. In the simulations presented here, the wireless channel is
modeled as a frequency-selective channel consisting of ﬁve independent Rayleigh
multipaths with an exponential power delay proﬁle, which are implemented using
the MATLAB functions. We consider a system that employs M-ary quadrature
amplitude modulation (MQAM) with C = {0, 2, 4, 6}. That is, 4-QAM, 16-QAM,
and 64-QAM are used for carrying 2, 4, and 6 bits/symbol.
In order to evaluate the performance of the proposed algorithm, we carried
out 500 independent experiments for each Eb /N0 . In the experiment, 128 subcarriers are used along with a total transmission rate of 512 bits/symbol over

The Optimal Subchannel and Bit Allocation Problem for OFDM

995

0

10

OFDM−FDMA
OFDMA−FDMA with Power Allocation
The Proposed
−1

Bit Error Rates

10

−2

10

−3

10

−4

10

0

5

10

15
20
Average Eb/N0 [dB]

25

30

Fig. 1. Bit error rates versus Eb /N0 for the three schemes

all users. The results are depicted in Fig. 1. For the purpose of comparison, the
BER curves of two diﬀerent schemes are provided in Fig. 1. One is “OFDMFDMA”(frequency division multiple access), which distributes the same number of bits to each subcarrier, (4 bits per subcarrier in this experiment), while
”OFDM-FDMA with Power Allocation” is to employ the adaptive power allocation algorithm with OFDM-FDMA. As shown in Fig. 1, the curve of OFDMFDMA shows the error ﬂoor eﬀect due to the frequency-selective channel. The
proposed algorithm is superior to the other two methods, especially, for high
Eb /N0 .

References
1. Aggarwal, A., Meng, T.H.: A convex interior-point method for optimal OFDM PAR
reduction. IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC) (2005)
2. Johnson E.L., Padberg M.W.: A note on the knapsack problem with special ordered
sets. Oper. Res. Lett. 1 (1981) 18–22
3. Kim, I., Lee, H.L., Kim, B., Lee, Y.H.: On the use of linear programming for dynamic
subchannel and bit allocation in multiuser OFDM. GLOBECOM ’01, 6 (2001) 3648–
3652
4. Rhee, W., Cioﬃ, J.M.: Increasing in capacity of multiuser OFDM system using
dynamic subchannel allocation. Proceedings of the IEEE VTC (2000)
5. Shen, Z., Andrews, J.G., Evans, B.L.: Optimal Power Allocation in Multiuser OFDM
Systems. Proc. IEEE Global Comm. Conference 1 (2003) 337–341
6. Sherali, H.D., Choi, G., Tuncbilek, C.H.: A variable target value method for nondiﬀerentiable optimization. Oper. Res. Lett. 26 (2000) 1–8
7. Wong, C.Y., Cheng, R.S., Letaief, K.B., Murch, R.D.: Multiuser OFDM with adaptive subcarrier, bit, and power allocation. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications 17 (1999) 1747–1758

