Advertisement-Aided Search in a P2P Context
Distribution System
Irene Sygkouna, Miltiades Anagnostou, and Efstathios Sykas
Computer Networks Laboratory, School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National
Technical University of Athens (NTUA), Greece
{isygk, miltos, sykas}@telecom.ntua.gr

Abstract. We study a P2P proactive search mechanism based on the dissemination of advertisements for the new sources. The system design goal of limiting
the state maintained by each peer and ensuring search efficiency is the driving
reason for exploiting the hierarchical network model of the small-world idea.
The results testify the theoretical bounds on search time and provide a view on
the search time in relation to the directory capacity requirements of the peers.

1 Introduction
Context-aware services (CASs) need a flow of information from and about their environment in order to be able to adapt to it. Context producers, consumers and brokers
are employed, with the last ones acting as mediatory players between producers and
consumers. A consumer is a CAS that addresses context requests during its operation
to the nearest broker. Producers are all the context sources. The need to support CASs
that are highly robust and can scale well with the number of nodes and information
sources points to Peer-to-Peer (P2P) architecture. The system faces the challenge to
ensure efficient and scalable distribution of context information. Toward this direction
we employ the advertisement dissemination mechanism, which implies that once a
new source becomes available, the respective broker propagates an advertisement of
the source to the remaining brokers. A broker may store a received advertisement in a
local directory. Assuming infinite directory sizes, each peer broker stores each advertisement and thus maintains knowledge of all the sources available. However, as the
system scales to a high number of sources, the length of the directories may become
unbounded. Thus, our intention is to limit the directory capacity requirements of each
peer and at the same time ensure low path-length for any search request. The idea is to
make the peers store advertisements selectively, according to the philosophy of smallworld model. A requested object is then located in a bounded number of steps with a
greedy search algorithm. We consider a set of brokers forming an overlay network.
Each peer broker maintains the Local Sources Directory (LSD), with entries to the local sources, and the Remote Sources Directory (RSD), which caches directory entries
for sources maintained by other peers. We assume that each source is described by a
structure, the context object, that consists of a name and a set of attributes determined
by (key, value) pairs. Search algorithms from literature are either request broadcastbased or advertisement-based. In the former case, the related mechanisms do not scale
well with the network size since a search request is broadcast throughout the network,
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part I, LNCS 3991, pp. 892 – 895, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

Advertisement-Aided Search in a P2P Context Distribution System

893

but improvements, such as Random Walk, have been proposed. Mechanisms of the
latter case have been also proposed [1, 2] but have not addressed scalability problems.

2 Search Mechanism with Advertisements
Inspired by the hierarchical network model [3] of the small-world phenomenon we
propose an advertisement dissemination mechanism, which proceeds in a way to
make the information maintained in the RSDs reflect the links of the graph generated
from the hierarchical model. The sources maintained by the overlay are classified according to a hierarchy, based on the names of the respective context objects. Thus,
each source corresponds to a specific leaf of a complete b-ary context tree. Note that
we allow more than one source to reside at a specific leaf since multiple sources may
produce context objects of the same context name but different attributes.
Once a source enters the overlay through a node, an advertisement is disseminated
to the rest of the peer nodes according to a flooding algorithm. A node stores a received advertisement if there is still room in its RSD and no other entry for a source
belonging to the same leaf with the new source exists. Once the RSD becomes full, an
elementary distribution of the entries is performed by corresponding each of the relevant remote sources to a local source in the following way: each remote source in turn
is assigned to the nearest, in terms of tree distance, local source provided that this is
feasible (does not exceed the threshold determined by the balanced distribution of the
entries among the local sources). This way, a list of “concentrated” sources LS i is
created for each local source Si, i ∈ { 1,2 ,… , LSD _ SIZE } . Note that the distance between any two sources Xi, Xj, denoted by dist (Xi, Xj), is measured by the height of the
least common ancestor of the leaves hosting Xi and Xj, respectively, in the tree. Note
also that this procedure needs to be repeated every time a new source becomes available though a peer. When an advertisement of a new source is received by a node that
would cause its RSD to exceed its size, the replacement scheme will take place. Assuming that the advertisement refers to a source X, a replacement can take place if the
RSD does not contain any entry for a source that belongs to the same leaf with X. In
particular, the following steps take place:
1. Among the local sources, the one that is closest to X in terms of tree distance, say
SX, is selected, namely: dist( S X , X ) = min dist( Si , X ) .
S i ∈ LSD

2. From the respective list of concentrated sources LS X , a source that is furthest
from SX in terms of tree distance, say SX_MAX, is selected:
dist( SX_MAX , S X ) = max dist( X i , S X ) . SX_MAX will then compete with X
X i ∈ LS X

for membership in the list. Based on the intuition from the model, SX should have
a connection to SX_MAX with probability proportional to p1 = b

− dist( S X , S X_MAXt )

and a connection to X with probability proportional to p2 = b

− dist( S X , X )

,
.

894

I. Sygkouna, M. Anagnostou, and E. Sykas

According to the normalizing probabilities, X will therefore replace SX_MAX with
probability equal to

p2
.
p1 + p2

Note that the advertisement of every new source that belongs to the same leaf with
a local source is definitely stored, provided that the storage capacity is not exceeded.
The following greedy search algorithm is then applied: Once a peer receives a request and a matching source is not found in the LSD, it then searches its RSD. If a
matching source is found, the request is forwarded to the peer pointed by the RSD.
Otherwise, it looks up the nearest source (in terms of tree distance) in the RSD to the
one requested, whose home-broker has not received the same request message from
the current node in the past, in order to avoid cycles. It then forwards the request to
the corresponding peer. The procedure is repeated until a matching source is located
or the TTL is exceeded. Note that a step forward may incur a divergence from the target source if it cannot find in the RSD a source that is at least in the same distance
from the target with the one selected during the previous step. Thus, two versions of
the search algorithm are tested: the Advertisement Flooding-Forward (AF-F) makes
only forward steps, while the Advertisement Flooding-Backwards (AF-B) makes a
move backwards if it does not want to continue from its current node.

3 Simulation Results
We study and quantify the potential gain from the proposed mechanism with an
event-based multithreaded simulation. As a reference for comparison we use Random,
which applies for preprocessing a random replacement scheme at the RSDs, and for
searching the same greedy algorithm. A number of sources join the overlay sequentially. After all the peer nodes have provided the same number of sources, a set of requests are initiated. We assume that the request popularity follows Zipf distribution
[4] (a=0.6). The performance of the mechanisms is well captured by the request hit
ratio (the ratio of the number of successful requests to the total number of requests)
and the average path-length per request (the ratio of the number of hops incurred
across all requests to the total number of requests). If a request fails, it is deemed to
have incurred TTL number of hops. Based on the hierarchical network model, the
RSD_SIZE, not counting the entries for the sources that do belong to the same leaf

(

)

with a local source, is computed as RSD _ SIZE = LSD _ SIZE ⋅ c ⋅ log b n , with
n denoting the total number of leaves in the complete b-ary context tree and c a constant. In effect, we will vary the RSD_size by varying the parameter c. Note that we
set the LSD_SIZE to the size of the LSD just prior to executing the requests. We consider a b-ary tree with b=4 and height equal to 5, for a total number of leaves equal to
1024. We also consider 200 peers. Setting the TTL to 20 and the LSD_SIZE initially
to 10 (Fig. 1a) and then to 30 (Fig. 1b), we intend to explore how the performance
metrics vary with respect to the RSD_SIZE. Parameter c will vary from 0.2 to 1 with
a step equal to 0.2, changing the percentage of the RSD_SIZE to the total number of
sources to 2.5%, 5%, 7.5%, 10%, and 12.5%, respectively. The metrics are calculated
over 100 requests. The figure shows that the proposed mechanism clearly outperforms
the Random, achieving high hit ratio and testifying the theoretical bound on search
2

Advertisement-Aided Search in a P2P Context Distribution System

895

time ( O(log b n ) ). Obviously, as the value of c increases, the performance improvement, compared to the Random, becomes less evident. Moreover, as the LSD_SIZE
increases this performance divergence decreases more quickly with an increase in c.
Thus, the value of the proposed algorithms is mainly identified under limited storage
capacity of the RSD, since in this case the small-world connections are clearly
shaped. Finally, the AF-F provides slightly better results compared to the AF-B.

Fig. 1. Performance metrics after (a) 2000 and (b) 6000 sources have joined the system

References
1. A. Ranganathan and R.H. Campbell, “Advertising in a Pervasive Environment”, Proceedings of the 2nd ACM International Workshop on Mobile Commerce, Atlanta, Georgia,
pp.10-14, September 2002.
2. T. Finin, O. Ratsimor, A. Joshi and Y. Yesha, “eNcentive: A Framework for Intelligent
Marketing in Mobile Peer-To-Peer Environments”, Proceedings of the 5th International
Conference on Electronic Commerce (ICEC’03), New York, NY, USA, pp.87-94, October
2003.
3. J. Kleinberg, “Small-world Phenomena and the Dynamics of Information”, Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS) 14, 2001.
4. L. Breslau, P. Cao, L. Fan, G. Phillips, and S. Shenker, “Web Caching and Zipf-like Distributions: Evidence and Implications”, INFOCOM (1), pp.126–134, 1999.

