A New Method for Crude Oil Price Forecasting
Based on Support Vector Machines
Wen Xie, Lean Yu, Shanying Xu, and Shouyang Wang
Institute of Systems Science, Academy of Mathematics and Systems Sciences,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100080, China
{xiewen, yulean, xsy, sywang}@amss.ac.cn

Abstract. This paper proposes a new method for crude oil price forecasting
based on support vector machine (SVM). The procedure of developing a support vector machine model for time series forecasting involves data sampling,
sample preprocessing, training & learning and out-of-sample forecasting. To
evaluate the forecasting ability of SVM, we compare its performance with
those of ARIMA and BPNN. The experiment results show that SVM outperforms the other two methods and is a fairly good candidate for the crude oil
price prediction.

1 Introduction
Oil plays an increasingly significant role in the world economy since nearly twothirds of the World’s energy consumption comes from crude oil and natural gas.
Sharp oil price movements are likely to disturb aggregate economic activity, especially since Jan 2004, global oil price has been rising rapidly and brings dramatic
uncertainty for the global economy. Hence, volatile oil prices are of considerable
interest to many researchers and institutions. The crude oil price is basically determined by its supply and demand, but more strongly influenced by many irregular
past/present/future events like weather, stock levels, GDP growth, political aspects
and so on. These facts lead to a strongly fluctuating and non-linear market and the
fundamental mechanism governing the complex dynamic is not understood. As Epaminondas et at. [1] reported, the oil market is the most volatile of all the markets except Nasdaq and shows strong evidence of chaos. Therefore, oil price prediction is a
very important topic, albeit an extremely hard one due to its intrinsic difficulty and
practical applications.
When it comes to crude oil price forecasting, most of the literatures focus only on
oil price volatility analysis [1] and oil price determination within the supply and demand framework [2]. There is very limited research on oil price forecasting, including
quantitative and qualitative methods. Among the quantitative methods, Huntington [3]
used a sophisticated econometric model to forecast crude oil prices in the 1980s.
Abramson and Finizza [4] utilized a probabilistic model for predicting oil prices and
Barone-Adesi et al. [5] suggested a semi-parametric approach for forecasting oil
price. Regarding the qualitative methods, Nelson et al. [6] used the Delphi method to
forecast oil prices for the California Energy Commission. However, the above methV.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part IV, LNCS 3994, pp. 444 – 451, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

A New Method for Crude Oil Price Forecasting Based on SVM

445

ods show poor performance and can’t meet practical needs in forecasting crude oil
prices. Very recently, Wang et al. [7] proposed a new integrated methodology-TEI@I
methodology and showed a good performance in crude oil price forecasting with
back-propagation neural network (BPNN) as the integrated technique. BPNN, a class
of the most popular neural network model, can in principle model nonlinear relations
but they do not lead to one global or unique solution due to differences in their initial
weight set. Another drawback is that BPNN is susceptible to over-fitting problems.
Consequently, it is of necessity to develop new individual methods for forecasting oil
prices which can be used for further integration into other methodologies like TEI@I.
Recently, support vector machine, a novel neural network algorithm, was developed by Vapnik and his colleagues [8]. Established on the unique theory of the structural risk minimization principle to estimate a function by minimizing an upper bound
of the generalization error, SVM is resistant to the over-fitting problem and can model
nonlinear relations in an efficient and stable way. Furthermore, SVM is trained as a
convex optimization problem resulting in a global solution that in many cases yields
unique solutions. Originally, SVMs have been developed for classification tasks [9].
With the introduction of Vapnik’s ε -insensitive loss function, SVMs have been extended to solve nonlinear regression and time series prediction problems, and they
exhibit excellent performance [10, 11].
The goal of this paper is to propose a new method based on SVM for the task of
crude oil price time series prediction. In addition, this paper examines the feasibility
of applying SVM in crude oil price forecasting through the contrast with ARIMA and
BPNN models. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes a
new SVM-based method for crude oil price prediction. To evaluate the SVM, an empirical study and its comparable results with ARIMA and BPNN are presented in
section 3. Some concluding remarks are made in section 4.

2 A New SVM-Based Crude Oil Forecasting Method
In this section, a new SVM-based method for time series forecasting and its application in crude oil price prediction are presented. We first introduce a basic theory of
the support vector machine model, and then present the new SVM-based method for
time series forecasting.
2.1 Theory of SVM
SVMs have originally been used for classification purposes but their principles can be
extended to the task of regression and time series prediction as well. In this paper, we
only focus on support vector regression (SVR) for the task of time series prediction.
An excellent general introduction to SVMs including support vector classification
(SVC) and support vector regression (SVR) can be seen in References [8] for more
details.
SVMs are linear learning machines which means that a linear function is always
used to solve the regression problem. When dealing with nonlinear regression, SVMs
map the data x into a high-dimensional feature space via a nonlinear mapping ϕ and
make linear regression in this space.

446

W. Xie et al.

f ( x ) = (ω ⋅ ϕ ( x )) + b

(1)

where b is a threshold. In linear cases, ϕ ( x ) is just x and f ( xi ) becomes a linear
function. Thus, linear regression in a high dimensional space corresponds to nonlinear
regression in the low dimensional input space. Since ϕ ( x ) is fixed, we determine ω
from the data by minimizing the sum of the empirical risk Remp [ f ] and a complexity
term

ω

2

, which enforces flatness in feature space.

Rreg [ f ] = Remp [ f ] + λ ω

2

l

= ∑ψ ( f ( xi ) − yi ) +λ ω

2

(2)

i =1

where l denotes the sample size, ψ (⋅) is a cost function and λ is a regularization
constant. For the goal of regression and time series prediction, Vapnik’s ε insensitive loss function is adopted in this paper.
⎧ f ( x ) − y − ε for f ( x ) − y ≥ ε
otherwise
⎩0

ψ ( f ( x) − y ) = ⎨

(3)

For a large set of cost functions, Eq. (2) can be minimized by solving a quadratic
programming problem by applying Lagrangian theory, which is uniquely solvable
under Karush-Kuhn-Tucker conditions. It can be shown that we are able to rewrite the
whole problem in terms of dot products in the low dimensional input space.
l

l

i =1

i =1

f ( x ) = ∑ (α i − α i * )(ϕ ( xi ) ⋅ ϕ ( x )) + b = ∑ (α i − α i * )K ( xi , x ) + b

(4)

In Eq. (4), K (⋅) is the so-called kernel function which simplifies the use of a mapping. Representing the mapping by simply using a kernel is called the kernel trick and
the problem is reduced to finding kernels that identify families of regression formulas.
Any symmetric kernel function K (⋅) satisfying Mercer’s condition corresponds to a
dot product in some feature space.
2.2 SVM-Based Forecasting
The procedure of developing a support vector machine for time series forecasting is
illustrated in Fig. 1. As can be seen from Fig. 1, the flow chart can be divided into
four phases. The first phase is data sampling. To develop a SVM model for a forecasting scenario, training, validating and testing data need to be collected. However, the
data collected from various sources must be selected according to the corresponding
criteria. The second phase is sample preprocessing. It includes two steps: data normalization, data division. In any model development process, familiarity with the
available data is of the utmost importance. SVM models are no exception, and data
normalization can have a significant effect on model performance. After that, data
collected should be split into two sub-sets: in-sample data and out-of-sample data
which are used for model development and model evaluation respectively. The third
phase is SVM training and learning. This phase includes three main tasks: determination of SVM architecture, sample training and sample validation. It is the core process

A New Method for Crude Oil Price Forecasting Based on SVM

447

of SVM model. In this phase, we shall determine the time-delay τ , embedding dimension d , ε , regularization constant λ and the choice of the kernel function. The
final phase is out-of-sample forecasting. When the former phases are complete, the
SVM can be used as a forecaster or predictor for out-of-sample forecasting of time
series.

Fig. 1. A flow chart of SVM-based forecasting system

Following the above procedure, SVM-based crude oil price prediction involves
four steps:
(a) Data sampling. A variety of data can be collected for this research, such as
WTI, NYMEX. Data collected can be categorized into different time scales: daily,
weekly and monthly. For daily data, there are various inconsistencies and missing
points for the market has been closed or halted due to weekends or unexpected events.
As a result, weekly data and monthly data should be adopted as alternatives.
(b) Data preprocessing. The collected oil price data may need to be transformed
into certain appropriate range for the network learning by logarithm transformation,
difference or other methods. Then the data should be divided into in-sample data and
out-of-sample data.
(c) Training and learning. The SVM architecture and parameters are determined in
this step by the training results. There are no criteria in deciding the parameters other
than a trial-and-error basis. In this investigation, the RBF kernel is used because the
RBF kernel tends to give good performance under general smoothness assumptions.
Consequently, it is especially useful if no additional knowledge of the data is available. Finally, a satisfactory SVM-based model for oil price forecasting is reached.
(d) Future price forecasting.

448

W. Xie et al.

3 An Empirical Study
In this section, we first describe the data, and then define some evaluation criteria for
prediction purposes. Finally, the empirical results and explanations are presented.
3.1 Data
The crude oil price data used in this study are monthly spot prices of West Texas
Intermediate (WTI) crude oil from January 1970 to December 2003 with a total of n =
408 observations, as illustrated in Fig. 2. Since SVM are resistant to the noise due to
the use of a nonlinear kernel and an ε -insensitive band, no normalization is used in
this investigation for simplicity. We take the monthly data from January 1970 to December 1999 as the in- sample data (including 60 validation data) sets with 360 observations for training and validation purposes and the remainder as the out-of-sample
data sets with 48 observations for testing purposes. For space reasons, the original
data are not listed here.

Fig. 2. The monthly oil price for the period 1970-2003

3.2 Evaluation Criteria
In order to evaluate the prediction performance, it is necessary to introduce some
forecasting evaluation criteria. In this study, two main evaluation criteria, root mean
square error (RMSE) and direction statistics (Dstat), are introduced. The RMSE is calculated as
RMSE =

1
N

∑

N

t =1

( y t − yˆ t ) 2

(5)

where yt represents the actual value, yˆ t is predicted values, and N is the number of
testing data sets. Apparently, the indicator RMSE describes the estimates’ deviation
from the real values.
In the oil price forecasting, a change in trend is more important than precision level
of goodness-of-fit from the viewpoint of practical applications. Trading driven by a

A New Method for Crude Oil Price Forecasting Based on SVM

449

certain forecast with a small forecast error may not be as profitable as trading guided
by an accurate prediction of the direction of movement. As a result, we introduce
directional change statistics, Dstat. Its computational equation can be expressed as
N
1
D stat =
a
(6)
=1 t
t
N

∑

where at = 1 if ( y t +1 − y t )( yˆ t +1 − y t ) ≥ 0 , and at = 0 otherwise.
3.3 Results and Analysis
Each of the forecasting method described in the last section is estimated and validated
by in-sample data. The model estimation selection process is then followed by an
empirical evaluation which is based on the out-sample data.
The results of an augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) test show that the time series in
level follows a unit root process. In order to utilize the ARIMA model, a first difference is necessary. Thus, ARIMA(1,1,0) is identified. The time delay τ , embedding
dimension d and the prediction horizon, decided by try-and-error criteria, are respectively 4,4,1 for both BPNN and SVM. The best experiment result of each method is
presented in Table 1 in which a comparison among them is performed.
Table 1. Crude oil price forecast results (Jan. 2000 - Dec. 2003)

Methods

ARIMA
BPNN
SVM

2.3392

Subperiod I
(2000)
3.0032

Subperiod II
(2001)
1.7495

Subperiod III
(2002)
1.9037

Subperiod IV
(2003)
2.4868

Dstat (%)

54.17

41.67

50.00

58.33

66.67

RMSE

2.2746

2.9108

1.8253

1.8534

2.3843

Dstat (%)
RMSE
Dstat (%)

62.50
2.1921
70.83

50.00
2.6490
83.33

58.33
1.8458
50.00

66.67
1.8210
58.33

75.00
2.3411
91.67

Criteria

Full
period

RMSE

Table 1 shows the detailed results of the simulated experiment via the three methods. It can be seen that the SVM method outperforms the ARIMA and BPNN models
in terms of both RMSE and Dstat. Focusing on the RMSE indicators, the values of
SVM model are explicitly lower than those of ARIMA and BPNN, except in the second sub-period. From the practical application viewpoint, indicator Dstat is more important than indicator RMSE. This is because the former can reflect the trend of
movements of the oil price and can help traders to hedge their risk and to make good
trading decisions in advance. Concerning the SVM-based method, it can be seen in
the table that although the Dstat value of the sub-periods II and III are some lower than
BPNN, the values of Dstat are all above 50% and generally higher than those of the
other two models, indicating that the SVM method has stronger prediction ability than
the other individual models.

450

W. Xie et al.

In addition, we observe from Table 1 that a smaller RMSE does not necessarily
mean a higher Dstat. For example, for the test case of the SVM, the RMSE for 2001 is
explicitly lower than that for 2000, while the Dstat for 2000 is larger than that for 2001
which implies that the Dstat criterion is not identical to the RMSE in different time
series forecasting.
We can therefore conclude from the results of Table 1 and the above analysis that
the proposed SVM approach performs the best among the three methods with 2.1921
and 70.83% for RMSE and Dstat respectively, while the ARIMA models show the
worst performance.
The main reasons for the above conclusions are as follows. As Epaminondas et at.
[1] reported, the crude oil market is one of the most volatile market in the world and
shows strong evidence of chaos. ARIMA, typical linear models which capture time
series’ linear characteristics, shows insufficient to describe the nonlinear dynamics.
Hence, ARIMA models perform worst among the three methods.
Both SVM and BPNN can in principle describe the nonlinear dynamics of crude
oil price. Established on the unique theory of the structural risk minimization principle to estimate a function by minimizing an upper bound of the generalization error,
SVM is resistant to the over-fitting problem and can model nonlinear relations in an
efficient and stable way. Furthermore, SVM is trained as a convex optimization problem resulting in a global solution that in many cases yields unique solutions. Compared with the SVM’s merits above, BPNN tends to suffer from over-fitting problem
and does not lead to one global or unique solution owing to differences in their initial
weights. Therefore, SVM generally outperforms BPNN. But, as shown in Table 1,
BPNN may outperform SVM in some sub-periods. There may be two reasons: 1) the
data in the sub-periods may be more suited to the BPNN’s learning algorithms; 2) the
chosen BPNN with the best performance outperforms SVM by chance with its initial
random weight. Generally speaking, SVM outperforms ARIMA and BPNN and is
more capable of oil price time series forecasting.

4 Conclusions
It has been shown in the literatures that support vector machines can perform very
well on time series forecasting. The largest benefit of SVM is the fact that a global
solution can be attained. In addition, due to the specific optimization procedure it is
assured that over-training is avoided and the SVM solution is general.
In this paper, we propose a new method for predicting crude oil price time series
based on support vector machines. There exist four phases when developing a SVM
for time series forecasting: data sampling, sample preprocessing, training & learning
and out-of-sample forecasting. An empirical study, in which we compare SVM’s
performance with those of autoregressive integrated moving average models and
back-propagation neural networks, is put underway to verify the effectiveness of the
SVM-based method. The results show that SVM is superior to the other individual
forecasting methods in monthly oil price prediction. The prediction can be improved
if irregular influences are taken into consideration in the framework of TEI@I [7],
which is undoubtedly a very interesting and meaningful topic for our future study.

A New Method for Crude Oil Price Forecasting Based on SVM

451

References
1. Panas, E., Ninni, V.: Are oil markets chaotic? A non-linear dynamic analysis. Energy Economics 22 (2000) 549-568
2. Hagen, R.: How is the international price of a particular crude determined? OPEC Review
18 (1994) 145-158
3. Huntington, H.G.: Oil price forecasting in the 1980s: what went wrong? The Energy Journal 15 (1994) 1-22
4. Abramson, B., Finizza, A.: Probabilistic forecasts from probabilistic models: a case study
in the oil market. International Journal of Forecasting 11(1995) 63-72
5. Barone-Adesi, G., Bourgoin, F., Giannopoulos, K.: Don’t look back. Risk August 8 (1998)
100-103
6. Nelson, Y., S. Stoner, G. Gemis, H.D. Nix: Results of Delphi VIII survey of oil price forecasts. Energy Report, California Energy Commission (1994)
7. Wang, S.Y., L.A. Yu, K.K.Lai: Crude oil price forecasting with TEI@I methodology.
Journal of Systems Science and Complexity 18 (2005) 145-166
8. Vapnik, V.N.: The Nature of Statistical Learning Theory. Springer, New York (1995)
9. Burges, C.J.C.: A tutorial on support vector machines for pattern recognition. Data Mining
and Knowledge Discovery 2 (1998) 121-167
10. Huang, W., Nakamori, Y., Wang, S.Y.: Forecasting stock market movement direction with
support vector machine. Computers & Operations Research 32 (2005) 2513-2522
11. Muller, K.R., Smola, J.A., Scholkopf, B.: Prediction time series with support vector machines. Proceedings of International Conference on Artificial Neural Networks, Lausanne
(1997) 999-1004

