The Generic McMillan Degree:
A New Method Using Integer Matrices
E. Sagianos and N. Karcanias
Control Engineering Research Centre
School of Engineering and Mathematical Sciences
City University, Northampton Sq.
EC1V 0HB London , UK
E.Sagianos@city.ac.uk

Abstract. In this paper the problem of computing the generic McMillan degree of a Structured Transfer Function (STF) rational matrix is
considered. The problem of determining the generic McMillan degree is
tackled using genericity arguments and an optimisation procedure based
on path properties of integer matrices is developed. This novel approach
exploits the structure of integer matrices and leads to an eﬃcient new
algorithm for the computation of the generic value of the McMillan degree.

1

Introduction

The study of system properties based on ill-deﬁned models is of great interest
in the context of early design of large scale systems [5]. Our interest here is
the study of the McMillan degree on special types of transfer functions referred
to as Structured Transfer Functions (STF). These are large dimension transfer
functions with certain elements ﬁxed to zero, some elements being constant, and
other elements expressing the dominant dynamics of the system, which have been
identiﬁed by some preliminary modelling eﬀort. The McMillan degree indicates
the complexity of the system, and can be calculated from the orders of the
denominators in the Smith-McMillan form [4], [2]; this method is impractical for
large dimension and uncertain models and the method suggested in [2], deﬁning
the pole polynomial as the least common multiple of the minors of all orders is
used. Given an STF matrix H(s), for example,
⎤
⎡
A2
A1 A2 A3 A21 A2
0
A23 A1
A32 ⎦ ,
(1)
H(s) = ⎣
A3 A2
A1 A1 A2 A3
where the Ai represent constant terms, ﬁrst or second order dynamics. We can
use partial fraction expansion and decompose H(s) in the following manner:
⎤ ⎡
⎤ ⎡
⎤
⎡
A2 A2 A2
A3 0 0
A1 A21 0
(2)
H(s) = ⎣ 0 A1 0 ⎦ + ⎣ 0 0 A32 ⎦ + ⎣ 0 A23 0 ⎦
0 A1 0
A3 0 A3
A2 0 A2
H1 (s)

H2 (s)

H3 (s)

V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part I, LNCS 3991, pp. 798–801, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

The Generic McMillan Degree: A New Method Using Integer Matrices

799

where the matrices Hi (s), i = 1, 2, 3, are called simple STF matrices. The generic
McMillan degree, denoted by δ(H), can be found by the sum [5]:
δ(H) = δ(H1 ) + δ(H2 ) + δ(H3 (s)) .

(3)

It has been shown in [5], that for simple matrices Hi (s) we can deﬁne a map
Hi (s) ∈ Rm×p (s) → Ii ∈ Nm×p ,
such that the entries of the integer matrix Ii , correspond to the orders of the entries in Hi (s), and thus reducing the problem of determining the generic McMillan degree, into an assignment problem of integer matrices [1].

2

Algorithm for Determining the Weight of an Integer
Matrix

Given a matrix A = [aij ] ∈ Nm×p , m ≥ p, we deﬁne:
Deﬁnition 1. A k−length independent path {ai1 j1 , ai2 j2 , . . . , aik jk }, on the matrix A, is a set of elements from the matrix such that there is no common index
in the sets {i1 , i2 , . . . , ik } and {j1 , j2 , . . . , jk }. The weight of a path is deﬁned as
the sum: γ = ai1 j1 + ai2 j2 + . . . + aik jk .
The maximal weight of all the independent paths of a matrix is denoted by
γ(A), and it is simply referred to as the weight of the matrix. Concerning the
relationship between the generic McMillan degree of a rational matrix and the
weight of the paths of an integer matrix, we have the following result [5]:
Theorem 1. The generic McMillan degree of the simple structured matrix
Hi (s) is equal to the maximal weight of its corresponding integer matrix Ii :
δgm (Hi ) = γ(Ii )

(4)

A matrix is called column irreducible, if the highest coeﬃcient matrix ( the
Boolean matrix indicating the location of elements in a column with maximal
value) has full structural rank, otherwise the matrix is called column reducible.
The algorithm for the computation of the maximal weight uses the following
result, based on the properties of Boolean matrices.
Lemma 1. [4] If the highest coeﬃcient matrix has full rank, then A is column
irreducible and the maximal weight is given by the sum of the maximum element
of each column. Otherwise A is column reducible and the sum of the maximum
element of each column does not yield its maximal weight.
The objective here is to provide a combination of p elements, which form an
independent path (i.e. they belong in a diﬀerent row and a diﬀerent column of
A), with the maximum weight γ(A), for any irreducible or reducible matrix A.

800

E. Sagianos and N. Karcanias

Assume that the columns of A are ordered according to descending weight and
form the table of the column contents with a resulting matrix C(A) ≡ C, i.e.
col(1) col(2) · · · col(p)
δ11
δ12 · · · δ1p
δ21
δ22 · · · δ2p
..
..
..
..
.
.
.
.
δσ1 (i)1 δσ2 (i)2 · · · δσp (i)p

(5)

where δ1j ≥ δ2j ≥ · · · ≥ δσj (i)j , ∀j = 1, . . . , p and the σj (i), j = 1, . . . , p are
arrangement functions, one for each column, which take the values {1, . . . , m}.
We represent (5) by a matrix B ∈ Nm×p , and will refer to it as the arrangement
matrix of A. We also deﬁne C ∈ Nm×p , as the row index matrix of A, given by:
C = [γij ] = [σj (i)j], i = 1, 2, . . . , m j = 1, 2, . . . , p

(6)

where σj (i) is the row coordinate of the i−th maximal element of the j−th
column of A. Let D ∈ Zm×p be the loss allocation matrix of A, given by:
D = [dij ] = [b1j − bij ], i = 1, 2, . . . , m j = 1, 2, . . . , p

(7)

i.e. the amount dij is the diﬀerence of the element aγij ,j from the maximum,
which is aγ1j ,j . We will refer to an element of D as a loss. The search for the
independent path with the maximum weight involves the following steps:
Algorithm
Preliminary Step: If the highest coeﬃcient matrix has full rank, γ(A) = δ(A) =
p
i=1 δ1i and the independent path is given by the highest coeﬃcient matrix. If
A is reducible, then γ(A) < δ(A) and the procedure to determine γ(A) continues
as follows:
Searching Routine: In D, there will be a minimum element (minimum loss),
denoted by m1 . Using the row index and loss allocation matrices, we can ﬁnd all
elements in A, for which aγ1j ,j − aγij ,j = m1 . We substitute those elements with
the maximum, i.e. set aγ1j ,j = aγij ,j for each column, and if the new highest
coeﬃcient matrix, which is a Boolean matrix, has full rank, then there deﬁnitely
exists at least one independent path, which contains exactly one non-zero element from each column. We choose the independent path with the minimum
loss, and denote this loss by ml1 . We now have a lower bound:
σ(A) = δ(A) − ml1 .

(8)

Let mi denote a minimum element of D, after the i−th step; we have:
(i) If mli ≥ δ(A) − σ(A) = ml1 , then all independent paths, give a greater loss,
we search in D for mi+1 :
(ii) If mli < ml1 , then mli becomes the new lower bound and the search continues for mi+1 similarly.

The Generic McMillan Degree: A New Method Using Integer Matrices

801

The search stops when we reach a loss mi+1 ≥ mli , and the weight of A, i.e. the
generic McMillan degree of the corresponding rational matrix, will be
γ(A) = δ(A) − mli .

3

(9)

Conclusions

The computation of the McMillan degree of a structured transfer function matrix
has been considered using properties of column irreducibility of integer matrices, which are similar to those determining the relationship between complexity
and degree of polynomial matrices [4]. The proposed algorithm avoids the general searching methods and determines the optimal solution in a small number
of steps. An alternative approach for the computation of the generic McMillan degree may be developed by using standard results from a class of integer
optimisation problems, more known as optimal assignment.
The optimal assignment problem frequently appears in Operational Research
as the problem of having to assign n workers to n jobs, where we assume that
the performance of the ith person for the jth job can in some sense be determined [1], [7]. Amongst the most popular methods for solving optimal assignment
problems, are the Hungarian, and the Bradford [7]. Such methods provide an
alternative way of looking at the problem and their performance to the case of
large dimension systems has to be evaluated. The comparison of this new, algebraically based algorithm to the standard methodologies, is under investigation.
There are strong indications that exploring the structural criteria based on the
reduceness properties, variants of the optimal assignment algorithms may be
developed which explore the sparse structure of the matrices and thus lead to
algorithms with reduced complexity.

References
1. Dantzig, G.B. : Linear Programming and Extensions. Princeton University Press.
(1963)
2. MacFarlane, A.G.J. , Karcanias, N. : Poles and zeros of linear multivariable systems:
A survey of the algebraic, geometric and complex value theory. Int. J. of Control.
24. (1976). 33–74
3. Reinschke, K. : Multivariable Control: A graph Theoretical Approach. SpringerVerlag. (1988)
4. Kailath, T. : Linear Systems. Prentice-Hall. (1980)
5. Karcanias, N. , Sagianos, E. , Milonides, E. : Structural Identiﬁcation: The Computation of the Generic McMillan Degree. 44th IEEE Conference on Decision and
Control and European Control Conference ECC 2005. Seville, Spain. (2005)
6. Vaﬁadis, K. : Systems and Control Problems in Early Systems Design. PhD Thesis.
Control Engineering Research Centre. City University, London. (2003)
7. Mack, C. : The Bradford Method for the Assignment Problem. The New Journal of
Operational Research. 1. (1966). 17–29

