Simple-Adaptive Link State Update Algorithm
for QoS Routing
Seung-Hyuk Choi1 , Myoung-Hee Jung1 , Min Young Chung1, ,
Mijeong Yang2 , Taeil Kim2 , and Jaehyung Park3
1

School of Information and Communication Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University
300, Chunchun-dong, Jangan-gu, Suwon, Kyunggi-do, 440-746, Korea
{zealion, aodgl, mychung}@ece.skku.ac.kr
2
Broadband Converged Network Division, ETRI
161, Gajeong-dong, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, 305-700, Korea
{mjyang, tikim}@etri.re.kr
3
Department of Computer Engineering, Chonnam National University
300, Yongbong-dong, Buk-ku, Gwangju, 500-757, Korea
hyeoung@chonnam.ac.kr

Abstract. To guarantee Quality of Service, routers should automatically determine routing paths in order to satisfy service requirements
eﬃciently, based on link state information as well as network topology.
Link State Database (LSDB) in routers should be well managed in order
to reﬂect the current state of all links eﬀectively. However, there is a
trade-oﬀ between the exact reﬂection of the current link status and its
update cost. In this paper, a simple-adaptive LSU algorithm to adaptively control the generation of link state update messages is proposed
and its performance is compared with those of four existing algorithms
by intensive simulations.

1

Introduction

In general, in order to guarantee QoS, routers determine routing paths by considering link state information as well as network topology. Therefore, it is important that routers know link state information to calculate the routing paths,
i.e., information in Link State Database (LSDB) resided in all routers should be
well managed. To reﬂect the link status in the LSDB, routers transmit LSU messages to their neighbors. If routers generate Link State Update (LSU) messages
inordinately, the router performance is reduced due to the processing of LSU
messages [1]. However, in the case that link state information is not updated
appropriately, route setup requests may be rejected even though routes exist.
This problem with QoS routing therefore can be characterized by the trade-oﬀ
This study was partially supported by the Smart(Ubiquitous) Seoul Project titled
“An Intelligent Convergence System of Urban Information for Smart(Ubiquitous)
Cities” which was operated by the University of Seoul and funded by City of Seoul,
Korea(South).
Corresponding author.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part I, LNCS 3991, pp. 969–972, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

970

S.-H. Choi et al.

between the accuracy of link state information and the overhead incurred by
exchanging this information [2].
Many algorithms exist for determining the instant of transmitting LSU messages, i.e., Period Based (PB), Threshold Based (TB), Equal Class Based (ECB),
Unequal Class Based (UCB) LSU algorithm [3], [4], Dynamic Threshold Based
(DTB) [5], and Second-moment Based (SB) [3] LSU algorithms. The existing
LSU algorithm uses ﬁxed value(s) in order to decide transmission of LSU messages, therefore they cannot eﬀectively perform under diﬀerent network topologies and traﬃc conditions. erfectly to network conditions.

2

The Proposed Algorithm

Since the existing algorithms use ﬁxed value(s) in order to determine the transmission instant of LSU messages, they may perform ineﬀectively depending on
varying network topology and traﬃc conditions. To overcome this disadvantage,
a Simple Adaptive (SA) LSU algorithm is proposed, where parameter values
adaptively change as the link state changes.
In the proposed algorithm, in order to determine whether to transmit LSU
messages, routers observe available bandwidth and the number of serving connections on a link. For every request for a connection setup (or release), the
available bandwidth increases (or decreases) by the corresponding request bandwidth, and the number of connections served increases (or decreases) by one. If
LSU messages are ﬂooded, all receiving routers update their LSDB as information contained in LSU messages.
Let Bn be the available bandwidth value stored in the LSDB. In addition,
let B(t) and N (t) be the current available bandwidth on links and the number
of serving connections on a link, respectively, immediately prior to making the
decision to transmit LSU messages. Routers transmit LSU messages to their
neighbors if the following condition is satisﬁed.
|Bn − B(t)| ≥
⇐⇒

B(t)
N (t)

U (t)
|U (t) − Un |
C
≥
−
,
1
N (t) N (t)

(1)
(2)

where U (t) denotes unavailable bandwidth immediately prior to making a decision to transmit LSU messages, Un indicates unavailable bandwidth stored in
the LSDB, and C expresses the total capacity of one link.
Consequently, in the SA LSU algorithm, if the variation in used bandwidth
per service is equal to or larger than the mean available bandwidth per connection, expected at the instant of the next link state update, LSU messages
are transmitted. Unlike the other algorithms, since the SA LSU algorithm only
uses the control parameters about link state, it is able to eﬀectively update the
LSDB.

Simple-Adaptive Link State Update Algorithm for QoS Routing

3

971

Performance Evaluation

In order to evaluate the performance of the proposed algorithm, an MCI topology consisting of 18 nodes and 30 bidirectional T3 links (45 Mbps) is considered
[3]. Each connection request is deﬁned as (s, d, breq ), where s, d, and breq denote source node, destination node, and request bandwidth, respectively. For
each connection, s and d are diﬀerent and randomly selected from 18 nodes.
In addition, breq is uniformly chosen in (3Mbps, 7Mbps), and it assumes that
connection requests arrive as a Poisson process with the mean arrival rate λ
and holding duration of connections is determined by the exponential distribution with the average service rate μ. Therefore, total oﬀered traﬃc load is equal
to λ/μ.
As performance measures, the number of updates per unit time and blocking
probability are deﬁned. The number of updates per unit time is deﬁned that the
total number of LSU messages transmitted is divided by the total simulation
time. The blocking probability of connection requests is deﬁned as
Pblock =

Nblock
Ntotal request

(3)

where Ntotal request is the total number of connection requests and Nblock is the
number of blocked connection requests.
In general, performance of the existing algorithms relies heavily on the used
values of control parameters. For each of them, the speciﬁed value(s) are determined as the pseudo-optimal value(s) of parameter(s) if the blocking probability
is close to that of the basic LSU algorithm in which LSU messages are generated
whenever the available bandwidth varies. For the MCI network and μ = 1/sec.,
the pseudo-optimal values of control parameters considered for the the existing
three algorithms are th = 0.2 for TB, R0 = 0.1 and Δth = 0.5 for DTB, and
th = 0.03 for SB LSU algorithm. These pseudo-optimal values are used in order
to evaluate the performance of the three existing algorithms.
For μ = 1/sec., the blocking probabilities of the four existing algorithms, and
the proposed algorithm is presented in Fig. 1. The blocking probability of the
basic LSU algorithm provides the least margin of those, because this algorithm
makes an update of the status-changed information immediately when routers
sense link status change. The blocking probability of the connection requests
increases in proportion to the traﬃc load. Each existing LSU algorithm with the
pseudo-optimal value(s) demonstrates a blocking probability which is analogous
to that of the basic LSU algorithm. In addition, the blocking probability in the
proposed LSU algorithm is similar to that of the basic LSU algorithm.
Fig. 2 presents the LSU rates varying traﬃc load. In the three existing LSU
algorithms, the parameter value(s) are ﬁxed.
On the other hand, in the SA LSU algorithm, the values used to determine
LSU message transmissions are calculated considering network traﬃc conditions.
Therefore, routers eﬀectively transmit LSU messages and make the smaller number of updates than the existing LSU algorithms.

972

S.-H. Choi et al.

Fig. 1. Blocking probability

4

Fig. 2. LSU rate

Conclusions

In this paper, the SA LSU algorithm is proposed and its performance is evaluated
by simulations. Existing LSU algorithms decide to transmit LSU messages by
ﬁxed parameter value(s). Therefore, the associated performance may degrade
with varying network conditions. However, since the SA LSU algorithm decides
whether to transmit or not LSU messages by parameters which are calculated
from traﬃc conditions, the associated performance dose not depend on traﬃc
conditions. In addition, in the proposed LSU algorithm, while the LSU messages
are transmitted less than existing LSU algorithms, the blocking probability of
connection requests is similar to that of existing LSU algorithms. Additionally,
because the SA LSU algorithm requires simple computations, it may be easily
implemented in QoS routers.

References
1. Apostolopoulos, G., Guerin, R., Kamat, s.: Implementation and Performance Measurements of QoS Routing Extensions to OSPF. IEEE INFOCOM 1999, Vol. 2.,
New York (1999) 680-688
2. Jia, Y., Nikolaidis, I., Gburzynski, P.: Multiple Path Routing in Networks with
Inaccurate Link State Information. ICC 2001, Vol. 8., IEEE, Helsinki (2001) 25832587
3. Zhao, M., Zhu, H., Li, V.O.K., Ma, Z.: A Stability-Based Link State Updating
Mechanism for QoS Routing. ICC 2005, Vol. 1., IEEE, Seoul (2005) 33-37
4. Ma, Z., Zhang, P., Kantola, R.: Inﬂuence of Link State Updating on the Performance
and Cost of QoS Routing in an Intranet. 2001 IEEE Workshop on High Performance
Switching and Routing, Dallas (2001) 375-379
5. Ariza, A., Casilari, E., Sandoval, F.: QoS routing with adaptive updating of link
states. Electronics Letters, Vol. 37., IEEE, (2001) 604-606

