Cross-Ontological Analytics: Combining Associative and
Hierarchical Relations in the Gene Ontologies to Assess
Gene Product Similarity
C. Posse, A. Sanfilippo, B. Gopalan, R. Riensche,
N. Beagley, and B. Baddeley
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
902 Battelle Blvd, Richland, PO Box 999, WA 99352, USA
{Christian.Posse, Antonio.Sanfilippo, Banu.Gopalan,
Rick.Riensche, Nathaniel.Beagley, Bob.Baddeley}@pnl.gov

Abstract. Gene and gene product similarity is a fundamental diagnostic
measure in analyzing biological data and constructing predictive models for
functional genomics. With the rising influence of the gene ontologies, two
complementary approaches have emerged where the similarity between two
genes/gene products is obtained by comparing gene ontology (GO) annotations
associated with the gene/gene products. One approach captures GO-based
similarity in terms of hierarchical relations within each gene ontology. The
other approach identifies GO-based similarity in terms of associative relations
across the three gene ontologies. We propose a novel methodology where the
two approaches can be merged with ensuing benefits in coverage and accuracy.

1 Introduction
The analysis of microarray data has become a mainstay of biological knowledge
discovery, with a consequent explosive growth in the amount of DNA, RNA, and
protein sequences and expression values to be interpreted. Gene and gene product
similarity is a primary method that biologists use to carry out this interpretation.
When genes and gene products are represented by their sequences, gene and gene
product similarity is usually performed using word-based heuristics to select maximal
segment pair alignments similar to those implemented in BLAST [1] and FASTA [12]
to approximate the Smith-Waterman algorithm [17]. Once gene or protein sequences
are mapped into higher level representations, other similarity methods become
available that provide additional insights to sequence similarity measures. For
example, [13] demonstrate how gene product similarity can be performed in terms of
PFAM domains (http://www.sanger.ac.uk/Software/Pfam) and [14] show how a
computational analysis of scientific literature can be leveraged to define and
recognize gene expression clusters.
With the rising influence of the gene ontologies (http://www.geneontology.org),
new approaches have emerged where the similarity between genes or gene products is
obtained by comparing gene ontology (GO) code annotations associated with them.
The gene ontologies provide three orthogonal networks of functional genomic
concepts structured in terms of semantic relationships such as inheritance and
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part II, LNCS 3992, pp. 871 – 878, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

872

C. Posse et al.

meronymy, which encode biological process (BP), molecular function (MF) and
cellular component (CC) properties of gene and gene products. The use of GO code
annotations in establishing gene and gene product similarity provides significant
added functionality to methods such as BLAST and FASTA as it explicitly relates
genes and gene products in terms of participation in the same/similar biological
processes, presence in the same/similar cellular components and expression of the
same/similar molecular functions.
Two main GO-based similarity approaches have emerged so far. One approach
assesses GO code similarity in terms of shared hierarchical relations within each gene
ontology (BP, MF, or CC) [2], [5], [9], [10]. For example, the relative semantic
closeness of two biological processes would be determined by the informational
specificity of the most immediate parent that the two biological processes share in the
BP ontology. The other approach establishes GO code similarity by leveraging
associative relations across the three gene ontologies [3]. Such associative relations
make predictions such as which cellular component is most likely to be the location of
a given biological process and which molecular function is most likely to be involved
in a given biological process.
While these two approaches are fully complementary, no effort has been made so
far to combine them. One major difficulty in carrying out such a combination resides
in the heterogeneity of the two measures, one based on a hierarchical assessment and
the other on an associative one. The aim of this paper is to present a methodology
(XOA for Cross-Ontological Analytics) where this difficulty can be solved so that the
two approaches can be integrated, with ensuing benefits in coverage and accuracy.

2 Background
GO-based similarity methods that focus on measuring intra-ontological relations have
adopted the information theoretic treatment of semantic similarity developed in
Natural Language Processing−see [4] for an extensive survey. An example of such an
approach is given by [15], who defines semantic similarity between two concept
nodes c1 c2 in a semantic graph as the information content of the least common
superordinate (lcs) of c1 and c2, as shown in (1) where p(c) is the probability of
encountering instances of c in a specific corpus and -log p(c) indicates the information
content of c.
sim(c1,c2) = -log p(lcs(c1,c2))

(1)

[6] provide a refinement of Resnik’s measure by factoring in the distance from each
concept to the least common superordinate, as shown in (2).
sim(c1,c2) = -[2*log p(lcs(c1,c2))-(log p(c1)+log p(c2))]

(2)

[8] introduces a slight modification to Jiang’s and Conrath’s measure:
sim(c1,c2) = 2*log p(lcs(c1,c2))/(log p(c1)+log p(c2))

(3)

The information theoretic approach is very well suited to assess GO code similarity
since each gene ontology is formalized as a directed acyclic graph, In addition, the
GO database includes numerous curated GO annotations which can be used to

Cross-Ontological Analytics: Combining Associative and Hierarchical Relations

873

calculate the information content of each GO code with high reliability. Evaluations
of this methodology have yielded promising results. [9] and [10] demonstrate that
there is strong correlation between GO-based similarity judgments for human proteins
and similarity judgments obtained through BLAST searches for the same proteins. [2]
show that there is a strong connection between the degree of GO-based similarity and
the expression correlation of gene products.
As [3] remark, the main problem with the information theoretic approach to GO
code similarity is that it does not take into account associative relations across the
gene ontologies. For example, the two GO codes 0050909 (sensory perception of
taste) and 0008527 (taste receptor activity) belong to different gene ontologies (BP
and MF) but are undeniably very closely related. The information theoretic approach
would simply miss associations of this kind as it is not designed to capture interontological relations.
[3] propose to recover associative relations across the gene ontologies using a
variety of statistical techniques which estimate the similarity of two GO codes intraontologically in terms of the distribution of the gene product annotations associated
with the two GO codes in the GO database. One such technique is an adaptation of the
vector space model frequently used in Information Retrieval [16], where each GO
code is represented as a vector of gene-based features weighted according to their
distribution in the GO annotation database, and the similarity between two GO codes
is computed as the cosine of the vectors for the two codes.
The ability to measure associative relations across the gene ontologies can
significantly augment the functionality of the information theoretic approach so as to
provide a more comprehensive assessment of gene and gene product similarity.
However, in spite of their complementarity, the two GO code similarity measures are
not easily integrated. This is because the two measures are obtained through different
methods, express distinct senses of similarity (i.e. intra- and inter-ontological) and are
thus incomparable. To date, this remains a challenge which is yet to be addressed.

3 Cross-Ontological Analytics (XOA)
Our basic approach in developing a GO-based similarity algorithm capable of
combining intra- and inter-ontological relations consists in “translating” each
associative relation across the gene ontologies into a hierarchical relation within a
single ontology. More precisely, let c1 (c2) denote a GO code in the gene ontology
O1 (O2), the XOA similarity between c1 and c2 is defined as follows:
XOA(c1, c2) = max{sim(c1, c3)*cos(c2, c3), sim(c2, c4)*cos(c1, c4)}

(4)

where cos(ci,cj) denotes the cosine associative measure proposed by [3], sim(ci,cj)
denotes any of the three intra-ontological semantic similarities defined in the previous
section, see (1)-(3), and the maximum is taken over all GO codes c3 in O1 and c4 in
O2. Note that if O1 and O2 refer to the same ontology, then:
XOA(c1, c2) = sim(c1, c2).

(5)

This shows that the XOA approach extends intra-ontological similarities to the interontological context. Conversely, c3 (c4) can be seen as a surrogate for c2 (c1) in the

874

C. Posse et al.

same ontology as c1 (c2). The inter-ontological semantic similarity between c1 (c2)
and c2 (c1) can be then estimated from the intra-ontological semantic similarity
between c1 (c2) and c3 (c4) and the associative relation between c3 (c4) and c2 (c1).
The XOA similarity between genes/gene products derives from the XOA similarity
between GO codes. Let GP1 and GP2 be two genes/gene products. Let c11, c12,…,
c1n denote the set of GO codes associated with GP1 and c21, c22,…., c2m the set of
GO codes associated with GP2. The XOA similarity between GP1 and GP2 is given
as shown in (6), where i=1,…, n and j=1,…,m.
XOA(GP1, GP2) = max{XOA(c1i , c2j)}

(6)

Note that [10] use the average instead of the maximum. However, genes/gene
products with many GO annotations have higher chance of exhibiting a few lower
XOA similarities between GO codes. This automatically lowers the similarity
between genes/gene products. In our experiments, using the maximum provided more
consistent results than the average. [2] also find that the average does not always
meaningfully estimate similarity and plan on investigating the maximum approach.
The maximum approach is also consistent with the first information content based
semantic similarity proposed by [15] where the similarity between two words is
defined as the maximum of the similarities between all concept pairs emerging from
difference senses for the two words.

4 Evaluation
To evaluate the XOA approach, we follow the benchmarking study carried out by
[10], which compares intra-ontological semantic similarities with sequence
similarities as measured with BLAST. In doing so, we use current data from the GO
database. This has several advantages. First, the replication of the above
benchmarking study three years later lets us assess the effects of the changes of the
gene ontologies and reference databases on the findings unearthed by [10]. Second, it
allows us to improve the benchmarking analysis. Finally, it allows us to compare our
XOA results with the intra-ontological semantic similarities obtained by [10].
All results reported are from analyses carried out on the May 2005 release of GO
database available from http://www.godatabase.org/dev. A large set of protein pairs
with varying degrees of sequence similarities was obtained by
1) performing BLAST searches with expect value of 100 over the set of
approximately 7000 SWISS-PROT human proteins for which GO codes were
available, and
2) retaining proteins from BLAST results for which GO codes were available. Only
those codes with “Traceable Author Statement” tags were used.
The full set of BLAST searches was completed in less than 30 minutes using
ScalaBLAST [11], a powerful parallel BLAST engine. This process generated a set of
255,529 protein pairs. Table 1 summarizes the distribution of GO codes in the
benchmarking set. It reveals that XOA provides coverage for around 15% more
protein pairs than the combination of intra-ontological semantic similarities applied
separately to the BP, MF and CC ontologies. When compared to any single gene
ontology the XOA coverage is at least twice as large.

Cross-Ontological Analytics: Combining Associative and Hierarchical Relations

875

Table 1. Distribution of TAS GO codes in benchmarking set

GO Code Distribution
Each protein in the pair has at least one GO code
Each protein in the pair has at least one BP GO code
Each protein in the pair has at least one MF GO code
Each protein in the pair has at least one CC GO code
Both proteins in the pair have at least one GO code
in the same ontology (BP, MF or CC)
Both proteins in the pair have only GO codes in
different ontologies

Number of protein pairs
255,529
128,921
112,027
94,677
216,714
38,788

[9] and [10] compare semantic and sequential similarities by calculating the
correlation coefficient between the intra-ontological semantic similarities and the
logarithm of the BLAST bit score LBS for each of the gene ontologies. Table 2
provides these correlations based on our more recent data. In addition, it shows the
correlation between XOA and LBS.
Table 2. Correlation coefficients between LBS and semantic similarities. Correlation
coefficients were calculated from the subset of proteins given in Table 1.

Gene Ontology
Molecular Function
Biological Process
Cellular Component
XOA

Resnik
0.555
0.394
0.318
0.412

Lin
0.516
0.394
0.345
0.362

Jiang and Conrath
0.468
0.378
0.320
0.270

We observe that despite the major changes in the gene ontologies in the last 3 years
and the enrichment of the SWISS-PROT database these correlations are very similar
to those produced by [10] in 2003 for the intra-ontological semantic similarities. This
is confirmed in Figure 1, which shows the functional relationships between LBS and
the semantic similarities. Furthermore, Table 2 agrees with [10] findings that Resnikbased semantic similarities on one hand and the Molecular Function ontology on the
other end tend to produce higher correlations. A novel finding is that XOA
correlations are comparable to those obtained with intra-ontological semantic
similarities though they are based on at least 100% more protein pairs than any single
ontology comparison.
These results however should be taken with some caution. Correlation coefficients
can only measure linear relationship between two variables. If taking the logarithm of
the bit score straightens the relationship between the Resnik similarity measure and
the bit score, this is not the case for the other similarity measures. One can show that,
for the Lin and Jiang & Conrath measures, higher order transformations of the bit
score, such as a+b*LBS+c*LBS2 with a, b and c being some constants, are required in
order to get a linear relationship. Rather than pursuing this direction we note that what
we are truly interested in measuring is a monotonic relationship between the bit score

876

C. Posse et al.

Fig. 1. Comparing sequence and semantic similarity. BLAST search were performed for each
SWISS-PROT human protein, and matches were analyzed for semantic similarity with the
search protein. Following [10], intervals were taken along the x-axis and log[bit score] and
semantic similarity values were averaged.
Table 3. Spearman rank order correlation coefficients between bit score and semantic similarities.
Correlation coefficients were calculated from the subset of proteins given in Table 1.

Gene Ontology
Molecular Function
Biological Process
Cellular Component
XOA

Resnik
0.575
0.389
0.343
0.405

Lin
0.544
0.417
0.387
0.393

Jiang and Conrath
0.516
0.423
0.382
0.368

and the semantic similarity. A well-known measure of monotonicity is Spearman rank
order correlation coefficient [7]. Table 3 reports this coefficient for the configuration
set in Table 2.
One can see that correlations tend to increase using the Spearman rank order
correlation coefficient. Even more interesting is the fact that each similarity measure
yields best correlation results when applied to a different ontology: Resnik for MF,
Jiang and Conrath for BP and Lin for CC. This is not too surprising. Because Resnik
measure rests only on the closest parent node of the node pair, it will tend to produce
higher values in well developed ontologies, such as MF, where nodes tend to be more
specific. By normalizing the Resnik measure with information content of the node
pair, the Lin and Jiang & Conrath measures prefer sparser ontologies with fewer child
nodes. Because Jiang and Conrath measure normalizes via a difference and Lin

Cross-Ontological Analytics: Combining Associative and Hierarchical Relations

877

measure via a ratio, the former favors more uniform ontologies while the latter prefers
ontologies more developed in regions of higher specificity within the ontology.
Another issue with the results in Tables 2 and 3 is that they do not reflect the
significant difference in coverage across the different methods. XOA correlations rely
on all protein pairs for which there are GO codes available. By contrast, MF- and BPbased correlations use only half of them and CC-based correlations use only a third.
Though the three gene ontologies are orthogonal, they can be subsumed under a
single root level term whose information content is 0. Conceptually, this root node
allows us to compute the Resnik, Lin and Jiang & Conrath semantic similarities for
nodes in different gene ontologies. In practice, this always results in a zero value for
the Resnik and Lin similarities and very small values for the Jiang and Conrath
similarity. Using this mechanism, we computed Spearman rank order correlations
between the bit score and the various semantic similarities using all protein pairs in
our benchmarking set. Table 4 summarizes these values. All correlations decrease
except for the XOA ones which remain unchanged and become the strongest ones.
Table 4. Spearman rank order correlation coefficients between bit score and semantic
similarities. Correlation coefficients were calculated using the entire benchmarking set of
255,529 protein pairs.

Gene Ontology
Molecular Function
Biological Process
Cellular Component
XOA

Resnik
0.307
0.195
0.229
0.405

Lin
0.301
0.202
0.234
0.393

Jiang and Conrath
0.296
0.203
0.233
0.368

5 Conclusions and Future Work
Our XOA approach provides a more comprehensive approach to the use of GO
annotations for the assessment of gene and product similarity than any of the methods
previously proposed. Due to its ability to yield a greater number of GO code
comparisons, XOA accounted for 15% more human protein pairs than the combined
three intra-ontological semantic similarity approaches (see Table 1), with a
consequent improvement of the overall correlation with BLAST results (see Table 4).
Moving forward, we are planning the use of textual evidence extracted from
relevant biomedical literature to improve inter-ontological GO-based similarities. We
also intend to use manually curated ground truth datasets such as the PFAM database
(http://www.sanger.ac.uk/Software/Pfam/) in addition to BLAST gene (product)
similarity search results, to carry out a more meaningful evaluation of XOA. Finally,
we have started to engage XOA in the analysis of gene expression data to aid the
identification of biological pathways and the detection of biomarkers. These
applications are yielding promising results and will constitute the ultimate testing
ground for XOA.

878

C. Posse et al.

References
1. Altschul, S.F., T. L. Madden, A. A. Schaffer, J. Zhang, Z. Anang, W. Miller and D.J.
Lipman (1997) Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLST: a new generation of protein database
search programs. Nucl. Acids Res. 25:3389-3402.
2. Azuaje F., H. Wang and O. Bodenreider (2005) Ontology-driven similarity approaches to
supporting gene functional assessment. In Proceedings of the ISMB'2005 SIG meeting on
Bio-ontologies 2005, pages 9-10.
3. Bodenreider, O., M. Aubry and A. Burgun (2005) Non-lexical approaches to identifying
associative relations in the gene ontology. In Proceedings of Pacific Symposium on
Biocomputing, pages 104-115.
4. Budanitsky, A. (1999) Lexical semantic relatedness and its application in natural language
processing. Technical report CSRG-390, Department of Computer Science, University of
Toronto.
5. Couto, F. M., M. J. Silva and P. Coutinho (2003) Implementation of a functional semantic
similarity measure between gene-products. Technical Report, Department of Informatics,
University of Lisbon, http://www.di.fc.ul.pt/tech-reports/03-29.pdf.
6. Jiang J. and D. Conrath (1997) Semantic similarity based on corpus statistics and lexical
taxonomy. In Proceedings of International Conference on Research in Computational
Linguistics, Taiwan.
7. Kendall M. G. (1949) Rank and product-moment correlation. Biometrika 36: 177-193.
8. Lin, D. (1998) An information-theoretic definition of similarity. In Proceedings of the 15th
International Conference on Machine Learning, Madison, WI.
9. Lord P.W., R.D. Stevens, A. Brass, and C.A.Goble (2002) Investigating semantic
similarity measures across the Gene Ontology: the relationship between sequence and
annotation. Bioinformatics 19(10):1275-1283.
10. Lord P.W., R.D. Stevens, A. Brass, and C.A.Goble (2003) Semantic similarity measures as
tools for exploring the Gene Ontology. In Proceedings of Pacific Symposium on
Biocomputing, pages 601-612.
11. Oehmen C.S. and J.N. Nieplocha (2006) ScalaBLAST: A scalable implementation of
BLAST for high performance data-intensive bioinformatics analysis. IEEE Transactions
on Parallel and Distributed Systems, in press.
12. Pearson, W. R. and D. J. Lipman (1988) Improved tools for biological sequence analysis.
In Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 85:2444-2448.
13. Popescu, M., J. M. Keller and J.A. Mitchell (2005) Gene ontology automatic annotation
using a domain based gene product similarity measure. In Proceedings of 14th IEEE
International Conference on Fuzzy Systems, Reno, Nevada, May 21-25, pages 108-111.
14. Raychaudhuri, S., J. T. Chang, F. Imam and R. B. Altman (2003) The computational
analysis of scientific literature to define and recognize gene expression clusters. Nucleic
Acids Research 31(15):4553-4560.
15. Resnik, P. (1995) Using information content to evaluate semantic similarity. In
Proceedings of the 14th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages
448–453, Montreal.
16. Salton, G., A. Wong and C. S. Yang (1975) A Vector space model for automatic indexing,
CACM 18(11):613-620.
17. Smith, T. and M. S. Waterman (1981) Identification of common molecular subsequences.
J. Mol. Biol. 147:195-197.

