Contextual Synchronization for Online Co-browsing on
Peer-to-Peer Environment
Jason J. Jung
INRIA Rhˆone-Alpes
ZIRST 655 avenue de l’Europe, Montbonnot
38334 Saint Ismier cedex, France
j2jung@intelligent.pe.kr

Abstract. In this paper, we propose a novel synchronization method based on
contextual information elicited from a group of peers for online collaborative
browsing on p2p environment. Thereby, the users are semantically tracked for
modeling the context about their information searching tasks. The co-browsing
system embedding our proposed method was shown to improve 52.7% and 11.5%
communication performance, compared to single browsing and the asynchronous
system, respectively.

1 Introduction
In communication systems, synchronization can be defined as the process of making
sure that two or more entities contain the same up-to-date information for consistency.
More particularly, in case of online cooperation between people, we consider that it
means the process of comparing the user’s current context and categorizing them into
the groups of similar users. We focus on detecting the moment at which the context is
switched to the others.
In this study, we propose semantics-based co-browsing system on peer-to-peer (p2p)
environment with two main contributions; i) automatic organization of the groups of
like-mined users by comparing the context represented as hierarchical topic paths, and
more importantly, ii) recognition of temporal transition of context. Thus, when a user’s
context is changed over time, he has to be shifted to the more relevant groups. Thereby,
the contextual transitions in information searching should be detected by analyzing the
sequential patterns of user browsing actions.

2 Modeling Browsing Contexts and Detecting Contextual
Transitions
The semantic factors are defined to measure the various relationships between users in a
group, and between web pages. The web access patterns of a user group Ga aggregated
during time interval T is given by a matrix W(Ga ) of size U × T , where U is the
number of users in Ga . Therefore, we can extract two kinds of browsing context; i)
personal context (PC(ui )) of user ui from each row component in P , and ii) group
context (GC(tj )) at a certain moment tj from each column components.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part III, LNCS 3993, pp. 244–247, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

Contextual Synchronization for Online Co-browsing

245

After labeling two arbitrary web requests based on function W D, which is referring
to the web directory, we can obtain both sets of hierarchical paths of the corresponding
topics. Here, lightweight ontologies (e.g., web directory) are deployed to label (more
exactly, conceptualize) the web pages accessed by the corresponding users1 . Let a web
page wpi categorized to the set {pim |pim ∈ W D(wpi ), m ∈ [1, . . . , M ]} where M is
the number of all possible topic paths.
Semantic distance δ

is minM,N
m=1,n=1

j
C
min((Lim −LC
m,n ),(Lm −Lm,n ))
exp(LC
m,n )

where Lim , Ljn , and

i
j
LC
m,n are the lengths of pm , pn , and common part of both, respectively. It is the minimum value among all combinatorial comparisons of two sets (|pi |×|pj |). Semantic
distance is assigned in the interval [0, 1], and in case of complete matching, it is 0.
Exponent function in denominator is for increasing the effect of LC
(m,n) .
Semantic distance matrix Δ The adjacent wp’s aggregated by either users’ accesses
at a certain time point (column components in W for GC) or a particular user’s
accesses during the time interval (row components in W for PC) of which size is
either U × U for GC or T × T for PC, and the diagonal elements are all zero.
T −1
T
Semantic distance mean μ is given by μ = T (T2−1) i=1
j=i+1 Δ (i, j), and
means the mean value of upper triangular elements in Δ except diagonal components. It can measure the semantic consistency of the given set of web requests.
T −1

T

2

Semantic distance deviation σ is T (T2−1) i=1
j=i+1 (Δ (i, j) − μ ) . measuring the degree of dispersion of the semantic distance values from a given set of
web requests.
To identify the contextual transition from the streaming web accesses of a group of
users, we have to consider to compute not only the semantic factors in a given interval
but also the distributions of μ and σ like sliding windows method. Hence, the triggering patterns from these signals are regarded as important evidence. This process should
G
be conducted by following the objective function min
g=1 GC g (tj+1 ) − GC g (tj )
where G is the total number of groups. It means that the temporal differences of GC of
each group should be minimized. This process is organized as two steps;
1. Alarming step. Semantic distance deviation σ of column components in P is
applied to capture the contextual transitions of a particular user ui whose personal
context PC is different from the corresponding group’s context GC. By using the
objective function, alarming at time tj can be characterized to
Δ(σ (GC)) = |σ (GC(tj )) − σ (GC(tj−1 ))| ≥ λA

(1)

where λA is a threshold for alarming of GC transitions. Then, a user is detected by
ui = argi min Δi (σ (GC))
= argi min |σ (GC i (tj )) − σ (GC i (tj−1 ))|

(2)
(3)

where GC i = GC− {i-th component}. Until Δi (σ (GC)) ≤ λA , alarming process
has to be repeated.
1

This web directory-based labeling process is explained in [1] in detail.

246

J.J. Jung

2. Confirming step. Semantic distance mean μ of the i-th row component in P is
applied to make sure that his context PC is changed or not. If so, the exact time
point can be detected. Similarly to the previous step, confirming the conceptual
transition of user ui can be characterized as
Δ(μ (PC)) = |μ (PC[t1 , ts−1 ]) − μ (PC[ts , tT ])| ≥ λC

(4)

where λC is the threshold for confirming of PC transitions. Then, the time point s
surely is the moment when PC of the corresponding user is changed.
Each time the streaming web accesses within a group is stored in W, the alarming
step has to be fulfilled. We employ the semantic distance deviation σ to recognize
the dispersion of members in a group, rather than the group context itself. Afterward,
if some users would be detected in this step, the confirming step can justify if their
transitions are validated or not, because the semantic distance mean μ is useful to
measure the semantic cohesion within a certain time interval.

3 Online Co-browsing with Contextual Transition
The users detected their context transitions should be reorganized to the most relevant
group. Thus, they can get all information about the group members’ browsing patterns
through blackboard module. User interface is simply composed of three frames for web
browser, blackboard, and lists of friends/groups. On p2p environment, all users utilize
homogeneous system, except to the facilities for super-peers.
Even multiple users can be the super-peer in a group, but we assume that the only
one be the super-peer to monitor and control the rest of members. Thus the super-peer
|Gg |
|PC(uk ) − PC(ui )|
of g-th group Gg is selected by SuPg = argi min k=1,u
k ∈Gg
which means that the super-peer user must be in the most middle of the group as minimizing the semantic distances between other members. This selection process should
be conducted when the members are changed. We can say it is similar to the adaptation
process of k-nearest neighborhood (k-NN) method.
Now, we want to explain reorganization process of the users whose contextual transition has been detected. By using the objective functions and super peer selection function, the reorganization process is given by argg minG
g=1 |PC(SuPg ) − PC(ui )|. where
G is the total number of groups in p2p network. It searches for the super-peer whose
context is closest to user ui , because the super-peer is surely regarded as the representative context of the corresponding group context. Hence, ui can join the most relevant
group Gg .

4 Experimental Results
We conducted simulations to evaluate the performance of communications on the proposed method for co-browsing system. Three groups GA , GB , and GC are organized
by 30 users (each ten users in a group), and then we collected the web logs dataset by
letting these users to browse the testing bed space2 in the fixed personal context.
2

As extended from the dataset applied in [1], it is composed of 4610 web pages labeled from
ODP (open directory project, http://www.dmoz.org).

Contextual Synchronization for Online Co-browsing

247

Firstly, in order to evaluate the detection of contextual transitions of each user, we
generated 30 testing sequences, including totally 583 contextual transitions, by randomly intermixing the fragments which are randomly segmented from the web log
dataset. We examined how exactly the transitions could be detected with respect to
measurement recall and precision. According to F1-value, set 2R×P
R+P , we empirically
uncovered the best threshold values λA = 0.4 and λC = 0.6. The threshold level
of confirming step seems slightly more critical, because it is for the personal context.
Overall, the average of confirming step is about 33% higher than that of alarming step.
Secondly, we evaluated the performance of communications by group organization.
This proves the efficiency of online co-browsing, rather than single browsing or basic
co-browsing systems. While users in GA browsed without any collaboration, GB and GC
was under co-browsing. But, users in GC was only considered the contextual transitions.
As the final results of three group members’ browsing for three weeks, GC in online cobrowsing has shown only 53% web access with helping each other according to the
context. Compared with GB , our proposed method has slightly improved by 11.5%.

5 Concluding Remarks and Future Work
In this paper, we have proposed online co-browsing system of which characteristics
are spatially remote and temporal synchronous. It is capable of detecting the contextual transitions of users in a group, so that they are efficiently shifted into the relevant group communications. As main contribution of this paper, most importantly, we
propose tracking the contextual dynamic of the groups while co-browsing, rather than
modeling the consensual context of the groups.
However, this system has still many problems that have to be dealt with in future
work. We modified Levenshtein edit distance [2] to measure the hierarchical pathlabeled web pages. In order to support more general users, we obviously consider various semantic annotation methods [3] to compare the relationships between them. Another issue is topology in p2p network. Because, as mentioned in [4], the hyperlinked
environment has various topological features such as authorities and hubs, we have to
think over about selection process of super-peers.

References
1. Jung, J.J.: Semantic preprocessing of web request streams for web usage mining. Journal of
Universal Computer Science 11(8) (2005) 1383–1396
2. Levenshtein, I.: Binary codes capable of correcting deletions, insertions, and reversals. Cybernetics and Control Theory 10(8) (1996) 707–710
3. Jung, J.J., Lee, K.S., Park, S.B., Jo, G.S.: Efficient web browsing with semantic annotation:
A case study of product images in e-commerce sites. IEICE Transactions on Information and
Systems E88-D(5) (2005) 843–850
4. Kleinberg, J.M.: Authoritative sources in a hyperlinked environment. Journal of the ACM
46(5) (1999) 604–632

