A Privacy Algorithm for 3D Human Body Scans
Joseph Laws and Yang Cai
Carnegie Mellon University,
Visual Intelligence Studio, Cylab, CIC 2218,
4720 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
ycai@cmu.edu

Abstract. In this paper, we explore a privacy algorithm that detects human private parts in a 3D scan dataset. The intrinsic human proportions are applied to
reduce the search space by an order of magnitude. A feature shape template is
constructed to match the model data points using Radial Basis Functions in a
non-linear regression. The feature is then detected using the relative measurements of the height and area factors. The method is tested on 100 datasets from
CAESER database.

1 Introduction
The rapidly growing market of three-dimensional holographic imaging systems has
created significant interest in possible security applications. Current devices operate
using a millimeter wave transceiver to reflect the signal off the human body and any
objects carried on it. Unlike current metal detectors, the system can also detect nonmetal threats or contraband, including plastic, liquids, drugs and ceramic weapons
hidden under clothing. The technology has also been used to create body measurements for custom-fit clothing. The holographic imager creates a high-resolution 3-D
scan of a body, allowing shops to provide tailored measurements to designers or provide recommendations on best-fit clothing. These high resolution scanned images
reveal human body details and have raised privacy concerns. Airport and transport
officials in several countries are refusing to run a test trial with the scanners until a
more suitable way to conceal certain parts of human body is found.
The scanner creates a three-dimensional point cloud (voxels) around the human
body. Since the millimeter wave signal can not penetrate the skin, a three-dimensional
human surface can be found. Furthermore, since the typical pose of a subject is standing, we can segment the 3-D dataset into 2-D contours, which reduces the amount of
data processing significantly. The goal of this study is to develop a method that can
efficiently find and conceal the private parts of a human.

2 Relevant Studies
From a computer vision point of view, detecting features from 3D body scan data is
nontrivial because human bodies are flexible and diversified. Function fitting has
been used for extracting special landmarks, e.g. ankle joints, from 3D body scan data
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part IV, LNCS 3994, pp. 870 – 877, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

A Privacy Algorithm for 3D Human Body Scans

871

[1,2], similar to the method for extracting special points on terrain [5]. Curvature
calculation is also introduced from other fields such as the sequence dependent DNA
curvature [3]. These curvature calculation use methods such as chain code [7] circle
fit, ratio of end to end distance to contour length, ratio of moments of inertia, and
cumulative and successive bending angles. Curvature values are calculated from the
data by fitting a quadratic surface over a square window and calculating directional
derivatives of this surface. Sensitivity to the data noise is a major problem in both
function fitting and curvature calculation methods because typical 3D scan data contain loud noises. Template matching appears to be a promising method because it is
invariant to the coordinate system [1,2]. However, how to define a template and
where to match the template is challenging.
In summary, there are two major obstacles in this study: robustness and speed.
Many machine learning algorithms are coordinate-dependent and limited by the training data space. Some algorithms only work within small bounding boxes that do not
warrant an acceptable performance. For example, if a feature detection algorithm
takes one hour to process, then it is not useful for a security screening system. In this
paper, we present a fast and robust algorithm for privacy protection.

3 Intrinsic Proportions
Our first step is to reduce the search space of the 3D body scans. We start by dividing
the 3D data points into 2D slices. The points are ‘snapped’ to the nearest planes enabling us to convert a 3D problem to 2D. In this study, we assume that body features
can be detected from the contours on the cutting planes. Examining each slice from
top to bottom is rather an expensive process. Here we present a novel approach to
reduce the search space by making use of intrinsic proportions. It is a relative measurement that uses an object in the scene to measure other objects [15].

Fig. 1. Body height measured by head example (left), normal distribution of heads per body
(middle), spread of actual # of heads per body size for all models (right)

Intrinsic proportion measurements have been used in architecture and art for thousands years. Roman architect Vitruvius said that the proportions of a building should
correspond to those of a person, and laid down what he considered to be the relative
measurements of an ideal human. Similarly in art, the proportions of the human body

872

J. Laws and Y. Cai

in a statue or painting have a direct effect on the creation of the human figure. Artists
use analogous measurements that are invariant to coordinate systems. For example,
using the head to measure the height and width of a human body, and using an eye to
measure the height and width of a face. Figure 1 shows a sample of the vertical proportion in a typical art book and the actual distribution of head to body proportions
calculated from our data set. Based on our observations from 100 3D scan data sets of
adults from 16 to 65 years old, including subjects from North America, Europe and
Asia, we found that the length of one and a half head units from the bottom of the
head is enough to cover the chest area. In addition, the chest width is about three
heads wide. Figure 2 shows an output from the intrinsic proportion calculation based
on the sample from CARSER database.

Fig. 2. Detected chest in white

We found that intrinsic proportion method can reduce the search space by an order
of magnitude. In addition, it reduces the risk of the local optima while searching the
whole body.

4 Template Matching
Template matching is image registration that matches a surface, of which all relevant
information is known, to a template of another surface. The matching of the two surfaces is driven by a similarity function. We need to solve two problems before applying template matching on the regions of interest. First, a suitable template had to be
created. Second, a similarity function had to be selected so that a minimization algorithm can align the template onto the region of interest. For each plane of the scan
data, the back of the body contour can be removed. By assign the X-axis between the
two points with the longest distance, we can obtain the front part of the body contour.
We then use three radial basis functions to configure the template for female breast
pattern.

A Privacy Algorithm for 3D Human Body Scans

873

3

Y = ∑ ai * exp( −(n − si ) 2 )

(1)

i =1

where, a = a1 = a2, b = a3, s = s1 = s2, and s3 = 0.
We use non-linear regression on the variables a, b, and s to match the template
with the scan data. Figure 3 shows the matching results for the female and male
samples.

Fig. 3. Variable definitions for the breast template (left), matching results for the female sample
(middle) and male sample (right). The solid black curves are the template contours. The red
points are the 3D scan data.

5 Coordinate Invariant Measurements
Most shape descriptions depend on coordinate systems and viewpoint, meaning that
the algorithm can only work within the training data space. Our shape invariant measurements are aimed to compute the shape properties from the ratio, rather than absolute values.
Template matching not only filters out noises but also describes the characteristics
of a shape. We define the following invariant similarity functions to the coordinate
system: height ratio and area ratio. The height ratio is defined as

H r=

H 1 Y mid /2
=
H 2 Y mid

(2)

The area ratio is defined as the ratio of the area of curvature feature (A1) to the total
area (A2) of the model by the following formula:

Ar=

A2
A1

(3)

3

where,

A 2 = ∫ ∑ ai *exp(−( x − si ) 2 )dx
l i =1

(4)

3

A1= ∫ (∑ ai *exp(−( x − si )2 ) − c)dx
l

i =1

(5)

874

J. Laws and Y. Cai
3

c = ∑ ai * exp(−( mid − si ) 2 )

(6)

i =1

We used the Taylor series to find an appropriate approximation of the areas.
3

( x − si ) 4 ( x − si )6 ( x − si )8
+
+
)
2!
3!
4!

(7)

( x − si ) 4 ( x − si )6 ( x − si )8
+
+
)−c
2!
3!
4!

(8)

A1= ∑ ai *(1 − ( x − si ) 2 +
i =1

3

A2 = ∑ ai *(1 − ( x − si ) 2 +
i =1

Another method utilizing the compactness of the polygon [27] was attempted. Due
to the fact that Male models are in general larger and therefore have a longer border
length it was determined that this method was not an effective feature differentiator as
the area ratio method.

5 Results
We tested our algorithm with the subset of CAESER database that contains 50 males
and 50 females ages 16-65, where 50 of them are North American with a black mix,
24 are Asian, and 26 are from the European survey from Italy and the Netherlands.
We try to find the breast features from known female and male scan data samples.
Figure 4 shows the test results. From the plot, we can see the distinguishable two
groups for male (without the curvature feature) and female group (with the curvature
feature). There is a ‘dilemma’ zone where some over-weight males do have the curvature features. However, the over-lapped zone is small, less than 8% of the total 100
samples.

Fig. 4. Chest feature detected

After the area and height factors have been calculated we determine the feature area,
as seen in Figure 5. Once we find the feature area, we reduce the polygon resolution
so that the area is blurred. Figure 6 shows the results of the blurring effects.

A Privacy Algorithm for 3D Human Body Scans

875

2

Height Factor

1.5
Female

1

Male

0.5
0
-1

-0.5

0

0.5

1

1.5

Area Factor
Fig. 5. Classification test results with male and female samples

Fig. 6. Blurred surface rendering

6 Conclusions
In this paper, we explored the algorithm to recognize the body feature areas and blur
them to protect a subject’s privacy. Human intrinsic proportions are used to drastically reduce the search space and reduce the chance of detecting local optima. The
feature template is defined with Radial Basis Functions whose parameters are determined by non-linear regression. Feature factors of the height and area are then used to
recognize the curvature feature. The relative measurements are coordinate invariant.
With non-linear regression method, the template matching is effective and convergent
within a given error range. We tested 100 body scans from the CAESER database and
found the algorithm can classify the male and female bodies based on the curvature
features at the successful rate of over 90%.
Our future work includes the development of more robust coordinate invariant
method to detect the predefined body features, and to fine tune the algorithms both for
protecting privacy and detecting concealed weapons. Ultimately, we will work with
the real field data to fine tune the algorithms.

Acknowledgement
We would like to thank for Cylab, Carnegie Mellon University for the support on
security research and we are in debt to ARO for the research grant. We would also

876

J. Laws and Y. Cai

appreciate the help from Alva Karl of Air Force for the CAESER database and the
assistance from Karl X. Fu from Carnegie Mellon University.

References
1. Suikerbuik, R., H. Tangelder, H. Daanen, A. Oudenhuijzen, Automatic feature detection in
3D human body scans, Proceedings of SAE Digital Human Modeling Conference, 2004,
04-DHM-52
2. Suikerbuik C.A.M. Automatic Feature Detection in 3D Human Body Scans. Master thesis
INF/SCR-02-23, Institute of Information and Computer Sciences. Utrecht University,
2002
3. Forsyth, D.A. and Fleck, M. M., Automatic detection of human nudes, International Journal of Computer Vision , 32 , 1, 63-77, August, 1999
4. S. Ioffe and D.A. Forsyth, Probabilistic methods for finding people, International Journal
of Computer Vision , Volume 43, Issue 1, pp45-68, June 2001
5. Forsyth, D.A. and Fleck, M.M., Body Plans, Proc. CVPR-97, 678-83, 1997.
6. Forsyth, D.A.; Fleck, M.M., Identifying nude pictures, Proceeding. Third IEEE Workshop
on Applications of Computer Vision. 103-108, 1996.
7. M.M. Fleck, D.A. Forsyth and C. Bregler, Finding naked people, Proc. European Conf. on
Computer Vision , Edited by: Buxton, B.; Cipolla, R. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag,
1996. p. 593-602
8. http://www.dace.co.uk/proportion.htm
9. Jones, P.R.M. and Rioux, M. 1997. Three-dimensional surface anthropometry: applications to the human body. Optics and Lasers in Engineering, 28, 89-117.
10. Robinette, K.M., Blackwell, S., Daanen, H.A.M., Fleming, S., Boehmer, M., Brill, T.,
Hoeferlin, D., Burnsides, D. 2002. Civilian American and European Surface
11. Anthropometry Resource (CAESAR), Final Report, Volume I: Summary, AFRL-HE-WPTR-2002-0169, United States Air Force Research Laboratory, Human Effectiveness Directorate, Crew System Interface Division, 2255 H Street, Wright-Patterson AFB OH 454337022 and SAE International, 400 Commonwealth Dr., Warrendale, PA 15096.
12. Gordon G. Face recognition based on depth and curvature features. Proceedings of the
IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (Champaign Illinois), pages 108-110, 1992.
13. Calladine C.R. Gaussian curvature and shell structures. The Mathematics of Surfaces, Oxford University Press, pages 179-196, 1985.
14. Li, P., Corner, B.D., Paquette, S. Evaluation of a surface curvature based landmark extraction method for three dimensional head scans. International Ergonomics Conference,
Seoul, 2003.
15. Ratner, P. 3-D human modeling and animation, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 2003
16. Liu, X. W. Kim, and B. Drerup, 3D Characterization and Localization of Anatomical
Landmarks of the Foot, Proceeding (417), Biomedical Engineering , Acta Press, 2004,
http://www.actapress.com/PaperInfo.aspx?PaperID=16382
17. Bansal, M. Analysis of curvature in genomic DNA. http://www.ibab.ac.in/bansal.htm
18. Coleman, R., M. Burr, D. Souvaine, A. Cheng, An intuitive approach to measuring protein
surface curvature, Proteins: structure, function and bioinformatics, vol. 61, no.4, pp 10681074
19. Goldgof, D.B., T.S.Huang, H.Lee, A Curvature-Based Approach to Terrain Recognition,
November 1989 (Vol. 11, No. 11) pp. 1213-1217

A Privacy Algorithm for 3D Human Body Scans

877

20. Besl, P.J. and R. C. Jain, "Three-dimensional object recognition," ACM Comput. Surveys,
vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 75-145, Mar. 1985.
21. Brady, M., J. Ponce, A. Yuille, and H. Asada, "Describing surfaces," Comput. Vision,
Graphics, Image Processing, vol. 32, pp. 1-28, 1985.
22. Fan, T.G., G. Medioni, and R. Nevatia, "Description of surfaces from range data using
curvature properties," in Proc. CVPR, May 1986.
23. Chen, H.H. and T. S. Huang, "Maximal matching of two three-dimensional point sets," in
Proc. ICPR, Oct. 1986.
24. Haralick, R.M., S.R. Sternberg, and X. Zhuang, "Image analysis using mathematical morphology," IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Machine Intell., vol. PAMI-9, no. 4, pp. 532-550,
1987.
25. Goldgof, D.B., T. S. Huang, and H. Lee, "Feature extraction and terrain matching," in
Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput. Vision Pattern Recognition, Ann Arbor, MI,
May 1988.
26. Goldgof, D.B., T. S. Huang, and H. Lee, "Curvature based approach to terrain recognition," Coord. Sci. Lab., Univ. Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, Tech. Note ISP-910, Apr.
1989.
27. Sonka, M. et al. Image processing, analysis and machine vision, PWS Publishing, 1999

