WIPER: The Integrated Wireless Phone Based
Emergency Response System*
Gregory R. Madey1, Gabor Szabo2, and Albert-László Barabási2
1

Computer Science & Engineering
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA
gmadey@nd.edu
http://www.nd.edu/~gmadey/
2
Department of Physics
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN. 46556, USA
{gabor.szabo, Albert.L.Barabasi.1}@nd.edu
http://www.nd.edu/~alb

Abstract. We describe a prototype emergency response system. This dynamic
data driven application system (DDDAS) uses wireless call data, including call
volume, who calls whom, call duration, services in use, and cell phone location
information. Since all cell phones (that are powered on) maintain contact with
one or more local cell towers, location data about each phone is updated periodically and available throughout the cellular phone network. This permits the
cell phones of a city to serve as an ad hoc mobile sensor net, measuring the
movement and calling patterns of the population. Social network theory and statistical analysis on normal call activity and call locations establish a baseline. A
detection and alert system monitors streaming summary cell phone call data.
Abnormal call patterns or population movements trigger a simulation and prediction system. Hypotheses about the anomaly are generated by a rule-based
system, each initiating an agent-based simulation. Automated dynamic validation of the simulations against incoming streaming data is used to test each hypothesis. A validated simulation is used to predict the evolution of the anomaly
and made available to an emergency response decision support system.

1 Introduction
During a disaster, emergency response managers could benefit from timely alerts and
quality information about the location and movement of the entire affected population. Reports from on-scene coordinators, first responders, public safety officials, the
news media, and the affected population can provide managers with point data about
an emergency, but those on-scene reports are often inaccurate, conflicting and incomplete with gaps in geographical and temporal coverage. Additionally, those reports
must be merged into a coherent evolving picture of the entire affected area to enable
emergency managers to effectively respond.
*

The material presented in this paper is based in part upon work supported by the National
Science Foundation, the DDDAS Program, under Grant No. CNS-050312.

V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part III, LNCS 3993, pp. 417 – 424, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

418

G.R. Madey, G. Szabo, and A.-L. Barabási

Mobile phones are becoming increasingly ubiquitous throughout large portions of
the world, especially in highly populated urban areas. Mobile phone providers have
available real-time data about the call volume, calling patterns, and the location of the
cell phones of their subscribers. In order for a cell phone to place outgoing calls and
to receive incoming calls, it must periodically report its presence to nearby cell towers, thus registering its spatial-temporal position in the geographical cell covered by
one of the towers. Thus, in addition to the call volume and call patterns of their subscribers, cellular carriers can provide data about the collective location and movement
of all the cell phones (those powered-on) in an area affected by a disaster.
We describe the design and development of a prototype emergency response system that would use streaming data from the cellular carriers in an affected area to
provide alerts, interpretation, and predictions of the evolution of the emergency event.
Recent events in New Orleans and Houston (USA) with hurricanes Katrina and Rita
motivate the need for such a system. Other disasters caused by earthquakes, floods,
tsunami, tornados, terrorist attacks, industrial accidents, and civil disorders also suggest applications for the system. Included in the design is an agent-based simulation
system that dynamically requests detailed data about cell phone activity in the area
modeled, including triangulated data with more precise location information. The
simulation system uses the streaming data to calibrate and dynamically validate one
or more agent-based simulations of the emergency. Validated simulations can then be
used to predict the evolution of the emergency and help emergency managers to anticipate events and needs of the affected population.
The design of the prototype Wireless Phone Based Emergency Response System
(WIPER) is inspired by the concepts of Dynamic Data Driven Application Systems
(DDDAS), which is briefly summarized in the next section. The subsequent section
describes the WIPER design, including 1) the system architecture – application of
open-source/open-standards Service Oriented Architecture (SOA) middleware tools,
grid services, software and servers used to implement the modular distributed WIPER
prototype, 2) the dynamic data driven simulations – knowledge-based & agent-based
simulation system used to classify, test, and predict the course of an anomaly, and 3)
the web services-based decision support system – the end-user composition of web
services based workflow for a flexible web-based decision support system. We conclude with a summary and discussion of the limitations and potential privacy challenges to deployment of the WIPER system.

2 Dynamic Data Driven Application Systems
The concept of dynamic data driven application systems (DDDAS) was first explored
in detail in a NSF workshop in early 2000 [1]. That workshop concluded that the
DDDAS concept (i.e., that simulations and real-world data be merged into symbiotic
feedback control systems) offered the potential of greatly improving the accuracy and
efficiency of models and simulations. The workshop final report recommended more
research in the areas of 1) dynamic, data driven application technologies, 2) adaptive
algorithms for injecting and steering real-time data into running simulations, and 3)
systems software that supports applications in dynamic environments. At following
conferences and workshops, initial research and applications exploring these research

WIPER: The Integrated Wireless Phone Based Emergency Response System

419

areas were reported [2]. A fourth area of research important to the DDDAS concept
emerged, that of measurement systems; the dynamic steering of the data collection
needed by the simulations may require improvements in measurement, observation
and instrumentation methods. In 2004, Darema described the DDDAS concept as:
Dynamic Data Driven Application Systems (DDDAS) entails the ability to incorporate additional data into an executing application - these data can be archival or collected on-line; and in reverse, the ability of applications to dynamically steer the
measurement process. The paradigm offers the promise of improving modeling
methods, and augmenting the analysis and prediction capabilities of application
simulations and the effectiveness of measurement systems. This presents the potential to transform the way science and engineering are done, and induce a major impact in the way many functions in our society are conducted, such as manufacturing,
commerce, hazard management, and medicine [2].

Several workshops and symposia focused on the DDDAS concept have been held
with proceedings available online [3].
The prototype WIPER system explores all four research areas relevant to the
DDDAS concept: 1) it dynamically responds to streaming real-time data and steers
the collection process, 2) it includes both algorithms for detecting anomalies that may
indicate an emergency and a rule and agent based system that dynamically incorporates new data into its analysis, 3) it employs the recently developed open standards
based service oriented architecture (SOA) for integrating the multiple distributed
modules that comprise the WIPER system, and 4) the data that streams into the system from the cellular carriers is dynamically focused on the locality of the emergency,
detailed data rather than aggregate data is collected, and when needed by the simulation system, higher precision triangulated date is requested from the carriers.

3 Data
The design and development of the WIPER system uses both actual call and location
data provided by a cellular carrier and synthetic data to simulate emergencies. All
data is anonymized to protect privacy. During development, testing and evaluation the
data is stored in a database with several modules streaming the data to simulate the
real-time data streams the system would see if deployed. The data that the WIPER
system uses is aggregate in nature, does not track individual cell phones by actual user
ID, and does not include the content of phone calls or messages. A discussion of privacy issues is included in the final section of this paper.

4 Design
The design and operation of the WIPER DDDAS prototype is shown schematically in
Fig. 1. The system has three layers: 1) Data Source and Measurement Layer; 2) Detection, Simulation and Prediction Layer; and 3) Decision Support (DSS) Layer. Each
is described briefly in the following subsections, along with details on the agent-based
simulations and the system architecture used by the WIPER sysem.

420

G.R. Madey, G. Szabo, and A.-L. Barabási

4.1 Data Source and Measurement Layer
For the development, testing and evaluation phases of the WIPER system, the Data
Source and Measurement Layer contains both real historic data and synthetic data
stored in three online database systems: RTDS, HIS and TRI. The Real Time Data
Source (RTDS) contains the full activity and spatial location data automatically collected by the mobile phone company, including the 30 sec CDR (Call Detail Record)
tags on all phones, identifying the closest cell tower to the phone, and activity data,
such as the initiator and the recipient of a call, its duration and the nature of service
used. The Historical Data (HIS) is generated from RTDS, and stores aggregated reference information used to train and calibrate the system that detects communication
and spatial anomalies. Finally, the Triangulation Application (TRI) is capable of providing high precision location information on selected phones. It is activated only on
request, and is steered by either the SPS or DSS modules. The interface to the three
data sources is designed such that real-time data streams from the cell phone carriers
can replace the archived data sources used during development.
4.2

Detection, Simulation, and Prediction Layer

The Detection and Alert System (DAS) processes the data stream provided by RTDS,
and after comparing it with the baseline data stored by HIS, discovers potential deviations from the normal communication and spatial location patterns. Anomalies are
reported to the Simulation and Prediction System (SPS), which then accesses the
detailed data available to RTDS, selects the relevant information in the vicinity of

Fig. 1. The data-streams on the location and the communication patterns of the mobile phones
are generated by RTDS, which passes the information to DAS, an application designed to
discover potential traffic and communication anomalies by comparing the streaming activity
data with a historical reference data stored in HIS. Anomalies are reported to SPS, which initiates a dynamic, data-driven agent-based simulation, predicting cell phone movement in the
physical vicinity of the anomaly. SPS has the capability to request detailed time dependent
coordinates of mobile phones in the vicinity of the anomaly from the TRI application. The
predictions on the unfolding of the anomaly are sent in real time to DSS, which feeds it selectively into the relevant alert and monitoring services for use by emergency response managers.

WIPER: The Integrated Wireless Phone Based Emergency Response System

421

each reported anomaly, and using a rule-based system, generates hypotheses about the
nature of each anomaly. The SPS then launches one or more agent-based simulations
for the reported anomaly; each simulation is a test of a hypothesis and able to predict
the evolution of the anomaly. If the spatial resolution in the vicinity of the anomaly is
not sufficient, SPS will instruct the Triangulation Application (TRI) to track the precise spatial location for each phone in the vicinity of the anomaly. The detailed location data from the RTDS and TRI will be used to dynamically test, update and validate the simulations. Multiple instances of the SPS may be invoked in response to
multiple concurrent alerts.
4.3 Agent Based Simulations
Within the agent-based simulations of the SPS, each cell phone is represented as an
agent. Each agent, based on the hypothesis the simulation is testing, may have unique
properties and behaviors. For example, if the cell phones are in cars on a limited access highway, their freedom of movement will be limited to the road, freeway exits,
and the other vehicles. Alternatively, if the cell phones are hypothesized to be carried
by pedestrians walking through a city, perhaps fleeing a natural event (fire, explosion,
etc.), their motion will be blocked by rivers, fenced-in highways, buildings, and other
barriers to pedestrians. The agent-based simulation paradigm we use is a bottom-up
approach, with large numbers of simple agents, interacting with each other and the
simulated environment [4-7]. The implementation is objected-oriented, where each
agent in the simulation is an instantiated object of a class or subclass of cell phone
user-types, providing the software engineering benefits of inheritance, encapsulation
and specialization. An agent-based simulation tool, RePast is used to build the simulations [8]. Repast is especially attractive since 1) it can be used in the Java/J2EE or
.NET environments [9] providing maximum portability, and 2) has recently been
extended to work with both the ESRI ArcMap [10] and OpenMap GIS (Geographical
Information Systems) [11, 12]. This will permit the use of GIS map data that can 1)
accurately represent mobile phone cells (i.e., the coverage of a cell tower) and 2) use
actual topographical map data to constrain the movement of agents in the simulations.
The simulations execute either by event scheduling or by time stepping the agents, per
their rules of behavior and individual attributes. A history of each simulation is stored
in a database, and as newer data is injected into the simulation system, each simulation’s predictions up to that point in time will be dynamically validated against the
new real data. Those simulations that are "close" to "reality" will be recalibrated and
rerun from that point in time. Others that fail to correlate with the newly injected data
will be terminated and new hypotheses and simulations generated and executed if
needed. Validated simulations are then used to predict the evolution of the anomaly
and this is shared with the modules in the DSS Layer.
4.4 The Decision Support System (DSS) Layer
The DSS is the user interface to the WIPER system, providing a view on the status
and the predicted evolution of the emergency. It can activate response applications
that the emergency response managers and autonomous systems may decide to invoke. These response systems might include information feeds to law enforcement,

422

G.R. Madey, G. Szabo, and A.-L. Barabási

public safety, customer data services, traffic reporting systems, emergency crews,
Amber Alerts, and alert systems to the mobile phone company’s own network engineers and managers. Emergency response managers can send requests to the SPS
Layer for predictions and visualizations of the cell phone distributions in the area of
the disaster. Similar to the SPS, multiple instances of the DSS may be invoked by
different emergency response users of the WIPER system.
4.5 System Software Architecture
The tasks that WIPER will address – that of monitoring, detecting, analyzing, simulating, predicting, and responding to anomalies in the movement of large numbers of
individuals, by tracking their cell phones’ locations and call activities – will consist of
multiple distributed heterogeneous applications that must be able to exchange data
and control information, both in the real world deployment and in our prototype development, testing and evaluation. In the real world deployment some of these programs may execute within one or more cell phone companies, and others (DSS or
response applications) may execute within government public safety (e.g., law enforcement, emergency response, and security) organizations. The data collection and
reporting services must be able to respond to requests for more detailed data for cell
phone tracking, and the monitoring and simulations must be able to adapt to new
streaming data that may need to be injected into the running simulations. Decision
support systems, either within the cell phone companies or within the public safety
organization must also be able to receive situation data from the monitoring systems
and predictions from the simulations and give users of the DSS the ability to compose
workflows of services (data sources, simulations, predictions, visualizations, status
reports) in an ad hoc and dynamic fashion. Likewise, in the proposed DDDAS development project, the HIS, RTDS, TRI, DAS, SPS, DSS and response systems will be
developed and deployed using different tools, platforms, and servers. We are using
the open standards-based Service Oriented Architecture (SOA) to integrate these
systems and to enable the end-user composition of system modules from within the
DSS. The SOA is being adopted both by industry and in e-government (e.g., cell
phone service providers, public safety organizations, emergency response agencies)
and the scientific and engineering communities (e.g., Globus, Grid Services, Service
Oriented Science) [13-17]. The SOA employs open standards, such as the Open Grid
Services Architecture (OSGA), extensible Markup Language (XML), Simple Object
Access Protocol (SOAP), and Web Services Description Language (WSDL) etc.,
from the Global Grid Forum (GGF), WWW Consortium (W3C), and OASIS standards bodies, and this will permit interested mobile phone companies, other interested
researchers, and other industrial and government organizations to more easily reuse,
integrate and extend our software. All programs, simulations, and online databases
are: 1) written or wrapped as Web Services, 2) deployed to individual servers as
needed for performance reasons and to emulate the real world distributed nature of
this DDDAS application, and 3) communicate with one another in a loosely coupled
distributed fashion by sending XML/SOAP formatted messages to one another as
shown in Fig. 2.

WIPER: The Integrated Wireless Phone Based Emergency Response System

423

DDDAS SERVICE ORIENTED ARCHITECTURE
Data Archival Services - Monitoring Services - Simulation & Predition Services
Decision Support Services - Response Services
Cell Phone
Location and
Activity Data

HIS
RTDS
TRI

XML/SOAP

XML/SOAP
WSDL/
UDDI
Server

Hypothesis
Generator
(Rule-based
system)

DAS
Detection
&
Alert

XML/SOAP

1

Simulation

2

Simulation

3

SPS
Agent-based Simulations
(hypothesis testing/dynamic update)

XML/SOAP
Cell Phone
Company
Decision
Support
Systems

Simulation
Validation
Prediction

XML/SOAP

Work Flow
Execution
Engine

Public Safety
Oranizations
Decision
Support
Systems

DSS and Response Systems

Fig. 2. The WIPER Service Oriented Architecture (SOA). The use of business and egovernment standards based middleware is needed since the data suppliers are typically commercial enterprises and the users of the DSS will be typically governmental public safety organizations.

5 Discussion and Summary
Mobile phone companies routinely record the location and communication patterns of
millions of cell phones. These cell phones form a large pre-existing mobile wireless
sensor net, generating datasets of potential value to public safety managers, emergency response personnel, traffic engineers, city planning and resource management,
offering a thorough snapshot of what humans do on a daily basis, how crowds selforganize, and how individuals alter their behavior when faced with emergencies,
traffic jams, civil disorder or terrorist attacks.
WIPER is projected to be capable of real-time monitoring of normal social and
geographical communication and activity patterns of millions of wireless phone users,
recognizing unusual human agglomerations, potential emergencies and traffic jams.
WIPER will select from these massive data streams high-resolution information in the
physical vicinity of a communication or traffic anomaly, and dynamically inject it into
an agent-based simulation system to classify and predict the unfolding of the emergency in real time. The agent-based simulation system will dynamically steer local
data collection in the vicinity of the anomaly. Multiple distributed data collection,
monitoring, analysis, simulation and decision support modules will be integrated
using a Service Oriented Architecture (SOA) to generate traffic forecasts and emergency alerts for engineering, public safety and emergency response personnel.

424

G.R. Madey, G. Szabo, and A.-L. Barabási

Both the reliability of the cellular phone system during a disaster, and privacy concerns present potential limitations on the WIPER system. Since the WIPER system
uses wireless cell phones to collect data about the population during an emergency,
extreme large-scale disasters such as earthquakes and hurricanes can disable key components of the cell phone system, thus reducing its data collection ability in areas
impacted most by the disaster. This was observed several days into hurricane Katrina
in New Orleans (USA) when flooding disabled cell towers and the landline phone
network they connect to [18]. At the individual level, since cell phones typically have
battery standby times of a few days, prolonged power outages will reduce the number
of phones available to collect data from.
Privacy concerns with government tracking cell phone locations and wiretapping
present a challenge for the deployment of a system such as WIPER [19, 20]. Measures may be required to filter or anonymize the IDs of individual phone data prior to
streaming it to the WIPER system to preserve individual privacy. The WIPER system
does not use the individual identify of each cell phone, but only the aggregate numbers and calling patterns of the phone in the area of the emergency. As stated earlier
in this paper, the WIPER development project is working with real but anonymized
data, and has no access to the content of phone calls or messages. This project will
continue to examine the impact on personal privacy that a system such as WIPER
may have, especially in the context of GIS systems and technologies [21, 22].

References
References for this paper can be obtained by contacting the authors or online at:
http://www.nd.edu/~dddas/Papers/papers.html#ICCS2006Refs

