Clustering Versus Evenly Distributing Energy
Dissipation in Wireless Sensor Routing for Prolonging
Network Lifetime*
Guangyan Huang1, Xiaowei Li1, and Jing He2
1

Advanced Test Technology Lab., Institute of Computing Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, P. R.China 100080
{huanggy, lxw}@ict.ac.cn
2 Chinese Academy of Sciences Research Center on Data Technology and
Knowledge Economy, Beijing, P. R. China 100080
hejing@gucas.ac.cn

Abstract. A novel Cluster Heads (CH) choosing algorithm based on both
Minimal Spanning Tree and Maximum Energy resource on sensors, named
MSTME, is provided for prolonging lifetime of wireless sensor networks.
MSTME can satisfy three principles of optimal CHs: to have the most energy
resource among sensors in local clusters, to group approximately the same
number of closer sensors into clusters, and to distribute evenly in the networks
in terms of location. Simulation shows the network lifetime in MSTME excels
its counterparts in two-hop and multi-hop wireless sensor networks.

1 Introduction
Recent advancements in wireless communications and electronics have made the development of low-cost, low-power smart wireless sensors available [1-3]. Tens or
hundreds of sensors can be deployed in observation environment to sense physical parameters that are sent to the Base Station (BS) to provide useful knowledge for people
[4-6]. Because sensors have limited battery resource and wireless communications
consume large number of energy, energy efficiency of the communication is most important in the wireless sensor networks [7,8].
The energy consumed by wireless communications is related with the number of
transmitting data and transmitting distance [9]. Optimal routes can achieve the minimal average transmitting distance. Furthermore, with only limited computing abilities,
sensors can fuse data by compressing or getting rid of redundancy to reduce the number of data and then send the user-cared knowledge to BS [9]. Thus, sensors are clustered into several clusters and some sensors are chosen as Cluster Heads (CH) to do
the fusing and middle-transferring jobs. However, different transmitting distances and
different jobs of non-CH sensors and CHs bring different energy dissipation. Thus, all
the sensors should work as a team and evenly distributing energy dissipation to prolong the whole network lifetime that is defined as the Time before the First sensor
*

This paper was supported by the National Basic Research Program of China
(No.2005CB321604 and No.2004CB720103), and the National Natural Science Foundation
of China (No.90207002).

V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part II, LNCS 3992, pp. 1069 – 1072, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

1070

G. Huang, X. Li, and J. He

Node Dies (TFND). Also, the Ratio of TFND and the Time before All sensor Nodes
Die (TAND), RTT, is used to evaluate the effectiveness of evenly distributing energy
dissipation. Therefore, network lifetime is determined by both energy efficiency and
effectiveness of evenly distributing energy dissipation.
Low Energy Adaptive Clustering Hierarchy (LEACH) [9-11] gives an elegant
scheme for evenly distributing energy dissipation. Base Station Controlled Dynamic
Clustering Protocol (BCDCP) [12] improves LEACH by reducing the transmitting
distances and balancing the number of sensors in clusters [13]. LEACH and BCDCP
show network lifetime can be improved further in four aspects: better closeness of
sensors in each cluster (Closer), the same number of sensors in each cluster (Same
Number), CHs with the most energy resource (Maximum Energy) and locations of
CHs are distributed evenly (Even Location). LEACH and BCDCP do well in Maximum Energy and in both Closer and Same Number, respectively. This paper proposes
a CH-choosing method, Minimal Spanning Tree (MST) and Maximum Energy resource on sensors determining CHs (MSTME), to do best in all the four aspects.

2 MSTME CH Choosing Algorithm
MSTME CH choosing algorithm is given in Table 1. The main goal is to choose expected number, NCH, of CHs, which satisfy all of the four optimal principles. Then,
non-CH sensors affiliate their closest CHs and thus clusters are formed. MSTME is
reasonable for clustering while evenly distributing energy dissipation in wireless
sensor networks. Firstly, MST connects all CH candidates with the minimal edges.
Wherever the edge is broken, the nodes in the same split sub trees are closer. Because
non-candidate sensors support the nearest CH candidates, CH candidates may delegate their supporters in terms of locations. Thus, sensors in the same clusters formed
by MSTME are closer to each other. Also approximately the same number of supporters in each CH candidate subset ensures nearly the same number of sensors closest to the CH in this subset. At last, any nodes in MST are high-energy sensors.
Therefore, MSTME synthetically does well in the four optimal principles.
Suppose BS knows the locations of all sensors and MSTME runs on BS. Maximum
Energy principle is satisfied firstly, then CHs (solid dots) formed by MSTME shown
in Fig. 1 (c) and (d) satisfy Closer, Same Number and Even Location better compared
with LEACH and BCDCP in Fig. 1 (a) and (b). The number of CHs is greater, the
MSTME method is better. However, optimal number of CHs is determined by network topology. Six CHs is optimal in two-hop networks according to [10], and nine
CHs is optimal in multi-hop networks based on simulated annealing algorithm.
To simulate the network lifetime of MSTME, we implement an energy simulator
of wireless sensor networks programmed in C/C++. We use a radio power model and
related parameter values in [10] and a network shown in Fig. 1 with 100 nodes randomly deployed in 100m × 100m. Initial energy resource on each node, the package
size of data message and BS position are 2J, 20kbits and (25m, 150m), respectively.
In two-hop networks, Fig. 2 (a) shows TFND in MSTME increases 3.2% of that in
LEACH and also TAND of MSTME outperforms 3.6% that of LEACH. RTT of 96%
in MSTME is nearly the same as RTT of 96.4% in LEACH. It means that MSTME
gets better trade-offs on clusters with even numbers of closer sensors and CHs with

Clustering Versus Evenly Distributing Energy Dissipation

1071

more energy resources. In multi-hop networks, Fig. 2 (b) shows TFND in MSTME
increases 6.4% of that in BCDCP and TAND in MSTME increases 5.6% of that in
BCDCP. RTT of 98.7% in MSTME is nearly the same as RTT of 98% in BCDCP.
MSTME performs better because it reduces average energy dissipation of the networks while keeps RTT approximately the same as both LEACH and BCDCP. In addition, it seems that MSTME performs better in Fig. 2 (b) than in Fig. 2 (a), because
MSTME reduces average transmitting distance of CHs further in multi-hop networks.
Table 1. MSTME CH Choosing Algorithm

Step 1: Sensors with more energy resource than average level are selected into CH
candidates set, S. Then a MST, T, is used to connect all the items in S. Also, supporters of a CH candidate x are those non-candidate sensors that are nearest to x
among all CH candidates. Compute the number of supporters for each CH candidate including candidate itself.
Step 2 (Initialization): Let the number of split edge nSplit=0, T’=T and S’=S.
Step 3 (Loop): Find an edge to break T’ into two sub MSTs of T1 and T2 and at the
same time the nodes in S’ are grouped into two subsets of S1 and S2 respectively
with the nearest number of supporters in both subsets. Then let nSplit= nSplit +1.
Step 4 (Termination test): If nSplit>=NCH, go to Step 5. Otherwise, go on splitting
S1 and S2 in turn. If the number of supporters in S1 (or S2) is more than N/NCH,
then let S’=S1 and T’=T1 (or S’=S2 and T’=T2). Go to Step 3.
Step 5: The CH candidate with the most energy resource in each subset is chosen as
CH.

(a)6 CHs in LEACH

(b)9 CHs in BCDCP

(c)6 CHs in MSTME (d)9 CHs in MSTME

Fig. 1. Analysis of CH Distribution

s
e
d
o
n
f
o
r
e
b
m
u
N

100

LEACH
MSTME

80

e 60
v
i
l 40
a
20
0
0

150 300 450 600 750 900
Number of rounds

(a) Two-hop

s
e
d
on
f
o
r
e
b
m
u
N

100

BCDCP
MSTME

80

e 60
v
i
l 40
a
20
0
0

150 300 450 600 750 900
Number of rounds

(b) Multi-hop

Fig. 2. Lifetime in Wireless Sensor Networks

1072

G. Huang, X. Li, and J. He

3 Conclusions
MSTME is proposed to cluster sensors optimally in wireless sensor networks. It not
only reduces the average transmitting distance but also distributes the energy dissipation evenly in the networks. Simulating of the network lifetime shows MSTME excels
LEACH and BCDCP in two-hop and multi-hop networks respectively.

References
1. Chandrakasan A., Amirtharajah R., Cho S.-H., Goodman J., Konduri G., Kulik J., Rabiner
W., Wang A.: Design Considerations for Distributed Microsensor Networks. In: Proc.
IEEE Custom Integrated Circuits Conference (1999) 279-286
2. Clare L., Pottie G., Agre J.: Self-Organizing Distributed Sensor Networks. In: Proc. SPIE
Conf. Unattended Ground Sensor Technologies and Applications (1999) 229-237
3. Dong M., Yung K., Kaiser W.: Low Power Signal Processing Architectures for Network
Microsensors. In: Proc. Int’l Symp. Low Power Electronics and Design (1997) 173-177
4. Estrin D., Govindan R., Heidemann J., Kumar S.: Next Century Challenges: Scalable Coordination in Sensor Networks. In: Proc. ACM/IEEE Mobicom (1999)
5. Kulik J., Rabiner W., Balakrishnan H.: Adaptive Protocols for Information Dissemination
in Wireless Sensor Networks. In: Proc. ACM/IEEE Mobicom (1999)
6. Xu Y., Heidemann J., and Estrin D.: Geography-Informed Energy Conservation for Ad
Hoc Routing. In: Proc. SIGMOBILE (2001)
7. Al-Karaki J. N., Kamal A. E.: Routing Techniques in Wireless Sensor Networks: A Survey. IEEE Wireless Communications, vol.11, (2004) 6-28
8. Akyildiz I. F., Weilian Su, Sankarasubramaniam Y., Cayirci E.: A Survey on Sensor Networks. IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 40, (2002) 102-114
9. Heinzelman W. B., Chandrakasan A. P., Balakrishnan H.: Energy Efficient Communication Protocol for Wireless Microsensor Networks. In: Proc. Hawaii Int’l. Conf. Sys. Sci.
(2000)
10. Heinzelman W. B., Chandrakasan A. P., Balakrishnan H.: An Application-Specific Protocol Architecture for Wireless Microsensor Networks. IEEE Transactions on Wireless
Communications, vol.1, (2002) 660-670
11. Heinzelman W. B.: Application-Specific Protocol Architectures for Wireless Networks.
Ph.D. Thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), (2000)
12. Muruganathan S. D., Ma. D. C. F., Bhasin R. I., Fapojuwo A. O.: A Centralized EnergyEfficient Routing Protocol for Wireless Sensor Networks. IEEE Communications Magazine, vol.43, (2005) 8-13
13. Ghiasi S. (et al): Optimal Energy Aware Clustering in Sensor Networks. In: MDPI Sensors, vol.2, no.7 (2002) 40-50

