IT Innovation: A New Era
Martin Curley
Senior Principal Engineer
Global Director, Innovation and IT Research
Intel Corporation
martin.g.curley@intel.com

Abstract. This presentation will discuss the emerging discipline of IT Innovation,
a discipline where unique value can be created at the intersection of Information
Technology and Innovation. The presentation also shares the structure of an
emerging Innovation Capability Maturity Framework and Model while discussing
how computing trends such as multicore technology and virtualization will reignite Moore’s law and provide a platform for Innovation that is unparalleled in
history.

IT Innovation is emerging as a new discipline, one which exists at the intersection of two
relatively immature disciplines, that of Information Technology and Innovation. Whilst
IT is increasingly being recognized as a discipline and the profession is reasonably well
developed, it is just in the last couple of years that business schools have started to
recognize that Innovation is not just something that happens by luck but perhaps is a
process that can be mastered. Driven by the power of Moore’s Law IT is a unique innovation resource, it’s transformative power and it’s ever improving performance/price
dynamic making it a very attractive transformation resource. However in parallel IT is
also a great resource for helping automate and manage the process of Innovation itself.
For any IT Innovation to be successful, at least six vectors need to be managed
successively in parallel
–
–
–
–
–
–

Vision (Opportunity/Problem)
IT enabled Solution
Business Case
Business Process Change
Organizational Change
Customer or Societal Change

To start with somebody has to have a vision of how a particular opportunity can be
exploited or how a particular problem can be solved through using information technology or some combination thereof. Typically the vision will be evolved over time. While
IT Professionals often think the hardest part of any IT innovation is delivering the IT solution, this often can be the easier part of achieving a new innovation. Since the dotcom
crash it is increasingly important and necessary to have a business case associated with
any new innovation. The dotcom crash meant that there was a swing from irrational
exuberance to irrational pessimism with respect to IT investment. Thankfully there is a
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part I, LNCS 3991, pp. 4–6, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

IT Innovation: A New Era

5

modicum of rationality returning to IT investment but increasingly a solid business case
is a requirement for an innovation to proceed.
The next three vectors are where soft issues come into play and often can be the
most problematic part of delivering an IT innovation. Typically an IT Innovation will
deliver some form of business process change - in the past typically we saw business
process automation but now more often that not we seen business process transformation. This is often accompanies by organizational change, either in the form of new
behaviors, new roles or indeed new organization forms. Resource fluidity and organizational and ecosystem dynamics will have a significant influence on the organizational
vector. Finally and perhaps most importantly an Innovation is only successful if it is
adopted by the customer. Many of today’s IT enabled Innovations have societal impact
and society’s willingness and ability to accept an Innovation is a crucial modulator in
the success of an Innovation.
Looking at Innovation as a process there is increasing awareness that Innovation
perhaps could be managed as a process. Typically there are three processes involved
with an Innovation - cognitive, organizational/logistical and economic. In collaboration
with the National University of Ireland, Intel is working to develop an IT Innovation
Capability Maturity Framework (ITI CMF) and Model (ITI CMM) to provide organizations with a roadmap and assessment tool to help deliver more value through IT
innovation. This framework and model is based on the concept of systemic innovation
where synchronous improvements are made to organizational strategy, culture, tools
and metrics to help create a virtuous circle of Innovation.

Fig. 1. IT Innovation Capability Maturity Framework (IT CMF). Source: IVI Intel/National University of Ireland.

At the bottom level of the maturity curve the organization has no or ad hoc practices
for innovation but as the organization traverses through the curve it steadily increases
the maturity and quality of its Innovation Strategy, Culture, Tools and Metrics and ultimately the innovation results. Level 5 maturity, i.e. systemic innovation is when Innovation becomes a way of life and this typically means sustained new profitable growth
for a commercial organization.
In parallel with the maturing of IT Innovation as a discipline, IT as a technology
continues to evolve. Whilst some were concerned that Moore’s Law would peter out as
the laws of Physics became barriers for ever increasing frequency , the adoption of a
Multicore approach will revitalize and give Moore’s law another lease of life. There is a
fundamental shift happening in the PC industry as companies move away from increasing the frequency of the CPU to increase performance to the adoption of parallelism as

6

M. Curley

the key parameter for delivering better performance. This ”right-hand” turn will likely
deliver an acceleration of Moore’s’ Law. The years 2000 to 2004 saw an approximately
3X improvement in CPU performance but the advent of multicore is projected to deliver
a 10X improvement in just the next four years. Multicore is essentially the configuration
of multiple logical microprocessors on a single physical die.
Multicore will not just bring better performance, it will also bring better performance per watt, larger throughput and better scalability. As a company Intel is on its
third generation of parallelism. Intel’s 1st generation of parallel computing was with
introduction of purpose-built multi-way servers (DP, MP and SMP). Intel’s 2nd generation of parallelism was with Hyper-threading or 2 virtual threads per core, this typically yield up to 30% performance gains on threaded code and enabled outstanding
multi-tasking usage benefits. Intel is now on its 3rd generation of threading with dual
core and beyond that combines multicore core with hyper threading for increased parallelism, throughput and versatility. In addition as Virtualization technology diffuses
into the marketplace the opportunity expands. Also multicore designs will deliver better performance/watt as easing concerns on the growing power consumption for more
and more powerful machines.
As multicore technology develops and as the process of IT Innovation is more managed and ultimately mastered, the future does look bright as a new era of IT Innovation
is ushered in.

References
1. Curley, M. 2004. ”IT Innovation for Competitive Advantage and Adaptiveness”, Kluwer, Proceedings IFIP 8.6 Conference. June.
2. Curley, M. 2004. ”Managing Information Technology for Business Value”, Intel Press.
January.
3. Intel internal technical documents, 2006
4. Swanson, Burton E, 2004. ”How is an IT Innovation assimilated”, Kluwer, Proceedings IFIP
8.6 Conference. June.
5. Pickering, Cindy. 2004. ”Using IT Concept Cars to accelerate Innovation”, Kluwer,
Proceedings IFIP 8.6 Conference. June.

