Multiresolution Remeshing Using Weighted
Centroidal Voronoi Diagram
Chao-Hung Lin1 , Chung-Ren Yan2 , Ji-Hsen Hsu2 , and Tong-Yee Lee2
1

Dept. of Geomatics, National Cheng Kung University, Taiwan
2
Dept. of Computer Science and Information Engineering,
National Cheng Kung University, Taiwan
http://couger.csie.ncku.edu.tw/∼ edirvr/

Abstract. We present a novel method for multiresolution remeshing
of irregular mesh. First, the original mesh (two-manifold any genus) is
decomposed into several patches, each patch is homeomorphic to a 2D
triangle. The goal of this decomposition process is that the decomposed
patches are size-equally. First, a mesh is manually cut into a few disk-like
patches. With the help of weighted centroidal Voronoi diagram (WCVD),
each patch is then automatically partitioned into more triangular patches
with nearly equal size. Recursively subdividing these triangular patches,
we ﬁnally get a semi-regular mesh.
Keywords: Parameterization, Remeshing, Voronoi Diagram, Resampling.

1

Introduction

In computer graphics and geometric modeling, 3D models are often represented
by triangular meshes. The connectivity of triangular mesh produced by modeling
software is usually irregular. Irregular meshes are not appropriate to handle in
such tasks as model texturing and computation of ﬁnite element. Therefore, the
remeshing process, i.e., modifying the sampling and connectivity of a geometry
to generate a new mesh, is a fundamental step for eﬃcient geometric processing.
The majority of previous works propose semi-regular remeshing techniques
[1, 2, 3] are based on an initial step of constructing a parameterization of the
original model over a base domain, i.e., so-called base mesh, consisting of a small
number of triangles. A triangle in the base mesh maps to a triangular patch in
the original mesh. This base mesh is then recursively subdivided, i.e., vertex
resampling, to accurately ﬁt the original mesh over the parametric domain.
Mesh re-tiling technique is proposed by [4, 5, 6] to resample the original mesh
based on a particle system approach. A new set of vertices are ﬁrst distributed
over the surface of a given mesh and are then triangulated these vertices to create
a surface that accurately ﬁts the original mesh. A global relaxation procedure
balances the distribution of the vertices by shifting them on the surface. In [6],
to exactly ﬁnd the sharp features, the authors extend the relaxation procedure
by attracting the vertices to feature edges.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part II, LNCS 3992, pp. 295–301, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

296

C.-H. Lin et al.

The concept of interactive user control in geometry remeshing has been recently proposed in [7]. In [7], the original mesh is substituted by a series of 2D
maps in parameter space. The user can combine these maps to create a control
map which is used to control the vertex sampling over the surface.
The weighted centroidal Voronoi diagram (WCVD) has been applied to many
applications such as non-photorealistic rendering (stippling) [13], and surface
remeshing [14]. In [14], an adaptive surface remeshing technique is presented. The
vertex resampling is achieved by a given density function. Utilizing the WCVD,
the mesh can be adaptive tessellated. This method focuses on generating a precise isotropic surface remeshing, but it is diﬃcult to generate a multiresolution
remeshing using their remeshing scheme. Multi-resolution remeshing technique
is important and can be applied to many applications such as morphing [8, 9]
and LOD. In this paper, a multiresolution remeshing technique for arbitrary
geometry is proposed. Unlike the previous works that create a base mesh using
simpliﬁcation algorithm [1, 2, 3], we decompose the original mesh into several triangular patches utilizing WCVD in the parametric domain. These decomposed
triangular patches are nearly equal-size and similar to equilateral triangle. Once
the decomposition is accomplished, these triangular patches are re-embedded
onto the parametric domain to obtain a low distortion parameterization. This
decomposition process can also be treated as a vertex resampling step. The next
step is to recursively subdivide the triangular patches to produce a new semiregular mesh as the result.

2

Methodology

The basic idea of the proposed method is to decompose the original mesh M into
several triangular patches using the WCVD. These triangular patches are then
subdivided to produce a new mesh with new connectivity that accurately ﬁt the
mesh M . The proposed remeshing algorithm consists of the following steps.
1. First pass decomposition: Manually partition the mesh M into a few disk-like
patches {P 1 , P 2 , ..., P m }.
2. Parameterization: Each individual surface patch is then embedded into an
isomorphic planar quadrilateral. The boundary of the parameterization is
ﬁxed to be a square so that a geometric map can be eﬃciently stored and
processed as a regular ﬂoating point image.
3. Construct WCVD: A geometric map is computed over the parameterization
and stored in 2D image as the weight of WCVD. For each quadrilateral,
given n sites, we construct a WCVD. The construction of WCVD will be
described in more detail in Section 2.1.
4. Second pass decomposition: After triangulating the WCVD, the disk-like
patch P i is further decomposed into several nearly equal-size triangular
i
patches {P1i , P2i , ..., Pm
}. This step will be also described in more detail in
Section 2.1.
5. Reparameterization: For each individual triangular patch, we re-embed it
into an isomorphic planar triangle for a lower distortion parameterization.

Multiresolution Remeshing Using Weighted Centroidal Voronoi Diagram

297

6. Resampling: Perform recursive 4-to-1 subdivisions on all triangular patches
Pji over the parametric domain. Finally, we can obtain a new semi-regular
mesh.
2.1

Mesh Decomposition Using Weighted Centroidal Voronoi
Diagram

Once the mesh M has been decomposed into a few disk-like patches, i.e., the
ﬁrst pass decomposition, and embedded into planar quadrilateral, we utilize
the WCVD to further decompose each disk-like patch into several triangle-like
patches.
Voronoi Diagram. Given a set of points, called Voronoi sites, a Voronoi diagram partition space into several regions. For each region, any position in this
region is closer to the Voronoi site of this region than to another one. In this
paper, we unitize the space partitioning ability of Voronoi diagram to decompose surface patch. We adopt a fast 3D graphics hardware-based algorithm [10]
to compute a Voronoi diagram. This algorithm draws a set of cones with their
apexes at each site. Each cone is given a unique color as the site’s identity. For
each pixel, the z-buﬀer determines which cone is closer to the viewer and assigns
the color of this cone, i.e., the site’s identity, to it. Finally, we can obtain each
region by the colors. This technique allows us to compute a discrete Voronoi
diagrams extremely fast.
Centroidal Voronoi Diagram. To uniformly decompose the surface patch, a
centroidal Voronoi diagram (CVD) is more suitable. The CVD has the property
that each site lies exactly on the centroid of its Voronoi region. The centroid of
a region is deﬁned as equation 1.
C=

xi ∈R

n

xi

(1)

Where R is the Voronoi region, is the pixel in the region R and n is the number
of pixels in the region . Speciﬁcally, a centroidal distridution of the sites is useful
because the sites are evenly distributed on the deﬁned plane and the Voronoi
region are nearly size-equally (the CVD is an optimization in some sense). These
properties are appropriate to handle uniform resampling or uniform decomposition. In this paper, we adopt a relaxation algorithm [11] to produce a CVD.
This algorithm can simply be stated as follows: compute Voronoi Diagram, ﬁnd
centroid of each region and move site to the centroid. This process is terminated
when the positions of these sites are convergent. Figure 1 shows an example of
CVD with 100 sites randomly placing in an equilateral quadrilateral. Figure 1(a)
is the Voronoi diagram of the given sites. After 23 iterations, we obtain the CVD
as shown in Figure 1(e).
Weighted Centroidal Voronoi. Diagram The CVD is created in the parametric domain which causes the regions in the planar quadrilateral to be distorted.

298

C.-H. Lin et al.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Fig. 1. Centroidal Voronoi Diagram. (a) voronoi diagram ;(b) 5 iterations ; (c) 10
iterations ; (d) 15 iterations ; (e) 23 iterations.

In this paper, we apply a weight function to the centroidal Voronoi diagram to
solve this problem. The Eq. 1, i.e., calculate the Voronoi centroid, is rewritten
as follows:
xi wi
C = xi ∈R
(2)
wi
Where wi is the weight of xi . We identify a relevant geometrical value: area
distortion map MA to serve as the weights of CVD. The map MA is easily computed using the ratio A3D /A2D of each triangle in the parameterization. Where
A2D and A3D are the triangle area in the parameterization and its corresponding
area on the 3D surface, respectively. After normalizing the scale A3D /A2D , the
geometric map MA can be treated as a grayscale image range from 0 to 255.
For a better visual eﬀect, we set the pixel with largest area distortion to be 0
and the pixel with the lowest area distortion to be 255. Following the relaxation
algorithm by S. Lloyd [11], the process of constructing WCVD can be described
as the pseudo-code below. In Figure 2, we show an example of the surface patch
decomposition using WCVD. During the relaxation process, the darker regions
of the geometry map have lager attraction for sites. With the help of WCVD, the
surface patch is uniformly decomposed (as shown in Figure 2(e)). One disadProcedure WCVD ()
{
Give n sites
Repeat
Compute Voronoi diagram
For each region Ri of site si
Find the weighted centroid si of the region Ri using Eq. (2)
Move the site si to the weighted centroid si
Until convergence
}

vantage of the proposed method is the use of discrete calculation of the Voronoi
diagram that is aﬀected by the resolution of the diagram and the distortion of
the parameterization. A related problem is that if the resolution is too low, the
sites will not distribute over the areas with an extremely high distortion. A solution described in [10] is to split the diagram into tiles and compute each tile at

Multiresolution Remeshing Using Weighted Centroidal Voronoi Diagram

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

299

(e)

Fig. 2. Surface patch decomposition using WCVD. (a) Surface patch; (b) The parameterization of (a); (c) The area distortion map of (b); (d) The WCVD with 12 sites;
(e) The surface decomposition result.

the higher resolution (increase arbitrary) and then stitch the full diagram back
together. Another solution is to repartition the surface patch and then re-embed
these sub-patches to parametric domain until the distortion is less than a deﬁned
threshold. In this paper, we compute a WCVD in a high resolution plane. If the
problem described above still occurs, we will repartition the surface patch.
2.2

Mesh Remeshing

Once the decomposition process is completed, we re-embed each triangle patch
to parametric domain to obtain a lower distortion parameterization. Then, we
produce a new mesh with subdivision connectivity from the parameterization.
The simple strategy we adopted is to perform a 4-to-1 split that the position of
the split point is at the middle of an edge.

3

Experimental Results

In Figure 3 and 4, we show the preliminary remeshing results using the proposed
method. Follow the evaluate function in [12]. Accuracy is measured as Peak Signal to Noise Ratio P SN R = 20 ∗ log(peak/d), where peak is the diagonal length
of the bounding box and d is the symmetric RMS Hausdorﬀ error (geometric
distance) between the original mesh and the remesh. The Table 1 shows the
Statistics of PSNR for the remeshing in the Figure 3 and 4. Roughly speaking,
the PSNR about 70dB is considered to be a nice approximation.

4

Conclusion and Future Work

We have introduced a novel approach for multiresolution uniform remeshing.
Utilize the weighted centroidal Voronoi diagram to uniformly distribute the vertices in the surface and then decompose the surface to several triangular patches
with nearly equal size. In the further work, we will address the processing of consistent remeshing of several diﬀerent poses models. This would be very useful in
the morphing and animation issues.

300

C.-H. Lin et al.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Fig. 3. Mesh remeshing of a man’s head model. (a) The original mesh; (b) The decomposition result (the coarsest level of subdivision: 353 triangles); (c),(d),(e) Remeshing
with 1408 triangles (level 1), 5632 triangles (level 2) and 22528 triangles (level3), respectively.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Fig. 4. Mesh remeshing of a rabbit model. (a) The original mesh; (b) The decomposition result (the coarsest level of subdivision: 472 triangles); (c),(d),(e) Remeshing with
1888 triangles (level 1), 7552 triangles (level 2) and 30208 triangles (level3), respectively.
Table 1. Statistics for PSNR
Model
Level
Lv 0
Man’s Head PSNR(dB) 44.42
no. of face 352
Rabbit PSNR(dB) 44.40
no. of face 472

Lv 1
52.81
1,408
50.5
1,888

Lv 2
60.44
5,632
58.71
7,552

Lv 3
68.40
22,528
61.27
30,208

Lv 4
85.71
90,112
73.96
120,832

Multiresolution Remeshing Using Weighted Centroidal Voronoi Diagram

301

Acknowledgements. This project is supported by National Science Council,
Taiwan, ROC, under contract No. 94-2213-E-006-063 and 94-2213-E-006-005.

References
1. A. W.F. Lee, D. Dobkin, W. Sweldens and P. Schroder, ”MAPS: Multiresolution
Adaptive Parameterization of Surfaces.” ACM SIGGRAPH ’98, pp. 95-104, 1998.
2. I. Guskov, W. Sweldens and P. Schroder, ”Multiresolution Signal Processing for
Meshes”, ACM SIGGRAPH ’99, pp. 325-334, 1999.
3. A. Khodakovsky, N. Litke and P. Schroder, ”Globally Smooth Parameterizations
with Low Distortion”, ACM SIGGRAPH’03, pp. 350-357, 2003.
4. L. Kobbelt, T. Bareuther, and H.-P. Seidel ”Multiresolution shape deformations
for meshes with dynamic vertex connectivity”, Computer Graphics Forum volume
19(3), pp. 249-260, 2000.
5. G. Turk, ”Re-tiling polygonal surfaces”, ACM SIGGRAPH’92, vol. 26, pp. 55-64,
1992.
6. J. Vorsatz, C. Rossl, Leif P. Kobbelt and Hans-Peter Seidel. ”Feature Sensitive
Remeshing”, Proceedings of EUROGRAPHICS’01, pp. 393-401, 2001.
7. P. Alliez, M. Meyer and M. Desbrun, ”Interactive Geometry Remeshing”, ACM
SIGGRAPH ’02, pp. 347-354, 2002.
8. C.-H. Lin and T.-Y. Lee, ”Metamorphosis of 3D Polyhedral Models Using Progressive Connectivity Transformations”, IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics, Vol. 11, No.1, pp. 2-12, Jan./Feb., 2005.
9. T.-Y. Lee and P.-H. Hung, ”Fast and Intuitive Metamorphosis of 3D Polyhedral
Models Using SMCC Mesh Merging Scheme”, IEEE Transactions of Visualization
and Computer Graphics, Vol. 9, No.1,pp. 85-98, January-March 2003.
10. K. E. Hoﬀ, T. Culver, J. Keyser, M. Lin and D. Manocha, ”Fast Computation of
Generalized Voronoi Diagrams Using Graphics Hadware”, ACM SIGGRAPH ’99,
pp. 277-286, 1999.
11. S. Lloyd, ”Least Square Quantization in PCM”, IEEE Transactions on Information
Theory, volume 28, pp.129-137, 1982.
12. P. Sender, J. Snyder, S. Gortler and H. Hoppe, ”Texture Mapping Progressive
Meshes”, ACM SIGGRAPH ’01, pp. 409-416, 2001.
13. A. Secord, ”Weighted Voronoi Stippling”, In Proceedings of NPAR, 2002.
14. V. Surazhsky, P. Alliez and C. Gotsman, ”Isotropic Remeshing of Surfaces:
A Local Parameterization Approach”, Proceedings, 12th International Meshing
Roundtable, Sandia National Laboratories, pp.215-224, Sept, 2003.

