Predictive Analysis of Blood Gasometry
Parameters Related to the Infants Respiration
Insuﬃciency
Wieslaw Wajs1 , Mariusz Swiecicki2 , Piotr Wais1 , Hubert Wojtowicz1 ,
Pawel Janik3 , and Leszek Nowak4
1

4

University of Mining and Metallurgy, Institute of Automatics,
Cracow, Poland
2
University of Technology, Intitute of Computer Modelling,
Cracow, Poland
3
Jagiellonian University, Faculty of Mathematics,
Astronomy and Applied Informatics,
Cracow, Poland
Jagiellonian University, Faculty of Mathematics and Informatics,
Cracow, Poland

Abstract. The paper presents application of artiﬁcial immune system
in time series prediction of the medical data. Prediction mechanism used
in the work is basing on the paradigm stating that in the immune system
during the response there exist not only antigene - antibody connections
but also antigene - antigene connections, which role is control of antibodies activity. Moreover in the work learning mechanism of the artiﬁcial
immune network, and results of carried out tests are presented.

1

Introduction

Biological phenomenons, and particularly organic processes are of a dynamic
character. Diagnosis and therapy are of the same character. In approaching diagnosis and making therapeutic decision phenomenons happening in time are
investigated [1]. Every doctor knows that it is rare to make a decision about
diagnosis and treatment on the basis of only one clinical observation. Usually it
is based on several patient’s examinations, regular analysis of many biophysical
and biochemical parameters, or imaging examination. On a particular level of
these examinations preliminary diagnosis is determined, and later a ﬁnal one.
Basing on determined diagnosis, and on the evaluation of the sickness process
dynamics, decision about the treatment is taken. The ﬁeld of neonatology has
made tremendous progress during the last twenty years. It’s been made possible thanks to the progress in modern technologies of intensive medical care and
progress in the applied sciences. Diagnostic examinations are based on micro
- methods. Modern monitoring technologies, both non - invasive and invasive,
aren’t very strenuous for the patient, allow in an exact manner for continuous
monitoring of gas exchange, lungs mechanics and functioning of circulatory system. Patophysiology of the infant respiration insuﬃciency and the role of the
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part I, LNCS 3991, pp. 300–307, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

Predictive Analysis of Blood Gasometry Parameters

301

surfactant deﬁciency in various forms of the respiration insuﬃciency was discovered. Physiology and patophysiology of the water - electrolyte economy of
regular and premature neonates was also discovered. Initial stabilization of the
infants state is a diﬃcult task. It can take even few days. To achieve it the
doctor analyses repeatedly many parameters related to the patient’s health condition. To these parameters belong birth anamnesis, physiological examinations
(body’s weight, dieresis), results of additional examinations ( biochemical, micro
biological, imaging) and readings from the monitoring instruments ( pulseximeter, cardio monitor, invasive measurement of the arterial pressure, respiratory
mechanics monitor). It isn’t rare when doctor appraises simultaneously over ﬁfty
variables. Analysis of this huge amount of data is hard and requires experience,
all the more if the decision about the treatment should be made quickly. In the
result of carried out data analysis doctor makes decision about the treatment
expecting positive results, which are expressed by the desired changes in the
results of additional examinations, readings of the monitoring instruments and
physical examination. The whole process can be veriﬁed by comparing it to the
model of respiratory insuﬃciency progress carried out by the doctor. Creation
of this model is based on theoretical and empirical knowledge found in scientiﬁc books and papers and also on the doctor’s experience. Out of necessity
created model is of subjective character. Moreover results of analysis carried out
by the doctor are always dependant of many external factors - recently read
reports, weariness of the doctor etc. Intensiﬁcation of gas exchange disorders
are best reﬂected by arterial blood gasometry parameters examined in the context of currently used methods of ventilation support. For that reason as an
output values four directly measured parameters of arterial blood gasometry:
pH, pCO2 , pO2 , HCO3 and oxygen parameter (pO2 /F iO2 ) were chosen. Alkalis
deﬁciency and hemoglobin oxygen saturation were omitted as derivatives of the
four parameters mentioned above.
1.1

Parameters Prognosis

Below short characteristic of the parameters is presented:
pH - blood reaction is a parameter, which depends on the state of the respiratory system, but also on the circulatory system functioning, kidneys and
metabolism of system. It is a general parameter, which can be treated as an
indicator of the general state of the patient.
pCO2 - partial pressure of the carbon dioxide is strictly correlated with the
rate of the respiratory system eﬃciency. Above all it is dependent on minute
ventilation. Its increase causes simultaneous decrease of pCO2 . Increase of the
partial pressure of the carbon dioxide is usually the symptom of respiration
disorders with lowered ventilation. However in serious respiration disorders with
handicapped gas diﬀusion through the alveolar - capillary barrier also appear
symptoms of handicapped exchange of carbon dioxide. Increase of CO2 decreases
blood’s pH. pCO2 of patients with supported ventilation depends mainly on the
frequency of breaths (RR) and respiration capacity (TV).

302

W. Wajs et al.

pO2 - partial pressure of oxygen is also strictly correlated with the rate of
the respiratory system eﬃciency. Normal exchange of oxygen in lungs depends
mainly on the proper ratio of ventilation to perfusion and on permeability of the
alveolar - capillary barrier. Perturbation of the ventilation to perfusion ratio is
observed usually in the case of atelectasis. Thickening of the alveolar - capillary
barrier in the ﬁrst place handicaps oxygen exchange, only further decrease of its
permeability handicaps CO2 exchange. pO2 of patients with ventilation support
depends on the oxygen concentration in the respiratory mixture (F iO2 ) and on
the rate of lung’s dilation. The latter in the patients with ventilation support depends on the proper pressure in respiratory tracts (peak pressure of inspiration,
average pressure in respiratory tracts). Oxygen deﬁciency in the organism causes
increase of anaerobic metabolism and also increase of lactic acid and decrease of
blood’s pH production.
HCO3 - hydrogen carbonate concentration in blood depends on system’s
metabolisms and kidney’s functioning. In case of disproportions between transport of oxygen to tissues and metabolic requirements of system decrease of bicarbonate concentration and metabolic acidosis supervene.
Assessing particular clinical case one doesn’t rely on only one, even complex
parameter, usually one evaluates many various parameters. Because of that four
parameters were chosen as inputs of artiﬁcial immune network. Exact classiﬁcation of their values reﬂects direction and rate of changes - improvement or
deterioration of respiratory system functioning, occurring in the natural progress
of the illness and used treatment methods.
1.2

Source of Data

Research data used in the presented work, was gathered during few years long
observation and hospitalization of patients on the Infant Intensive Care Ward of
the Polish - American Institute of Pediatrics Collegium Medicum Jagiellonian
University of Cracow. On this ward a computer database is used called Neonatal Information System (NIS), which stores information about all hospitalized
infants.

2

An Artiﬁcial Immune Network for Signal Analysis

Main goal of our system is a prediction of signals and to achieve this goal several
problems had to be solved. The ﬁrst of them is connected with an algorithm
of learning the immune network. The next problem is related to the structures
of data, which are responsible for representation of signals. Solutions to these
problems are presented below. The last paragraph presents results of signals
prediction by our immune network.
2.1

Signal Representation

The input signal for the system, is interpreted as an antibody (Ab) so the task of
immune network is to ﬁnd an antigen Ag that will be suitable for Ab. The Ag-Ab

Predictive Analysis of Blood Gasometry Parameters

303

representation will partially determine which distance measure shall be used to
calculate their degree of interaction. Mathematically, the generalized shape of a
molecule (m), either an antibody (Ab) or an antigen (Ag), can be represented by
a set of real-valued coordinates m =< m1, m2, ..., mL >, which can be regarded
as a point in an L-dimensional real-valued space.
L

(abi − agi )2

D=

(1)

i=1

The aﬃnity between an antigen and an antibody is related to their distance
that can be estimated via any distance measure between two vectors, for example
the Euclidean or the Manhattan distance. If the coordinates of an antibody
are given by < ab1, ab2, ..., abL > and the coordinates of an antigen are given
by < ag1, ag2, ..., agL >, then the distance (D) between them is presented in
equation (1), which uses real-valued coordinates. The measure distances are
called Euclidean shape-spaces.
2.2

Learning Algorithm

In this article, we are basing on an algorithm that was proposed in the papers [2, 3] by de Castro and Von Zuben. Our modiﬁed version of immune net
algorithm [4] was adapted to cope with continuous signals prediction. The aforementioned algorithm is presented below. The learning algorithm lets building
of a set that recognizes and represents the data structural organization. The
more speciﬁc the antibodies, the less parsimonious the network (low compression rate), whilst the more generalist the antibodies, the more parsimonious the
network with relation to the number of antibodies. The suppression threshold
controls the speciﬁcity level of the antibodies, the clustering accuracy and network plasticity.
For each Agj ∈ Ag do
– Determine its aﬃnity fi,j , i = 1,...,N, to all Abi . fi,j = 1/Di,j , i = 1,...,N
– A subset Ab(n) which contains the n highest aﬃnity antibodies is selected;
– The n selected antibodies are going to clone proportionally to their antigenic
aﬃnity fi,j , generating a set C of clones
– The set C is submitted to a directed aﬃnity maturation process (guided
mutation) generating a mutated set C ∗ , where each antibody k from C ∗ will
suﬀer a mutation with a rate inversely proportional to the antigenic aﬃnity
fi,j of its parent antibody: the higher the aﬃnity, the smaller the mutation
rate:
– Determine the aﬃnity dk,j = 1/Dk,j among Agj and all the elements of C ∗ :
– From C ∗ , re-select ξ % of the antibodies with highest dk,j and put them into
a matrix Mj of clonal memory;
– Apoptosis: eliminate all the memory clones from Mj whose aﬃnity Dk,j > d:
– Determine the aﬃnity si,k among the memory clones:
– Clonal suppression: eliminate those memory clones whose si,k < s:

304

W. Wajs et al.

– Concatenate the total antibody memory matrix with the resultant clonal
memory Mj
– Determine the aﬃnity among all the memory antibodies from Abm:
– Network suppression: eliminate all the antibodies such that si,k < s:
– Build the total antibody matrix Ab ← [Ab(m); Ab(d)]
Where:
Ab - available antibody repertoire (Ab ∈ SN × L, Ab = Ab(d) ∪ Ab(m));
Ab(m) - total memory antibody repertoire (Ab(m) ∈ Sm × L, m ≤ N );
Ab(d) - d new antibodies to be inserted in Ab (Ab(d) ∈ Sd × L);
Ag - population of antigens (Ag ∈ Sm × L);
fj - vector containing the aﬃnity of all the antibodies Abi (i = 1,...N) with
relation to antigen Agj . The aﬃnity is inversely proportional to the Ag-Ab
distance;
S - similarity matrix between each pair Abi - Abj , with elements si,j (i,j =
1,...,N);
C - population of Nc clones generated from Ab(C ∈ SN L );
C ∗ - population C after the aﬃnity maturation process;
dj - vector containing the aﬃnity between every element from the set C ∗ with
Agj ;
ξ - percentage of the mature antibodies to be selected;
Mj - memory clone for antigen Agj (remaining from the process of clonal suppression);
Mj - resultant clonal memory for antigen Agj ;
d - natural death threshold;
s - suppression threshold.
Artiﬁcial Immune System response algorithm:
N0_Ag = length(Ag);
Ab = Ag;
for i = N0_Ag : N_SegmentationWindowWidth - 1
LenAg = length(Ab);
[M, vbD, Dn ] = Answer_Net( M, Ab, i, ds );
Ab=[Ab, M(1,i+1)];
end
The presented algorithm requires some explanations. There are important
operations that are responsible for suppressive steps. The steps are called clonal
suppression and network suppression, respectively. As far as a diﬀerent clone is
generated to each antigenic pattern presented, a clonal suppression is necessary
to eliminate intra-clonal self-recognizing antibodies, while a network suppression
is required to search for similarities between diﬀerent sets of clones. After the
learning phase, the network antibodies represent internal images of the antigens.

Predictive Analysis of Blood Gasometry Parameters

3

305

Example - Prediction of Blood Gasometry Parameters

In the given example use of the artiﬁcial immune network is presented in the prediction of the pH, pCO2 , pO2 and HCO3 parameters. Using a database, functioning for the few years on the Infant Intensive Care Ward of the Polish - American
Institute of Pediatrics Collegium Medicum Jagiellonian University of Cracow, an
artiﬁcial immune network was created, which task is prediction of the arterial
blood gasometry parameters (pH, pCO2 , pO2 , HCO3 ). In the process of training
previous values of gasometry, respirator settings and surfactant administration
were used as an input data.
Training process of the artiﬁcial immune network consists of two phases. First
phase is a learning of the artiﬁcial immune network. This phase proceeds accordingly to the algorithm presented previously.
Training set is comprised of blood gasometry parameters time series starting
from the time t. Time series are segmented as shown in Figure 1.

Fig. 1. pO2=f(t) time series segmentation process

Second phase tests the network’s generalization abilities by presenting it input
vectors from the test dataset.
3.1

Training Process

Dataset for the training process consisted of 480 samples, and parameters of the
artiﬁcial immune network were set to the following values:
n = 4, ξ = 20%, σd = 0.8, σs = 0.01
Stopping criterions of the training process were set to one hundred generations
Ngen = 100. One of the more important parameters, which has a major inﬂuence
on the immune network structure is a (σs) parameter. Changing value of the

306

W. Wajs et al.

suppression threshold (σs) inﬂuences the generalization abilities of the artiﬁcial
immune network.
3.2

Testing Process

Figure 2 presents example response of the network, for the time series, chosen
for the infants blood gasometry parameters data set.

Fig. 2. Time series prediction result of pO2 , pCO2 , pH and HCO3 parameters for one
of the patients

Legend:

4

Summary

In the paper application of artiﬁcial immune network in time series prediction
of medical data was presented. Prediction mechanism used in the work is basing on the paradigm stating that in the immune system during the response
there exist not only antigene - antibody connections but also antigene - antigene
connections, which role is control of antibodies activity. The mechanism turned
out to be an interesting technique useful in prediction of the time series. Future
work aims at increasing systems reliability by improving the algorithms used
and acquring further data of the infants hospitalization.

Predictive Analysis of Blood Gasometry Parameters

307

Fig. 3. Prediction error calculated for pO2 , pCO2 , pH and HCO3 parameters

Acknowledgements
This work was partially supported by the Polish Government through a Grant
No. 3T11E04227 from the State Committee of Scientiﬁc Research (KBN).

References
1. Kruczek, P. Assesment of neural networks methods usefulness in prediction of
premature neonates respiration insuﬃciency, Doctoral Dissertation, Collegium
Medicum, Jagiellonian University in Cracow, Cracow 2001.
2. De Castro, L. N., Von Zuben, F. J. (2000a) An Evolutionary Immune Network for
Data Clustering, Proc. of the IEEE SBRN, pp. 84-89.
3. De Castro, L. N., Von Zuben, F. J. (2000b) The Clonal Selection Algorithm with
Engineering Applications, GECCO’00 - Workshop Proceedings, pp. 36-37.
4. Wajs, W., Wais, P., Swiecicki, M., Wojtowicz, H. Artiﬁcial Immune System for
Medical Data Classiﬁcation, Proc. of the International Conference on Computational
Science 2005, Springer LNCS 3516, pp. 810-812, 2005.

