Cell Dormancy in Cellular Automata
Mohammad Ali Javaheri Javid and Rene te Boekhorst
School of Computer Science
Faculty of Engineering and Information Sciences
University of Hertfordshire
Hatfield, Hertfordshire AL10 9AB
United Kingdom
javaheri@javaheri.info, r.teboekhorst@herts.ac.uk

Abstract. This paper describes a novel implementation of a two-dimensional
Cellular Automaton (CA) by introducing a dormant state. An overview of the
use of CA’s in the field of Artificial Life reveals that certain crucial aspects of
biological realism have been sacrificed in favour of abstraction or have not been
considered at all. Conway’s famous “Game of Life” model includes certain
fundamental aspects of population dynamics, including the transition from
living state to dead state. But even the simplest biological system consists of
more stages than the binary state in the Game of Life. The aim of this research
is to build an extended CA model of natural biological systems by introducing a
dormant state and to investigate the effect of dormancy on simple population
dynamics.

1 Introduction
The rapidly growing field of Artificial Life is inspired by biological systems and
exploits computer technology to synthesize and simulate common processes and
characteristics of living organisms. Artificial Life can be used as powerful tool in a
variety of fields like psychology, biology, therapy, robotics, Artificial Intelligence,
evolutionary computation, art, etc [1]. An overview of the field reveals that some
aspects of biological systems lost in abstraction or simply have not been considered.
The famous Game of Life introduced by John Conway resembles the population
dynamics by including the transition from living state to dead state. However,
observations from developing real biological systems show that they go through more
stages than the binary states of the Game of Life. In this paper we consider a more
realistic CA model of simple biological systems in the theoretical framework of
Artificial Life by including and investigating the effect of dormancy on the dynamics
of an artificial population.

2 Background
Artificial Life considers living systems as dynamical systems in which life is an
emergent rather than an inherent property of those systems. This view departs from
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part III, LNCS 3993, pp. 367 – 374, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

368

M.A. Javaheri Javid and R. te Boekhorst

the classical biological framework which studies living systems by decomposing them
from top to down in order to understand the mechanism of life. The top-down
approach describes the mechanics of life in terms of complex, hierarchical
biochemical system. However, life cannot be understood completely in terms of its
parts, Instead, the exhibited properties of living systems are the result of interactions
between their components. Artificial Life, by adapting a bottom-up approach, tries to
synthesize living systems by combining separate elements or substances to form a
coherent whole [2] in a medium like computers or robots. In this approach, the whole
is different than the sum of its constituents.
2.1 Cellular Automaton and the Game of Life
Cellular Automata (CA) are dynamical systems in which both space and time are
represented as discrete units. They have been conceived by von Neumann and Ulam
to provide a formal framework for investigating the behaviour of complex, extended
systems [3] and to study the process of self-reproduction. Von Neumann was
interested in the essence of reproduction and not in any particular, implementation of
the process. Thus, he purposely abstracted away all the details of, say, how animals
reproduce, and instead concentrated on the simplest mathematical framework that
allows information to reproduce [4].
A cellular automaton consists of an array of cells, each of which can be in one of a
finite number of possible states (known as finite-state automaton), updated
synchronously or asynchronously [see 5] in discrete time steps, according to local
interaction rules. The state of a cell at the next time step is determined by the current
states of a surrounding neighbourhood of cells [6, 7].
Conway introduced the “Game of Life” as a very simple Boolean CA [8]. But
despite its simplicity, the “Game of Life” gives rise to complicated behaviour. The
cells in the Game of Life have two states, {0, 1}, which are interpreted as live or dead
states.
The rule structure of CA in the Game of Life is given a Moore Neighbourhood
(eight possible neighbours: N, W, S, E, NE, NW, SE and SW of a reference cell):
1.
2.

A cell becomes alive if three of its neighbours are alive.
A cell remains alive if two or three of its neighbours are alive, otherwise it
dies either from exposure (number of neighbours ≤ 1) or from
overcrowding (number of neighbours ≥ 4).

3 Life and Death in Biological and Synthesised Systems
Any attempt in creating new forms of life in artificial media must have clear idea
about the nature of life. Life can be studied at a molecular,- cellular,- organismal-,
population - and ecosystem level [9]. Next, one could try to extract key properties of
life which occur in all the stated levels. So far, attempts to define life are based on
listing such properties. Properties common to many lists include the abilities to
replicate, evolve, metabolize, respond to stimuli, and to repair damage [10].

Cell Dormancy in Cellular Automata

369

Problem arises from a lack of agreement on what should or should not be included
in the list [see 11, 12]. The properties that are considered to distinguish a living
system from a non-living one are not consistent enough to give an appropriate
overview of living systems. This raises the problem that if a system lacks the
properties of life, then the system could be either dead or “just not alive”. According
to our knowledge, now non-living system are not distinguished from dead systems in
the literature so far.

4 Dormancy
Dormancy is a well-known feature of many biological systems. Biological systems
(e.g. bacteria) due to stress conditions (say lack of nutrition) may enter into dormant
state with relatively low metabolism and ceased replication. As the environmental
condition changes, the system regains its active state properties like high metabolism
and reproduction. Dormancy is considered to have survival value in that it helps to
endure stressful circumstances. This metabolically inactive but reversible state may
occur at different levels. When it involves the whole organism, it is more likely to be
periodic like winter hibernation in animals and seasonal dormancy in plants. In some
cases dormancy is limited to reproductive organs like seeds and spores. In all cases,
the system regains its active state properties once the environmental conditions have
become favourable again.
Stress conditions to which many bacteria are being exposed apparently did not call
for the evolution of highly sophisticated resistant structures [13]. Bacteria in the
dormant state function at very low metabolic rates and do not undergo cell division.
When the stress is released, bacteria resume cell division. Thus, the transformation to
a dormant state considered here involves adaptive mechanisms but no morphological
differentiations such as sporulation [14, 15].

5 Dormancy in Artificial Systems
Reproduction is a fundamental character of living systems. In von Neumann's initial
thought-experiment, artificial reproduction was realized in a universal constructor
surrounded by components: given the description of any machine, it will locate the
proper parts and re-construct that machine. If given a description of itself, it will
construct itself [2].Thus, reproduction can be viewed as self-reconstruction, explained
in terms of interactions of simple elements and studied as logical principles
independent of its physical realization [16].
Von Neumann’s model and Langton’s loops assume certain minimal requirements
for a system to exhibit self-reconstruction. However, should a system be called
“dead” or “not alive” when these requirements are not met? In this paper, and inspired
by the existence of dormant stages in biological systems, we would like to extend
these notions by introducing an intermediate state in artificial systems. For this
purpose, we define a dormant state as a state in which a system fails to exhibit the
properties of living systems. However it is able to reverse to a previous state in which

370

M.A. Javaheri Javid and R. te Boekhorst

it is able to display these properties. Translating this definition in the context of a twodimensional CA given a Moore Neighbourhood, a dormant cell is a cell which in a
previous time step (t-1) was in the living state {1} and in the time (t) it is in the
dormant state {0.5}. Considering the state transition of dormant cells in biological
systems, we distinguish the following types of dormancy for cells in a CA:
Dormancy A: This is a static dormancy which maintains its dormant value of {0.5}
for all time steps.
1. A cell becomes alive if three of its neighbours are alive (reproduction).
2. A cell remains alive if two or three of its neighbours are alive otherwise it
enters into a dormant state.
These rules are identical to Conway’s Game of Life, the only difference being that
cells enter into dormant state (and therefore still occupy space) instead of dying (and
hence leave behind an open space).
Dormancy B: This is a type of dormancy which, due to ongoing environmental stress
can change a dormant state {0.5} into a dead state of {0}:
1. An empty cell becomes alive if three of its neighbours are alive
(reproduction), otherwise it stays empty
2. A cell stays alive if two or three of its neighbours are alive otherwise it
enters into the dormant state (maintenance)
3. A cell remains dormant if less than four of its neighbours are dormant
otherwise it dies.
Dormancy C: This includes a phase of dormancy which, due to favourable
environmental factors, regains the state of being alive {1}:
1.
2.
3.
4.

A cell becomes alive if three of its neighbours are alive, otherwise it stays
empty.
A cell remains alive if two or three of its neighbours are alive otherwise it
enters into dormant state.
A cell remains dormant if four of its neighbours are dormant and dies if it
has more than 4 neighbours.
A dormant cell becomes alive if two or three of its neighbours are dormant.

The rule number four retains the situation that due to environmental changes which
favour reproduction, dormant cells will be able to regain their live states.

6 Simulations and Results
The rule tables of the three systems were implemented in a CA environment with
wrap-around Moore neighbourhood to test the effect of a set of initial conditions. The
experimental initial states are the “glider” and a rectangular “block” with a perimeter
of 14 cells ( ). Figure 1 illustrates snapshots from some later stages in the pattern
development for dormancy type A starting from a “glider” and figure 2 shows the
same when starting with a “block”. Figures 3 to 6 show the results of runs for both

Cell Dormancy in Cellular Automata

371

initial configurations for respectively dormancy types B and C. In figures (1 to 6) the
final state is a state that the growth of cells continues unless there is no place to grow
(Full colour snapshots are available from:http://www.javaheri.info/dormancy.html).

Final state

Fig. 1. Development of patterns in dormancy type A for Glider initial state. White = dormant
cells, Grey = living cells.

Final state

Fig. 2. Development of patterns in dormancy type A for Block initial state

Final state

Fig. 3. Development of patterns in dormancy type B for Glider initial state

372

M.A. Javaheri Javid and R. te Boekhorst

Final state

Fig. 4. Development of patterns in dormancy type B for Block initial state

Final state

Fig. 5. Development of patterns in dormancy type C for Glider initial state

Final state

Fig. 6. Development of patterns in dormancy type C for Block initial state

The experiment conducted for ten consecutive time steps and compared with those
of the classical Game of Life. Simulations show that from the third time step the
Game of Life results in a fixed number of living cells, i.e. an attractor. The
development of the systems including dormancy (A, B and C) is very different.
Obviously, dormancy affects the population dynamics of artificial cells in a CA
environment. Figure 7 shows that the number of living cells is increased in systems
that include dormant states, which suggests survival value.

Cell Dormancy in Cellular Automata

373

The initial state plays an important role. If living cells are in close proximity of
each other - even if randomly located - their growth continues unless there is no place
to grow (final state). We found that for dormancy type A, cell growth occurs at the
edges of an area covered by dormant cells (figure 1 and 2). Furthermore, in dormancy
type A for Glider initial state, after time step {10}, the population splits into two parts
and only grows upwards (figure 1) which is reminiscent of a kind of directed tissue
growth. In a torpid CA environment, when the two parts meet each other, there is
explosion of population growth which accelerates the growth of dormant cells. We
also noticed that the final steady state for both Glider and Block initial states are
symmetric. As the figures 1 - 6 show, the final state of all dormancy types produce a
symmetric pattern.

Fig. 7. Dynamics of the number of living cells in different dormancy systems compared to
Conway’s Game of Life

7 Conclusions and Further Work
The Game of Life is a very simple two-dimensional CA which abstracts natural
biological systems into two discrete states. Inspired by natural biological systems we
implemented a Game of Life with an intermediate dormant state. This led to the
development of a model that describes different types. Analysis of the runs showed that
the introduction of dormant state significantly affects the population dynamics of living
cells. The increased number of living cells in different dormancies suggests that
dormancy has survival value for an artificial system in a CA environment. The shape of
the patterns depends on the initial configuration and their growth pattern is symmetric.
As possible further work for our dormancy models, we suggest investigating whether
there is relationship between number of dormant cells and living cells.

References
1. Langton C. G. and Shimohara K.: Artificial Life V: Proceedings of the Fifth International
Workshop on the Synthesis and Simulation of Living systems, The MIT Press/A Bradford
Book (1996).
2. Langton, C. G.: Artificial Life, In Langton C.G. (ed.) Artificial Life, Addison-Wesley,
(1989) 1- 47.
3. von Neumann, J.: Theory of Self-Reproducing Automata, University of Illinois Press,
Illinois. Edited and completed by A. W. Burks (1996).

374

M.A. Javaheri Javid and R. te Boekhorst

4. Flake, G.W.: The computational beauty of Nature, MIT press (1998).
5. Nehaniv, C. L.: Evolution in asynchronous cellular automata, Proceedings of the eighth
international conference on artificial life, (2002) 65-73.
6. Wolfram, S.: Universality and complexity in cellular automata. Physica D, Vol. 10
(1984)1-35.
7. Tofoli, T. and Margolus, N.: Cellular Automata Machines, The MIT Press, Cambridge,
Massachusetts (1987)
8. Gardner, M.: The fantastic combinations of John Conway’s new solitaire game “Life”.
Sci. Am. 223 (1970) 120–123.
9. Taylor Charles and Jefferson David: Artificial life as a tool for biological inquiry. In
Christopher G. Langton (ed), Artificial Life: an overview, Cambridge, Massachusetts,
1995. MIT Press (1995) 1-14.
10. Ray, T. S.: Artificial Life, In Renato Dulbecco, David Baltimore, François Jacob, Rita
Levi-Montalcini (eds), Frontiers of Life, Vol. 1, One The Origins of Life, Academic Press
(2001) 107-124.
11. Emmeche, C.: The Garden in the Machine, Princeton (1994).
12. Adami, C.: Introduction to Artificial Life. Springer-Verlag, Berlin (1998).
13. Heins, Y.: Survival and Dormancy of Microorganism, John Wiley & Sons (1987).
14. Roszak, D. B., and R. R. Colwell.: Survival strategies of bacteria in the natural
environments, Am. J. Pub. Health, Vol. 51 (1987) 365-379.
15. Barer, M.R. and Harwood, C.R. (1999) Bacterial viability and culturability, Adv. Microb.
Physiol., Vol. 41 (1999) 93 –137.
16. Heudin, J.C. (1998) Virtual Worlds, Proceedings of the First Int. Conf. on Virtual Worlds,
Vol. 1434, Springer-Verlag Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Berlin) (1998).

