A Web User Interface of the Security
Requirement Management Database
Based on ISO/IEC 15408
Daisuke Horie, Shoichi Morimoto, and Jingde Cheng
Department of Information and Computer Sciences,
Saitama University, Saitama, 338-8570, Japan
{horie, morimo, cheng}@aise.ics.saitama-u.ac.jp

Abstract. In order to support design and development of secure information systems, we have proposed a security requirement management database based on the international standard ISO/IEC 15408. Design and development of secure information systems concern issues of
information security engineering as well as software engineering. Our
security requirement management database will be useful in practices
only if we can provide its users with a highly usable user interface.
This paper presents the design and development of a web user interface of our security requirement management database. We analyze and
deﬁne usability requirements that the database should satisfy, present
design and implementation of the web user interface, and show some
examples for evaluating the interface from the viewpoint of usability
engineering.

1

Introduction

Nowadays, security is an important factor in information system development.
There is rising demand for security in information systems. Database technologies have successfully been applied to software engineering [9, 6, 3]. Similarly, we
can apply database technologies to information security engineering. Therefore,
we have proposed a concept for a database to support design and development of
secure information systems, named “ISEDS (Information Security Engineering
Database System) [7].” ISEDS can collect and manage the past knowledge and
experience for secure system design.
However, we had not suﬃciently discussed how to use ISEDS yet. In order
to achieve the purpose of ISEDS, it is necessary to clarify usage of ISEDS and
usability requirements for ISEDS from the viewpoint of usability engineering.
Moreover, it is desirable to implement a useful and convenient user interface
which satisﬁes the requirements. In this paper, we analyze and deﬁne the requirements and present design and implementation of a web user interface. Users
of ISEDS can easily and eﬀectively use it for ISEDS anytime and anywhere by
web browsers.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part IV, LNCS 3994, pp. 797–804, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

798

2

D. Horie, S. Morimoto, and J. Cheng

The Outline of ISEDS

We developed ISEDS based on the international standard ISO/IEC 15408, because ISO/IEC 15408 deﬁnes common criteria that should be applied to validate
a secure information system [5]. ISEDS can store the knowledge or experience in
security speciﬁcations for secure system design according to the common criteria.
The data can be a guideline to design and development of secure information
systems.

Specification
Contents

Common Criteria
Classes

Threats
Families
TOEs
(Information Systems)

Security Objectives
Components
Security Functions
Elements

Fig. 1. The entity-relationship diagram of ISEDS

ISEDS has the structure as shown in Fig. 1. It is the entity-relationship diagram in relational notation [2]. Below, an italic word denotes a schema or its
attribute in Fig. 1.
Applicants who apply to obtain the evaluation of ISO/IEC 15408 have to
make and submit the speciﬁcation document called ‘security target’ or ‘protection proﬁle’ to the evaluation organization. A security target, ST for short, must
describe the range of the target system which is evaluated (target of evaluation,
TOE for short). A protection proﬁle, PP for short, is a template for an ST.
The schema TOE has attributes that are written to an ST or a PP, i.e., TOE
Name, TOE Abstract, Author, Small Classiﬁcation, Middle Classiﬁcation, and
Large Classiﬁcation. The classiﬁcations denote TOE kinds. So far, Large Classiﬁcation is only ‘IT products.’ Middle Classiﬁcation is ‘software,’ ‘hardware,’
‘middleware,’ and so on. Small Classiﬁcation shows the concrete TOE kind, e.g.,
‘Database,’ ‘Firewall,’ ‘IC card,’ ‘OS,’ ‘Copier,’ and so on. In addition to these
attributes, we deﬁned Document Type and Document File. Document Type is a
ﬂag for distinguishing an ST or a PP. Document File is an attribute for storing
the binary ﬁle of the ST or PP.

A Web User Interface of the Security Requirement Management Database

799

An ST or a PP must describe threats assumed in its category. Next, the documents must describe security objectives which oppose these threats. Thirdly,
the documents must describe security criteria required for achievement of these
objectives. In particular, the required security criteria must be quoted from the
security functional requirements which are deﬁned in ISO/IEC 15408 Part 2. For
the implementation of security functional requirements, the documents must also
describe that they are actually implemented as what functions in systems. These
functions are called a TOE security function, TSF for short. TOE relates to one
or more Threat s, Security Objectives, and Security Functions. The schemata
Threat, Security Objective, and Security Function have their ID numbers, abbreviation names, formal names, texts of the deﬁnition on the documents, and
foreign keys to TOE. ISEDS can store such data of the documents.
Security functional requirements of Part 2 have a hierarchical structure which
is composed by classes, families, components, and elements. Each element is an
indivisible security requirement, and describes a security functional requirement
exactly and directly. A component is a group of elements, and may be mutually
dependent on the other components. A family is a group of components, and
a class is a group of families. The schemata of security functional requirements
have the attributes deﬁned in ISO/IEC 15408 Part 2. ISEDS can also store such
data of the criteria.

3

The Web User Interface of ISEDS

ISEDS can achieve its purpose only if we can provide its users with a usable
user interface. Thus, we examine requirements to ISEDS from the viewpoint of
software engineering, information security engineering, and usability engineering.
In compliance with the requirements we have implemented the prototype of the
user interface.
3.1

Requirements for ISEDS

We herein estimate and enumerate requirements for ISEDS.
1. From the viewpoint of software engineering, ISEDS must structurally collect and manage data of knowledge or experience for secure system design.
Requirement 1-1: Users must be able to structurally refer to the data using
ISEDS.
Requirement 1-2: Users must be able to update the data using ISEDS.
2. From the viewpoint of information security engineering, ISEDS must provide useful information for secure system design and development.
Requirement 2-1: Users must be able to know what systems comply with ISO/IEC
15408 using ISEDS.
Users may refer to what TOEs exist. That is, the users may want to search
whether or not the TOEs in ﬁrewall category exist. Moreover, users may refer to
what threats are assumed in a category and what security objectives, security

800

D. Horie, S. Morimoto, and J. Cheng

functions, or criteria of ISO/IEC 15408 are required in a category. For example,
the users may refer to what threats are assumed in the TOEs of ﬁrewall category.
Requirement 2-2: Users must be able to know what security criteria are in
ISO/IEC 15408 using ISEDS.
Users may refer to what criteria exist. The users may refer to what criteria
about user data protection are. Moreover, users may refer to what categories,
threats, or objectives require a criterion. The users may refer what systems
require the criterion FTA TSE.1. In addition, users may refer to hierarchical
structure of ISO/IEC 15408. The users may refer to which criteria are included
in the class FTA.
Requirement 2-3: Users must be able to know what threats are in the past systems
using ISEDS.
Users may refer to what threats exist. The users may want to search whether or
not the threats about spooﬁng exist. Moreover, users may refer to what categories
assume a threat and what security objectives, security functions, or criteria can
resist a threat. The user may refer to what security functions can resist spooﬁng.
Requirement 2-4: Users must be able to know what security countermeasures
are in the past systems using ISEDS.
Users may refer to what security objectives exist. The users may want to
search whether or not security objectives about concealment of IP addresses exist. Moreover, users may refer to what categories or threats require an objective
and what security criteria are required for achievement of an objective. The users
may refer to what security criteria are required for concealment of IP addresses.
At least, ISEDS should satisfy the above requirements. In order to provide useful functions satisfying the requirements, it is necessary to consider usability
engineering. ISO 9241-11 deﬁnes that usability is extent to which a product
can be used by speciﬁed users to achieve speciﬁed goals with eﬀectiveness, eﬃciency and satisfaction in a speciﬁed context of use [4]. The usability consists of
four elements, i.e., eﬀectiveness, eﬃciency, satisfaction, and context of use. The
eﬀectiveness is accuracy and completeness with which users achieve speciﬁed
goals. The eﬃciency shows resources expended in relation to the accuracy and
completeness with which users achieve goals. The satisfaction is freedom from
discomfort, and positive attitudes towards the use of the product. The context
of use shows users, tasks, equipment (hardware, software and materials), and the
physical and social environments in which a product is used. ISEDS’s interface
should also satisfy these requirements for usability.
3.2

Functions Provided by the Web User Interface

We have implemented a prototype user interface satisfying the above requirements. The user interface provides the following functions.

A Web User Interface of the Security Requirement Management Database

801

Function 1: Certiﬁed System’s Speciﬁcations Search; the function to refer to
all or speciﬁc data of certiﬁed system speciﬁcations. This function satisﬁes the
requirements 1-1, 2-1, 2-3, and 2-4.
Function 2: Common Criteria Search; the function to refer to all or speciﬁc security criteria in ISO/IEC 15408. This function satisﬁes the requirements 1-1 and
2-2.
Function 3: Free Word Search; the function to freely retrieve data in ISEDS. This
function satisﬁes the eﬃciency and satisfaction.
Function 4: Update Function; the function to update the data in ISEDS. This
function satisﬁes the requirement 1-2.
The eﬀectiveness is satisﬁed by all functions. Moreover, we implemented the
user interface using web technologies so as to satisfy the context of use, i.e.,
the requirement for ‘anytime and anywhere.’ The user interface is implemented
with PHP, because it can dynamically generate web pages and has high aﬃnity
with PostgreSQL which implements ISEDS. The user interface generates SQL
sentences based on user’s requests and sends the SQL sentences to ISEDS. Next,
the interface receives data from ISEDS and legibly displays the results. Users
who are not well informed about SQL can easily and ubiquitously use ISEDS
with web-browsers. Thus, the user interface satisﬁes the context of use.
3.3

Examples

We show some examples using the user interface.

Certified System’s
Specifications Search
Common Criteria Search

Display TOE list
Display Threat list
Display Security Objective list
Display Security Function list
Display Element list
Display Component list
Display Family list
Display Class list

Free Word Search
Update Function
Fig. 2. The top page of the user interface

Example 1: If users require retrieval such as the requirements 2-1, 2-3 or 2-4;
Click the required link from Certiﬁed System’s Speciﬁcations Search menus in
Fig. 2. All of the data corresponding to the selected menu will be displayed as
Fig. 3. Moreover, one can narrow the range to input a speciﬁc keyword into the
text box, select the radio button of the attribute including the speciﬁc keyword,
and push the button ‘search more.’ For example, click the link ‘TOE List.’ All
data of TOEs will be displayed. Input a keyword ‘ﬁrewall’ into the text box,

802

D. Horie, S. Morimoto, and J. Cheng

Fig. 3. The result display in the user interface

select the radio button ‘Small Classiﬁcation,’ and push the button ‘search more
TOEs.’ Then, data of documents in the ﬁrewall category will be displayed.
Example 2: If users require such as the requirement 2-2;
Click the required link from Common Criteria Search menus in Fig. 2. All of the
data corresponding to the selected menu will be displayed as Fig. 3. Moreover,
one can narrow the range as well as the example 1. For example, click the link
‘Element List.’ All data of elements displayed. Input a keyword ‘recording’ into
the text box, select the radio button ‘Deﬁnition,’ and push the button ‘search
more elements.’ Then, data of elements including the keyword ‘recording’ in the
attribute ‘Deﬁnition’ will be displayed.
Example 3: If users require further retrieval;
Click the link ‘Free Word Search’ in Fig. 2. Users can freely choose the items
to display and to narrow retrieval range. For example, click the link ‘Free Word
Search,’ select the radio button ‘Small Classiﬁcation’ of ‘TOE’ for narrowing
the range, check the check boxes ‘Threat name’ and ‘Deﬁnition’ of ‘Threat’
for display, input a keyword ‘ﬁrewall’ into the text box, and push the button
‘Search.’ Then, the threat names and deﬁnitions of threats which are assumed
in the ﬁrewall category will be displayed.
Example 4: If users want to update the data;
Click the link of ‘Update Function’ in Fig. 2. If the users have no authority to
update, they must get their account and password. Moreover, the users need to
make a security speciﬁcation document ﬁle for updating data according to STs
or PPs. After that, click the link ‘Update Function,’ input the user name and
password, push the button ‘Reference,’ select the document ﬁle, and push the

A Web User Interface of the Security Requirement Management Database

803

button ‘Upload.’ The administrator will extract data from the uploaded ﬁle and
update the data.

4

Discussion

We implemented the prototype user interface which has four functions. Function
1 supplies to easily and eﬀectively retrieve the required data of design in secure
system’s speciﬁcations. Function 2 supplies to easily and eﬀectively retrieve the
required data of security criteria in ISO/IEC 15408. Function 3 supplies to freely
retrieve the relationship of secure system design data. Function 4 supplies to
update the data in ISEDS and to store secure system design data which are
newly deﬁned by users. These functions satisfy the requirements that we deﬁned
for ISEDS.
Furthermore, we evaluate the user interface from the viewpoint of usability
engineering. There are two methods in usability evaluation, i.e., quantitative
evaluation and qualitative evaluation. The quantitative evaluation is a questionnaire and the qualitative evaluation is heuristic evaluation or user tests [8]. Since
it is diﬃcult to perform questionnaires and user tests now, we evaluate the user
interface with heuristic evaluation. The user interface satisﬁes ﬁve out of ten
usability heuristics. ISEDS and its interface were implemented in a server which
has suitable performance. Thus, the interface satisﬁes ‘match between system
and the real world,’ one of the heuristic principles. Function 3 satisﬁes ‘user control and freedom.’ We uniﬁed the usage and display in every function. Therefore,
the interface satisﬁes ‘consistency and standards’ and ‘recognition rather than
recall.’ Since we prepared some explanations of the usage in the web pages, it
also satisﬁes ‘help and documentation.’
However, the interface does not satisﬁes the other heuristic principles ‘visibility of system status,’ ‘error prevention,’ ‘ﬂexibility and eﬃciency of use,’ ‘aesthetic and minimalist design,’ and ‘help users recognize, diagnose, and recover
from errors.’ For example, users may refer to what the other threats that are
included in categories assuming a certain threat are. The users may also refer
to what security functions are implemented in categories which require a certain
criterion. The user interface cannot generate SQL sentences for such operations
at once now. Users must have many intricate steps to execute such operations.
We need to carefully discuss further improvement of the user interface for the
eﬃciency and satisfaction.

5

Concluding Remarks

We have presented a web user interface of ISEDS. We designed, implemented,
and evaluated the web user interface according to the requirements which are
analyzed and deﬁned from the viewpoint of software engineering, information
security engineering, and usability engineering. Users can easily and eﬀectively
refer to secure system design data in ISEDS with web browsers. Therefore, ISEDS
and its user interface can support design and development of secure information
systems.

804

D. Horie, S. Morimoto, and J. Cheng

Because the user interface has been evaluated only with qualitative method,
we should also quantitatively evaluate it. Moreover, the structure of STs, PPs,
security requirements, and the security functional requirements can easily, exactly and rigorously be expressed in XML. Therefore, we are improving ISEDS
as a native XML database into which users can directly store the XML documents and are developing its web service. Moreover, ISEDS is deﬁcient in some
attributes of ISO/IEC 15408, STs, and PPs now, e.g., creation dates of STs or
PPs, evaluation assurance levels, and security assurance requirements deﬁned in
ISO/IEC 15408 Part 3. We are discussing whether or not these attributes are
necessary.

References
1. Advanced Information Systems Engineering Laboratory, Saitama University.: ISEDS: Information Security Engineering Database System. http://
www.aise.ics.saitama-u.ac.jp/
2. Chen, P.: The Entity-Relationship Model - Toward a Uniﬁed View of Data. ACM
Transactions on Database Systems (TODS), Volume 1, Issue 1, pp. 9-36 (1976)
3. International Software Benchmarking Standard Group.: Empirical Databases of
Metrics Collected from Software Projects. http://www.isbsg.org/
4. ISO 9241-11 standard.: Ergonomic Requirements for Oﬃce Work with Visual Display Terminals – Part 11: Guidance on Usability (1998)
5. ISO/IEC 15408 standard.: Information Technology - Security Techniques - Evaluation Criteria for IT Security (1999)
6. Jiao, J. and Tseng, M.: A Requirement Management Database System for Product
Deﬁnition. Journal of Integrated Manufacturing Systems, Vol. 10, No. 3, pp. 146-154
(1999)
7. Morimoto, S., Horie, D., and Cheng, J.: A Security Requirement Management Database Based on ISO/IEC 15408, in Computational Science and its Applications ICCSA 2006, International Conference, Glasgow, UK, May 8-11, 2006, Proceedings.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer-Verlag, May (2006)
8. Nielsen, J. and Molich, R.: Heuristic Evaluation of User Interfaces. Proceedings
of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems: Empowering
people, pp. 249-256, Seattle, WA, April (1990)
9. Software Engineering Institute.: Software Engineering Information Repository.
http://seir.sei.cmu.edu/large

