Dynamic Contaminant Identification in Water
Craig C. Douglas1,2 , J. Clay Harris3 , Mohamed Iskandarani4,
Chris R. Johnson5 , Robert J. Lodder3 , Steven G. Parker5, Martin J. Cole5 ,
Richard Ewing6 , Yalchin Efendiev6 , Raytcho Lazarov6, and Guan Qin6
1

University of Kentucky, Department of Computer Science, 773 Anderson Hall,
Lexington, KY 40506-0046, USA
2
Yale University, Department of Computer Science, P.O. Box 208285
New Haven, CT 06520-8285, USA
douglas-craig@cs.yale.edu
3
University of Kentucky, Department of Chemistry, Lexington, KY, 40506 USA
claymay27@gmail.com, lodder@contactincontext.org
4
University of Miami, Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science,
4600 Rickenbacker Causeway, Miami, FL 33149-1098, USA
mohamed.iskandarani@rsmas.miami.edu
5
University of Utah, Scientiﬁc Computing and Imaging Institute,
Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA
{crj, sparker, mjc}@cs.utah.edu
6
Texas A&M University, Institute for Scientiﬁc Computation, 612 Blocker,
3404 TAMU, College Station, TX 77843-3404, USA
{richard ewing, guan.qin}@tamu.edu, {efendiev, lazarov}@math.tamu.edu

Abstract. We describe how we plan to convert a traditional data collection sensor and ocean model into a DDDAS enabled system for identifying contaminants and then reacting with diﬀerent models, simulations,
and sensing strategies in a symbiotic manner. The sensor is just as useful
in water as it would be on Mars for material identiﬁcation. A successful
terrestrial application of the sensor will lead to many new applications
of the device and possible technology transfer to the private sector.

1

Introduction

The Solid-State Spectral Imager (SSSI) is a new instrument to gather hydrological and geological data and to perform chemical analyses. It is suitably small
and light to mount in remote sensing applications, and can scan ranges of up to
10 meters. Using a laser-diode array, photodetectors, and on-board processing,
the SSSI combines innovative spectroscopic integrated sensing and processing
with a hyperspace data analysis algorithm [1].
Ultraviolet (UV), visible, and near-infrared laser diodes illuminate target
points using a precomputed sequence, and a photodetector records the amount
of reﬂected light. For each point illuminated, the resulting reﬂectance data is
processed to separate the contribution of each wavelength of light and classify
the substances present.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part III, LNCS 3993, pp. 393–400, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

394

C.C. Douglas et al.

Fig. 1. SSSI emiter and collected spectrum

Several prototype implementations of SSSI have been developed and are being tested at the University of Kentucky. A full-scale implementation of SSSI
is being designed with 25 lasers in discrete wavelengths between 300 nm and
2400 nm with 5 rows of each wavelength. This full-scale version is designed to
consume less than 4 Watts and weigh less than 600 grams. The rugged laser
diodes and detectors allow SSSI to be packaged in a small, rugged, space qualiﬁed package. For water monitoring in the open ocean, imaging capability is
not needed, and a single row of diodes (with one diode at each frequency) is
suﬃcient, and power consumption of the optical system can be reduce to approximately one watt.
The SSSI combines near-infrared, visible, and ultraviolet spectroscopy with a
powerful statistical classiﬁcation algorithm to detect and identify contaminants
in water. Virtually every organic compound (e.g., polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, paraﬃns, carboxylic acids, and sulfonic acids) has a near-IR spectrum
that can be measured, including two classes of terrestrial biomarkers, lipids, and
amino acids. Near-infrared spectra consist of overtones and combinations of fundamental mid-infrared bands, giving near-infrared spectra a powerful ability to
identify organic compounds while still permitting some penetration of light into
samples [2].
To further increase the signal-to-noise ratio, the SSSI uses Walsh-Hadamard
or CRISP encoding sequences of light pulses. In a Walsh-Hadamard sequence
multiple laser diodes illuminate the target at the same time, increasing the number of photons received at the photo detector. The Walsh- Hadamard sequence
can be demultiplexed to individual wavelength responses with a matrix-vector
multiply [3]. Beneﬁts of generating encoding sequences by this method include
equivalent numbers of on and oﬀ states for each sequence and a constant number
of diodes in the on state at each resolution point of a data acquisition period.

Fig. 2. SSSI processing

Dynamic Contaminant Identiﬁcation in Water

395

Fig. 3. Spectral element grid showing elemental partition of the New York/Newark
Bay estuarine system

CRISP encoding uses orthogonal pseudorandom codes with unequal numbers
of on and oﬀ states. The duty cycle of each code is diﬀerent, and the codes are
selected to deliver the highest duty cycles at the wavelengths where the most
light is needed and lowest duty cycle where the least light is needed to make the
sum of all of the transmitted (or reﬂected) light from the samples proportional
to the analyte concentration of interest.
The initial deployment of the sensor and model will focus on estuarine regions
where water quality monitoring is critical for human health and environmental
monitoring. The authors will capitalize on an existing conﬁguration of the model
to the Hudson-Raritan Estuary to illustrate the model’s capabilities. As shown
in Fig. 3 the model domain includes the Lower and Middle Hudson River, the
Hudson-Raritan Estuary, Newark Bay and Long Island sound. In the initial
experimentation stage only a portion of the grid will be for fast prototyping of
the diﬀerent elements in the DDDAS system.
The forward model is based on the two-dimensional Spectral Element Ocean
Model (SEOM-2D) which solves the shallow water equations:
ut + u · ∇u + f × u + g∇η =

∇ · (hν∇u)
τw − τd
+
ρh
h
ht + ∇ · (hu) = Q

(1)
(2)

where h = H + η is the layer thickness, and H and η are the resting depth
and interface displacement, respectively, u is the depth-average velocity; g is the
gravity coeﬃcient, f is the Coriolis parameter, ν the viscosity, τ w the surface
wind stress, τ b the bottom drag, and Q is an area mass source. An advectiondiﬀusion equation tracks the evolution of passive tracers:
Tt + u · ∇T =

∇ · (αh∇T )
h

(3)

where α is the diﬀusion coeﬃcient, and T stands for a generic tracer. The model
can be forced through winds, tides, and lateral injection of mass at inﬂow boundaries (e.g. river input).

396

C.C. Douglas et al.

The spectral element discretization is an h-p type ﬁnite element method which
relies on relatively high degree (5-8th) polynomials to approximate the solution within each element. The main features of the spectral element method
are: geometric ﬂexibility due to its unstructured grids, its dual paths to convergence: exponential by increasing polynomial degree or algebraic via increasing
the number of elements, dense computational kernels with sparse inter-element
synchronization, and excellent scalability on parallel machines.
A sample tidal calculation is performed using a grid that encompasses the
Newark/New York bays regions, the Long-Island sound, and a substantial portion of the Hudson River. The model is forced with tidal elevation obtained from
tide gauges located on the eastern edge of the Long-Island sound and in Sandy
Hook.
The SSSI is reprogramable in the ﬁeld. When an interesting chemical trace
is discovered, the reaction from the application overseeing the SSSI is two-fold:
(a) invoke an appropriate application, and (b) request that the SSSI look for
speciﬁc other chemical traces. There is a symbiotic relationship between the
sensor network and the application simulation that is typical in a DDDAS.
Consider ﬁnding gasoline or diesel fuel in a body of water. This can be a sign
of innocuos pollution from a boat. Depending on what other traces are found,
it could be an indication that a boat sank recently nearby. The SSSI needs to
be reprogrammed in the latter case and a search and locate application must be
invoked to ﬁnd the sunken boat. Emergency services, the coast guard, and the
news media may also need to be automatically informed of progress.
The SSSI has a modest amount of memory and computing capacity on board.
Some of the computing and decision making will be put onto the SSSI over time,
thus reducing the amount of time needed to reprogram the device.

2

Data Assimilation and Accurate Predictions

Data collection is initiated by a signal sent to the serial interface of the SSSI. All
data is collected by the SSSI using a phototransistor connected to an operational
ampliﬁer circuit. The analog signal is converted with an on-board 0.5-5 V analog
to digital converter at 12 bits. Each scan consists of 256 data points collected in
both the on and oﬀ states of 25 Hadamard encoded light sequences. The result is
50 total states with 12800 data points collected for each scan. The corresponding
values of the on and oﬀ states for each Hadamard coded light sequence are subtracted to remove ambient light from the data. After subtraction, the resulting
256 data points from each of the 25 Hadamard coded light sequences are then
averaged to obtain 25 16 bit intensity values. The ﬁnal 25 16 bit resulting values
are exported to Matlab via the serial connection to a graphical user interface
where data undergoes a reverse Hadamard transform to obtain intensity values
for each of the 25 diodes.
A single scan with MatLab processing takes less than 300 ms. The switching
speed of our transistors within the SSSI is signiﬁcantly slow that this prototype
requires a 5 μs delay before each datum reading for signal stabilization after the

Dynamic Contaminant Identiﬁcation in Water

397

lights have switched states. Both times will be signiﬁcantly speeded up if we
move to a commercial quallity device.
We can use the data to improve our prediction of the contaminant transport by
updating the initial conditions. Here, initial condition refers to the concentration
distribution at some previous time step. This update reduces the computational
errors associated with incorrect initial data and improves the predictions. We
consider contaminant transport described by (1)-(3). Initial data is sought in a
ﬁnite dimensional space. Using the ﬁrst set of measurements, the approximation
of the initial data is recovered. As new data are incorporated into the simulator, the initial data is updated using an objective function. We note that the
formulated problem is ill-posed because there are fewer sensors than the ﬁnite
dimensional space describing the initial data. Consequently, the objective function is set up based on both a measurement error as well as a penalization term
that depends on the prior knowledge about the solution at previous time steps
(or initial data). The prior information is refreshed using the updated initial
data. The penalization constants depend on time of update and can be associated with the relative diﬀerence between simulated and measured values. In the
simulations, both the prior and penalization constants change in time.
To account for the errors (uncertainties) associated with sensor measurements,
we consider an initial data update within a Bayesian framework. The posterior
distribution is set up based on measurement errors and prior information. This
posterior distribution is complicated and involves the solutions of partial diﬀerential equations. We could use a Metropolis-Hasting Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) method to generate samples from the posterior distributions. However, a sampling with MCMC is expensive since it requires iterative steps and
the acceptance rate is typically low. We developed an approach that combines
least squares with a Bayesian approach that gives a high acceptance rate. In
particular, we can prove that rigorous sampling can be achieved by sampling the
sensor data from the known distribution, thus obtaining various realizations of
the initial data. Our approach has similarities with the Ensemble Kalman Filter
approach, which can also be adapted to an initial data update. These issues will
be discussed in detail elsewhere.

3

Chemical Identification Process

A programmable, networked, portable low-cost mil-spec sensor and network for
DDDAS in extreme aqueous environments must be able to perform chemical
analyses to be eﬀective in terrorist attack and accident scenarios. Most oil sensing
in the oceans is done by remote sensor systems [4].
A network of sensors immersed in the ocean water (either on ﬁxed buoys or
as roving sensors) eliminates many of the problems with remote sensing. Bad
weather does not aﬀect immersed sensors. A roving sensor can be programmed
to investigate beaches, weeds or debris. The SSSI is laser ﬂuorosensor when a
ﬁlter is placed over the detector, so it can positively discriminate oil on most

398

C.C. Douglas et al.

Fig. 4. Identiﬁcation

backgrounds. Light scattering measurements reveal droplet size, and spectral
transmission and reﬂectance reveal droplet chemistry.
Once the spectrum of a sample has been collected, it must be classiﬁed to
determine the substance present. The Bootstrap Error-adjusted Single-sample
Technique (BEST) [5] is the analytical basis of SSSI, and the foundation for the
chemical library. Spectra recorded at n wavelengths are represented as single
points in a n-dimensional hyperspace. In this scheme, similar samples produce
similar spectra that project as “probability orbitals” or “clusters” into similar
regions of hyperspace. The BEST metric is a clustering technique for exploring
these distributions of spectra in hyperspace.
A sample spectrum is compared to each substance in a biogeochemical and industrial library based on its direction and distance, measured in standard deviation (SD) units, from the known substances. BEST handles asymmetric standard
deviations surrounding each substance nonparametrically, allowing very precise
discrimination. A sample within 3 SD units of a substance is considered to be
composed of the matching substance. Any substance more than 3 SD units away
from any known substance is considered an unknown substance.
For a given library entry, the BEST algorithm can be suitably approximated
using multiple linear regression (MLR) to substantially reduce computational
requirements (see Fig. 4). In this implementation, BEST SD units are precalculated before the SSSI is deployed in a large number of directions from the
population means, and MLR is used to ﬁt the standard deviation contours as a
function of direction. With a suﬃcient number of terms (in the example, 10th
order with cross terms), the MLR version of the algorithm can predict BEST
distances to within 5% of the true value.
Oil droplets can travel nearly anywhere in the ocean. The droplet size exerts
a major eﬀect on droplet motion [6]. The rise velocity of oil droplets extends
from about 2.5 × 10−7 m/s for a diameter of 2 μm to 4.3 × 10−3 m/s for a
diameter of 260 μm. Droplets traveling at 2.5 × 10−7 m/s will ascend only 0.001
m and 0.02 m, over periods of 1 hour and 24 hours, while over equivalent periods, droplets ascending at 4.3 × 10−3 m/s will climb 15 m and 370 m. In the
meantime, a vertical diﬀusivity of 51 cm2 /s will distribute oil droplets (equally
upward and downward) about 6 m and 30 m over the same time. Therefore, the

Dynamic Contaminant Identiﬁcation in Water

399

smallest oil droplets act as though they are neutrally buoyant (transported only
by diﬀusion), while the largest droplets are advected largely by their buoyancy.
Using multiple linear regression the BEST classiﬁcation algorithm can be
performed in situ, allowing a rover to classify many samples, only notifying
the simulation when an interesting substance is found. An initial library can
be computed based on substances likely to be found in the target environment.
When a substance unknown to the BEST library is found, the sensor can sample
nearby points with similar spectra to create a new library entry for the new
substance. Scientists can determine the type of substance present by further
analyzing raw spectra of the substance provided by SSSI and by using data from
their other instruments, apply these data to update the simulation. The SSSI
chemical library will comprise substances expected to be in the environment in
which the SSSI operates.

4

Matlab and SCIRun Environments

The SCIRun-Matlab interface is designed such that SCIRun [7] detects at runtime whether Matlab is available. Hence, SCIRun does not have to be linked
against any of the Matlab libraries. The way the interfacing is accomplished is
thorugh a virtual shell. SCIRun accesses Matlab through stdin and stdout and
ﬁles that are written to a temporary directory. The whole process of translating,
saving, and opening ﬁles is hidden from the user and is initiated automatically.
Data translation is also seamless for things like 0 or 1 based indices.

Fig. 5. SCIRun running the SSSI-cid module

400

C.C. Douglas et al.

The module is designed in such a way that once the Module is executed it will
keep Matlab running in its internal engine, hence re-executing the module will
allow to access the variables that were left by a previous execution cycle. Hence
the Matlab Engine can be used as well for iterative processes. An example of
the matlabinterface module is depicted in Fig. 5. The ﬁgure shows how matlab
is integrated into the dataﬂow structure of SCIRun. Once the ”Matlab” module receives all the dataﬂow objects that are connected to it, the speciﬁc code
in Matlab is executed and now dataﬂow objects are created for the dataﬂow
downstream.
Hence, moving the current Matlab interface for the SSSI sensor to a problem
solving environment like SCIRun is trivial.

5

Conclusions

We described how we plan to convert a traditional data collection sensor and
ocean model into a DDDAS enabled system for identifying contaminants and
then reacting with diﬀerent models, simulations, and sensing strategies in a
symbiotic manner. A drone is being built so that the SSSI will be mobile. We
are already able to make measurements and are proceeding to program the
system for remote sensing and steering. Libraries will be created for interesting
contaminants during the coming year that we will use to reprogram the SSSI
dynamically while we switch to an appropriate simulation for the contaminants
identiﬁed to explore what else might be in the vicinity of the SSSI.

References
1. Lowell, A., Ho, K.S., Lodder, R.A.: Hyperspectral imaging of endolithic bioﬁlms
using a robotic probe. Contact in Context 1 (2002) 1–10
2. Dempsey, R.J., Davis, D.G., R. G. Buice, J., Lodder, R.A.: Biological and medical
applications of near-infrared spectrometry. Appl. Spectrosc. 50 (1996) 18A–34A
3. Silva, H.E.B.D., Pasquini, C.: Dual-beam near-infrared Hadamard. Spectrophotometer Appl. Spectrosc. 55 (2001) 715–721
4. Fingas, M.F., Brown, C.E.: Review of oil spill remote sensing. In: Spillcon 2000,
Darwin, Australia (2000)
5. Dieter, W., Lodder, R.A., James E. Lumpp, J.: Scanning for extinct astrobiological
residues and current habitats (SEARCH) using integrated computational imaging.
IEEE Aerospace and Electronic Systems (2006) (in press)
6. (OSB), O.S.B.: Oil Spill Dispersants: Eﬃcacy and Eﬀects (2005). The National
Academies Press, Washington, DC (2005)
7. Johnson, C.R., Parker, S., Weinstein, D., Heﬀernan, S.: Component-based problem
solving environments for large-scale scientiﬁc computing. Concur. Comput.: Practice
and Experience 14 (2002) 1337–1349

