Eﬃcient Unilateral Authentication Mechanism
for MIPv6
Yoon-Su Jeong1 , Bong-Keun Lee2 , Keon-Myung Lee1 , and Sang-Ho Lee1
1

Department of Computer Science, Chungbuk National University, Chungju,
Chungbuk, Korea
bukmunro@netsec.cbnu.ac.kr, {kmlee, shlee}@chungbuk.ac.kr
2
Department of Multimedia Computer, Busan Kyungsang College,
Chungbuk, Korea
rbk@bsks.ac.kr
Abstract. We present a unilateral authentication protocol for protecting IPv6 networks against abuse of mobile IPv6 primitives. The proposed
protocol imposes minimal computational requirements on mobile nodes,
uses as few messages as possible. It is also easy to implement, economic
to deploy and lightweight in use. We formally veriﬁes the correctness of
the protocol using the ﬁnite-state analysis tool mur φ, which has been
used previously to analyze hardware designs and security properties of
several protocols.

1

Introduction

Recently mobility technology is regarded as indispensable feature in internet area
according to widely use of mobile nodes such as notebook computer, internet
accessible mobile phone. Mobile IPv6 is a key protocol that supports mobility in
IPv6 network. But Mobile IPv6 speciﬁcation does not specify how to gain access
to network when mobile node is away from its home.
The most diﬃcult adoption issue for any form of authenticated Mobile IPv6
is reliance on authentication infrastructure. Recent Diameter speciﬁcation deals
with IPv6 mobility support [1]. However, The [1] does not state any speciﬁc protocol to be used between mobile node and AAA client. This paper proposes eﬃcient user authentication to provide a minimum level of unilateral authentication
of binding update. We assume that MIPv6 is used to authenticate the user and
Diameter conveys MIPv6 authentication message between foreign AAA(AAAF)
and home AAA(AAAH). In this paper, diameter is responsible for supporting
IP mobility features such as home agent assignment and key distribution which
is needed to securely send BU message to its home agent.

2

Related Works

Brandner, Mankin and Schiller [4] proposed a framework called Purpose Built
Keys. An advantage of this framework is that it does not require any security
infrastructure. However, purpose-built keys provide authentication if and only
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part I, LNCS 3991, pp. 908–911, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

Eﬃcient Unilateral Authentication Mechanism for MIPv6

909

if the initial hash of the public key is received correctly by correspondent node
(CN). This might not be the case. An attacker could intercept the hash and send
the hash of a diﬀerent key (which it owns) to CN. Subsequently, it can pretend
to be mobile node (MN) without CN being any wiser. The authors of the draft
were, of course, aware of this weakness.
Le and Faccin[2] proposed two protocols for authenticating binding updates.
The ﬁrst assumes that both the MN and the CN share security associations with
two AAA servers. The second protocol proposed in [2] involves an unauthenticated Diﬃe-Hellman key exchange between MN and CN. The resulting key is
subsequently used to authenticate binding updates. The authors recognize that
this protocol is vulnerable to a man-in-the-middle(MITM) attack but state that
”due to the properties of IP” such an attack will always be detected.

3

Proposed Protocol

In this section, our main goal is to institute a mechanism for setting up security associations between MN-CN pairs that will allow binding updates to be
authenticated.
3.1

Assumption

We consider the following design assumptions:
– Each MN(Mobile Node) has a pre-established bidirectional security association with its HA(Home Agent) using which they can authenticate each
other.
– HA’s are capable of authenticating each other using public key cryptography.
– Identity veriﬁcation should not rely on the existence of a global PKI.
– Minimize the number of messages and bytes sent between the participating
entities.
– Consider the computational capabilities of the MN’s and CN’s.
– Resist to DoS attacks that CN does not need to create state before the third
message.
3.2

Protocol Description

Our protocol considers (a) an initialization phase in which MN and CN set up an
authentication key and (b) an update phase in which MN sends an authenticated
binding update to CN using the key obtained from phase (a).
Initialization Phase. The initialization phase for the protocols are the elliptic
curve parameters that are common to both entities and consist of an elliptic
curve E deﬁned over a ﬁnite ﬁeld Fq , generating element G(a point of the elliptic
curve) ∈ E(Fq ), n is order of G in E(Fq ), and h is cofactor of n,i.e.,h= E(Fq )/n.
We will assume that static public keys are exchanged via certiﬁcates. CertHAM N
denotes HAMN ’s public-key certiﬁcate, containing her static public key Ya ,

910

Y.-S. Jeong et al.

Fig. 1. Registration protocol

ephemeral key(random number) ra and a certifying authority HACN ’s signature.
The security of proposed protocol in this paper is based on the Diﬃe-Hellman
problem in elliptic curve group(ECDHP). The protocol is shown in Figure 1 as
follows.
– Step 1: A MN send a message( ra Yb and CertHAM N ) to CN when MN
already knows a group and generator that is acceptable to CN.
– Step 2: Upon receiving message 1, CN generates rb Ya , computes KD ==
h((rb /xb )Ma +xb Ya )=h(ra rb +xa xb )G and SCN and sends a message to
HACN encrypted with their shared key, KC .
– Step 3: HACN forwards to HAMN the session parameters that it recovers
by decrypting message2. It is necessary to include CN’s IP address since the
same MN might be executing this protocol parallely with multiple correspondent nodes.
– Step 4: HAMN forwards the session parameters to MN in message 4, encrypted with KM , their shared key.
– Step 5: MN encrypts the session parameters with the newly computed elliptic
curve secret based on the ECDLP.
In this protocol, CN authenticates herself to MN through the chain of trust
CN → HACN → HAMN → MN. MN could also use the same trust chain in the
other direction to authenticate herself to CN.
Update Phase. Once MN and CN have set up a shared secret, KD , MN can
easily send an authenticated binding update(BU) by executing the following
Step 1 protocol.
Identity, BU, h(KD , Identity, BU)
Here, h(...) is a keyed cryptographic hash function [3].

Eﬃcient Unilateral Authentication Mechanism for MIPv6

4

911

Analysis of the Protocol

The use of elliptic curve key exchange ensures that the protocol provides perfect
forward secrecy(PFS)[5]. If the perfect forward secrecy is not a requirement, an
alternative would be to replace the exchange of certiﬁcate by an exchange of
nonces(nMN and nCN ). nMN could be sent in the clear in Step 1, while nCN is
sent encrypted in Step 2, 3, 4. The shared secret could be derived from a hash
of these nonces, e.g., HMAC(nMN ,nCN ).
A key exchange protocol requires each participant to use some fresh information in every run of the protocol. Any adversary which possesses a certiﬁcate
could intercept Step 1 and then send Step 3 without HAMN being any wiser.
The basic 5-Step protocol is susceptible to denial of service attacks. A useful
property of our protocol is that since home agents do not create state, memory
denial of service attacks are not possible on the home agents. Preventing computation denial of service attacks on the home agents reduces to the problem of
detecting, without performing expensive computations, whether a message has
been replayed. Preventing denial of service attacks on HAMN without adding extra message, appears to be more diﬃcult. Adding a sequence number to message
3 and including it in the signature alleviates the problem somewhat.

5

Conclusions

In response to the requirement that all location information about a mobile
node in IPv6 should be authenticated, we proposed a protocol for authenticating
binding updates. The other requirements are taken into accounts as well: the
computational load on the nodes and on the routers is minimized, by eliminating
expensive encryption operations and keeping the number of steps at minimum.
Therefore, we believe that our protocol addresses the main issues in Mobile IPv6
authentication and makes best use of whatever infrastructure is available.

References
[1] A. J. Menezes, P. C. van Oorschot, S. A. Vanstone. Handbook of Applied Cryptography. CRC Press, (1996).
[2] F. Le, S. M. Faccin. Dynamic Diﬃe Helman based Key Distribution for Mobile
IPv6. Internet Draft, (April 2001).
[3] S. Bradner, A. Mankin, J. I. Schiller. A framework for purpose Built Keys(PBK).
Internet Draft. (February 2001).
[4] H. Krawczyk, M. Bellare, R. Canetti. HMAC:Keyed-Hashing for Mesage Authentication. RFC 2104. (February 1997).
[5] D. Dill. The Mur φ Veriﬁcation System. In Proc. 8th International Conference on
Computer Aided Veriﬁcation, pages 390-393. (1996).

