Framework for Adaptive Sampling of
Point-Based Surfaces Using Geometry
and Color Attributes
Duck Bong Kim1 , Eui Chul Kang1 , Kwan H. Lee1 , and Renato B. Pajarola2
1
Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology (GIST),
Intelligent Design and Graphics laboratory, Department of Mechatronics,
1 Oryong-dong, Buk-gu, Gwangju, 500-712, Korea
{eorka333, eckang, lee}@kyebek.gist.ac.kr
2
Univ. of Zurich, Department of Informatics, Winterthurerstr. 190
8057, Zurich, Switzerland
pajarola@acm.org

Abstract. Point-based rendering has oﬀered a powerful alternative to
triangle meshes when it comes to the rendering of highly complex objects
consisting of densely sampled point clouds due to its ﬂexibility and simplicity. The technological advance of 3D scanners has made it possible to
acquire color as well as geometry data of highly complex objects. However, scanning and acquisition systems often produce surfaces that are
much more dense than actually required for the intended application.
Mobile devices, computer games and distributed virtual environments
must often operate on systems where rendering and transmission capacity is highly constrained and therefore require strict control over the
level of detail used in models. In this research, we present a framework
for adaptive sampling of point-based surfaces using both geometry and
color information.

1

Introduction

The recent advancement of 3D scanners has made it possible to acquire color as
well as geometry information of highly complex objects with very high speed and
with good accuracy. However, the acquired data poses great challenges in storage, editing, transmission, and rendering due to the heavy data set. Therefore,
simpliﬁcation of highly detailed objects is necessary for the real time implementation and has become an important issue in many application ﬁelds such as
entertainment, industrial design, virtual reality and other related ﬁelds.
Polygonal-based simpliﬁcation has been studied by many researchers. In spite
of the simplicity and ﬂexibility of polygonal-based simpliﬁcation, it has some
limitations and drawbacks in some applications due to the need of establishing
connectivity. However, a point-based method does not need the connectivity
information during the simpliﬁcation process. Eﬃcient simpliﬁcation of pointsampled surfaces has been researched [1,2]. However, many existing point-based
simpliﬁcation methods focus only on decimating an original model into simpliﬁed
models considering only the geometry information.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part II, LNCS 3992, pp. 371–374, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

372

D.B. Kim et al.

(a) Real object

(b) Scanned data

(c) Adapt. sampling

(d) Display

Fig. 1. 3D discrete LOD models of point-based surface creation pipeline

In our research, there are mainly three steps in adaptive sampling of the generation of point-based surfaces. Fig. 1 illustrates the whole process of generating
3D discrete LOD (level of detail) models of point-based surfaces acquired from a
3D scanning system. First, a real object is digitized using a 3D scanning device.
The raw data from the 3D scanner is to be sampled adaptively according to
the required level or desired application. Finally, the model is displayed using a
point based rendering system based on blending and visibility splatting [3].
The main goal of this work is to present a framework for an adaptive sampling of point-based surfaces based on 3D grids using both color and geometry
information to create the same visual quality and to speed up the rendering with
lower sampling density.

2

Adaptive Sampling of Point-Based Surface

In this stage, the raw data from the 3D scanner is to be sampled adaptively
according to the required level. The proposed method uses a 3D grid algorithm
[4]. It subdivides the point cloud into a number of sub grids according to normal and color standard deviation of points, each of which is replaced by one
representative point sample. Using the 3D grid algorithm, we can sample more
points in the regions of high curvature and big color diﬀerence, as shown in Fig.
2(c) and 2(d). Before using 3D grid algorithm, normal estimation is performed
locally using an algorithm [3] based on covariance matrix for each point and
its neighbors. Fig. 2 illustrates the whole procedure of the adaptive point sampling method based on 3D grids from the unorganized point data set. Fig. 2(a)
shows the model Nefertiti. Initial grids are generated by a user deﬁned input,
as shown in Fig. 2(b). Each initial grid is subdivided according to the standard deviation of normal values, as shown in Fig. 2(c). The subdivided grids
are repeatedly subdivided according to the standard deviation of color values,
as shown in Fig. 2(d). A Reﬁnement step is performed in order to avoid holes
and intervention between discrete point samples, as shown in Fig. 2(e). Upon
completion of the 3D grid subdivision, the decimated discrete point samples are
converted into surface splats in order to ﬁll the gap between the neighboring
samples. In order to estimate the extent of each splat, another calculation is
required. However, we estimate the extent of each splat according to the depth
of each grid.

Framework for Adaptive Sampling of Point-Based Surfaces

373

Fig. 2. Adaptive sampling method procedure: (a) Nefertiti (b) Initial grids (c) Subdivided by normal variation (d) Subdivided by color variation (e) Reﬁnement

3

Rendering Result

Fig. 3 shows the visual quality comparison between the original model (left),
the model simpliﬁed by uniform sampling method (left middle), the model simpliﬁed by only using geometry variation (right middle), and the model simpliﬁed by geometry and color variation (right). The model, Nefertiti, is simpliﬁed
from the original point set of 448k to 14k by the uniform sampling method and
the proposed algorithm and rendered by the proposed point-based rendering
technique. This rendering result demonstrates that the eyes of Nefertiti simpliﬁed by geometry and color variation look sharp, while the eyes of Nefertiti, simpliﬁed by uniform sampling method and only geometry variation, are
blurred.
Fig. 4 illustrates the visual quality according to 3D discrete LOD (level of
detail) point-based surfaces. The visual quality of each point-based surface is
poorer in accordance with the smaller 3D discrete LOD (level of detail) pointbased surfaces. However, the rendering speed time becomes faster as the level of
detail decreases.

Fig. 3. Visual comparison of Model Nefertiti: (a) Original (b) sampled by uniform (c)
using geometry variation (d) using geometry and color variation

374

D.B. Kim et al.

Fig. 4. Nefertiti at diﬀerent levels of detail. From left to right, 450k, 110k, 45k, 14k
and 5k points of the original model, rendered with a point splatting renderer.

4

Conclusion

In this paper, we proposed a framework for adaptive sampling of point-based surfaces using both geometry and color attributes. Experimental rendering results
demonstrate that the visual quality of the model simpliﬁed by using geometry
and color variation has the best quality compared with other approaches and
a trade oﬀ exists between the visual quality and the speed of rendering time.
In future we will deﬁne new mathematical criteria for determining the extent of
each splat to generate point-based surfaces without holes and intervention.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Immersive Contents Research Center and by the
Realistic Broadcasting Research Center at GIST, Gwang-ju, South Korea and
by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF). The authors would
like to thank Inus technology, Inc. for providing the geometric model Nefertiti.

References
1. M. Pauly, M. Gross, and L.P. Kobbelt, ”Eﬃcient Simpliﬁcation of Point-Sampled
Surfaces,” Proc. IEEE Visualization 2002, pp. 163-170, 2002
2. J. Wu and L. Kobbelt, ”Optimized Sub-Sampling of Point Sets for Surface Splatting”, Computer Graphics Forum, 23(3), pp. 53-64. 2004
3. R.B.Pajarola, M.Sainz, P.Guidotiti. Confetti Object-Space Point Blending and
Splatting. IEEE Transaction on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 2004
4. K. H. Lee, H. Woo and T. Suk, ”Point Data Reduction Using 3D Grids”, The
International Journal of Advanced manufacturing Technology, pages 18:201-210,
2001

