A Reputation Management Framework Based on Global
Trust Model for P2P Systems*
Jingtao Li, Xueping Wang, Yongqiang Chen, and Gendu Zhang
School of Information Science & Engineering, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200433, China

Abstract. A framework based on global trust model, called SRGTrust, is proposed for reputation management in P2P systems. SRGTrust assigns each peer
a unique global trust value, which reflects the rating that the system as a whole
gives to a peer. SRGTrust does not need any pre-trusted peers to ensure the
convergence of the algorithm and invalidates one of the basic assumptions used
in the previous models. Experiments show that SRGTrust converges quickly
and significantly decreases the number of inauthentic files in the system.

1 Introduction
Motivation. In decentralized peer-to-peer (P2P) file-sharing systems, due to the
anonymous and self-organization nature of peers, they have to manage the risk involved with the transactions without prior experience and knowledge about each
other's reputation. One way to address this uncertainty problem is to develop strategies for establishing reputation systems [2,3] that can assist peers in assessing the
level of trust they should place on the quality of resources they are receiving.
Challenge. The very core of the reputation mechanism in a P2P system is to build a
distributed reputation management system that is efficient, scalable, and secure in
both trust computation and trust data storage and dissemination. The main challenge
of building such a reputation mechanism is how to effectively cope with various malicious collectives of peers who know one another and attempt to collectively subvert
the system by providing fake or misleading ratings about other peers [2,3].
Contribution. We present a framework, called SRGTrust (Global Trust model based
on Similarity-weighted Recommendations), for reputation management in P2P systems, which includes a global trust model for quantifying the trustworthiness (section
2), and a decentralized implementation of such model over a structured P2P overlay
network (section 3). Previous global trust models such as eigentrust [3] are based on
the assumption that the peers with high trust value will give the honest recommendation. We argue that this assumption may not hold in all cases. In SRGTrust, each peer
i is assigned a unique global trust value that based on similarity-weighted recommendations of the peers in the network who has interacted with peer i; Finally, A series of
simulation-based experiments show that the SRGTrust algorithm is robust and efficient to cope with various malicious collectives (section 4).
*

This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 60373021).

V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part I, LNCS 3991, pp. 896 – 899, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

A Reputation Management Framework Based on Global Trust Model for P2P Systems

897

2 The Trust Model
Assume n denotes the number of the peers in a system. Each peer i rates another peer
j from which he tries to download files by rating each download as either positive or
negative, depending on whether i was able to download an authentic file from j or not.
The sum of the ratings of all of i's interactions with j is called a local trust value Sij.
Sij=Gij -Fij wherein Gij denotes the number of positive downloads and Fij denotes the
number of negative downloads.
A normalized local trust value Lij is defined as follows:
Lij =

max (S ij ,0 )

∑ max (S ij ,0 )

.

(1)

j

Lij is a real value between 0 and 1, and ∑ Lij = 1 . If
j

∑ max(S ij ,0 ) =0, let Lij = Ti n . Lii=0
j

for every peer i; otherwise, i can assigns arbitrarily high local trust values to itself.
One critical step in our model is to compute the similarity between rating opinions
of peers and then to weight the peers’ recommendations by that value. The similarity
between them is measured by computing the cosine of the angle between these two
vectors [1]. The similarity between peers i and j, denoted by Cij, is given by
Cij =

Bi ∗ B j
Bi ⋅ B j

,

(2)

where " * " denotes the dot-product of the two vectors. Here Bi denotes the rating
opinion vector of peer i, defined as Bi= [Bi1, Bi2, ..., Bin] where Bik (k=1, ...,n) is the
rating opinion of peer i on peer k. Bik is defined as follows:

If i≠k, and Gik +Fik= 0, then Bik = 0;
⎧ Gik (Gik + Fik )

if i≠k, and Gik +Fik > 0, then Bik = ⎪⎨

Gik ≥ Fik

⎪− Fik (Gik + Fik ) Gik < Fik
⎩

ε

.

(3)

ε

For each peer i, we let Bii =1+ where
is an arbitrarily small positive constant.
A global trust value vector, T = [T1, T2, ... , Tn]T, is given by
Ti =

∑ ( Lki ⋅ Cki ⋅ Tk )

k∈U i

,

(4)

where Ti is the global trust value of peer i. Ui denotes the set of the peers who have
interacted with peer i. The global trust value of peer i is the sum of the weighted recommendations of the peers that have interacted with i in a single iteration. After several iterations of asking friends of friends by using the above formula, peer i will have
a view of the entire network. The credibility of the recommendations of a peer is
different from that of the peer itself. So, different from eigentrust [3], we weight the
recommendations of peer k by the similarity between peers k and i.

898

J. Li et al.

3 Distributed Implementation
Trust Data Management. There is no central database in P2P environments. Trust
data that are needed to compute the trust measure for peers are stored across the network in a distributed manner. Each peer has a trust value manager that is responsible
for feedback submission and trust evaluation, a small database that stores a portion of
the global trust data, and a data locator for placement and location of trust data. In our
implementation, the DHT algorithm, Chord [4], is used to assign trust value managers
to peers. The detailed methods will not be given here due to space constraint.
The SRGTrust Algorithm is executed to compute a global trust value vector in a
dynamic and decentralized fashion at each peer.
Primitives. Submit (IDi, (IDj, IDk ), Value1, Value2): Submitting Value1and Value2
to the trust value managers of peer i. We use the Value1 and Value2 to refer to the
normalized local trust value that peer j place in k and rating opinion vector of peer j,
the meaning will be clear from context; Query (IDj, Tj, Lji, Bj ): Querying the global
trust value, recommendation to peer i, and rating opinion vector of peer j.
Algorithm 1. SRGAgorithm1, peer i as an ordinary peer.
Update_SubmitTrustdata( ) // submits its rating (Gij, Fij) to peer j after a transaction
{
If ( a good transaction ) Gij Gij+1;
else
Fij Fij+1;
}
Submit(IDi, (IDi, IDj ), Gij, Fij);
// submits Gij and Fij to Mi, and triggers the UpdateLocaltrust( ) in Mi

←

←

Algorithm 2. SRGAgorithm2, peer i as a trust value manager of peer u.
UpdateLocaltrust( ) // updates Luv and Buv after receiving a Submit primitive from u
{
Verify the consistency of Guv and Fuv;
Compute Suv, Luv, Buv;
Submit (IDv, (IDu, IDv ), Luv, null);
}
// submits Luv to Mv
CalcGlobaltrust( )
// computes the global trust value of peer u
{
for ( every j Uu ( j u) )
{
Query (IDj, Tj, Lju, Bj );

∈

C ju ←

Tu

B j * Bu
B j ⋅ Bu

←T + L

return Tu;

≠

u

ju

;

⋅ C ju ⋅ Tj ;

// computes the similarity between peers u and j
}

}

4 Experiments
Simulation Setup. As a test bed for the experiments, we use the Query Cycle Simulator [5] which simulates a P2P file-sharing network. Trust values in this network are
used to bias download sources. We shall demonstrate the algorithms’ performance
under two typical threat models. Threat Model IM: Individual malicious peers,
called IM peers, always provide an inauthentic file when selected as a download
source and they always set their satisfaction values to Sij= Fij -Gij; Threat Model CM:

A Reputation Management Framework Based on Global Trust Model for P2P Systems

899

Malicious peers, called CM peers, always provide an inauthentic file when selected as
a download source and each CM peer i let Lij=1/||CMs|| for any j CMs where CMs
denotes the set of all CM peers, and ||CM|| denotes the total of all CM peers.

∈

Results. Proportion of Authentic Downloads (PAD), the ratio of the number of
authentic downloads to the number of all downloads viewed by all good peers when
we use three algorithms separately, are showed in Fig. 1. The PAD is higher than 80%
even if IM, or CM peers make up a half of all peers in the network when our scheme
is activated.
1

SRGTrust,CM

0.8
DA
P

eigentrust,CM

0.6

Random,CM

0.4

SRGTrust,IM

0.2

eigentrust,IM

0
0%

10%
20%
30%
40%
Percentage of IM, or CM peers

50%

Random,IM

Fig. 1. PAD against different percentage of malicious peers. "Random" means a P2P system
where no reputation system is implemented. We set up a network consisting of 500 peers. The
initial distribution of the global trust values is a uniform probability distribution over all n
peers, that is Ti=1/n (i=1, … , n). After issuing a query, a peer waits for incoming responses
from the peers that have the file he is looking for, selects a download source whose global trust
value is the highest among those peers, and downloads the file. The last two steps are repeated
until the peer receives a complete, authentic copy of the file.

References
1. Sarwar, B., Karypis, G., Konstan, J., Riedl, J.: Item-Based collaborative filtering recommendation algorithms. Proceedings of the 10th International World Wide Web Conference.
ACM Press. (2001) 285–295
2. Xiong, L., Liu, L.: PeerTrust: Supporting Reputation-Based Trust for Peer-to-Peer Electronic Communities. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING 16(7). IEEE Press. 843–857
3. Kamvar, S.D., Schlosser, M.T.: The eigentrust algorithm for reputation management in P2P
networks. Proceedings of the 12th international conference on World Wide Web. ACM
Press. (2003) 640–651
4. Stoica, I., Morris, R., Karger, D.: Chord: A scalable peer-to-peer lookup service for Internet
applications. Technical Report. MIT. (2002). http://pdos.csail.mit. edu/chord/
5. Schlosser, M.T., Condie, T.E., Kamvar, S.D.: Simulating a File-Sharing P2P Network. Proceedings of First Workshop on Semantics in P2P and Grid Computing. (2003) 69–80

