Automata Network Simulator Applied to the
Epidemiology of Urban Dengue Fever
Henrique F. Gagliardi1,3, Fabrício A.B. da Silva3, and Domingos Alves1,2
1

Laboratório de Computação Científica Aplicada à Saúde Coletiva (LCCASC),
UNISANTOS, Santos, Brazil
henrique.gagliardi@gmail.com
2 Programa de Mestrado em Saúde Coletiva, UNISANTOS, Santos, Brazil
quiron@unisantos.br
3 Programa de Mestrado em Informática, UNISANTOS, R. Carvalho de Mendonça, 144,
Santos, Brazil
fabricio@unisantos.br

Abstract. The main goal this paper is to describe a software simulating spatiotemporal Dengue epidemic spread based on the utilization of a generalized
probabilistic cellular automata computational analysis as the dynamic model of
spatial epidemiology. This epidemic spatial model permits to reproduce
explicitly the interaction of two types of transmission mechanisms in terms of
global and local variables, which in turn can be adjusted to simulate
respectively the populational mobility and geographical neighborhood contacts.
The resulting virtual laboratory was designed to run spatio-temporal simulation
of the Dengue disease spreading based on local and global interactions among
two distinct populations (humans and mosquitoes).

1 Introduction
Mathematical and statistical modeling, in particular, is valuable in the design and
interpretation of epidemiological studies, but is not well suited to simulation of
interventions and resulting changes of behaviour [1,2]. Extraordinary increase in
speed of computer processors and availability of cheap memory now make it possible
to provide better prediction and to define better strategies to overwhelm the spread of
epidemics, giving rise to development of the new mathematical and computing
methodologies. Such methodologies could serve as virtual “laboratories” for a new
science of experimental epidemiology in which new population-level interventions
could be designed, evaluated, and iteratively refined on simulated epidemics, with
tangible benefits for real-world epidemic prevention and control efforts. Indeed, some
developments have already appeared at these epidemiological/computational
interfaces [3,4].
Particularly, the successful applications of Cellular Automata (CA) in the context
of epidemic dynamic [2,5] have motivated us to develop a simulator based on the
utilization of generalized probabilistic cellular automata [2], to study the spread of
Dengue fever. The reason for this approach is that cellular automata have a significant
role in epidemic modeling because each individual, or cell, or small region of space
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part III, LNCS 3993, pp. 297 – 304, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

298

H.F. Gagliardi, F.A.B. da Silva, and D. Alves

"updates" itself independently (in parallel) allowing for the concurrent development
of several epidemic spatial clusters, defining its new state based on the current state of
its surrounding cells (locality) and on some shared laws of change [2,5].
Therefore, the main contribution of this paper is to present a software system that
incorporates a general probabilistic cellular automata model [2] to describe the
dynamics of Dengue transmission in a virtual urban environment. The basis of the
transmission model is the simulation of stochastic inter-populations interactions
(human and mosquitoes) including the infectious period in which individual
interactions are straightforwardly described in terms of the local (physical contacts)
and the global (populational mobility) modes of transmission [2]. At last, we shall
discuss some simplifications of our model for Dengue spreading and to provide a
modicum of validation for a specific location. We also compare simulation results
with reports population data from dengue epidemic in real city. The software itself
consists of four modules: the specification module, the simulation module, the
visualization module and the analysis module. Particularly, the analysis module is
used for spatio-temporal model analysis in the same environment, using a friendly
user interface while at the same time providing considerable flexibility to analysis.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In the next section we detail
the model implemented in the software system. The simulator system itself is
presented in section 3. Finally, conclusions and some directions for future work are
stated in section 4.

2 The Epidemic Cellular Automata Model for Dengue
In this section, we will focus our discussion in the Dengue model, which is a humanvector iteration model. Consider a discrete dynamical system (discrete space and
discrete time) where a population of N individuals is distributed on the sites of a
lattice M = mij — with i and j may vary from 1 to L ( N = L × L) . Each individual site
is assigned to receive three specific attributes: (1) a spatial address or lattice position
(i,j); (2) a set of possible clinical status, specifying a clinic disease stage of each
particular individual, which represent, for instance, the conditions of susceptible
(subject to be infected by a contagious agent), infectious (effectively transmitter of
contagious agents) and removed (recovered or immune); and finally (3) a period τ ,
specifying how many units of time an individual stays on a specific clinical status, i.e.
how much time an infection disease can propagate through the contagious agent. The
dynamic evolution of the population is described, step-by-step, by a set of interaction
rules defined a priori, and assumes that each new configurational state of the system
(described here by the lattice position (i,j) of each individual and by the instantaneous
number of individuals in each particular state), depends only on its previous state.
The main assumption of our approach is that the Dengue transition rules are
defined by two sets of states, each one representing the behavior of a distinct
population. In the language of state-variable models, the humans are defined by a
SEIR (Susceptible, Exposed, Infective and Recovered) model which when Exposed,
the individual is infected but still not infective. The mosquito population is
represented by a different SEI (Susceptible, Exposed and Infective) model as shown
in Fig. 1.

Automata Network Simulator Applied to the Epidemiology of Urban Dengue Fever

299

Fig. 1. The schematic model of Dengue spreading representing the stages of the disease for
both populations, where thick edges represent the interaction among populations (mosquito
bite) and the thin ones the internal transition of states in each model

The Dengue model has a singular characteristic, different from the other models
based in cellular automata: the use of two overlapping interacting automata cellular
grids to represent the human and the vector (Aedes aegypti mosquito) populations that
transmit Dengue virus. Therefore, the neighborhood of each individual has a different
meaning and is not defined around each individual cell in the same population but at
an equivalent position at the overlapping one, i.e. a neighbor of a human cell is
defined by the mosquitoes (vector) population and vice-versa. This special
characteristic allows for the possibility of a human host being locally infected by a
vector and to infect another mosquito. This interaction (a bite), however, never occurs
directly among the neighbors of a same population because a human may only
become infected by Aedes aegypti bite and a mosquito only becomes infected by
biting an infective human. Moreover, here we propose a novel framework to model
the spread of a Dengue outbreak. Besides defining internal state transition rules for
each iterative population (human and mosquitoes), we define iterative rules between
these two cellular automata (Fig. 2), reflecting them from one population to the other:

Fig. 2. The local and global influences are shown in this figure. The pointed squares represent
the mosquitoes affected by the local and global human infective influence. The same kind of
influences occurring in this bottom-up direction for human-vector interactions also occurs for
the vector-humans in a top-down sense at each simulation update. We can see also in this figure
a schematic representation of the neighborhood of a single element in a given automata
network.

300

H.F. Gagliardi, F.A.B. da Silva, and D. Alves

1. Any susceptible individual may become infected with probability pS.
2. An infected individual becomes infective after an average latency time τ E
(assumed here as a constant, without lost of generality).
3. Infective individuals are removed deterministically from the system (becoming
immune) after an infectious period τ I > 0 , which is considered as a constant for
all infected human individuals and infinity to the mosquito population.
4. Once in the removed class, the individual participate only passively in the
spreading of the infection (eventually blocking the spreading process) by a
period of immunity larger than the complete epidemic process.
The probability pS of any susceptible individual (human or mosquito) to become
infective is a superposition of: the local mode of transmission that incorporates the
individual-based component from the perspective of the susceptible individuals, the
actual (physical) contacts that each susceptible individual experiences; and the global
influence due to intrinsic populational mobility, which may be viewed as resulting of
a mean-field (discrete) approach, in the sense that the disease transmission to each
susceptible individual also depends on the instantaneous total number of infectious
individuals in the population. Therefore, one can assume that disease transmission
occurs with a total infection probability pS written as:

p S = Γp G + Λp L ,

(1)

where the pre-factors Γ and Λ are weight parameters tuning the short (cluster
formation) and long-range (mean-field type) interactions; it is also required that
Γ + Λ = 1 in order to satisfy the probabilistic requirement 0 ≤ pS ≤ 1 . The global
influence p G represents the probability of a susceptible individual in a population
(human or mosquito) to become infective due to the presence of I(t) infected
individuals in another population (mean-field) and it is related to the intrinsic mobility
of the population elements on space, i.e. the ability of an element to establish contact
with anyone of the another population and infect him. On the other hand, the local
term p L = p L (i, j ) is the probability of a susceptible individual (located at the site
(i,j)) being infected due to n infectives in the first and second neighborhoods (Moore
neighborhood).
The resulting probabilities to each population are as follow:

Humans:

p L = 1 − (1 − λm ) nIm and p G =
Mosquito:
p L = 1 − (1 − λh ) nIh and p G =

ρ h N mi (t )

(2)

Nm

ρ m N ih (t )

(3)

Nh

Therefore, the system is governed by p S (Equation 1) and τ , and its temporal
evolution is determined by updating the lattice synchronously at each time step
through the application of the three rules above. This model is available on a

Automata Network Simulator Applied to the Epidemiology of Urban Dengue Fever

301

simulator initially developed to help the comprehension and analysis of epidemics
spread that we will be presenting in the following section.

3 Design and Implementation of the Dengue Epidemic Simulator
In this section, we discuss the design and implementation of an epidemic simulation
tool, the technological choices we made and an overview of the general architecture
of the simulation tool. We choose C++ as the programming language due to
robustness and facilities offered as an object-oriented programming language and its
possibility to append new models and tools to the system, which is upgraded in a
modular way. To create grid animations during simulations we are using OpenGL.
The software system consists of four modules: the specification module, the
simulation module, the visualization module and the analysis module. It is worth to
note that the specification module generates the model specification which serves as
input to both the simulation and visualization modules and the analysis module
supports spatio-temporal model analysis.
A setup window enables the user to configure all the parameters of each available
model. Thus, each model has its specific settings and many different kinds of
scenarios can be simulated by adjusting its values. Through this specification module
we can configure the period (in days) that the human will stay exposed and infected,
the period that the vector stays incubated (exposed), the global and local probability
of interaction inter grids, grids initial conditions (with one infected human/vector at
the center or a percentage of individuals in different states of a full susceptible grid
when the simulation starts for both populations) and the type of view we wish to use
(perspective or orthogonal).
The simulation module is the responsible for execution of the model simulations.
When executing a specified simulation, initially every element of the grids is set to
the initial conditions defined in the specification module. Each element has an integer
value that represents its state (0 (zero) for the susceptible, 1 to τ E for the exposed
(infected), τ E + 1 to τ E + τ I for the infectives and τ E + τ I + 1 for the recovered).
Therefore, each update is done by increasing the current time of the system and
visiting each individual of both grids to update its states. If the individual current state
is the susceptible state, it has a probability p S to become infected (Equation 1),
which is calculated by the sum of the global and local probabilities described by
Equations 2 and 3, respectively. However, if it current state is not susceptible, it
current integer value is increased (as schematized in Fig.1). After each updating, the
visualization module displays an animation of the grids dynamics at the user’s screen.
The visualization module shows a graphical animation of the spreading of the
Dengue epidemics using the previously defined parameters (as shown in Fig. 3). It is
possible to control and customize the stochastic realizations of the simulation process
through navigator and velocity toolbars. It is also possible to change graphic windows
settings or disable the animation to speed-up the simulation process.
Particularly, in the Fig. 3 we can see very interesting characteristics of Dengue
model. In fact, we can see the mobility effects of a simulation with the same grid

302

H.F. Gagliardi, F.A.B. da Silva, and D. Alves

a)

b)

90 days

90 days

Fig. 3. Two Dengue cellular automata iterating in the perspective view. In (a) we see a
simulation with the orthogonal view and in (b) the perspective view, where the bottom grid
represents the human population while the top grid represents the vector population. The
connections between the grids show the effective contact between different populations and it is
also possible to see the global influence for Dengue spreading by the infective clusters
geographically distributed in the grid.

parameters and λ values but with Γ = 0 for both networks (a system without global
iterations) for (a) and Γ = 0,2 for the human population (a system with human global
interactions with mosquitoes) for (b). Comparing both simulations we can see that the
first requires a large amount of time to percolate the entire grid. In this case the
spreading is geographically dependent. However, with just a small Γ value we can
observe in (b) that the spreading is faster than (a) because the spreading becomes
concurrent due the global moves among grids elements, what looks like a small world
phenomena scenario [6] which elements relationships makes a spreading process
faster by establishing shortcuts among distant elements (similar to the global
influence). This space of parameters can be adequately explored through the analysis
module (Fig. 4) by executing series of simulations varying the model parameters.

Fig. 4. The Status and the Graphic windows of the analysis module

In fact, a very interesting feature of the analysis module is the ability to see the
progression of the epidemic spread and to generate series of stochastic realizations in
which averages are calculated by the data generated in the simulated epidemic

Automata Network Simulator Applied to the Epidemiology of Urban Dengue Fever

303

process. It is then possible to visualize the average behavior of the system for a
variable set of configurable intervals of parameters.

4 Conclusions and Future Work
This paper describes a simulator for the study of the spread of Dengue epidemic using
a probabilistic cellular automata model. Strengths and weaknesses of software
observed in practice show that there is a general need for improvement concerning the
clarification of model structure, as well as the support for systematic validation and
robustness tests. Furthermore, owing to its extreme simplicity, this formulation may
be useful, in the sense of having the value of an approximation, to tackle problems in
Dengue epidemiology.
Monthly Evolution of Urban Dengue Fever Cases
10000
2001
2004

Confirmed Cases

Average
1000

100

10

1
oct

nov

dec

jan

feb

mar

apr

may

jun

jul

aug

sep

Months

Fig. 5. The monthly evolution of confirmed cases in the years 2001 and 2004. Here we can
observe the average behavior of urban Dengue fever in Ribeirão Preto city in the dark line.

As shown by the Dengue progress curves from Ribeirão Preto, a city in southeast
Brazil (see Fig. 5) seasonal effects play a central role in disease spreading. In fact, the
fastest Dengue spreading progress is observed from November through March (end of
summer), a period associated to high temperatures and regular rains. The seasonal
modulations are been included in the CA model through the variation in the motility
of vectors as well as in the fraction of humans in the removed state. The remaining
CA parameters were varied in order to compare the simulated and observed Dengue
progress curves. We find in our virtual experiments that in the model space of
parameters there are different value intervals in which the resulting qualitative
behavior of the CA progress curves show the same functional behavior of the
measured curves shown on Fig. 5. Even a surprisingly quantitative agreement
between the CA and the observed Dengue progress curves were obtained in a restrict
set of values of parameters. To be used as a decision-making tool, however, the
simulator must be better parameterized and validated with actual epidemiological
data.
Moreover, the possibility to simulate the evolution of a Dengue epidemic model
over a digitalized city map is another desired feature that actually we are working on.
This is an important issue, since it would be highly desirable to study and to visualize
the infective individuals located in a layer over a city map updated along the
simulation process.

304

H.F. Gagliardi, F.A.B. da Silva, and D. Alves

At the present moment we are able to execute our simulations over a digital city
map image where the Dengue model is constructed considering the urban regions (as
in Fig. 6, here taken as a marginal region around the streets).

Fig. 6. A simulation of the Dengue model over Santos city map, a southeast costal Brazilian
city which epidemic historical data will also be used in our future study

This is a useful feature to observe the geographical distribution of the simulation
over a real city shaped grid. To the best of our knowledge, there are no similar results
reported for this type of coupled cellular automata.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo
(FAPESP): Proc. 02/03564-8.

References
1. Paterson, S., Viney, M. E.: The interface between epidemiology and population genetics,
Parasitology Today, Vol.16. 12 (2000) 528.
2. Alves, D., Hass, V., Caliri, A.: The predictive power of R0 in an epidemic probabilistic
model. Journal of Biological Physics, Vol. 29. 1 (2003) 63.
3. Focks, D., A., et al. A simulation model of the epidemiology of urban dengue fever:
Literature analysis, model development, preliminary validation, and samples of simulation
results. American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, Vol. 53. (1995) 489-506.
4. Stefano, B., Fukś, H., Lawniczak, A. T., Object-Oriented Implementation of CA/LGCA
Modelling Applied To the Spread of Epidemics. Canadian Conference on Electrical and
Computer Engineering (IEEE), Vol.1. (2000) 26-31.
5. Boccara, N., Cheong, K.: Automata Network SIR Models for Spread of Infectious Diseases
in Populations of Moving Individuals. J. Phys. A: Math and Gen., Vol.25. (2000), 2447.
6. Watts, D. J. and Strogatz, S. H., The Collective Dynamics of ‘Small-World’ Networks,
Nature, Vol.393 (1998) 440.

