A Novel Nonlinear Neural Network Ensemble Model
for Financial Time Series Forecasting
Kin Keung Lai1,2, Lean Yu2,3, Shouyang Wang1,3, and Huang Wei4
1

College of Business Administration, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, China
2 Department of Management Sciences, City University of Hong Kong,
Tat Chee Avenue, Kowloon, Hong Kong
{mskklai, msyulean}@cityu.edu.hk
3 Institute of Systems Science, Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100080, China
{yulean, sywang}@amss.ac.cn
4 School of Management, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
1037 Luoyu Road, Wuhan 430074, China

Abstract. In this study, a new nonlinear neural network ensemble model is proposed for financial time series forecasting. In this model, many different neural
network models are first generated. Then the principal component analysis
technique is used to select the appropriate ensemble members. Finally, the support vector machine regression method is used for neural network ensemble.
For further illustration, two real financial time series are used for testing.

1 Introduction
Financial market is a complex evolved dynamic market with high volatility and noise.
Due to its irregularity, financial time series forecasting is regarded as a rather challenging task. For traditional statistical methods, it is extremely difficult to capture the
irregularity. In the past decades, many emerging techniques, such as neural networks,
were widely used in the financial time series forecasting and obtained good results.
However, neural networks are a kind of unstable learning methods, i.e., small
changes in the training set and/or parameter selection can produce large changes in
the predicted output. This diversity of neural networks is a naturally by-product of the
randomness of the inherent data and training process, and also of the intrinsic nonidentifiability of the model. For example, the results of many experiments have shown
that the generalization of single neural network is not unique. That is, the neural network’s results are not stable. Even for some simple problems, different structures of
neural networks (e.g., different number of hidden layers, different hidden nodes and
different initial conditions) result in different patterns of network generalization. In
addition, even the most powerful neural network model still cannot cope well when
dealing with complex data sets containing some random errors or insufficient training
data. Thus, the performance for these data sets may not be as good as expected [1-2].
Recently, some experiments have been proved that neural network ensemble forecasting model is an effective approach to the development of a high performance
forecasting system relative to single neural networks [3]. Meantime, some linear
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part I, LNCS 3991, pp. 790 – 793, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

A Novel Nonlinear Neural Network Ensemble Model

791

ensemble methods are also presented [4-6]. Different from the previous work, this
study proposes a novel nonlinear ensemble forecasting method in terms of support
vector machine regression principle.
The rest of this study is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the building
process of the nonlinear neural network ensemble forecasting model in detail. For
further illustration, two real financial time series are used for testing in Section 3.
Finally, some concluding remarks are drawn in Section 4.

2 The Building Process of the Nonlinear Ensemble Model
In this section, a triple-phase nonlinear neural network ensemble model is proposed
for financial time series forecasting. First of all, many individual neural predictors are
generated. Then an appropriate number of neural predictors are selected from the
considerable number of candidate predictors. Finally, selected neural predictors are
combined into an aggregated neural predictor in a nonlinear way.
A. Generating individual neural network predictors
With the work about bias-variance trade-off of Breiman [7], an ensemble model consisting of diverse models with much disagreement is more likely to have a good generalization. Therefore, how to generate diverse models is a crucial factor. For neural
network model, there are four methods for generating diverse models.
(1) Initializing different starting weights for each neural network models.
(2) Training neural networks with different training subsets.
(3) Varying the architecture of neural network, e.g., changing the different numbers
of layers or different numbers of nodes in each layer.
(4) Using different training algorithms, such as the back-propagation algorithm, radial basis function algorithm and Bayesian regression algorithms.
B. Selecting appropriate ensemble members
After training, each individual neural predictor has generated its own result. However,
if there are a great number of individual members, we need to select a subset of representatives in order to improve ensemble efficiency. In this study, the principal
component analysis (PCA) technique [8] is adopted to select appropriate ensemble
members. Interested readers can be referred to [8] for more details.
C. Combining the selected members
Depended upon the work done in previous phases, a collection of appropriate ensemble members can be collected. The subsequent task is to combine these selected
members into an aggregated predictor in an appropriate ensemble strategy. Generally,
there are two ensemble strategies: linear ensemble and nonlinear ensemble.
Typically, linear ensemble strategy includes two approaches: the simple averaging
[4] approach and the weighted averaging [5] approach. There are two types of
weighted averaging: the mean squared error (MSE) based regression approach [6] and
variance-based weighted approach [6]. The nonlinear ensemble strategy is a promising approach for determining the optimal neural ensemble predictor’s weight. The
literature only mentions one nonlinear approach: neural network-based nonlinear

792

K.K. Lai et al.

ensemble method [8]. Different from the previous work, we propose a new nonlinear
ensemble method with support vector machine regression (SVMR) [9] principle.
Generally speaking, an SVMR-based nonlinear ensemble forecasting model can be
viewed as a nonlinear information processing system that can be represented as:

yˆ = f ( xˆ1 , xˆ 2 ," , xˆ n )

(1)

where ( xˆ1 , xˆ 2 , " , xˆ n ) is the output of individual neural network predictors, yˆ is the
aggregated output, f(·) is nonlinear function determined by SVMR. In this sense,
SVMR-based ensemble is a nonlinear ensemble method.

3 Empirical Analysis
The data set used for our experiment consists of two time series data: the S&P 500
index series, and the GBP/USD series. The data used in this study are obtained from
Datastream (http://www.datastream. com). The entire data set covers the period from
January 1, 1991 to December 31, 2002. We take daily data from January 1, 1991 to
December 31, 2000 as the in-sample data sets and take the data from January 1, 2001
to December 31, 2002 as the out-of-sample data set (i.e., testing set), which are used
to evaluate the good or bad performance of predictions. The root mean squared error
(RMSE) is used the evaluation criteria over each of the two different testing sets and
corresponding results are reported in Tables 1.
Table 1. A comparison of RMSE between different ensemble methods

Ensemble Method
Simple averaging
MSE regression
Variance-based weight
Neural network
SVMR

S&P500
RMSE
Rank
0.0115
3
0.0159
5
0.0124
4
0.0108
2
0.0098
1

GBP/USD
RMSE
Rank
0.0075
4
0.0078
5
0.0058
3
0.0044
2
0.0017
1

From Table 1, we can conclude that (1) in all the ensemble methods the SVMRbased ensemble model performs the best, followed by the neural network based ensemble method and other three linear ensemble method from a general view and (2)
the nonlinear ensemble methods including neural network-based and SVMR-based
method outperform all the linear ensemble methods, indicating that the nonlinear
ensemble methods are more suitable for financial time series forecasting than the
linear ensemble approaches due to high volatility of the financial time series. Interestedly, in the testing case of S&P 500, the simple averaging ensemble method can beat
other two linear ensemble approaches. The phenomenon also reflects a basic principle, i.e., the simplest may be the best.

A Novel Nonlinear Neural Network Ensemble Model

793

4 Conclusions
In this study, we propose a novel triple-phase nonlinear ensemble predictor for financial time series forecasting. The experimental results reported in this paper demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed nonlinear ensemble approach, implying
that the proposed nonlinear ensemble model can be used as a feasible approach to
financial time series forecasting.

Acknowledgements
This work is partially supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China
(NSFC No. 70221001); Chinese Academy of Sciences; Key Research Institute of
Humanities and Social Sciences in Hubei Province-Research Center of Modern Information Management and Strategic Research Grant of City University of Hong
Kong (SRG No. 7001677).

References
1. Naftaly, U, Intrator, N, Horn, D.: Optimal Ensemble Averaging of Neural Networks. Network Computation in Neural Systems 8 (1997) 283-296
2. Carney, J, Cunningham, P.: Tuning Diversity in Bagged Ensembles. International Journal
of Neural Systems 10 (2000) 267-280
3. Bishop, C.M.: Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition. Oxford University Press (1995)
4. Benediktsson, J.A., Sveinsson, J.R., Ersoy, O.K., Swain, P.H.: Parallel Consensual Neural
Networks. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks 8 (1997) 54-64
5. Perrone, M.P., Cooper, L.N.: When Networks Disagree: Ensemble Methods for Hybrid
Neural Networks. In Mammone, R.J. (ed.): Neural Networks for Speech and Image Processing, Chapman-Hall (1993) 126-142
6. Krogh, A., Vedelsby, J.: Neural Network Ensembles, Cross Validation, and Active Learning. In: Tesauro, G., Touretzky, D., Leen, D. (eds.): Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems. The MIT Press (1995) 231–238
7. Breiman, L. Combining Predictors. In: Sharkey, A.J.C. (ed.): Combining Artificial Neural
Nets – Ensemble and Modular Multi-net Systems. Springer, Berlin (1999) 31-50
8. Yu, L., Wang, S.Y., Lai, K.K.: A Novel Nonlinear Ensemble Forecasting Model Incorporating GLAR and ANN for Foreign Exchange Rates. Computers and Operations Research
32 (2005) 2523-2541
9. Vapnik, V.: The Nature of Statistical Learning Theory. New York: Springer-Verlag (1995)

