A Reputation-Based Grid Information Service
J. H. Abawajy and A. M. Goscinski
Deakin University,
School of Engineering & Information Technology,
Geelong, Victoria 3217, Australia

Abstract. In a large-scale wide-area system such as the Grid, trust
is a prime concern. The current generation of grid information services
lack the ability to determine how trustworthy a particular grid service
provider or grid customer is likely to be. In this paper, we propose a
grid information service with reputation management facility and its
underlying algorithm for computing and managing reputation in serviceoriented grid computing. Our reputation management service is based
on the concept of dynamic trust and reputation adaptation based on
community experiences. The working model and functionality oﬀered by
the proposed reputation management service is discussed.

1

Introduction

Grid computing aims to enable resource sharing and coordinated problem solving in dynamic, multi-institutional virtual organizations (VO) [10]. In Grids,
federation is typically motivated by a need to access resources or services that
cannot easily be replicated locally [9]. Grids are currently evolving towards a
service-oriented computing by adopting Web services-based and WSRF technologies [14] [4]. An example is the the latest Globus Toolkit (i.e., GT4) [9] [3],
which is based on the Open Grid Services Architecture (OGSA) [11]. A service
in a service-oriented computing can be computers, storage, data, networks, or
sensors.
The Grid Information Service (GIS) is one of the main services oﬀered by
Grids. GIS maintains information about hardware, software, services and people participating in a VO. Moreover, GIS provides fundamental mechanisms for
service advertisement and service discovery [10]. It allows service providers to
publish their oﬀerings while grid customers can use services provided by GIS to
discover services that meet their QoS requirements. However, when integrating
services across multiple partners that form a VO, trust issues become signiﬁcant. For example, how can grid service customers choose a trustworthy service
provider without prior interaction? Similarly, service providers are commonly
concerned if the customer is legitimate and able to pay for services rendered. As
customers and service providers are increasingly demanding trustworthy paid
services in the digital economy [12], the answer to these questions are important. However, the current generation of grid information services lack the ability
to assist service providers (users) in determining how trustworthy a speciﬁc customer (provider) is likely to be.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part IV, LNCS 3994, pp. 1015–1022, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

1016

J.H. Abawajy and A.M. Goscinski

In this paper, we address this problem and propose a reputation-enabled grid
information service that maintains a dynamic reputation metric such that grid
customers can select a reliable service provider to transact with. Similarly, the
proposed approach enables the service providers to tailor payment methods to
a particular client based on credit rating of customers. The proposed reputation
management service is based on the concept of dynamic trust and reputation
adaptation based on community experiences. The feedback from the participants
is analyzed, aggregated with feedback received from other members and made
publicly available to the community in the form of service provider and customer reputation proﬁles. We present the underlying algorithm for computing
and managing reputation in service-oriented grid computing environments.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we provide a
short overview of the current research eﬀorts that form the basis of our work.
The working model and functionality oﬀered by grid directory services and their
limitations with respect to the questions at hand are brieﬂy discussed. In Section 3, we propose a new framework for managing reputation in service-oriented
grid computing and discuss its underlying architecture. In Section 4, we discuss
how the reputation and credit values for service providers and consumers are
computed. We summarize future work and conclude our work in Section 5.

2
2.1

Problem Statement and Related Work
Problem Statement

Reputation is of core importance when consumers and providers engage in situations which they perceive as risky. In this paper, reputation refers to the value we
attribute to a speciﬁc entity including agents (e.g., brokers), services, and persons
in the service grid, based on the trust exhibited by it in the past. In a typical Grid
scenario users are interested in identifying possible candidate services through
grid information service in a similar manner to an online shopping site [5].
There are many information services enabling service providers to publish
their services while at the same time allow customers discover services of interest from among a large pool of potentially interesting services (e.g., [1] [8]
and [14]). As far as we know, existing GIS have not yet addressed the issue of
integrating reputation into their resource discovery algorithms. Thus, GIS users
optimistically assume all trading partners are trustworthy. As a result, both service providers and consumers are forced to assume all the risks associated with
a particular service and resources obtained through the existing GISs.
However, customers are interested in selecting a reliable service provider to
transact with. Similarly, the service providers want to tailor payment methods
to a particular client based on credit rating of customers. Reputation-enabled
information service can address these concerns. Reputations hold entities accountable for their actions and deter bad behavior [12]. Entities that engage in
good behavior build a positive reputation and people will continue to interact
with it. Such a system encourages individuals to act in a trustworthy manner [7].
Since GISs provide automated resource and services discovery, we believe that

A Reputation-Based Grid Information Service

1017

the reputation service should be loosely integrated with the GIS such that desired services are automatically discovered by GIS and then ranked based on the
reputation they obtain by the reputation services.
2.2

Related Work

Numerous information services that enabling service providers to advertise their
services as well as allow customers discover services of interest. For example, the
Universal Description, Discovery and Integration (UDDI) [1] deﬁnes a standard
for enabling businesses to publish or discover Web services. Several eﬀorts to
extend UDDI for grid service discovery is underway (e.g., [13]). The Monitoring
and Discovery System (MDS) [8] is the information services component of the
Globus Toolkit [9] and provides information about the available resources on the
Grid and their status. The latest version of MDS includes Web Service Resource
Framework (WSRF) based implementations of the Index Service, a Trigger Service, WebMDS (formerly known as the Web Service Data Browser) and the
underlying framework, the Aggregator Framework. A market-oriented grid directory service (GDS) for publication and discovery of grid service providers and
their services is discussed in [14].
Several examples of feedback mechanisms are already being used in a number
of well-known online communities, such as eBay [2]. A growing body of empirical
evidence seems to indicate that these systems have managed to provide remarkable
stability in otherwise very risky trading environments [12]. We envision a reputation service similar to the online shopping [2] for service-oriented grid computing.
However, reputation requirements of the grid systems diﬀer from that of the online
shopping reputation system. For example, in eBay [2], buyers reputations matter
substantially less, since sellers can hold goods until they are paid. Moreover, even
if sellers wished to rely on buyers reputations it would do little good, since it is not
possible to exclude buyers with bad reputations from ones auction. Also, there is a
potential diﬃculty in aggregating and displaying feedback so that it is truly useful
in inﬂuencing future decisions about who to trust. Finally, the reputation systems
are for single context. In contrast, contexts in Grids can be numerous.
Recently, trust has been receiving increasing attention in grid computing community [5] [6]. The focus, however, is on grid security system to formulate trust
enhanced security solutions. In contrast, we are interested in reputation enhanced
grid information services. To the best of our knowledge, there is a lack of reputation information about services, resources, service providers and service users
in existing grid information services. This motivated us to design a reputation
service for augmenting grid information services.

3

Reputation-Based Grid Information Service

In this section, the proposed reputation-enabled grid information service infrastructure is discussed. We assume that once registered, both service providers
and customers will have unforgeable identities. Unforgeable identities are usually generated by a trusted system entity and given to new users as they join. We

1018

J.H. Abawajy and A.M. Goscinski

Fig. 1. Reputation-based Grid Information Service

also assume that there is no way a single user can generate multiple identities to
pretend as several distinct service provider or customer or both in the network.
The overall design of the proposed reputation-based grid information service
is shown in Fig. 1. The system is composed of information service and reputation management service components. Note that upon registration, the service
providers (consumers) are informed to maintain a minimum trust level (Φmin )
at all times. By approximately automating word-of-mouth reputation for grid
market environments, the proposed reputation-enabled grid information service
infrastructure can provide a service that mitigates misbehavior while imposing
a minimal cost on the well-behaved users.
The proposed approach uses credit score and reputation score to manage creditworthiness and trustworthnes of the GSC and GSP respectively. Reputation
score have proved to be a great asset for both online shoppers and sellers to establish trust. Similarly, credit scoring is an important tool used by todays ﬁnancial institutions to assess the creditworthiness of prospective customers and to
monitor customer credit ratings. Credit scoring enables service providers to oﬀer
diﬀerentiated products and beneﬁts based on credit information from customers.
3.1

Information Service

The information service component is the same as the conventional grid information services such as the MDS [8]. It is composed of a suite of web services
including Index service, Trigger service and Aggregator framework, which is

A Reputation-Based Grid Information Service

1019

used by the Index and Trigger services. The central role of information services
is to provide eﬃcient resource registration, monitoring and resource discovery
including subscription/notiﬁcation. It maintains information about the resources
available within grid computing such as hosts, clusters, switches, routers, links,
services, sensors, available software, and services. As the focus of this paper is on
the reputation management service, we will not discuss the information service
components in the rest of the paper.
3.2

Reputation Management Service

The main goal of the reputation management service (RMS) component is to assist grid service providers and customers to conﬁdently select trading partners.
It collects and processes reputation data from the service providers and consumers. It also maintains a dynamic reputation metric for its community and
provides several mechanisms for manipulating the reputation data in the repository with the objective of automating word-of-mouth reputation for grid market
environments. The functionality of the RMS is encapsulated in ﬁve components:
Reputation Processing, Reputation Query, Reputation Feedback, Reputation Response, and Reputation Assessment.
The Reputation Feedback allows service provider and consumer to rate each
other only after they are engaged in service trading Each feedback consists of a
rating: positive, negative, or neutral. Once the raw reputation data is collected
from the service providers and consumers, the Reputation Assessment component calculates a reputation score for the service provider and consumer taking
into account several factors including the reputation of the feedback provider
and the cost of the service. The reputation query subcomponent allows service
providers and consumers to access the reputation information after being authenticated to have been registered users.
The main responsibility of a response manager is to sanction entities in the
service grid that are not behaving consistently and who break trust relations.
The action that the the response manager takes when a service provider (consumer) reputation level falls below Φmin is conﬁgurable. For example, it can be
conﬁgured to send the service provider (consumer) a simple warning or immediately eject it from the network for a period of time or permanently banned.
To reenter the system, the service providers (consumers) would need to acquire
a new valid identiﬁer, which may be costly or impossible. The shaded part of
Fig. 1 shows the interaction between the RMS subcomponents as well as with
the other system components (e.g., service providers and consumers).

4

Reputation Assessment

Reputation and credit data are collected from the grid service customer (GSC)
and the grid service providers (GSP) after the completion of the service. The
data is then processed to be represented as credit score and reputation score
respectively. Reputation score provides a way of assigning quality or value to a

1020

J.H. Abawajy and A.M. Goscinski

service. In this work, reputation and credit of an entity is represented using a
value in the interval between -1 and 1. As this value approaches -1, the entity
becomes increasingly distrusting and conversely, as it approaches 1 the entity has
complete or blind trust. We now discuss how the reputation score is computed
for an entity Pi at time t.
Note that service contexts (i.e., c) in grid computing can be numerous, varying from executing jobs, storing information, downloading data, and using the
network. The overall cumulative reputation score, R(Pi , t, c), for context c of Pi
service provider at time t is deﬁned as follows:
R(Pi , t, c) = min (Rnew (Pi , t, c), 1.0

(1)

where t is the current time and Rexist (Pi , t − 1, c) ≥ 0 is the reputation score of
an entity Pi for context c at time t − 1.
The parameter Rnew (Pi , t, c) in Eq. 1 is the sum of the previous and the
current reputation score and is computed as follows:
Rnew (Pi , t, c) = Rcurrent (Pi , t, c) + Rexist (Pi , t − 1, c)

(2)

where the parameter Rcurrent (Pi , t, c) is computed as follows:
Rcurrent (Pi , t, c) = F eedback(c, t) + P ricet (c) + Credibilityt(Pi , t, c)

(3)

From Eq. 3, we observe that there are three factors contributing to the current
reputation score of a given service provider (consumer): (1) feedback provided
by the rater (i.e., Θf ); (2) the price of the service (i.e., P ricet (c)); and (3) the
credibility of the rater (i.e., Credibilityt (Pi , t, c)).
To determine the contribution of the Rater Feedback to the current reputation score, let f ∈ {positive, negative, neutral} be Pi ’s feedback at time t
(i.e., right after the completion of the latest service) for context c. Note that a
service provider, Pi , will only be allowed to supply the reputation data when
the payment method used involves credit (e.g., pay-as-you-go and pay-afteruse). If pay-before-use is used, then the consumer will be automatically given
f = positive).
(4)
F eedback(c, t) = 1 − αf
Following the completion of the service, both the service provider and the
consumer rate the quality of service as positive (i.e., f = 1) or as negative (i.e.,
f = −1) or as neutral (i.e., f = 0). Based on the value of f, the contribution
of the feedback to the current reputation score is computed as in Eq. 4 where
0 ≤ αt ≤ 1.
The P ricet (c) in Eq. 3 denotes the contribution of the service cost to the
current reputation score and is given as follows:
P ricet (c) = 1 − e−λℵ
t

(5)

where ℵ is the price paid for the service. Intuitively, a GSP that defects on one
$100 transaction should have a lower reputation than one who defects on two or

A Reputation-Based Grid Information Service

1021

three $1 transactions. It is also important that one large transaction does not
elevate the rate of an entity from nothing to complete or blind trust level. Thus,
we constrain the range λ can take as follows:
⎧
⎨ negative λ ≥ 0.01
F eedback = positive λ ≥ 0.0001
(6)
⎩
nuetral λ ≥ 0.00001
This avoid one of the main problems with existing reputation systems in
which service providers build up a high positive reputation based on many small
transactions and then defraud one or more buyers on a high-priced item.
The trustworthiness of the feedback provider (i.e., Credibilityt (Pi , t, c)) contribution in the calculation of the current reputation score is given as follows:
Credibilityt(Pi , t, c) =

0
0≤T ≤1
¯
N
−( β·T
)
¯
N
− 1 Otherwise

(7)

¯ denotes the total number of negative feedbacks so far received by Pi
where N
and T denotes the total number of feedbacks a grid service provider has so far
¯
accumulated and β = N
T while T is given as follows:
T =

F eedback(Pi , c, ±) + μ

F eedback(Pi , c, ∼)

(8)

where
F eedback(Pi , c, ±) is the sum of positive and negative feedbacks while
F eedback(Pi , c, ∼) is the sum of neutral feedbacks received so far by Pi respectively. We believe that the neutral feedbacks should only contribute a portion
to the reputation score of Pi . This is because, in real life, humans tend to take
neutral position when faced with two alternatives for which they do not want
to cast votes to. Thus, we use μ such that = 0 ≤ μ ≤ 1 to capture the real life
scenario.

5

Conclusion and Future Direction

Although there are variety of information services that could potentially enable
grid users discover services and resources, none of these middleware services
provide a direct or indirect means of discovering reputable grid services and
resources. In this paper, we have introduced a reputation management support
in grid information service. We believe that reputation serves as an important
metric to avert the usage of under provisioned and malicious resources with
the help of community feedback. As a future work, an important issue to be
addressed is that if the resource selection decisions are contingent only on the
reputation, severe load imbalance can occur in a large-scale grid computing with
some dominant resources. Therefore, a mechanism for balancing performance
against reliability will be investigated. Another future issue to be looked at
is how to elicit feedback from the participants. We are currently performing
analysis of reputation assessment algorithm. Finally, in the proposed approach,

1022

J.H. Abawajy and A.M. Goscinski

a service provider (consumer) can be immediately ejected it from the network
for a period of time or permanently banned. A mechanism for allowing service
providers (consumers) to reenter the system would be needed, which we are
currently working on.
Acknowledgments. The ﬁrst author would like to thank Maliha Omar for all
the helps.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

10.
11.

12.

13.
14.

http://www.uddi.org.
http://www.ebay.com.
Globus toolkit. http://www.globus.org.
J. H. Abawajy, editor. Grid Accounting Service Infrastructure for Service-Oriented
Grid Computing Systems. Springer-Verlag, 2005.
B. K. Alunkal, I. Veljkovic, G. von Laszewski, and K. Amin. Reputation-based
grid resource selection. In Proceedings of AGridM 2003, 2003.
F. Azzedin and M. Maheswaran. Towards trust-aware resource management in
grid computing systems. In Proceedings of CCGRID’02, page 452, 2002.
S. Ba and P. Pavlou. Evidence of the eﬀect of trust building technology in electronic
markets: Price premiums and buyer behavior. MIS Quarterly, 11(26(3)), 2002.
K. Czajkowski, S. Fitzgerald, I. Foster, and C. Kesselmand. Grid information
services for distributed resource sharing. In Proceedings of the HPDC-10, 2001.
I. Foster. Globus toolkit version 4: Software for service-oriented systems. In Proceedings of IFIP International Conference on Network and Parallel Computing,
pages 2–13, 2005.
I. Foster and C. Kesselman, editors. The grid: blueprint for a new computing
infrastructure. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA, 1999.
I. Foster, C. Kesselman, J. Nick, and S. Tuecke. The physiology of the grid: An open
grid services architecture for distributed systems integration. IEEE Computer,
35(6), 2002.
P. Resnick and R. Zeckhauser. Trust among strangers in internet transactions: Empirical analysis of ebay’s reputation system. In M. R. Baye, editor, The Economics
of the Internet and E-Commerce. Advances in Applied Microeconomics, volume 11.
JAI Press, Greenwich, CT, 2002.
B. Sinclair, A. Goscinski, and R. Dew. Enhancing uddi for grid service discovery
by using dynamic parameters. In ICCSA (3), pages 49–59, 2005.
J. Venugopal and R. Buyya. A market-oriented grid directory service for publication and discovery of grid service providers and their services. Journal of Supercomputing, 2005.

