An Efficient Neighbor Knowledge Based Broadcasting
for Mobile Ad Hoc Networks*
Sung-Hee Lee and Young-Bae Ko
College of Information and Communication, Ajou University, Suwon, South Korea
{sunghee, youngko}@ajou.ac.kr

Abstract. Although a flooding is the most commonly used method for one-toall communications, it often results in huge traffic in mobile ad hoc networks.
Several optimization schemes have been proposed to alleviate this problem.
However, none of them offers a complete solution and has their own limitations, such as, lack of reliability, high latency or excessive control packet
overhead. In this paper, we propose the FONIAH (Flooding based on Onehop Neighbor Information and Adaptive Holding) scheme to overcome these
limitations.

1 Introduction
In mobile ad hoc networks (MANET), a flooding is the simplest method to
disseminate a certain message from a single node to everyone in a network. With the
simplest blind flooding, any node is required to rebroadcast a receiving packet to its
neighbors unless it has already received a duplicate packet. Although flooding is
simple and easy to implement, it often results in a large number of network wide
redundant packets. This situation is also referred in literature as the broadcast
storm [1].
Many routing protocols and applications in MANET rely on flooding (or its
variants) for a route discovery or data dissemination. Previous studies show that the
reliability achieved by employing the blind flooding comes at the cost of overall
network performance degradation [2]. There are several disadvantages associated
with the blind flooding such as excessive redundant packets, heavy contentions and
collisions [1]. To alleviate these problems, a considerable number of protocols have
been presented with the same good of developing more efficient broadcasting
schemes. In [3], the authors categorized these protocols into four families: Simple
flooding (= blind flooding), Probability based flooding, Area based flooding, and
Neighbor knowledge based flooding. Probability based flooding is defined to use a
certain predetermined probability to decide whether each node rebroadcasts a
receiving packet or not. Area based flooding requires a node to evaluate the additional
*

This research is supported by the Ubiquitous Autonomic Computing and Network Project,
the 21st Century Frontier R&D Program, and the ITRC (Information Technology Research
Center) support program supervised by the IITA(Institute of Information Technology Assessment), the Ministry of Information and Communication(MIC) in Korea.

V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2006, Part II, LNCS 3992, pp. 1097 – 1100, 2006.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

1098

S.-H. Lee and Y.-B. Ko

area covered by its rebroadcasting. If this additional coverage is less than some
threshold value, the node will give up its rebroadcasting. Neighbor knowledge based
flooding utilizes two hop neighbor information obtained via HELLO packets to
reduce redundant broadcasting. Thus, this Neighbor knowledge method may allow a
node receiving a packet to do rebroadcast, only when its rebroacasting results in any
additional neighbors to be reached. As the authors in [3] argued, all these flooding
approaches have their own strengths and weaknesses in terms of algorithm
complexity, additional overhead, and so on.
In this paper, we take some hybrid approach combining Neighbor knowledge based
flooding and Area based flooding, and propose a new algorithm called as FONIAH
(Flooding based on One-hop Neighbor Information and Adaptive Holding). The
proposed FONIAH utilizes knowledge of 1-hop neighbors and the concept of
“adaptive holding time,” which is motivated from one of the area-based flooding
protocol named GeoFlood [4]. In [4], the concept of “Packet holding time” is defined
to allow a node receiving a packet to hold it for some amount of time before
rebroadcasting. This holding time is incremental as the distance from the sender to the
receiver decreases, so a node closer to the sender will become waiting longer.
Although this concept can be useful to rapidly enlarge a coverage area, it may cause a
high latency problem in a sparse network. Through the simulation study with ns-2, we
have shown that the proposed scheme provides better efficiency without harming
delivery effectiveness, compared to the existing schemes of either purely Neighbor
knowledge based or Area based approaches.

2 The Proposed Scheme: FONIAH
We assume that each node knows its own geographical location, and periodically
sends HELLO packets containing its location information. Upon receiving a HELLO
packet, a node updates its neighbor table. Consequently, every node becomes to know
geographical locations of all neighbors within one hop transmission radius.
In the proposed scheme, at first, a broadcasting initiator node looks up the neighbor
table to find a farthest neighbor within one hop radius, and then calculates the
distance from itself to the farthest neighbor. This distance is referred to as Maximum
Distance (dmax), and it is embedded in the broadcast packet with the location of the
sender node. dmax value is utilized to calculate a packet holding time at the receiver
node. This embedded information is updated by the successive next hop nodes.
On receiving a broadcast packet, a node waits for a certain holding time which is
inversely proportional to the distance from the sender to itself. When a holding time
expires, a node updates the value of dmax and the location of the sender node in the
packet, and then rebroadcasts it. We propose a simple linear function to obtain a
packet holding time as follows:
HTcur = HTmax −

d cur × HTmax
d max

(1)

HTmax is the predetermined, constant maximum holding time. dcur is the distance
from the previous hop node to the current node. It is calculated from the location of
the previous hop node embedded in the receiving packet. dmax is also embedded in the
packet. A current holding time HTcur is a function of dcur and dmax. As a result, a

An Efficient Neighbor Knowledge Based Broadcasting for MANET

1099

current holding time is inversely proportional to the distance between the sender and
receiver node. That is, the farthest node from the sender node rebroadcasts earlier than
any others. It helps to enlarge a coverage area rapidly because outer nodes cover more
new network space than inner nodes.
Since the maximum distance is fixed to the maximum transmission range in
GeoFlood, a high latency problem occurs in a sparse network as we mentioned before.
However, in our scheme, this value is not fixed and it is just supplied by the previous
hop node via the packet. Therefore, unlike GeoFlood, the farthest neighbor always has
zero holding time wherever it is placed. We refer this mechanism to the Adaptive
Holding Time.
When a node receives a new broadcasting packet, it creates a Mark Table per
packet. This mark table represents which neighbors have yet received the packet.
Waiting for the packet holding time to expire, a node decides whether to rebroadcast a
receiving packet or not, based on the following procedure. When a node receives a
redundant packet during the holding time, it estimates which of its neighboring node
has also received that packet. A receiver node calculates the distance from the packet
sender to each own neighbor, and compares it with dmax value embedded in the packet.
If this distance is shorter or equal to dmax, this neighbor supposes to receive that
packet. This process is repeated when a redundant packet arrives. Finally, before a
holding time expires, if all neighbors in the mark table are marked – that is all
neighbors have already received the packet, the deferred packet is dropped.
Otherwise, that packet is rebroadcasted. A mark table is also removed when a holding
time expires.

3 Performance Evaluation
We performed a simulation study using ns-2. In our simulation model, nodes are
randomly deployed in 1000m×1000m square area and move according to a random
movement pattern at maximum speed of 5m/s without any pause. A broadcast packet
is initiated at every 1 second from a randomly selected node with fixed-size payload
of 64 bytes which is equal to the size of typical RREQ message in AODV. We use the
IEEE 802.11 MAC with a bandwidth of 2Mbps and a maximum transmission range of
250m. In FONIAH, each node sends a HELLO packet at every 5 seconds. Total
simulation time is 300 seconds and we repeat each scenario five times with different
random seed numbers. We select 50ms of the maximum holding time for GeoFlood
and FONIAH.
We evaluate our scheme using the following metrics. Packet delivery ratio is
defined as a ratio of the number of nodes receiving the flooded packet to the number
of nodes in the network. Total packet overhead is defined as the total size of all
transmitted data and control packets. This metric reflects the total routing load
involved in flooding and hence protocol efficiency. The end-to-end latency is
measured as a difference in time from when the source node initiates flooding to
when other nodes receives it. We report the average latency over all nodes.
Fig. 1(a) presents the delivery ratio as a function of the number of nodes. When the
number of nodes is 20, the delivery ratio of three schemes is dropped up to 83%,
because the network density is too sparse to support the network connectivity. In

1100

S.-H. Lee and Y.-B. Ko

Fig. 1(b), we observe that the total packet overhead in FONIAH is smaller than
GeoFlood and Blind Flooding. The difference of the packet overhead becomes larger
as the number of nodes increases. In Fig. 1(c), the average latency of our scheme is
always smaller than GeoFlood. It represents that the adaptive holding time
mechanism in FONIAH is more efficient than GeoFlood in the end-to-end packet
latency. Especially, the difference between GeoFlood and FONIAH is larger in the
small number of nodes, since our scheme alleviates the high-latency problem of
GeoFlood in a sparse network. Even though the latency is still longer than simplest
blind flooding, a reduced packet overhead is helpful to improve the network
performance.

80%
70%

Blind Flooding
GeoFlood
FONIAH

60%
50%
20

40

60

80

Number of Nodes

(a) Delivery Ratio

100

20

Blind Flooding
GeoFlood
FONIAH

2000

Average Latency (ms)

Delivery Ratio (%)

90%

Total Packet Overhead (Kbyte).

2500

100%

1500
1000
500
0

Blind Flooding
GeoFlood
FONIAH

15

10
5

0
20

40

60

80

100

Number of Nodes

(b) Total Packet Overhead

20

40

60

80

100

Number of Nodes

(c) Average Latency

Fig. 1. Simulation results with respect to the number of nodes

4 Conclusion
The proposed FONIAH (Flooding based on One-hop Neighbor Information and
Adaptive Holding) scheme provides a more efficient solution to alleviate the problem
caused by blind flooding. Our scheme combines both Neighbor knowledge based
flooding and Area based flooding to overcome the limitations in each approach.
Simulation results shows that our scheme has low packet overhead, reasonable
latency and high reliability. Future works would include some complexity analysis of
the proposed algorithm and the study for further reducing its end-to-end latency.

References
1. S.-Y. Ni, Y.-C. Tseng, Y.-S. Chen, and J.-P. Sheu, “The broadcast storm problem in a
mobile ad hoc network,” in Proc. of MobiCom, pages 151.162, 1999.
2. J. M. McCune, E. Shi, A. Perrig and M. K. Reiter, “Detection of Denial-of-Message
Attacks on Sensor Network Broadcasts,” in Proceedings of IEEE Symposium on Security
and Privacy, pp. 64-78, 2005.
3. B. Williams, T. Camp “Comparison of Broadcasting Techniques for Mobile Ad Hoc
Networks,” in Proc. of the third ACM international symposium on Mobile ad hoc
networking & computiong, pp.194-205, June, 2002
4. J. Arango, M. Degermark, A Efrat, S. Pink “An Efficient Flooding Algorithm for Mobile
Ad-hoc Networks”, in Proc. of WiOpt, 2004

